<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh019)  [Next](joh021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 20:0</span></span>

This evangelist, though he began not his gospel as the rest did, yet
concludes it as they did, with the history of Christ' resurrection; not
of the thing itself, for none of them describe how he rose, but of the
proofs and evidences of it, which demonstrated that he was risen. The
proofs of Christ's resurrection, which we have in this chapter, are I.
Such as occurred immediately at the sepulchre. 1. The sepulchre found
empty, and the graveclothes in good order ([Joh
20:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#001)). 2. Two angels appearing to
Mary Magdalene at the sepulchre ([Joh
20:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#011)). 3. Christ himself appearing
to her ([Joh 20:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#014)). II. Such as
occurred afterwards at the meetings of the apostles. 1. At one, the same
day at evening that Christ rose, when Thomas was absent ([Joh
20:19-25](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#019)). 2. At another, that day
seven-night, when Thomas was with them ([Joh
20:26-31](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#026)). What is related here is
mostly what was omitted by the other evangelists.

[John 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 20:1</span></span>

There was no one thing of which the apostles were more concerned to
produce substantial proof than the resurrection of their Master, 1.
Because it was that which he himself appealed to as the last and most
cogent proof of his being the Messiah. Those that would not believe
other signs were referred to this sign of the prophet Jonas. And
therefore enemies were most solicitous to stifle the notice of this,
because it was put on this issue, and, if he be risen, they are not only
murderers, but murderers of the Messiah. 2. Because it was upon this the
performance of his undertaking for our redemption and salvation did
depend. If he give his life a ransom, and do not resume it, it does not
appear that his giving it was accepted as a satisfaction. If he be
imprisoned for our debt, and lie by it, we are undone, [Co1
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#017). 3. Because he never showed
himself alive after his resurrection to all the people, [Act
10:40](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#040), [Act
10:41](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#041). We should have said, "Let his
ignominious death be private, and his glorious resurrection public." But
God's thoughts are not as ours; and he ordered it that his death should
be public before the sun, by the same token that the sun blushed and hid
his face upon it. But the demonstrations of his resurrection should be
reserved as a favour for his particular friends, and by them be
published to the world, that those might be blessed who have not seen,
and yet have believed. The method of proof is such as gives abundant
satisfaction to those who are piously disposed to receive the doctrine
and law of Christ, and yet leaves room for those to object who are
willingly ignorant and obstinate in their unbelief. And this is a fair
trial, suited to the case of those who are probationers.

In these verses we have the first step towards the proof of Christ's
resurrection, which is, that the sepulchre was found empty. He is not
here, and, if so, they must tell us where he is or we conclude him
risen.

I. Mary Magdalene, coming to the sepulchre, finds the stone taken away.
This evangelist does not mention the other women that went with Mary
Magdalene, but here only, because she was the most active and forward in
this visit to the sepulchre, and in her appeared the most affection; and
it was an affection kindled by a good cause, in consideration of the
great things Christ had done for her. Much was forgiven her, therefore
she loved much. She had shown her affection to him while he lived,
attended his doctrine, ministered to him of her substance, [Luk
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#002), [Luk
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#003). It does not appear that she had
any business now at Jerusalem, but to wait upon him for the women were
not bound to go up to the feast, and probably she and others followed
him the closer, as Elisha did Elijah, now that they knew their Master
would shortly be taken from their head, [Kg2
2:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#001). The continued instances of her
respect to him at and after his death prove the sincerity of her love.
Note, Love to Christ, if it be cordial, will be constant. Her love to
Christ was strong as death, the death of the cross, for it stood by
that; cruel as the grave, for it made a visit to that, and was not
deterred by its terrors.

1\. She came to the sepulchre, to wash the dead body with her tears, for
she went to the grave, to weep there, and to anoint it with the ointment
she had prepared. The grave is a house that people do not care for
making visits to. They that are free among the dead are separated from
the living; and it must be an extraordinary affection to the person
which will endear his grave to us. It is especially frightful to the
weak and timourous sex. Could she, that had not strength enough to roll
away the stone, pretend to such a presence of mind as to enter the
grave? The Jews' religion forbade them to meddle any more than needs
must with graves and dead bodies. In visiting Christ's sepulchre she
exposed herself, and perhaps the disciples, to the suspicion of a design
to steal him away; and what real service could she do him by it? But her
love answers these, and a thousand such objections. Note, (1.) We must
study to do honour to Christ in those things wherein yet we cannot be
profitable to him. (2.) Love to Christ will take off the terror of death
and the grave. If we cannot come to Christ but through that darksome
valley, even in that, if we love him, we shall fear no evil.

2\. She came as soon as she could, for she came, (1.) Upon the first day
of the week, as soon as ever the sabbath was gone, longing, not to sell
corn and to set forth wheat (as [Amo
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#005)), but to be at the sepulchre.
Those that love Christ will take the first opportunity of testifying
their respect to him. This was the first Christian sabbath, and she
begins it accordingly with enquiries after Christ. She had spent the day
before in commemorating the work of creation, and therefore rested; but
now she is upon search into the work of redemption, and therefore makes
a visit to Christ and him crucified. (2.) She came early, while it was
yet dark; so early did she set out. Note, Those who would seek Christ so
as to find him must seek him early; that is, \[1.\] Seek him
solicitously, with such a care as even breaks the sleep; be up early for
fear of missing him. \[2.\] Seek him industriously; we must deny
ourselves and our own repose in pursuit of Christ. \[3.\] Seek him
betimes, early in our days, early every day. My voice shalt thou hear in
the morning. That day is in a fair way to be well ended that is thus
begun. Those that diligently enquire after Christ while it is yet dark
shall have such light given them concerning him as shall shine more and
more.

3\. She found the stone taken away, which she had seen rolled to the
door of the sepulchre. Now this was, (1.) A surprise to her, for she
little expected it. Christ crucified is the fountain of life. His grave
is one of the wells of salvation; if we come to it in faith; though to a
carnal heart it be a spring shut up, we shall find the stone rolled away
(as [Gen 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#010)) and free access to the
comforts of it. Surprising comforts are the frequent encouragements of
early seekers. (2.) It was the beginning of a glorious discovery; the
Lord was risen, though she did not at first apprehend it so. Note,
\[1.\] Those that are most constant in their adherence to Christ, and
most diligent in their enquiries after him, have commonly the first and
sweetest notices of the divine grace. Mary Magdalene, who followed
Christ to the last in his humiliation, met him with the first in his
exaltation. \[2.\] God ordinarily reveals himself and his comforts to us
by degrees; to raise our expectations and quicken our enquiries.

II\. Finding the stone taken away, she hastens back to Peter and John,
who probably lodged together at that end of the town, not far off, and
acquaints them with it: "They have taken the Lord out of the sepulchre,
envying him the honour of such a decent burying-place, and we know not
where they have laid him, nor where to find him, that we may pay him the
remainder of our last respects." Observe here, 1. What a notion Mary had
of the thing as it now appeared; she found the stone gone, looked into
the grave, and saw it empty. Now one would expect that the first thought
that offered itself would have been, Surely the Lord is risen; for
whenever he had told them that he should be crucified, which she had now
lately seen accomplished, he still subjoined in the same breath that the
third day he should rise again. Could she feel the great earthquake that
happened as she was coming to the sepulchre, or getting ready to come,
and now see the grave empty, and yet have no thought of the resurrection
enter into her mind? what, no conjecture, no suspicion of it? So it
seems by the odd construction she puts upon the removing of the stone,
which was very far fetched. Note, When we come to reflect upon our own
conduct in a cloudy and dark day, we shall stand amazed at our dulness
and forgetfulness, that we could miss of such thoughts as afterwards
appear obvious, and how they could be so far out of the way when we had
occasion for them. She suggested, They have taken away the Lord; either
the chief priests have taken him away, to put him in a worse place, or
Joseph and Nicodemus have, upon second thoughts, taken him away, to
avoid the ill-will of the Jews. Whatever was her suspicion, it seems it
was a great vexation and disturbance to her that the body was gone;
whereas, if she had understood it rightly, nothing could be more happy.
Note, Weak believers often make that the matter of their complaint which
is really just ground of hope, and matter of joy. We cry out that this
and the other creature-comfort are taken away, and we know not how to
retrieve them, when indeed the removal of our temporal comforts, which
we lament, is in order to the resurrection of our spiritual comforts,
which we should rejoice in too. 2. What a narrative she made of it to
Peter and John. She did not stand poring upon the grief herself, but
acquaints her friends with it. Note, The communication of sorrows is one
good improvement of the communion of saints. Observe, Peter, though he
had denied his Master, had not deserted his Master's friends; by this
appears the sincerity of his repentance, that he associated with the
disciple whom Jesus loved. And the disciples' keeping up their intimacy
with him as formerly, notwithstanding his fall, teaches us to restore
those with a spirit of meekness that have been faulty. If God has
received them upon their repentance, why should not we?

III\. Peter and John go with all speed to the sepulchre, to satisfy
themselves of the truth of what was told them, and to see if they could
make any further discoveries, [Joh
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#003), [Joh
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#004). Some think that the other
disciples were with Peter and John when the news came; for they told
these things to the eleven, [Luk 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#009).
Others think that Mary Magdalene told her story only to Peter and John,
and that the other women told theirs to the other disciples; yet none of
them went to the sepulchre but Peter and John, who were two of the first
three of Christ's disciples, often distinguished from the rest by
special favours. Note, It is well when those that are more honoured than
others with the privileges of disciples are more active than others in
the duty of disciples, more willing to take pains and run hazards in a
good work. 1. See here what use we should make of the experience and
observations of others. When Mary told them what she had seen, they
would not in this sense take her word, but would go and see with their
own eyes. Do others tell us of the comfort and benefit of ordinances?
Let us be engaged thereby to make trial of them. Come and see how good
it is to draw near to God. 2. See how ready we should be to share with
our friends in their cares and fears. Peter and John hastened to the
sepulchre, that they might be able to give Mary a satisfactory answer to
her jealousies. We should not grudge any pains we take for the
succouring and comforting of the weak and timorous followers of Christ.
3. See what haste we should make in a good work, and when we are going
on a good errand. Peter and John consulted neither their ease nor their
gravity, but ran to the sepulchre, that they might show the strength of
their zeal and affection, and might lose no time. If we are in the way
of God's commandments, we should run in that way. 4. See what a good
thing it is to have good company in a good work. Perhaps neither of
these disciples would have ventured to the sepulchre alone, but, being
both together, they made no difficulty of it. See [Ecc
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#009). 5. See what a laudable emulation
it is among disciples to strive which shall excel, which shall exceed,
in that which is good. It was no breach of ill manners for John, though
the younger, to outrun Peter, and get before him. We must do our best,
and neither envy those that can do better, nor despise those that do as
they can, though they come behind. (1.) He that got foremost in this
race as the disciple whom Jesus loved in a special manner, and who
therefore in a special manner loved Jesus. Note, Sense of Christ's love
to us, kindling love in us to him again, will make us to excel in
virtue. The love of Christ will constrain us more than any thing to
abound in duty. (2.) He that was cast behind was Peter, who had denied
his Master, and was in sorrow and shame for it, and this clogged him as
a weight; sense of guilt cramps us, and hinders our enlargement in the
service of God. When conscience is offended we lose ground.

IV\. Peter and John, having come to the sepulchre, prosecute the
enquiry, yet improve little in the discovery.

1\. John went no further than Mary Magdalene had done. (1.) He had the
curiosity to look into the sepulchre, and saw it was empty. He stooped
down, and looked in. Those that would find the knowledge of Christ must
stoop down, and look in, must with a humble heart submit to the
authority of divine revelation, and must look wistly. (2.) Yet he had
not courage to go into the sepulchre. The warmest affections are not
always accompanied with the boldest resolutions; many are swift to run
religion's race that are not stout to fight her battles.

2\. Peter, though he came last, went in first, and made a more exact
discovery than John had done, [Joh
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#006), [Joh
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#007). Though John outran him, he did
not therefore turn back, nor stand still, but made after him as fast as
he could; and, while John was with much caution looking in, he came, and
with great courage went into the sepulchre.

(1.) Observe here the boldness of Peter, and how God dispenses his gifts
variously. John could out-run Peter, but Peter could out-dare John. It
is seldom true of the same persons, what David says poetically of Saul
and Jonathan, that they were swifter than eagles, and yet stronger than
lions, [Sa2 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#023). Some disciples are
quick, and they are useful to quicken those that are slow; others are
bold, and they are useful to embolden those that are timorous; diversity
of gifts, but one Spirit. Peter's venturing into the sepulchre may teach
us, \[1.\] That those who in good earnest seek after Christ must not
frighten themselves with bugbears and foolish fancies: "There is a lion
in the way, a ghost in the grave." \[2.\] That good Christians need not
be afraid of the grave, since Christ has lain in it; for to them there
is nothing in it frightful; it is not the pit of destruction, nor are
the worms in it never-dying worms. Let us therefore not indulge, but
conquer, the fear we are apt to conceive upon the sight of a dead body,
or being alone among the graves; and, since we must be dead and in the
grave shortly, let us make death and the grave familiar to us, as our
near kindred, [Job 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#014). \[3.\] We
must be willing to go through the grave to Christ; that way he went to
his glory, and so must we. If we cannot see God's face and live, better
die than never see it. See [Job 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025),
etc.

(2.) Observe the posture in which he found things in the sepulchre.
\[1.\] Christ had left his grave-clothes behind him there; what clothes
he appeared in to his disciples we are not told, but he never appeared
in his grave-clothes, as ghosts are supposed to do; no, he laid them
aside, First, Because he arose to die no more; death was to have no more
dominion over him, [Rom 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009). Lazarus
came out with his grave-clothes on, for he was to use them again; but
Christ, rising to an immortal life, came out free from those
incumbrances. Secondly, because he was going to be clothed with the
robes of glory, therefore he lays aside these rags; in the heavenly
paradise there will be no more occasion for clothes than there was in
the earthly. The ascending prophet dropped his mantle. Thirdly, When we
arise from the death of sin to the life of righteousness, we must leave
our grave-clothes behind us, must put off all our corruptions. Fourthly,
Christ left those in the grave, as it were, for our use if the grave be
a bed to the saints, thus he hath sheeted that bed, and made it ready
for them; and the napkin by itself is of use for the mourning survivors
to wipe away their tears. \[2.\] The grave-clothes were found in very
good order, which serves for an evidence that his body was not stolen
away while men slept. Robbers of tombs have been known to take away the
clothes and leave the body; but none \[prior to the practices of modern
resurrectionists\] ever took away the body and left the clothes,
especially when it was fine linen and new, [Mar
15:46](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#046). Any one would rather choose to
carry a dead body in its clothes than naked. Or, if those that were
supposed to have stolen it would have left the grave-clothes behind, yet
it cannot be supposed they should find leisure to fold up the linen.

(3.) See how Peter's boldness encouraged John; now he took heart and
ventured in ([Joh 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#008)), and he saw
and believed; not barely believed what Mary said, that the body was gone
(no thanks to him to believe what he saw), but he began to believe that
Jesus was risen to life again, though his faith, as yet, was weak and
wavering.

\[1.\] John followed Peter in venturing. It should seem, he durst not
have gone into the sepulchre if Peter had not gone in first. Note, It is
good to be emboldened in a good work by the boldness of others. The
dread of difficulty and danger will be taken off by observing the
resolution and courage of others. Perhaps John's quickness had made
Peter run faster, and now Peter's boldness makes John venture further,
than otherwise either the one or the other would have done; though Peter
had lately fallen under the disgrace of being a deserter, and John had
been advanced to the honour of a confidant (Christ having committed his
mother to him), yet John not only associated with Peter, but thought it
no disparagement to follow him.

\[2.\] Yet, it should seem, John got the start of Peter in believing.
Peter saw and wondered ([Luk 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#012)),
but John saw and believed. A mind disposed to contemplation may perhaps
sooner receive the evidence of divine truth than a mind disposed to
action. But what was the reason that they were so slow of heart to
believe? The evangelist tells us ([Joh
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#009)), as yet they knew not the
scripture, that is, they did not consider, and apply, and duly improve,
what they knew of the scripture, that he must rise again from the dead.
The Old Testament spoke of the resurrection of the Messiah; they
believed him to be the Messiah; he himself had often told them that,
according to the scriptures of the Old Testament, he should rise again;
but they had not presence of mind sufficient by these to explain the
present appearances. Observe here, First, How unapt the disciples
themselves were, at first, to believe the resurrection of Christ, which
confirms the testimony they afterwards gave with so much assurance
concerning it; for, by their backwardness to believe it, it appears that
they were not credulous concerning it, nor of those simple ones that
believe every word. If they had had any design to advance their own
interest by it, they would greedily have caught at the first spark of
its evidence, would have raised and supported one another's expectations
of it, and have prepared the minds of those that followed them to
receive the notices of it; but we find, on the contrary, that their
hopes were frustrated, it was to them as a strange thing, and one of the
furthest things from their thoughts. Peter and John were so shy of
believing it at first that nothing less than the most convincing proof
the thing was capable of could bring them to testify it afterwards with
so much assurance. Hereby it appears that they were not only honest men,
who would not deceive others, but cautious men, who would not themselves
be imposed upon. Secondly, What was the reason of their slowness to
believe; because as yet they knew not the scripture. This seems to be
the evangelist's acknowledgment of his own fault among the rest; he does
not say, "For as yet Jesus had not appeared to them, had not shown them
his hands and his side," but, "As yet he had not opened their
understandings to understand the scripture" ([Luk
24:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#044), [Luk
24:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#045)), for that is the most sure word
of prophecy.

3\. Peter and John pursued their enquiry no further, but desisted,
hovering between faith and unbelief ([Joh
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#010)): The disciples went away, not
much the wiser, to their own home, pros heautous - to their own friends
and companions, the rest of the disciples to their own lodgings, for
homes they had none at Jerusalem. They went away, (1.) For fear of being
taken up upon suspicion of a design to steal away the body, or of being
charged with it now that it was gone Instead of improving their faith,
their care is to secure themselves, to shift for their own safety. In
difficult dangerous times it is hard even for good men to go on in their
work with the resolution that becomes them. (2.) Because they were at a
loss, and knew not what to do next, nor what to make of what they had
seen; and therefore, not having courage to stay at the grave, they
resolve to go home, and wait till God shall reveal even this unto them,
which is an instance of their weakness as yet. (3.) It is probable that
the rest of the disciples were together; to them they return, to make
report of what they had discovered and to consult with them what was to
be done; and, probably, now they appointed their meeting in the evening,
when Christ came to them. It is observable that before Peter and John
came to the sepulchre an angel had appeared there, rolled away the
stone, frightened the guard, and comforted the women; as soon as they
were gone from the sepulchre, Mary Magdalene here sees two angels in the
sepulchre ([Joh 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#012)), and yet Peter
and John come to the sepulchre, and go into it, and see none. What shall
we make of this? Where were the angels when Peter and John were at the
sepulchre, who appeared there before and after? \[1.\] Angels appear and
disappear at pleasure, according to the orders and instructions given
them. They may be, and are really, where they are not visibly; nay, it
should seem, may be visible to one and not to another, at the same time,
[Num 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#023); [Kg2
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#017). How they make themselves
visible, then invisible, and then visible again, it is presumption for
us to enquire; but that they do so is plain from this story. \[2.\] This
favour was shown to those who were early and constant in their enquiries
after Christ, and was the reward of those that came first and staid
last, but denied to those that made a transient visit. \[3.\] The
apostles were not to receive their instructions from the angels, but
from the Spirit of grace. See [Heb
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#005).

[John 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 20:11</span></span>

St. Mark tells us that Christ appeared first to Mary Magdalene ([Mar
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#009)); that appearance is here largely
related; and we may observe,

I. The constancy and fervency of Mary Magdalene's affection to the Lord
Jesus, [Joh 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#011).

1\. She staid at the sepulchre, when Peter and John were gone, because
there her Master had lain, and there she was likeliest to hear some
tidings of him. Note, (1.) Where there is a true love to Christ there
will be a constant adherence to him, and a resolution with purpose of
heart to cleave to him. This good woman, though she has lost him, yet,
rather than seem to desert him, will abide by his grave for his sake,
and continue in his love even when she wants the comfort of it. (2.)
Where there is a true desire of acquaintance with Christ there will be a
constant attendance on the means of knowledge. See [Hos
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#002), [Hos
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#003), The third day he will raise us
up; and then shall we know the meaning of that resurrection, if we
follow on to know, as Mary here.

2\. She staid there weeping, and these tears loudly bespoke her
affection to her Master. Those that have lost Christ have cause to weep;
she wept at the remembrance of his bitter sufferings; wept for his
death, and the loss which she and her friends and the country sustained
by it; wept to think of returning home without him; wept because she did
not now find his body. Those that seek Christ must seek him sorrowing
([Luk 2:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#048)), must weep, not for him,
but for themselves.

3\. As she wept, she looked into the sepulchre, that her eye might
affect her heart. When we are in search of something that we have lost
we look again and again in the place where we last left it, and expected
to have found it. She will look yet seven times, not knowing but that at
length she may see some encouragement. Note, (1.) Weeping must not
hinder seeking. Though she wept, she stooped down and looked in. (2.)
Those are likely to seek and find that seek with affection, that seek in
tears.

II\. The vision she had of two angels in the sepulchre, [Joh
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#012). Observe here,

1\. The description of the persons she saw. They were two angels in
white, sitting (probably on some benches or ledges hewn out in the rock)
one at the head, and the other at the feet, of the grave. Here we have,

(1.) Their nature. They were angels, messengers from heaven, sent on
purpose, on this great occasion, \[1.\] To honour the Son and to grace
the solemnity of his resurrection. Now that the Son of God was again to
be brought into the world, the angels have a charge to attend him, as
they did at his birth, [Heb 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006).
\[2.\] To comfort the saints; to speak good words to those that were in
sorrow, and, by giving them notice that the Lord was risen, to prepare
them for the sight of him.

(2.) Their number: two, not a multitude of the heavenly host, to sing
praise, only two, to bear witness; for out of the mouth of two witnesses
this word would be established.

(3.) Their array: They were in white, denoting, \[1.\] Their purity and
holiness. The best of men standing before the angels, and compared with
them, are clothed in filthy garments ([Zac
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#003)), but angels are spotless; and
glorified saints, when they come to be as the angels, shall walk with
Christ in white. \[2.\] Their glory, and glorying, upon this occasion.
The white in which they appeared represented the brightness of that
state into which Christ was now risen.

(4.) Their posture and place: They sat, as it were, reposing themselves
in Christ's grave; for angels, though they needed not a restoration,
were obliged to Christ for their establishment. These angels went into
the grave, to teach us not to be afraid of it, nor to think that our
resting in it awhile will be any prejudice to our immortality; no,
matters are so ordered that the grave is not much out of our way to
heaven. It intimates likewise that angels are to be employed about the
saints, not only at their death, to carry their souls into Abraham's
bosom, but at the great day, to raise their bodies, [Mat
24:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#031). These angelic guards (and
angels are called watchers [Dan 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#023)),
keeping possession of the sepulchre, when they had frightened away the
guards which the enemies had set, represents Christ's victory over the
powers of darkness, routing and defeating them. Thus Michael and his
angels are more than conquerors. Their sitting to face one another, one
at his bed's head, the other at his bed's feet, denotes their care of
the entire body of Christ, his mystical as well as his natural body,
from head to foot; it may also remind us of the two cherubim, placed one
at either end of the mercy-seat, looking one at another, [Exo
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#018). Christ crucified was the great
propitiatory, at the head and feet of which were these two cherubim, not
with flaming swords, to keep us fRom. but welcome messengers, to direct
us to, the way of life.

2\. Their compassionate enquiry into the cause of Mary Magdalene's grief
([Joh 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#013)): Woman, why weepest thou?
This question was, (1.) A rebuke to her weeping: "Why weepest thou, when
thou has cause to rejoice?" Many of the floods of our tears would dry
away before such a search as this into the fountain of them. Why are
thou cast down? (2.) It was designed to show how much angels are
concerned at the griefs of the saints, having a charge to minister to
them for their comfort. Christians should thus sympathize with one
another. (3.) It was only to make an occasion of informing her of that
which would turn her mourning into rejoicing, would put off her
sackcloth, and gird her with gladness.

3\. The melancholy account she gives them of her present distress:
Because they have taken away the blessed body I came to embalm, and I
know not where they have laid it. The same story she had told, [Joh
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#002). In it we may see, (1.) The
weakness of her faith. If she had had faith as a grain of mustard-seed,
this mountain would have been removed; but we often perplex ourselves
needlessly with imaginary difficulties, which faith would discover to us
as real advantages. Many good people complain of the clouds and darkness
they are under, which are the necessary methods of grace for the
humbling of their souls, the mortifying of their sins, and the endearing
of Christ to them. (2.) The strength of her love. Those that have a true
affection for Christ cannot but be in great affliction when they have
lost either the comfortable tokens of his love in their souls or the
comfortable opportunities of conversing with him, and doing him honour,
in his ordinances. Mary Magdalene is not diverted from her enquiries by
the surprise of the vision, nor satisfied with the honour of it; but
still she harps upon the same string: They have taken away my Lord. A
sight of angels and their smiles will not suffice without a sight of
Christ and God's smiles in him. Nay, the sight of angels is but an
opportunity of pursuing her enquiries after Christ. All creatures, the
most excellent, the most dear, should be used as means, and but as
means, to bring us into acquaintance with God in Christ. The angels
asked her, Why weepest thou? I have cause enough to weep, says she, for
they have taken away my Lord, and, like Micah, What have I more? Do you
ask, Why I weep? My beloved has withdrawn himself, and is gone. Note,
None know, but those who have experienced it, the sorrow of a deserted
soul, that has had comfortable evidences of the love of God in Christ,
and hopes of heaven, but has now lost them, and walks in darkness; such
a wounded spirit who can bear?

III\. Christ's appearing to her while she was talking with the angels,
and telling them her case. Before they had given her any answer, Christ
himself steps in, to satisfy her enquiries, for God now speaketh to us
by his Son; none but he himself can direct us to himself. Mary would
fain know where her Lord is, and behold he is at her right hand. Note,
1. Those that will be content with nothing short of a sight of Christ
shall be put off with nothing less. He never said to the soul that
sought him, Seek in vain. "Is it Christ that thou wouldest have? Christ
thou shalt have." 2. Christ, in manifesting himself to those that seek
him, often outdoes their expectations. Mary longs to see the dead body
of Christ, and complains of the loss of that, and behold she sees him
alive. Thus he does for his praying people more than they are able to
ask or think. In this appearance of Christ to Mary observe,

(1.) How he did at first conceal himself from her.

\[1.\] He stood as a common person, and she looked upon him accordingly,
[Joh 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#014). She stood expecting an
answer to her complaint from the angels; and either seeing the shadow,
or hearing the tread, of some person behind her, she turned herself back
from talking with the angels, and sees Jesus himself standing, the very
person she was looking for, and yet she knew not that it was Jesus.
Note, First, The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart ([Psa
34:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#018)), nearer than they are aware.
Those that seek Christ, though they do not see him, may yet be sure he
is not far from them. Secondly, Those that diligently seek the Lord will
turn every way in their enquiry after him. Mary turned herself back, in
hopes of some discoveries. Several of the ancients suggest that Mary was
directed to look behind her by the angels' rising up, and doing their
obeisance to the Lord Jesus, whom they saw before Mary did; and that she
looked back to see to whom it was they paid such a profound reverence.
But, if so, it is not likely that she would have taken him for the
gardener; rather, therefore, it was her earnest desire in seeking that
made her turn every way. Thirdly, Christ is often near his people, and
they are not aware of him. She knew not that it was Jesus; not that he
appeared in any other likeness, but either it was a careless transient
look she cast upon him, and, her eyes being full of care, she could not
so well distinguish, or they were holden, that she should not know him,
as those of the two disciples, [Luk
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#016).

\[2.\] He asked her a common question, and she answered him accordingly,
[Joh 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#015).

First, The question he asked her was natural enough, and what any one
would have asked her: "Woman, why weepest thou? Whom seekest thou? What
business hast thou here in the garden so early? And what is all this
noise and ado for?" Perhaps it was spoken with some roughness, as Joseph
spoke to his brethren when he made himself strange, before he made
himself known to them. It should seem, this was the first word Christ
spoke after his resurrection: "Why weepest thou? I am risen." The
resurrection of Christ has enough in it to ally all our sorrows, to
check the streams, and dry up the fountains, of our tears. Observe here,
Christ takes cognizance, 1. Of his people's griefs, and enquires, Why
weep you? He bottles their tears, and records them in his book. 2. Of
his people's cares and enquires, Whom seek you, and what would you have?
When he knows they are seeking him, yet he will know it from them; they
must tell him whom they seek.

Secondly, The reply she made him is natural enough; she does not give
him a direct answer, but, as if she should say, "Why do you banter me,
and upbraid me with my tears? You know why I weep, and whom I seek;" and
therefore, supposing him to be the gardener, the person employed by
Joseph to dress and keep his garden, who, she thought, was come thither
thus early to his work, she said, Sir, if thou hast carried him hence,
pray tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away. See
here, 1. The error of her understanding. She supposed our Lord Jesus to
be the gardener, perhaps because he asked what authority she had to be
there. Note, Troubled spirits, in a cloudy and dark day, are apt to
misrepresent Christ to themselves, and to put wrong constructions upon
the methods of his providence and grace. 2. The truth of her affection.
See how her heart was set upon finding Christ. She puts the question to
every one she meets, like the careful spouse, Saw you him whom my soul
loveth? She speaks respectfully to a gardener, and calls him Sir, in
hopes to gain some intelligence from him concerning her beloved. When
she speaks of Christ, she does not name him; but, If thou have borne him
hence, taking it for granted that this gardener was full of thoughts
concerning this Jesus as well as she, and therefore could not but know
whom she meant. Another evidence of the strength of her affection was
that, wherever he was laid, she would undertake to remove him. Such a
body, with such a weight of spices about it, was much more than she
could pretend to carry; but true love thinks it can do more than it can,
and makes nothing of difficulties. She supposed this gardener grudged
that the body of one that was ignominiously crucified should have the
honour to be laid in his master's new tomb, and that therefore he had
removed it to some sorry place, which he thought fitter for it. Yet Mary
does not threaten to tell his master, and get him turned out of his
place for it; but undertakes to find out some other sepulchre, to which
he might be welcome. Christ needs not to stay where he is thought a
burden.

(2.) How Christ at length made himself known to her, and, by a pleasing
surprise, gave her infallible assurances of his resurrection. Joseph at
length said to his brethren, I am Joseph. So Christ here to Mary
Magdalene, now that he is entered upon his exalted state. Observe,

\[1.\] How Christ discovered himself to this good woman that was seeking
him in tears ([Joh 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#016)): Jesus saith
unto her, Mary. It was said with an emphasis, and the air of kindness
and freedom with which he was wont to speak to her. Now he changed his
voice, and spoke like himself, not like the gardener. Christ's way of
making himself known to his people is by his word, his word applied to
their souls, speaking to them in particular. When those whom God knew by
name in the counsels of his love ([Exo
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#012)) are called by name in the
efficacy of his grace, then he reveals his Son in them as in Paul ([Gal
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016)), when Christ called to him by
name, Saul, Saul. Christ's sheep know his voice, [Joh
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#004). This one word, Mary, was like
that to the disciples in the storm, It is I. Then the word of Christ
does us good when we put our names into the precepts and promises. "In
this Christ calls to me, and speaks to me."

\[2.\] How readily she received this discovery. When Christ said, "Mary,
dost thou not know me? are you and I grown such strangers?" she was
presently aware who it was, as the spouse ([Sol
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#008)), It is the voice of my beloved.
She turned herself, and said, Rabboni, My Master. It might properly be
read with an interrogation, "Rabboni? Is it my master? Nay, but is it
indeed?" Observe, First, The title of respect she gives Him: My Master;
didaskale - a teaching master. The Jews called their doctors Rabbies,
great men. Their critics tell us that Rabbon was with them a more
honourable title than Rabbi; and therefore Mary chooses that, and adds a
note of appropriation, My great Master. Note, Notwithstanding the
freedom of communion which Christ is pleased to admit us to with
himself, we must remember that he is our Master, and to be approached
with a godly fear. Secondly, With what liveliness of affection she gives
this title to Christ. She turned from the angels, whom she had in her
eye, to look unto Jesus. We must take off our regards from all
creatures, even the brightest and best, to fix them upon Christ, from
whom nothing must divert us, and with whom nothing must interfere. When
she thought it had been the gardener, she looked another way while
speaking to him; but now that she knew the voice of Christ she turned
herself. The soul that hears Christ's voice, and is turned to him, calls
him, with joy and triumph, My Master. See with what pleasure those who
love Christ speak of his authority over them. My Master, my great
Master.

\[3.\] The further instructions that Christ gave her ([Joh
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#017)): "Touch me not, but go and
carry the news to the disciples."

First, He diverts her from the expectation of familiar society and
conversation with him at this time: Touch me not, for I am not yet
ascended. Mary was so transported with the sight of her dear Master that
she forgot herself, and that state of glory into which he was now
entering, and was ready to express her joy by affectionate embraces of
him, which Christ here forbids at this time. 1. Touch me not thus at
all, for I am to ascend to heaven. He bade the disciples touch him, for
the confirmation of their faith; he allowed the women to take hold of
his feet, and worship him ([Mat 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#009));
but Mary, supposing that he was risen, as Lazarus was, to live among
them constantly, and converse with them freely as he had done, upon that
presumption was about to take hold of his hand with her usual freedom.
This mistake Christ rectified; she must believe him, and adore him, as
exalted, but must not expect to be familiar with him as formerly. See
[Co2 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#016). He forbids her to dote upon
his bodily presence, to set her heart on this, or expect its
continuance, and leads her to the spiritual converse and communion which
she should have with him after he was ascended to his Father; for the
greatest joy of his resurrection was that it was a step towards his
ascension. Mary thought, now that her Master was risen, he would
presently set up a temporal kingdom, such as they had long promised
themselves. "No," says Christ, "touch me not, with any such thought;
think not to lay hold on me, so as to detain me here; for, though I am
not yet ascended, go to my brethren, and tell them, I am to ascend." As
before his death, so now after his resurrection, he still harps upon
this, that he was going away, was no more in the world; and therefore
they must look higher than his bodily presence, and look further than
the present state of things. 2. "Touch me not, do not stay to touch me
now, stay not now to make any further enquiries, or give any further
expressions of joy, for I am not yet ascended, I shall not depart
immediately, it may as well be done another time; the best service thou
canst do now is to carry the tidings to the disciples; lose no time
therefore, but go away with all speed." Note, Public service ought to be
preferred before private satisfaction. It is more blessed to give than
to receive. Jacob must let an angel go, when the day breaks, and it is
time for him to look after his family. Mary must not stay to talk with
her Master, but must carry his message; for it is a day of good tidings,
which she must not engross the comfort of, but hand it to others. See
that story, [Kg2 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#009).

Secondly, He directs her what message to carry to his disciples: But go
to my brethren, and tell them, not only that I am risen (she could have
told them that of herself, for she had seen him), but that I ascend.
Observe,

a\. To whom this message is sent: Go to my brethren with it; for he is
not ashamed to call them so. (1.) He was now entering upon his glory,
and was declared to be the Son of God with greater power than ever, yet
he owns his disciples as his brethren, and expresses himself with more
tender affection to them than before; he had called them friends, but
never brethren till now. Though Christ be high, yet he is not haughty.
Notwithstanding his elevation, he disdains not to own his poor
relations. (b.) His disciples had lately carried themselves very
disingenuously towards him; he had never seen them together since they
all forsook him and fled, when he was apprehended; justly might he now
have sent them an angry message: "Go to yonder treacherous deserters,
and tell them, I will never trust them any more, or have any thing more
to do with them." No, he forgives, he forgets, and does not upbraid.

b\. By whom it is sent: by Mary Magdalene, out of whom had been cast
seven devils, yet now thus favoured. This was her reward for her
constancy in adhering to Christ, and enquiring after him; and a tacit
rebuke to the apostles, who had not been so close as she was in
attending on the dying Jesus, nor so early as she was in meeting the
rising Jesus; she becomes an apostle to the apostles.

c\. What the message itself is: I ascend to my Father. Two full breasts
of consolation are here in these words: -

(a.) Our joint-relation to God, resulting from our union with Christ, is
an unspeakable comfort. Speaking of that inexhaustible spring of light,
life, and bliss, he says, He is my Father, and our Father; my God, and
your God. This is very expressive of the near relation that subsists
between Christ and believers: he that sanctifieth, and those that are
sanctified, are both one; for they agree in one, [Heb
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#011). Here we have such an advancement
of Christians, and such a condescension of Christ, as bring them very
near together, so admirably well is the matter contrived, in order to
their union. \[a.\] It is the great dignity of believers that the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ is, in him, their Father. A vast difference
indeed there is between the respective foundations of the relation; he
is Christ's Father by eternal generation, ours by a gracious adoption;
yet even this warrants us to call him, as Christ did, Abba, Father. This
gives a reason why Christ called them brethren, because his Father was
their Father. Christ was now ascending to appear as an advocate with the
Father - with his Father, and therefore we may hope he will prevail for
any thing - with our Father, and therefore we may hope he will prevail
for us. \[b.\] It is the great condescension of Christ that he is
pleased to own the believer's God for his God: My God, and your God;
mine, that he may be yours; the God of the Redeemer, to support him
([Psa 89:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#026)), that he might be the God
of the redeemed, to save them. The summary of the new covenant is that
God will be to us a God; and therefore Christ being the surety and head
of the covenant, who is primarily dealt with, and believers only through
him as his spiritual seed, this covenant-relation fastens first upon
him, God becomes his God, and so ours; we partaking of a divine nature,
Christ's Father is our Father; and, he partaking of the human nature,
our God is his God.

(b.) Christ's ascension into heaven, in further prosecution of his
undertaking for us, is likewise an unspeakable comfort: "Tell them I
must shortly ascend; that is the next step I am to take." Now this was
intended to be, \[a.\] A word of caution to these disciples, not to
expect the continuance of his bodily presence on earth, nor the setting
up of his temporal kingdom among men, which they dreamed of. "No, tell
them, I am risen, not to stay with them, but to go on their errand to
heaven." Thus those who are raised to a spiritual life, in conformity to
Christ's resurrection, must reckon that they rise to ascend; they are
quickened with Christ that they may sit with him in heavenly places,
[Eph 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#005), [Eph
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006). Let them not think that this
earth is to be their home and rest; no, being born from heaven, they are
bound for heaven; their eye and aim must be upon another world, and this
must be ever upon their hearts, I ascend, therefore must I seek things
above. \[b.\] A word of comfort to them, and to all that shall believe
in him through their word; he was then ascending, he is now ascended to
his Father, and our Father. This was his advancement; he ascended to
receive those honours and powers which were to be the recompence of his
humiliation; he says it with triumph, that those who love him may
rejoice. This is our advantage; for he ascended as a conqueror, leading
captivity captive for us ([Psa 68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018)),
he ascended as our forerunner, to prepare a place for us, and to be
ready to receive us. This message was like that which Joseph's brethren
brought to Jacob concerning him ([Gen
45:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#026)), Joseph is yet alive, and not
only so, vivit imo, et in senatum venit - he lives, and comes into the
senate too; he is governor over all the land of Egypt; all power is his.

Some make those words, I ascend to my God and your God, to include a
promise of our resurrection, in the virtue of Christ's resurrection; for
Christ had proved the resurrection of the dead from these words, I am
the God of Abraham, [Mat 22:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#032). So
that Christ here insinuates, "As he is my God, and hath therefore raised
me, so he is your God, and will therefore raise you, and be your God,
[Rev 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#003). Because I live, you shall
live also. I now ascend, to honour my God, and you shall ascend to him
as your God.

IV\. Here is Mary Magdalene's faithful report of what she had seen and
heard to the disciples ([Joh 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#018)):
She came and told the disciples, whom she found together, that she had
seen the Lord. Peter and John had left her seeking him carefully with
tears, and would not stay to seek him with her; and now she comes to
tell them that she had found him, and to rectify the mistake she had led
them into by enquiring after the dead body, for now she found it was a
living body and a glorified one; so that she found what she sought, and,
what was infinitely better, she had joy in her sight of the Master
herself, and was willing to communicate of her joy, for she knew it
would be good news to them. When God comforts us, it is with this
design, that we may comfort others. And as she told them what she had
seen, so also what she had heard; she had seen the Lord alive, of which
this was a token (and a good token it was) that he had spoken these
things unto her as a message to be delivered to them, and she delivered
it faithfully. Those that are acquainted with the word of Christ
themselves should communicate their knowledge for the good of others,
and not grudge that others should know as much as they do.

[John 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 20:19</span></span>

The infallible proof of Christ's resurrection was his showing himself
alive, [Act 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#003). In these verses, we
have an account of his first appearance to the college of the disciples,
on the day on which he rose. He had sent them the tidings of his
resurrection by trusty and credible messengers; but to show his love to
them, and confirm their faith in him, he came himself, and gave them all
the assurances they could desire of the truth of it, that they might not
have it by hearsay only, and at second hand, but might themselves be
eye-witnesses of his being alive, because they must attest it to the
world, and build the church upon that testimony. Now observe here,

I. When and where this appearance was, [Joh
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#019). It was the same day that he
rose, being the first day of the week, the day after the Jewish sabbath,
at a private meeting of the disciples, ten of them, and some more of
their friends with them, [Luk 24:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#033).

There are three secondary ordinances (as I may call them) instituted by
our Lord Jesus, to continue in his church, for the support of it, and
for the due administration of the principal ordinances - the word,
sacraments, and prayer; these are, the Lord's day, solemn assemblies,
and standing ministry. The mind of Christ concerning each of these is
plainly intimated to us in these verses; of the first two, here, in the
circumstances of this appearance, the other [Joh
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#021). Christ's kingdom was to be set
up among men, immediately upon his resurrection; and accordingly we find
the very day he arose, though but a day of small things, yet graced with
those solemnities which should help to keep up a face of religion
throughout all the ages of the church.

1\. Here is a Christian sabbath observed by the disciples, and owned by
our Lord Jesus. The visit Christ made to his disciples was on the first
day of the week. And the first day of the week is (I think) the only day
of the week, or month, or year, that is ever mentioned by number in all
the New Testament; and this is several times spoken of as a day
religiously observed. Though it was said here expressly ([Joh
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#001)) that Christ arose on the first
day of the week, and it might have been sufficient to say here ([Joh
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#019)), he appeared the same day at
evening; yet, to put an honour upon the day, it is repeated, being the
first day of the week; not that the apostles designed to put honour upon
the day (they were yet in doubt concerning the occasion of it), but God
designed to put honour upon it, by ordering it that they should be
altogether, to receive Christ's first visit on that day. Thus, in
effect, he blessed and sanctified that day, because in it the Redeemer
rested.

2\. Here is a Christian assembly solemnized by the disciples, and also
owned by the Lord Jesus. Probably the disciples met here for some
religious exercise, to pray together; or, perhaps, they met to compare
notes, and consider whether they had sufficient evidence of their
Master's resurrection, and to consult what was now to be done, whether
they should keep together or scatter; they met to know one another's
minds, strengthen one another's hands, and concert proper measures to be
taken in the present critical juncture. This meeting was private,
because they durst not appear publicly, especially in a body. They met
in a house, but they kept the door shut, that they might not be seen
together, and that no one might come among them but such as they knew;
for they feared the Jews, who would prosecute the disciples as
criminals, that they might seem to believe the lie they would deceive
the world with, that his disciples came by night, and stole him away.
Note, (1.) The disciples of Christ, even in difficult times, must not
forsake the assembling of themselves together, [Heb
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#025). Those sheep of the flock were
scattered in the storm; but sheep are sociable, and will come together
again. It is no new thing for the assemblies of Christ's disciples to be
driven into corners, and forced into the wilderness, [Rev
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#014); [Pro
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#012). (2.) God's people have been
often obliged to enter into their chambers, and shut their doors, as
here, for fear of the Jews. Persecution is allotted them, and retirement
from persecution is allowed them; and then where shall we look for them
but in dens and caves of the earth. It is a real grief, but no real
reproach, to Christ's disciples, thus to abscond.

II\. What was said and done in this visit Christ made to his disciples,
and his interview between them. When they were assembled, Jesus came
among them, in his own likeness, yet drawing a veil over the brightness
of his body, now begun to be glorified, else it would have dazzled their
eyes, as in his transfiguration. Christ came among them, to give them a
specimen of the performance of his promise, that, where two or three are
gathered together in his name, he will be in the midst of them. He came,
though the doors were shut. This does not at all weaken the evidence of
his having a real human body after his resurrection; though the doors
were shut, he knew how to open them without any noise, and come in so
that they might not hear him, as formerly he had walked on the water,
and yet had a true body. It is a comfort to Christ's disciples, when
their solemn assemblies are reduced to privacy, that no doors can shut
out Christ's presence from them. We have five things in this appearance
of Christ: -

(1.) His kind and familiar salutation of his disciples: He said, Peace
be unto you. This was not a word of course, though commonly used so at
the meeting of friends, but a solemn, uncommon benediction, conferring
upon them all the blessed fruits and effects of his death and
resurrection. The phrase was common, but the sense was now peculiar.
Peace be unto you is as much as, All good be to you, all peace always by
all means. Christ had left them his peace for their legacy, [Joh
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027). By the death of the testator
the testament was become of force, and he was now risen from the dead,
to prove the will, and to be himself the executor of it. Accordingly, he
here makes prompt payment of the legacy: Peace be unto you. His speaking
peace makes peace, creates the fruit of the lips, peace; peace with God,
peace in your own consciences, peace with one another; all this peace be
with you; not peace with the world, but peace in Christ. His sudden
appearing in the midst of them when they were full of doubts concerning
him, full of fears concerning themselves, could not but put them into
some disorder and consternation, the noise of which waves he stills with
this word, Peace be unto you.

(2.) His clear and undeniable manifestation of himself to them, [Joh
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#020). And here observe,

\[1.\] The method he took to convince them of the truth of his
resurrection, They now saw him alive whom multitudes had seen dead two
or three days before. Now the only doubt was whether this that they saw
alive was the same individual body that had been seen dead; and none
could desire a further proof that it was so than the scars or marks of
the wounds in the body. Now, First, The marks of the wounds, and very
deep marks (though without any pain or soreness), remained in the body
of the Lord Jesus even after his resurrection, that they might be
demonstrations of the truth of it. Conquerors glory in the marks of
their wounds. Christ's wounds were to speak on earth that it was he
himself, and therefore he arose with them; they were to speak in heaven,
in the intercession he must ever live to make, and therefore he ascended
with them, and appeared in the midst of the throne, a Lamb as it had
been slain, and bleeding afresh, [Rev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006). Nay, it should seem, he will come
again with his scars, that they may look on him whom they pierced.
Secondly, These marks he showed to his disciples, for their conviction.
They had not only the satisfaction of seeing him look with the same
countenance, and hearing him speak with the same voice they had been so
long accustomed to, Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora, ferebat - Such
were his gestures, such his eyes and hands! but they had the further
evidence of these peculiar marks: he opened his hands to them, that they
might see the marks of the wounds on them; he opened his breast, as the
nurse hers to the child, to show them the wound there. Note, The exalted
Redeemer will ever show himself open-handed and open-hearted to all his
faithful friends and followers. When Christ manifests his love to
believers by the comforts of his Spirit, assures them that because he
lives they shall live also, then he shows them his hands and his side.

\[2.\] The impression it made upon them, and the good it did them.
First, They were convinced that they saw the Lord: so was their faith
confirmed. At first, they thought they saw an apparition only, a
phantasm; but now they knew it was the Lord himself. Thus many true
believers, who, while they were weak, feared their comforts were but
imaginary, afterwards find them, through grace, real and substantial.
They ask not, Is it the Lord? but are assured, it is he. Secondly, Then
they were glad; that which strengthened their faith raised their joy;
believing they rejoice. The evangelist seems to write it with somewhat
of transport and triumph. Then! then! were the disciples glad, when they
saw the Lord, If it revived the spirit of Jacob to hear that Joseph was
yet alive, how would it revive the heart of these disciples to hear that
Jesus is again alive? It is life from the dead to them. Now that word of
Christ was fulfilled ([Joh 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#022)), I
will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice. This wiped away all
tears from their eyes. Note, A sight of Christ will gladden the heart of
a disciple at any time; the more we see of Christ, the more we shall
rejoice in him; and our joy will never be perfect till we come where we
shall see him as he is.

(3.) The honourable and ample commission he gave them to be his agents
in the planting of his church, [Joh
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#021). Here is,

\[1.\] The preface to their commission, which was the solemn repetition
of the salutation before: Peace be unto you. This was intended, either,
First, To raise their attention to the commission he was about to give
them. The former salutation was to still the tumult of their fear, that
they might calmly attend to the proofs of his resurrection; this was to
reduce the transport of their joy, that they might sedately hear what he
had further to say to them; or, Secondly, To encourage them to accept of
the commission he was giving them. Though it would involve them in a
great deal of trouble, yet he designed their honour and comfort in it,
and, in the issue, it would be peace to them. Gideon received his
commission with this word, Peace be unto thee, [Jdg
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#022), [Jdg
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#023). Christ is our Peace; if he is
with us, peace is to us. Christ was now sending the disciples to publish
peace to the world ([Isa 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007)), and he
here not only confers it upon them for their own satisfaction, but
commits it to them as a trust to be by them transmitted to all the sons
of peace, [Luk 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#005), [Luk
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#006).

\[2.\] The commission itself, which sounds very great: As my Father hath
sent me, even so send I you.

First, It is easy to understand how Christ sent them; he appointed them
to go on with his work upon earth, and to lay out themselves for the
spreading of his gospel, and the setting up of his kingdom, among men.
He sent them authorized with a divine warrant, armed with a divine
power, - sent them as ambassadors to treat of peace, and as heralds to
proclaim it, - sent them as servants to bid to the marriage. Hence they
were called apostles - men sent.

Secondly, But how Christ sent them as the Father sent him is not so
easily understood; certainly their commissions and powers were
infinitely inferior to his; but, 1. Their work was of the same kind with
his, and they were to go on where he left off. They were not sent to be
priests and kings, like him, but only prophets. As he was sent to bear
witness to the truth, so were they; not to be mediators of the
reconciliation, but only preachers and publishers of it. Was he sent,
not to be ministered to, but to minister? not to do his own will, but
the will of him that sent him? not to destroy the law and the prophets,
but to fill them up? So were they. As the Father sent him to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel, so he sent them into all the world. 2. He
had a power to send them equal to that which the Father had to send him.
Here the force of the comparison seems to lie. By the same authority
that the Father sent me do I send you. This proves the Godhead of
Christ; the commissions he gave were of equal authority with those which
the Father gave, and as valid and effectual to all intents and purposes,
equal with those he gave to the Old Testament prophets in visions. The
commissions of Peter and John, by the plain word of Christ, are as good
as those of Isaiah and Ezekiel, by the Lord sitting on his throne; nay,
equal with that which was given to the Mediator himself for his work.
Had he an incontestable authority, and an irresistible ability, for his
work? so had they for theirs. Or thus, As the Father hath sent me is, as
it were, the recital of his power; by virtue of the authority given him
as a Mediator, he gave authority to them, as his ministers, to act for
him, and in his name, with the children of men; so that those who
received them, or rejected them, received or rejected him, and him that
sent him, [Joh 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#020).

(4.) The qualifying of them for the discharge of the trust reposed in
them by their commission ([Joh 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022)):
He breathed on them, and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Observe,

\[1.\] The sign he used to assure them of, and affect them with, the
gift he was now about to bestow upon them: He breathed on them; not only
to show them, by this breath of life, that he himself was really alive,
but to signify to them the spiritual life and power which they should
receive from him for all the services that lay before them. Probably he
breathed upon them all together, not upon each severally and, though
Thomas was not with them, yet the Spirit of the Lord knew where to find
him, as he did Eldad and Medad, [Num
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#026). Christ here seems to refer to
the creation of man at first, by the breathing of the breath of life
into him ([Gen 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)), and to intimate
that he himself was the author of that work, and that the spiritual life
and strength of ministers and Christians are derived from him, and
depend upon him, as much as the natural life of Adam and his seed. As
the breath of the Almighty gave life to man and began the old world, so
the breath of the mighty Saviour gave life to his ministers, and began a
new world, [Job 33:4](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#004). Now this
intimates to us, First, That the Spirit is the breath of Christ,
proceeding from the Son. The Spirit, in the Old Testament, is compared
to breath ([Eze 37:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#009)), Come, O breath;
but the New Testament tells us it is Christ's breath. The breath of God
is put for the power of his wrath ([Isa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004); [Isa
30:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#033)); but the breath of Christ
signifies the power of his grace; the breathing of threatenings is
changed into the breathings of love by the mediation of Christ. Our
words are uttered by our breath, so the word of Christ is spirit and
life. The word comes from the Spirit, and the Spirit comes along with
the word. Secondly, That the Spirit is the gift of Christ. The apostles
communicated the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, those hands being
first lifted up in prayer, for they could only beg this blessing, and
carry it as messengers; but Christ conferred the Holy Ghost by
breathing, for he is the author of the gift, and from him it comes
originally. Moses could not give his Spirit, God did it ([Num
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#017)); but Christ did it himself.

\[2.\] The solemn grant he made, signified by this sign, Receive ye the
Holy Ghost, in part now, as an earnest of what you shall further receive
not many days hence." They now received more of the Holy Ghost than they
had yet received. Thus spiritual blessings are given gradually; to him
that has shall be given. Now that Jesus began to be glorified more of
the Spirit began to be given: see [Joh
7:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039). Let us see what is contained in
this grant. First, Christ hereby gives them assurance of the Spirit's
aid in their future work, in the execution of the commission now given
them: "I send you, and you shall have the Spirit to go along with you."
Now the Spirit of the Lord rested upon them to qualify them for all the
services that lay before them. Whom Christ employs he will clothe with
his Spirit, and furnish with all needful powers. Secondly, He hereby
gives them experience of the Spirit's influences in their present case.
He had shown them his hands and his side, to convince them of the truth
of his resurrection; but the plainest evidences will not of themselves
work faith, witness the infidelity of the soldiers, who were the only
eye-witnesses of the resurrection. "Therefore receive ye the Holy Ghost,
to work faith in you, and to open your understandings." They were now in
danger of the Jews: "Therefore receive ye the Holy Ghost, to work
courage in you." What Christ said to them he says to all true believers,
Receive ye the Holy Ghost, [Eph 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013).
What Christ gives we must receive, must submit ourselves and our whole
souls to the quickening, sanctifying, influences of the blessed Spirit -
receive his motions, and comply with them - receive his powers and make
use of them: and those who thus obey this word as a precept shall have
the benefit of it as a promise; they shall receive the Holy Ghost as the
guide of their way and the earnest of their inheritance.

(5.) One particular branch of the power given them by their commission
particularized ([Joh 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#023)):
"Whosesoever sins you remit, in the due execution of the powers you are
entrusted with, they are remitted to them, and they may take the comfort
of it; and whosesoever sins you retain, that is, pronounce unpardoned
and the guilt of them bound on, they are retained, and the sinner may be
sure of it, to his sorrow." Now this follows upon their receiving the
Holy Ghost; for, if they had not had an extraordinary spirit of
discerning, they had not been fit to be entrusted with such an
authority; for, in the strictest sense, this is a special commission to
the apostles themselves and the first preachers of the gospel, who could
distinguish who were in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, and
who were not. By virtue of this power, Peter struck Ananias and Sapphira
dead, and Paul struck Elymas blind. Yet it must be understood as a
general charter to the church and her ministers, not securing an
infallibility of judgment to any man or company of men in the world, but
encouraging the faithful stewards of the mysteries of God to stand to
the gospel they were sent to preach, for that God himself will stand to
it. The apostles, in preaching remission, must begin at Jerusalem,
though she had lately brought upon herself the guilt of Christ's blood:
"Yet you may declare their sins remitted upon gospel terms." And Peter
did so, [Act 2:38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038); [Act
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#019). Christ, being risen for our
justification, sends his gospel heralds to proclaim the jubilee begun,
the act of indemnity now passed; and by this rule men shall be judged,
[Joh 12:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#048); [Rom
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#016); [Jam
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#012). God will never alter this rule
of judgment, nor vary from it; those whom the gospel acquits shall be
acquitted, and those whom the gospel condemns shall be condemned, which
puts immense honour upon the ministry, and should put immense courage
into ministers. Two ways the apostles and ministers of Christ remit and
retain sin, and both as having authority: - \[1.\] By sound doctrine.
They are commissioned to tell the world that salvation is to be had upon
gospel terms, and no other, and they shall find God will say Amen to it;
so shall their doom be. \[2.\] By a strict discipline, applying the
general rule of the gospel to particular persons. "Whom you admit into
communion with you, according to the rules of the gospel, God will admit
into communion with himself; and whom you cast out of communion as
impenitent, and obstinate in scandalous and infectious sins, shall be
bound over to the righteous judgment of God."

III\. The incredulity of Thomas, when the report of this was made to
him, which introduced Christ's second appearance.

1\. Here is Thomas's absence from this meeting, [Joh
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#024). He is said to be one of the
twelve, one of the college of the apostles, who, though now eleven, had
been twelve, and were to be so again. They were but eleven, and one of
them was missing: Christ's disciples will never be all together till the
general assembly at the great day. Perhaps it was Thomas's unhappiness
that he was absent - either he was not well, or had not notice; or
perhaps it was his sin and folly - either he was diverted by business or
company, which he preferred before this opportunity, or he durst not
come for fear of the Jews; and he called that his prudence and caution
which was his cowardice. However, by his absence he missed the
satisfaction of seeing his Master risen, and of sharing with the
disciples in their joy upon that occasion. Note, Those know not what
they lose who carelessly absent themselves from the stated solemn
assemblies of Christians.

2\. The account which the other disciples gave him of the visit their
Master had made them, [Joh 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#025). The
next time they saw him they said unto him, with joy enough, We have seen
the Lord; and no doubt they related to him all that had passed,
particularly the satisfaction he had given them by showing them his
hands and his side. It seems, though Thomas was then from them, he was
not long from them; absentees for a time must not be condemned as
apostates for ever: Thomas is not Judas. Observe with what exultation
and triumph they speak it: "We have seen the Lord, the most comfortable
sight we ever saw." This they said to Thomas, (1.) To upbraid him with
his absence: "We have seen the Lord, but thou hast not." Or rather, (2.)
To inform him: "We have seen the Lord, and we wish thou hadst been here,
to see him too, for thou wouldest have seen enough to satisfy thee."
Note, The disciples of Christ should endeavour to build up one another
in their most holy faith, both by repeating what they have heard to
those that were absent, that they may hear it at second hand, and also
by communicating what they have experienced. Those that by faith have
seen the Lord, and tasted that he is gracious, should tell others what
God has done for their souls; only let boasting be excluded.

3\. The objections Thomas raised against the evidence, to justify
himself in his unwillingness to admit it. "Tell me not that you have
seen the Lord alive; you are too credulous; somebody has made fools of
you. For my part, except I shall not only see in his hands the print of
the nails, but put my finger into it, and thrust my hand into the wound
in his side, I am resolved I will not believe." Some, by comparing this
with what he said ([Joh 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#016); [Joh
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#005)), conjecture him to have been a
man of a rough, morose temper, apt to speak peevishly; for all good
people are not alike happy in their temper. However, there was certainly
much amiss in his conduct at this time. (1.) He had either not heeded,
or not duly regarded, what Christ had so often said, and that too
according to the Old Testament, that he would rise again the third day;
so that he ought to have said, He is risen, though he had not seen him,
nor spoken with any that had. (2.) He did not pay a just deference to
the testimony of his fellow-disciples, who were men of wisdom and
integrity, and ought to have been credited. He knew them to be honest
men; they all ten of them concurred in the testimony with great
assurance; and yet he could not persuade himself to say that their
record was true. Christ had chosen them to be his witnesses of this very
thing to all nations; and yet Thomas, one of their own fraternity, would
not allow them to be competent witnesses, nor trust them further than he
could see them. It was not, however, their veracity that he questioned,
but their prudence; he feared they were too credulous. (3.) He tempted
Christ, and limited the Holy One of Israel, when he would be convinced
by his own method, or not at all. He could not be sure that the print of
the nails, which the apostles told him they had seen, would admit the
putting of his finger into it, or the wound in his side the thrusting in
of his hand; nor was it fit to deal so roughly with a living body; yet
Thomas ties up his faith to this evidence. Either he will be humoured,
and have his fancy gratified, or he will not believe; see [Mat
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#001); [Mat
27:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#042). (4.) The open avowal of this in
the presence of the disciples was an offence and discouragement to them.
It was not only a sin, but a scandal. As one coward makes many, so does
one believer, one sceptic, making his brethren's heart to faint like his
heart, [Deu 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#008). Had he only thought
this evil, and then laid his hand upon his mouth, to suppress it, his
error had remained with himself; but his proclaiming his infidelity, and
that so peremptorily, might be of ill consequence to the rest, who were
as yet but weak and wavering.

[John 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 20:26</span></span>

We have here an account of another appearance of Christ to his
disciples, after his resurrection, when Thomas was now with them. And
concerning this we may observe,

I. When it was that Christ repeated his visit to his disciples: After
eight days, that day seven-night after he rose, which must therefore be,
as that was, the first day of the week.

1\. He deferred his next appearance for some time, to show his disciples
that he was not risen to such a life as he had formerly lived, to
converse constantly with them but was as one that belonged to another
world, and visited this only as angels do, now and then, when there was
occasion. Where Christ was during these eight days, and the rest of the
time of his abode on earth, it is folly to enquire, and presumption to
determine. Wherever he was, no doubt angels ministered unto him. In the
beginning of his ministry he had been forty days unseen, tempted by the
evil spirit, [Mat 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001), [Mat
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#002). And now in the beginning of his
glory he was forty days, for the most part unseen, attended by good
spirits.

2\. He deferred it so long as seven days. And why so? (1.) That he might
put a rebuke upon Thomas for his incredulity. He had neglected the
former meeting of the disciples; and, to teach him to prize those
seasons of grace better for the future, he cannot have such another
opportunity for several days. He that slips one tide must stay a good
while for another. A very melancholy week, we have reason to think
Thomas had of it, drooping, and in suspense, while the other disciples
were full of joy; and it was owing to himself and his own folly. (2.)
That he might try the faith and patience of the rest of the disciples.
They had gained a great point when they were satisfied that they had
seen the Lord. Then were the disciples glad; but he would try whether
they could keep the ground they had got, when they saw no more of him
for some days. And thus he would gradually wean them from his bodily
presence, which they had doted and depended too much upon. (3.) That he
might put an honour upon the first day of the week, and give a plain
intimation of his will, that it should be observed in his church as the
Christian sabbath, the weekly day of holy rest and holy convocations.
That one day in seven should be religiously observed was an appointment
from the beginning, as old as innocency; and that in the kingdom of the
Messiah the first day of the week should be that solemn day this was
indication enough, that Christ on that day once and again met his
disciples in a religious assembly. It is highly probable that in his
former appearance to them he appointed them that day seven-night to be
together again, and promised to meet them; and also that he appeared to
them every first day of the week, besides other times, during the forty
days. The religious observance of that day has been thence transmitted
down to us through every age of the church. This therefore is the day
which the Lord has made.

II\. Where, and how, Christ made them this visit. It was at Jerusalem,
for the doors were shut now, as before, for fear of the Jews. There they
staid, to keep the feast of unleavened bread seven days, which expired
the day before this; yet they would not set out on their journey to
Galilee on the first day of the week, because it was the Christian
sabbath, but staid till the day after. Now observe, 1. That Thomas was
with them; though he had withdrawn himself once, yet not a second time.
When we have lost one opportunity, we should give the more earnest heed
to lay hold on the next, that we may recover our losses. It is a good
sign if such a loss whet our desires, and a bad sign if it cool them.
The disciples admitted him among them, and did not insist upon his
believing the resurrection of Christ, as they did, because as yet it was
but darkly revealed; they did not receive him to doubtful disputation,
but bade him welcome to come and see. But observe, Christ did not appear
to Thomas, for his satisfaction, till he found him in society with the
rest of his disciples, because he would countenance the meetings of
Christians and ministers, for there will he be in the midst of them.
And, besides, he would have all the disciples witnesses of the rebuke he
gave to Thomas, and yet withal of the tender care he had of him. 2. That
Christ came in among them, and stood in the midst, and they all knew
him, for he showed himself now, just as he had shown himself before
([Joh 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#019)), still the same, and no
changeling. See the condescension of our Lord Jesus. The gates of heaven
were ready to be opened to him, and there he might have been in the
midst of the adorations of a world of angels; yet, for the benefit of
his church, he lingered on earth, and visited the little private
meetings of his poor disciples, and is in the midst of them. 3. He
saluted them all in a friendly manner, as he had done before; he said,
Peace be unto you. This was no vain repetition, but significant of the
abundant and assured peace which Christ gives, and of the continuance of
his blessings upon his people, for they fail not, but are new every
morning, new every meeting.

III\. What passed between Christ and Thomas at this meeting; and that
only is recorded, though we may suppose he said a great deal to the rest
of them. Here is,

1\. Christ's gracious condescension to Thomas, [Joh
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#027). He singled him out from the
rest, and applied himself particularly to him: "Reach hither thy finger,
and, since thou wilt have it so, behold my hands, and satisfy thy
curiosity to the utmost about the print of the nails; reach hither thy
hand, and, if nothing less will convince thee, thrust it into my side."
Here we have, (1.) An implicit rebuke of Thomas's incredulity, in the
plain reference which is here had to what Thomas had said, answering it
word for word, for he had heard it, though unseen; and one would think
that his telling him of it should put him to the blush. Note, There is
not an unbelieving word on our tongues, no, nor thought in our minds, at
any time, but it is known to the Lord Jesus. [Psa
78:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#021). (2.) An express condescension
to this weakness, which appears in two things: - \[1.\] That he suffers
his wisdom to be prescribed to. Great spirits will not be dictated to by
their inferiors, especially in their acts of grace; yet Christ is
pleased here to accommodate himself even to Thomas's fancy in a needless
thing, rather than break with him, and leave him in his unbelief. He
will not break the bruised reed, but, as a good shepherd, gathers that
which was driven away, [Eze 34:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#016). We
ought thus to bear the infirmities of the weak, [Rom
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001), [Rom
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#002). \[2.\] He suffers his wounds to
be raked into, allows Thomas even to thrust his hand into his side, if
then at last he would believe. Thus, for the confirmation of our faith,
he has instituted an ordinance on purpose to keep his death in
remembrance, though it was an ignominious, shameful death, and one would
think should rather have been forgotten, and no more said of it; yet,
because it was such an evidence of his love as would be an encouragement
to our faith, he appoints the memorial of it to be celebrated. And in
that ordinance where in we show the Lord's death we are called, as it
were, to put our finger into the print of the nails. Reach hither thy
hand to him, who reacheth forth his helping, inviting, giving hand to
thee.

It is an affecting word with which Christ closes up what he had to say
to Thomas: Be not faithless but believing; mē ginou apistos - do not
thou become an unbeliever; as if he would have been sealed up under
unbelief, had he not yielded now. This warning is given to us all: Be
not faithless; for, if we are faithless, we are Christless and
graceless, hopeless and joyless; let us therefore say, Lord, I believe,
help thou my unbelief.

2\. Thomas's believing consent to Jesus Christ. He is now ashamed of his
incredulity, and cries out, My Lord and my God, [Joh
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#028). We are not told whether he did
put his finger into the print of the nails; it should seem, he did not,
for Christ says ([Joh 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#029)), Thou
hast seem, and believed; seeing sufficed. And now faith comes off a
conqueror, after a struggle with unbelief.

(1.) Thomas is now fully satisfied of the truth of Christ's resurrection
- that the same Jesus that was crucified is now alive, and this is he.
His slowness and backwardness to believe may help to strengthen our
faith; for hereby it appears that the witnesses of Christ's
resurrection, who attested it to the world, and pawned their lives upon
it, were not easy credulous men, but cautious enough, and suspended
their belief of it till they saw the utmost evidence of it they could
desire. Thus out of the eater came forth meat.

(2.) He therefore believed him to be Lord and God, and we are to believe
him so. \[1.\] We must believe his deity - that he is God; not a man
made God, but God made man, as this evangelist had laid down his thesis
at first, [Joh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001). The author and
head of our holy religion has the wisdom, power, sovereignty, and
unchangeableness of God, which was necessary, because he was to be not
only the founder of it, but the foundation of it for its constant
support, and the fountain of life for its supply. \[2.\] His mediation -
that he is Lord, the one Lord, [Co1
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006); [Ti1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005). He is sufficiently authorized, as
pleni-potentiary, to settle the great concerns that lie between God and
man, to take up the controversy which would inevitably have been our
ruin, and to establish the correspondence that was necessary to our
happiness; see [Act 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036); [Rom
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#009).

(3.) He consented to him as his Lord and his God. In faith there must be
the consent of the will to gospel terms, as well as the assent of the
understanding to gospel truths. We must accept of Christ to be that to
us which the Father hath appointed him. My Lord refers to Adonai - my
foundation and stay; my God to Elohim - my prince and judge. God having
constituted him the umpire and referee, we must approve the choice, and
entirely refer ourselves to him. This is the vital act of faith, He is
mine, [Sol 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#016).

(4.) He made an open profession of this, before those that had been the
witnesses of his unbelieving doubts. He says it to Christ, and, to
complete the sense, we must read it, Thou art my Lord and my God; or,
speaking to his brethren, This is my Lord and my God. Do we accept of
Christ as our Lord God? We must go to him, and tell him so, as David
([Psa 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#002)), deliver the surrender to
him as our act and deed, tell others so, as those that triumph in our
relation to Christ: This is my beloved. Thomas speaks with an ardency of
affection, as one that took hold of Christ with all his might, My Lord
and my God.

3\. The judgment of Christ upon the whole ([Joh
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#029)): "Thomas because thou hast seen
me, thou hast believed, and it is well thou art brought to it at last
upon any terms; but blessed are those that have not seen, and yet have
believed." Here,

(1.) Christ owns Thomas a believer. Sound and sincere believers, though
they be slow and weak, shall be graciously accepted of the Lord Jesus.
Those who have long stood it out, if at last they yield, shall find him
ready to forgive. No sooner did Thomas consent to Christ than Christ
gives him the comfort of it, and lets him know that he believes.

(2.) He upbraids him with his former incredulity. He might well be
ashamed to think, \[1.\] That he had been so backward to believe, and
came so slowly to his own comforts. Those that in sincerity have closed
with Christ see a great deal of reason to lament that they did not do it
sooner. \[2.\] That it was not without much ado that he was brought to
believe at last: "If thou hadst not seen me alive, thou wouldst not have
believed;" but if no evidence must be admitted but that of our own
senses, and we must believe nothing but what we ourselves are
eye-witnesses of, farewell all commerce and conversation. If this must
be the only method of proof, how must the world be converted to the
faith of Christ? He is therefore justly blamed for laying so much stress
upon this.

(3.) He commends the faith of those who believe upon easier terms.
Thomas, as a believer, was truly blessed; but rather blessed are those
that have not seen. It is not meant of not seeing the objects of faith
(for these are invisible, [Heb 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#001);
[Co2 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#018)), but the motives of faith -
Christ's miracles, and especially his resurrection; blessed are those
that see not these, and yet believe in Christ. This may look, either
backward, upon the Old Testament saints, who had not seen the things
which they saw, and yet believed the promise made unto the father, and
lived by that faith; or forward, upon those who should afterwards
believe, the Gentiles, who had never seen Christ in the flesh, as the
Jews had. This faith is more laudable and praise-worthy than theirs who
saw and believed; for, \[1.\] It evidences a better temper of mind in
those that do believe. Not to see and yet to believe argues greater
industry in searching after truth, and greater ingenuousness of mind in
embracing it. He that believes upon that sight has his resistance
conquered by a sort of violence; but he that believes without it, like
the Bereans, is more noble. \[2.\] It is a greater instance of the power
of divine grace. The less sensible the evidence is the more does the
work of faith appear to be the Lord's doing. Peter is blessed in his
faith, because flesh and blood have not revealed it to him, [Mat
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017). Flesh and blood contribute more
to their faith that see and believe, than to theirs who see not and yet
believe. Dr. Lightfoot quotes a saying of one of the rabbin, "That one
proselyte is more acceptable to God than all the thousands of Israel
that stood before mount Sinai; for they saw and received the law, but a
proselyte sees not, and yet receives it."

IV\. The remark which the evangelist makes upon his narrative, like an
historian drawing towards a conclusion, [Joh
20:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#030), [Joh
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#031). And here,

1\. He assures us that many other things occurred, which were all worthy
to be recorded, but are not written in the book: many signs. Some refer
this to all the signs that Jesus did during his whole life, all the
wondrous words he spoke, and all the wondrous works he did. But it seems
rather to be confined to the signs he did after his resurrection, for
these were in the presence of the disciples only, who are here spoken
of, [Act 10:41](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#041). Divers of his
appearances are not recorded, as appears, [Co1
15:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#005). See [Act
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#003). Now, (1.) We may here improve
this general attestation, that there were other signs, many others, for
the confirmation of our faith; and, being added to the particular
narratives, they very much strengthen the evidence. Those that recorded
the resurrection of Christ were not put to fish for evidence, to take up
such short and scanty proofs as they could find, and make up the rest
with conjecture. No, they had evidence enough and to spare, and more
witnesses to produce than they had occasion for. The disciples, in whose
presence these other signs were done, were to be preachers of Christ's
resurrection to others, and therefore it was requisite they should have
proofs of it ex abundanti - in abundance, that they might have a strong
consolation, who ventured life and all upon it. (2.) We need not ask why
they were not all written, or why not more than these, or others than
these; for it is enough for us that so it seemed good to the Holy
Spirit, by whose inspiration this was given. Had this history been a
mere human composition, it had been swelled with a multitude of
depositions and affidavits, to prove the contested truth of Christ's
resurrection and long argument drawn up for the demonstration of it;
but, being a divine history, the penmen write with a noble security,
relating what amounted to a competent proof, sufficient to convince
those that were willing to be taught and to condemn those that were
obstinate in their unbelief; and, if this satisfy not, more would not.
Men produce all they have to say, that they may gain credit; but God
does not, for he can give faith. Had this history been written for the
entertainment of the curious, it would have been more copious, or every
circumstance would have brightened and embellished the story; but it was
written to bring men to believe, and enough is said to answer that
intention, whether men will hear or whether they will forbear.

2\. He instructs us in the design of recording what we do find here
([Joh 20:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#031)): "These accounts are
given in this and the following chapter, that you might believe upon
these evidences; that you might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the
Son of God, declared with power to be so by his resurrection."

(1.) Here is the design of those that wrote the gospel. Some write books
for their diversion, and publish them for their profit or applause,
others to oblige the Athenian humour, others to instruct the world in
arts and sciences for their secular advantage; but the evangelists wrote
without any view of temporal benefit to themselves or others, but to
bring men to Christ and heaven, and, in order to this, to persuade men
to believe; and for this they took the most fitting methods, they
brought to the world a divine revelation, supported with its due
evidences.

(2.) The duty of those that read and hear the gospel. It is their duty
to believe, to embrace, the doctrine of Christ, and that record given
concerning him [Jo1 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#011). \[1.\] We
are here told what the great gospel truth is which we are to believe -
that Jesus is that Christ, that Son of God. First, That he is the
Christ, the person who, under the title of the Messiah, was promised to,
and expected by, the Old Testament saints, and who, according to the
signification of the name, is anointed of God to be a prince and a
Saviour. Secondly, That he is the Son of God; not only as Mediator (for
then he had not been greater than Moses, who was a prophet, intercessor,
and lawgiver), but antecedent to his being the Mediator; for if he had
not been a divine person, endued with the power of God and entitled to
the glory of God, he had not been qualified for the undertaking - not
fit either to do the Redeemer's work or to wear the Redeemer's crown.
\[2.\] What the great gospel blessedness is which we are to hope for -
That believing we shall have life through his name. This is, First, To
direct our faith; it must have an eye to the life, the crown of life,
the tree of life set before us. Life through Christ's name, the life
proposed in the covenant which is made with us in Christ, is what we
must propose to ourselves as the fulness of our joy and the abundant
recompence of all our services and sufferings. Secondly, To encourage
our faith, and invite us to believe. Upon the prospect of some great
advantage, men will venture far; and greater advantage there cannot be
than that which is offered by the words of this life, as the gospel is
called, [Act 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#020). It includes both
spiritual life, in conformity to God and communion with him, and eternal
life, in the vision and fruition of him. Both are through Christ's name,
by his merit and power, and both indefeasibly sure to all true
believers.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 21](joh021)

</div>
