<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh013)  [Next](joh015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 14:0</span></span>

This chapter is a continuation of Christ's discourse with his disciples
after supper. When he had convicted and discarded Judas, he set himself
to comfort the rest, who were full of sorrow upon what he had said of
leaving them, and a great many good words and comfortable words he here
speaks to them. The discourse in interlocutory; as Peter in the
foregoing chapter, so Thomas, and Philip, and Jude, in this interposed
their thoughts upon what he said, according to the liberty he was
pleased to allow them. Free conferences are as instructive as solemn
speeches, and more so. The general scope of this chapter is in the first
verse; it is designed to keep trouble from their hearts; now in order to
this they must believe: and let them consider, I. Heaven as their
everlasting rest ([Joh 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#002), [Joh
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#003)). II. Christ himself as their way
([Joh 14:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#004)). III. The great power
they shall be clothed with by the prevalency of their prayers ([Joh
14:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#012)). IV. The coming of another
comforter ([Joh 14:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#015)). V. The
fellowship and communion that should be between him and them after his
departure ([Joh 14:18-24](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#018)). VI. The
instructions which the Holy Ghost should give them ([Joh
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#025), [Joh
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026)). VII. The peace Christ
bequeathed to them ([Joh 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027)). VII.
Christ's own cheerfulness in his departure ([Joh
14:28-31](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028)). And this which he said to
them is designed for the comfort of all his faithful followers.

[John 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 14:1</span></span>

In these verses we have,

I. A general caution which Christ gives to his disciples against trouble
of heart ([Joh 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001)): Let not your
heart be troubled. They now began to be troubled, were entering into
this temptation. Now here see,

1\. How Christ took notice of it. Perhaps it was apparent in their
looks; it was said ([Joh 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#022)), They
looked one upon another with anxiety and concern, and Christ looked upon
them all, and observed it; at least, it was intelligible to the Lord
Jesus, who is acquainted with all our secret undiscovered sorrows, with
the wound that bleeds inwardly; he knows not only how we are afflicted,
but how we stand affected under our afflictions, and how near they lie
to our hearts; he takes cognizance of all the trouble which his people
are at any time in danger of being overwhelmed with; he knows our souls
in adversity. Many things concurred to trouble the disciples now.

(1.) Christ had just told them of the unkindness he should receive from
some of them, and this troubled them all. Peter, no doubt, looked very
sorrowful upon what Christ said to him, and all the rest were sorry for
him and for themselves too, not knowing whose turn it should be to be
told next of some ill thing or other they should do. As to this, Christ
comforts them; though a godly jealousy over ourselves is of great use to
keep us humble and watchful, yet it must not prevail to the disquieting
of our spirits and the damping of our holy joy.

(2.) He had just told them of his own departure from them, that he
should not only go away, but go away in a cloud of sufferings. They must
shortly hear him loaded with reproaches, and these will be as a sword in
their bones; they must see him barbarously abused and put to death, and
this also will be a sword piercing through their own souls, for they had
loved him, and chosen him, and left all to follow him. When we now look
upon Christ pierced, we cannot but mourn and be in bitterness, though we
see the glorious issue and fruit of it; much more grievous must the
sight be to them, who could then look no further. If Christ depart from
them \[1.\] They will think themselves shamefully disappointed; for they
looked that this had been he that should have delivered Israel, and
should have set upon his kingdom in secular power and glory, and, in
expectation of this, had lost all to follow him. Now, if he leave the
world in the same circumstances of meanness and poverty in which he had
lived, and worse, they are quite defeated. \[2.\] They will think
themselves sadly deserted and exposed. They knew by experience what
little presence of mind they had in difficult emergencies, that they
could count upon nothing but being ruined and run down if they part with
their Master. Now, in reference to all these, Let not your heart be
troubled. Here are three words, upon any of which the emphasis may
significantly be laid. First, Upon the word troubled, mē tarassesthō. Be
not so troubled as to be put into a hurry and confusion, like the
troubled sea when it cannot rest. He does not say, "Let not your hearts
be sensible of the griefs, or sad because of them" but, "Be not ruffled
and discomposed, be not cast down and disquieted," [Psa
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#005). Secondly, Upon the word heart:
"Though the nation and city be troubled, though your little family and
flock be troubled, yet let not your heart be troubled. Keep possession
of your own souls when you can keep possession of nothing else." The
heart is the main fort; whatever you do, keep trouble from this, keep
this with all diligence. The spirit must sustain the infirmity,
therefore, see that this be not wounded. Thirdly, Upon the word your:
"You that are my disciples and followers, my redeemed, chosen,
sanctified ones, however others are overwhelmed with the sorrows of this
present time, be not you so, for you know better; let the sinners in
Zion tremble, but let the sons of Zion be joyful in their king." Herein
Christ's disciples should do more than others, should keep their minds
quiet, when every thing else is unquiet.

2\. The remedy he prescribes against this trouble of mind, which he saw
ready to prevail over them; in general, believe - pisteuete. (1.) Some
read it in both parts imperatively, "Believe in God, and his perfections
and providence, believe also in me, and my mediation. Build with
confidence upon the great acknowledged principles of natural religion:
that there is a God, that he is most holy, wise, powerful, and good;
that he is the governor of the world, and has the sovereign disposal of
all events; and comfort yourselves likewise with the peculiar doctrines
of that holy religion which I have taught you." But, (2.) We read the
former as an acknowledgment that they did believe in God, for which he
commends them: "But, if you would effectually provide against a stormy
day, believe also in me." Through Christ we are brought into covenant
with God, and become interested in his favour and promise, which
otherwise as sinners we must despair of, and the remembrance of God
would have been our trouble; but, by believing in Christ as the Mediator
between God and man, our belief in God becomes comfortable; and this is
the will of God, that all men should honour the Son as they honour the
Father, by believing in the Son as they believe in the Father. Those
that rightly believe in God will believe in Jesus Christ, whom he has
made known to them; and believing in God through Jesus Christ is an
excellent means of keeping trouble from the heart. The joy of faith is
the best remedy against the griefs of sense; it is a remedy with a
promise annexed to it; the just shall live by faith; a remedy with a
probatum est annexed to it. I had fainted unless I had believed.

II\. Here is a particular direction to act faith upon the promise of
eternal life, [Joh 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#002), [Joh
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#003). He had directed them to trust to
God, and to trust in him; but what must they trust God and Christ for?
Trust them for a happiness to come when this body and this world shall
be no more, and for a happiness to last as long as the immortal soul and
the eternal world shall last. Now this is proposed as a sovereign
cordial under all the troubles of this present time, to which there is
that in the happiness of heaven which is admirably adapted and
accommodated. The saints have encouraged themselves with this in their
greatest extremities, That heaven would make amends for all. Let us see
how this is suggested here.

1\. Believe and consider that really there is such a happiness: In my
Father's house there are many mansions; if it were not so, I would have
told you, [Joh 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#002).

(1.) See under what notion the happiness of heaven is here represented:
as mansions, many mansions in Christ's Father's house. \[1.\] Heaven is
a house, not a tent or tabernacle; it is a house not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens. \[2.\] It is a Father's house: my Father's
house; and his Father is our Father, to whom he was now ascending; so
that in right of their elder brother all true believers shall be welcome
to that happiness as to their home. It is his house who is King of kings
and Lord of lords, dwells in light, and inhabits eternity. \[3.\] There
are mansions there; that is, First, Distinct dwellings, an apartment for
each. Perhaps there is an allusion to the priests' chambers that were
about the temple. In heaven there are accommodations for particular
saints; though all shall be swallowed up in God, yet our individuality
shall not be lost there; every Israelite had his lot in Canaan, and
every elder a seat, [Rev 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004).
Secondly, Durable dwellings. Monai, from mneiō, maneo, abiding places.
The house itself is lasting; our estate in it is not for a term of
years, but a perpetuity. Here we are as in an inn; in heaven we shall
gain a settlement. The disciples had quitted their houses to attend
Christ, who had not where to lay his head, but the mansions in heaven
will make them amends. \[4.\] There are many mansions, for there are
many sons to be brought to glory, and Christ exactly knows their number,
nor will be straitened for room by the coming of more company than he
expects. He had told Peter that he should follow him ([Joh
13:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#036)), but let not the rest be
discouraged, in heaven there are mansions for them all. Rehoboth, [Gen
26:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#022).

(2.) See what assurance we have of the reality of the happiness itself,
and the sincerity of the proposal of it to us: "If it were not so, I
would have told you. If you had deceived yourselves, when you quitted
your livelihoods, and ventured your lives for me, in prospect of a
happiness future and unseen, I would soon have undeceived you." The
assurance is built, \[1.\] Upon the veracity of his word. It is implied,
"If there were not such a happiness, valuable and attainable, I would
not have told you that there was." \[2.\] Upon the sincerity of his
affection to them. As he is true, and would not impose upon them
himself, so he is kind, and would not suffer them to be imposed upon. If
either there were no such mansions, or none designed for them, who had
left all to follow him, he would have given them timely notice of the
mistake, that they might have made an honourable retreat to the world
again, and have made the best they could of it. Note, Christ's good-will
to us is a great encouragement to our hope in him. He loves us too well,
and means us too well, to disappoint the expectations of his own
raising, or to leave those to be of all men most miserable who have been
of him most observant.

2\. Believe and consider that the design of Christ's going away was to
prepare a place in heaven for his disciples. "You are grieved to think
of my going away, whereas I go on your errand, as the forerunner; I am
to enter for you." He went to prepare a place for us; that is, (1.) To
take possession for us, as our advocate or attorney, and so to secure
our title as indefeasible. Livery of seisin was given to Christ, for the
use and behoof of all that should believe on him. (2.) To make provision
for us as our friend and father. The happiness of heaven, though
prepared before the foundation of the world, yet must be further fitted
up for man in his fallen state. It consisting much in the presence of
Christ there, it was therefore necessary that he should go before, to
enter into that glory which his disciples were to share in. Heaven would
be an unready place for a Christian if Christ were not there. He went to
prepare a table for them, to prepare thrones for them, [Luk
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#030). Thus Christ declares the
fitness of heaven's happiness for the saints, for whom it is prepared.

3\. Believe and consider that therefore he would certainly come again in
due time, to fetch them to that blessed place which he was now going to
possess for himself and prepare for them ([Joh
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#003)): "If I go and prepare a place
for you, if this be the errand of my journey, you may be sure, when
every thing is ready, I will come again, and receive you to myself, so
that you shall follow me hereafter, that where I am there you may be
also." Now these are comfortable words indeed. (1.) That Jesus Christ
will come again; erchomai - I do come, intimating the certainty of it,
that he will come and that he is daily coming. We say, We are coming,
when we are busy in preparing for our coming, and so he is; all he does
has a reference and tendency to his second coming. Note, The belief of
Christ's second coming, of which he has given us the assurance, is an
excellent preservative against trouble of heart, [Phi
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005); [Jam
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#008). (2.) That he will come again to
receive all his faithful followers to himself. He sends for them
privately at death, and gathers them one by one; but they are to make
their public entry in solemn state all together at the last day, and
then Christ himself will come to receive them, to conduct them in the
abundance of his grace, and to welcome them in the abundance of his
love. He will hereby testify the utmost respect and endearment
imaginable. The coming of Christ is in order to our gathering together
unto him, [Th2 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#001). (3.) That where he
is there they shall be also. This intimates, what many other scriptures
declare, that the quintessence of heaven's happiness is being with
Christ there, [Joh 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#024); [Phi
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023); [Th1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#017). Christ speaks of his being there
as now present, that where I am; where I am to be shortly, where I am to
be eternally; there you shall be shortly, there you shall be eternally:
not only there, in the same place; but here, in the same state: not only
spectators of his glory, as the three disciples on the mount, but
sharers in it. (4.) That this may be inferred from his going to prepare
a place for us, for his preparations shall not be in vain. He will not
build and furnish lodgings, and let them stand empty. He will be the
finisher of that of which he is the author. If he has prepared the place
for us, he will prepare us for it, and in due time put us in possession
of it. As the resurrection of Christ is the assurance of our
resurrection, so his ascension, victory, and glory, are an assurance of
ours.

[John 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 14:4</span></span>

Christ, having set the happiness of heaven before them as the end, here
shows them himself as the way to it, and tells them that they were
better acquainted both with the end they were to aim at and with the way
they were to walk in than they thought they were: You know, that is, 1.
"You may know; it is none of the secret things which belong not to you,
but one of the things revealed; you need not ascend into heaven, nor go
down into the deep, for the word is nigh you ([Rom
10:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006)), level to you." 2. "You do
know; you know that which is the home and which is the way, though
perhaps not as the home and as the way. You have been told it, and
cannot but know, if you would recollect and consider it." Note, Jesus
Christ is willing to make the best of his people's knowledge, though
they are weak and defective in it. He knows the good that is in them
better than they do themselves, and is certain that they have that
knowledge, and faith, and love, of which they themselves are not
sensible, or not certain.

This word of Christ gave occasion to two of his disciples to address
themselves to him, and he answers them both.

I. Thomas enquired concerning the way ([Joh
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#005)), without any apology for
contradicting his Master.

1\. He said, "Lord, we know not whither thou goest, to what place or
what state, and how can we know the way in which we must follow thee? We
can neither guess at it, nor enquire it out, but must still be at a
loss." Christ's testimony concerning their knowledge made them more
sensible of their ignorance, and more inquisitive after further light.
Thomas here shows more modesty than Peter, who thought he could follow
Christ now. Peter was the more solicitous to know whither Christ went.
Thomas here, though he complains that he did not know this, yet seems
more solicitous to know the way. Now, (1.) His confession of his
ignorance was commendable enough. If good men be in the dark, and know
but in part, yet they are willing to own their defects. But, (2.) The
cause of his ignorance was culpable. They knew not whither Christ went,
because they dreamed of a temporal kingdom in external pomp and power,
and doted upon this, notwithstanding what he had said again and again to
the contrary. Hence it was that, when Christ spoke of going away and
their following him, their fancy ran upon his going to some remarkable
city or other, Bethlehem, or Nazareth, or Capernaum, or some of the
cities of the Gentiles, as David to Hebron, there to be anointed king,
and to restore the kingdom to Israel; and which way this place lay,
where these castles in the air were to be built, east, west, north, or
south, they could not tell, and therefore knew not the way. Thus still
we think ourselves more in the dark than we need be concerning the
future state of the church, because we expect its worldly prosperity,
whereas it is spiritual advancement that the promise points at. Had
Thomas understood, as he might have done, that Christ was going to the
invisible world, the world of spirits, to which spiritual things only
have a reference, he would not have said, Lord, we do not know the way.

II\. Now to this complaint of their ignorance, which included a desire
to be taught, Christ gives a full answer, [Joh
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006), [Joh
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#007). Thomas had enquired both whither
he went and what was the way, and Christ answers both these enquiries
and makes good what he had said, that they would have needed no answer
if they had understood themselves aright; for they knew him, and he was
the way; they knew the Father, and he was the end; and therefore,
whither I go you know, and the way you know. Believe in God as the end,
and in me as the way ([Joh 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001)), and
you do all you should do.

(1.) He speaks of himself as the way, [Joh
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006). Dost thou not know the way? I am
the way, and I only, for no man comes to the Father but by me. Great
things Christ here saith of himself, showing us,

\[1.\] The nature of his mediation: He is the way, the truth, and the
life.

First, Let us consider these first distinctly. 1. Christ is the way, the
highway spoken of, [Isa 35:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#008). Christ
was his own way, for by his own blood he entered into the holy place
([Heb 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012)), and he is our way, for we
enter by him. By his doctrine and example he teaches us our duty, by his
merit and intercession he procures our happiness, and so he is the way.
In him God and man meet, and are brought together. We could not get to
the tree of life in the way of innocency; but Christ is another way to
it. By Christ, as the way an intercourse is settled and kept up between
heaven and earth; the angels of God ascend and descend; our prayers go
to God, and his blessings come to us by him; this is the way that leads
to rest, the good old way. The disciples followed him, and Christ tells
them that they followed the road, and, while they continued following
him, they would never be out of their way. 2. He is the truth. (1.) As
truth is opposed to figure and shadow. Christ is the substance of all
the Old Testament types, which are therefore said to be figures of the
true, [Heb 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#024). Christ is the true
manna ([Joh 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#032)), the true
tabernacle, [Heb 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#002). (2.) As truth is
opposed to falsehood and error; the doctrine of Christ is true doctrine.
When we enquire for truth, we need learn no more than the truth as it is
in Jesus. (3.) As truth is opposed to fallacy and deceit; he is true to
all that trust in him, as true as truth itself, [Co2
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020). 3. He is the life; for we are
alive unto God only in and through Jesus Christ, [Rom
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#011). Christ formed in us is that to
our souls which our souls are to our bodies. Christ is the resurrection
and the life.

Secondly, Let us consider these jointly, and with reference to each
other. Christ is the way, the truth, and the life; that is, 1. He is the
beginning, the middle, and the end. In him we must set out, go on, and
finish. As the truth, he is the guide of our way; as the life, he is the
end of it. 2. He is the true and living way ([Heb
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#020)); there are truth and life in
the way, as well as at the end of it. 3. He is the true way to life, the
only true way; other ways may seem right, but the end of them is the way
of death.

\[2.\] The necessity of his mediation: No man cometh to the Father but
by me. Fallen man must come to God as a Judge, but cannot come to him as
a Father, otherwise than by Christ as Mediator. We cannot perform the
duty of coming to God, by repentance and the acts of worship, without
the Spirit and grace of Christ, nor obtain the happiness of coming to
God as our Father without his merit and righteousness; he is the high
priest of our profession, our advocate.

(2.) He speaks of his Father as the end ([Joh
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#007)): "If you had known me aright,
you would have known my Father also; and henceforth, by the glory you
have seen in me and the doctrine you have heard from me, you know him
and have seen him." Here is, \[1.\] A tacit rebuke to them for their
dulness and carelessness in not acquainting themselves with Jesus
Christ, though they had been his constant followers and associates: If
you had known me - . They knew him, and yet did not know him so well as
they might and should have known him. They knew him to be the Christ,
but did not follow on to know God in him. Christ had said to the Jews
([Joh 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#019)): If you had known me, you
would have known my Father also; and here the same to his disciples; for
it is hard to say which is more strange, the wilful ignorance of those
that are enemies to the light, or the defects and mistakes of the
children of light, that have had such opportunities of knowledge. If
they had known Christ aright, they would have known that his kingdom is
spiritual, and not of this world; that he came down from heaven, and
therefore must return to heaven; and then they would have known his
Father also, would have known whither he designed to go, when he said, I
go to the Father, to a glory in the other world, not in this. If we knew
Christianity better, we should better know natural religion. \[2.\] A
favourable intimation that he was well satisfied concerning their
sincerity, notwithstanding the weakness of their understanding: "And
henceforth, from my giving you this hint, which will serve as a key to
all the instructions I have given you hitherto, let me tell you, you
know him, and have seen him, inasmuch as you know me, and have seen me;"
for in the face of Christ we see the glory of God, as we see a father in
his son that resembles him. Christ tells his disciples that they were
not so ignorant as they seemed to be; for, though little children, yet
they had known the Father, [Jo1 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#013).
Note, Many of the disciples of Christ have more knowledge and more grace
than they think they have, and Christ takes notice of, and is well
pleased with, that good in them which they themselves are not aware of;
for those that know God do not all at once know that they know him, [Jo1
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#003).

II\. Philip enquired concerning the Father ([Joh
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#008)), and Christ answered him, [Joh
14:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009), where observe,

1\. Philip's request for some extraordinary discovery of the Father. He
was not so forward to speak as some others of them were, and yet, from
an earnest desire of further light, he cries out, Show us the Father.
Philip listened to what Christ said to Thomas, and fastened upon the
last words, You have seen him. "Nay," says Philip, "that is what we
want, that is what we would have: Show us the Father and it sufficeth
us." (1.) This supposes an earnest desire of acquaintance with God as a
Father. The petition is, "Show us the Father; give us to know him in
that relation to us;" and this he begs, not for himself only, but for
the rest of the disciples. The plea is, It sufficeth us. He not only
professes it himself, but will pass his word for his fellow-disciples.
Grant us but one sight of the Father, and we have enough. Jansenius
saith, "Though Philip did not mean it, yet the Holy Ghost, by his mouth,
designed here to teach us that the satisfaction and happiness of a soul
consist in the vision and fruition of God," [Psa
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#011); [Psa
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#015). In the knowledge of God the
understanding rests, and is at the summit of its ambition; in the
knowledge of God as our Father the soul is satisfied; a sight of the
Father is a heaven upon earth, fills us with joy unspeakable. (2.) As
Philip speaks it here, it intimates that he was not satisfied with such
a discovery of the Father as Christ thought fit to give them, but he
would prescribe to him, and press upon him, something further and no
less than some visible appearance of the glory of God, like that to
Moses ([Exo 33:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#022)), and to the elders
of Israel, [Exo 24:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#009). "Let us see
the Father with our bodily eyes, as we see thee, and it sufficeth us; we
will trouble thee with no more questions, Whither goest thou?" And so it
manifests not only the weakness of his faith, but his ignorance of the
gospel way of manifesting the Father, which is spiritual, and not
sensible. Such a sight of God, he thinks, would suffice them, and yet
those who did thus see him were not sufficed, but soon corrupted
themselves, and made a graven image. Christ's institutions have provided
better for the confirmation of our faith than our own inventions would.

2\. Christ's reply, referring him to the discoveries already made of the
Father, [Joh 14:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009).

(1.) He refers him to what he had seen, [Joh
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009). He upbraids him with his
ignorance and inadvertency: "Have I been so long time with you, now
above three years intimately conversant with you, and yet hast thou not
known me, Philip? Now, he that hath seen me hath seen the Father; and
how sayest thou then, Show us the Father? Wilt thou ask for that which
thou hast already?" Now here,

\[1.\] He reproves him for two things: First, For not improving his
acquaintance with Christ, as he might have done, to a clear and distinct
knowledge of him: "Hast thou not known me, Philip, whom thou hast
followed so long, and conversed with so much?" Philip, the first day he
came to him, declared that he knew him to be the Messiah ([Joh
1:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#045)), and yet to this day did not
know the Father in him. Many that have good knowledge in the scripture
and divine things fall short of the attainments justly expected from
them, for want of compounding the ideas they have, and going on to
perfection. Many know Christ, who yet do not know what they might know
of him, nor see what they should see in him. That which aggravated
Philip's dulness was that he had so long an opportunity of improvement:
I have been so long time with thee. Note, The longer we enjoy the means
of knowledge and grace, the more inexcusable we are if we be found
defective in grace and knowledge. Christ expects that our proficiency
should be in some measure according to our standing, that we should not
be always babes. Let us thus reason with ourselves: "Have I been so long
a hearer of sermons, a student in the scripture, a scholar in the school
of Christ, and yet so weak in the knowledge of Christ, and so unskilful
in the word of righteousness?" Secondly, He reproves him for his
infirmity in the prayer made, Show us the Father. Note, Herein appears
much of the weakness of Christ's disciples that they know not what to
pray for as they ought ([Rom 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026)),
but often ask amiss ([Jam 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#003)), for
that which either is not promised or is already bestowed in the sense of
the promise, as here.

\[2.\] He instructs him, and gives him a maxim which not only in general
magnifies Christ and leads us to the knowledge of God in him, but
justifies what Christ had said ([Joh
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#007)): You know the Father, and have
seen him; and answered what Philip had asked, Show us the Father. Why,
saith Christ, the difficulty is soon over, for he that hath seen me hath
seen the Father. First, All that saw Christ in the flesh might have seen
the Father in him, if Satan had not blinded their minds, and kept them
from a sight of Christ, as the image of God, [Co2
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004). Secondly, All that saw Christ by
faith did see the Father in him, though they were not suddenly aware
that they did so. In the light of Christ's doctrine they saw God as the
father of lights; in the miracles they saw God as the God of power, the
finger of God. The holiness of God shone in the spotless purity of
Christ's life, and his grace in all the acts of grace he did.

(2.) He refers him to what he had reason to believe ([Joh
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010), [Joh
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#011)): "Believest thou not that I am
in the Father, and the Father in me, and therefore that in seeing me
thou hast seen the Father? Hast thou not believed this? If not, take my
word for it, and believe it now."

\[1.\] See here what it is which we are to believe: That I am in the
Father, and the Father in me; that is, as he had said ([Joh
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)), I and my Father are one. He
speaks of the Father and himself as two persons, and yet so one as never
any two were or can be. In knowing Christ as God of God, light of light,
very God of very God, begotten, not made, and as being of one substance
with the Father, by whom all things were made, we know the Father; and
in seeing him thus we see the Father. In Christ we behold more of the
glory of God than Moses did at Mount Horeb.

\[2.\] See here what inducements we have to believe this; and they are
two: - We must believe it, First, For his word's sake: The words that I
speak to you, I speak not of myself. See [Joh
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#016), My doctrine is not mine. What he
said seemed to them careless as the word of man, speaking his own
thought at his own pleasure; but really it was the wisdom of God that
indited it and the will of God that enforced it. He spoke not of himself
only, but the mind of God according to the eternal counsels. Secondly,
For his works' sake: The Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth them; and
therefore believe me for their sake. Observe, 1. The Father is said to
dwell in him ho en emoi menōn - he abideth in me, by the inseparable
union of the divine and human nature: never had God such a temple to
dwell in on earth as the body of the Lord Jesus, [Joh
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#021). Here was the true Shechinah, of
which that in the tabernacle was but a type. The fulness of the Godhead
dwelt in him bodily, [Col 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009). The
Father so dwells in Christ that in him he may be found, as a man where
he dwells. Seek ye the Lord, seek him in Christ, and he will be found,
for in him he dwells. 2. He doeth the works. Many words of power, and
works of mercy, Christ did, and the Father did them in him; and the work
of redemption in general was God's own work. 3. We are bound to believe
this, for the very works' sake. As we are to believe the being and
perfections of God for the sake of the works of creation, which declare
his glory; so we are to believe the revelation of God to man in Jesus
Christ for the sake of the works of the Redeemer, those mighty works
which, by showing forth themselves ([Mat
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#002)), Show forth him, and God in him.
Note, Christ's miracles are proofs of his divine mission, not only for
the conviction of infidels, but for the confirmation of the faith of his
own disciples, [Joh 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#011); [Joh
5:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#036); [Joh
10:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#037).

[John 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 14:12</span></span>

The disciples, as they were full of grief to think of parting with their
Master, so they were full of care what would become of themselves when
he was gone; while he was with them, he was a support to them, kept them
in countenance, kept them in heart; but, if he leave them, they will be
as sheep having no shepherd, an easy prey to those who seek to run them
down. Now, to silence these fears, Christ here assures them that they
should be clothed with powers sufficient to bear them out. As Christ has
all power, they, in his name, should have great power, both in heaven
and in earth.

I. Great power on earth ([Joh 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#012)):
He that believeth on me (as I know you do), the works that I do shall he
do also. This does not weaken the argument Christ had taken from his
works, to prove himself one with the Father (that others should do as
great works), but rather strengthens it; for the miracles which the
apostles wrought were wrought in his name, and by faith in him; and this
magnifies his power more than any thing, that he not only wrought
miracles himself, but gave power to others to do so too.

1\. Two things he assures them of: -

(1.) That they should be enabled to do such works as he had done, and
that they should have a more ample power for the doing of them than they
had had when he first sent them forth, [Mat
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#008). Did Christ heal the sick,
cleanse the leper, raise the dead? So should they. Did he convince and
convert sinners, and draw multitudes to him? So should they. Though he
should depart, the work should not cease, nor fall to the ground, but
should be carried on as vigorously and successfully as ever; and it is
still in the doing.

(2.) That they should do greater works than these. \[1.\] In the kingdom
of nature they should work greater miracles. No miracle is little, but
some to our apprehension seem greater than others. Christ had healed
with the hem of his garment, but Peter with his shadow ([Act
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#015)), Paul by the handkerchief that
had touched him, [Act 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#012). Christ
wrought miracles for two or three years in one country, but his
followers wrought miracles in his name for many ages in divers
countries. You shall do greater works, if there be occasion, for the
glory of God. The prayer of faith, if at any time it had been necessary,
would have removed mountains. \[2.\] In the kingdom of grace. They
should obtain greater victories by the gospel than had been obtained
while Christ was upon earth. The truth is, the captivating of so great a
part of the world to Christ, under such outward disadvantages, was the
miracle of all. I think this refers especially to the gift of tongues;
this was the immediate effect of the pouring out of the Spirit, which
was a constant miracle upon the mind, in which words are framed, and
which was made to serve so glorious an intention as that of spreading
the gospel to all nations in their own language. This was a greater sign
to them that believed not ([Co1
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#022)), and more powerful for their
conviction, than any other miracle whatever.

2\. The reason Christ gives for this is, Because I go unto my Father,
(1.) "Because I go, it will be requisite that you should have such a
power, lest the work suffer damage by my absence." (2.) "Because I go to
the Father, I shall be in a capacity to furnish you with such a power,
for I go to the Father, to send the Comforter, from whom you shall
receive power," [Act 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#008). The
wonderful works which they did in Christ's name were part of the glories
of his exalted state, when he ascended on high, [Eph
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008).

II\. Great power in heaven: "Whatsoever you shall ask, that will I do
([Joh 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#013), [Joh
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#014)), as Israel, who was a prince
with God. Therefore you shall do such mighty works, because you have
such an interest in me, and I in my Father." Observe,

1\. In what way they were to keep up communion with him, and derive
power from him, when he was gone to the Father - by prayer. When dear
friends are to be removed to a distance from each other, they provide
for the settling of a correspondence; thus, when Christ was going to his
Father, he tells his disciples how they might write to him upon every
occasion, and send their epistles by a safe and ready way of conveyance,
without danger of miscarrying, or lying by the way: "Let me hear from
you by prayer, the prayer of faith, and you shall hear from me by the
Spirit." This was the old way of intercourse with Heaven, ever since men
began to call upon the name of the Lord; but Christ by his death has
laid it more open, and it is still open to us. Here is, (1.) Humility
prescribed: You shall ask. Though they had quitted all for Christ, they
could demand nothing of him as a debt, but must be humble supplicants,
beg or starve, beg or perish. (2.) Liberty allowed: "Ask any thing, any
thing that is good and proper for you; any thing, provided you know what
you ask, you may ask; you may ask for assistance in your work, for a
mouth and wisdom, for preservation out of the hands of your enemies, for
power to work miracles when there is occasion, for the success of the
ministry in the conversion of souls; ask to be informed, directed,
vindicated." Occasions vary, but they shall be welcome to the throne of
grace upon every occasion.

2\. In what name they were to present their petitions: Ask in my name.
To ask in Christ's name is, (1.) To plead his merit and intercession,
and to depend upon that plea. The Old Testament saints had an eye to
this when they prayed for the Lord's sake ([Dan
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#017)), and for the sake of the
anointed ([Psa 84:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#009)), but Christ's
mediation is brought to a clearer light by the gospel, and so we are
enabled more expressly to ask in his name. When Christ dictated the
Lord's prayer, this was not inserted, because they did not then so fully
understand this matter as they did afterwards, when the Spirit was
poured out. If we ask in our own name, we cannot expect to speed, for,
being strangers, we have no name in heaven; being sinners, we have an
ill name there; but Christ's is a good name, well known in heaven, and
very precious. (2.) It is to aim at his glory and to seek this as our
highest end in all our prayers.

3\. What success they should have in their prayers: "What you ask, that
will I do," [Joh 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#013). And again
([Joh 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#014)), "I will do it. You may
be sure I will: not only it shall be done, I will see it done, or give
orders for the doing of it, but I will do it;" for he has not only the
interest of an intercessor, but the power of a sovereign prince, who
sits at the right hand of God, the hand of action, and has the doing of
all in the kingdom of God. By faith in his name we may have what we will
for the asking.

4\. For what reason their prayers should speed so well: That the Father
may be glorified in the Son. That is, (1.) This they ought to aim at,
and have their eye upon, in asking. In this all our desires and prayers
should meet as in their centre; to this they must all be directed, that
God in Christ may be honoured by our services, and in our salvation.
Hallowed be thy name is an answered prayer, and is put first, because,
if the heart be sincere in this, it does in a manner consecrate all the
other petitions. (2.) This Christ will aim at in granting, and for the
sake of this will do what they ask, that hereby the glory of the Father
in the Son may be manifested. The wisdom, power, and goodness of God
were magnified in the Redeemer when by a power derived from him, and
exerted in his name and for his service, his apostles and ministers were
enabled to do such great things, both in the proofs of their doctrine
and in the successes of it.

[John 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 14:15</span></span>

Christ not only proposes such things to them as were the matter of their
comfort, but here promises to send the Spirit, whose office it should be
to be their Comforter, to impress these things upon them.

I. He premises to this a memento of duty ([Joh
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#015)): If you love me, keep my
commandments. Keeping the commandments of Christ is here put for the
practice of godliness in general, and for the faithful and diligent
discharge of their office as apostles in particular. Now observe, 1.
When Christ is comforting them, he bids them keep his commandments; for
we must not expect comfort but in the way of duty. The same word
(parakaleō) signifies both to exhort and to comfort. 2. When they were
in care what they should do, now that their Master was leaving them, and
what would become of them now, he bids them keep his commandments, and
then nothing could come amiss to them. In difficult times our care
concerning the events of the day should be swallowed up in a care
concerning the duty of the day. 3. When they were showing their love to
Christ by their grieving to think of his departure, and the sorrow which
filled their hearts upon the foresight of that, he bids them, if they
would show their love to him, do it, not by these weak and feminine
passions, but by their conscientious care to perform their trust, and by
a universal obedience to his commands; this is better than sacrifice,
better than tears. Lovest thou me? Feed my lambs. 4. When Christ has
given them precious promises, of the answer of their prayers and the
coming of the Comforter, he lays down this as a limitation of the
promises, "Provided you keep my commandments, from a principle of love
to me." Christ will not be an advocate for any but those that will be
ruled and advised by him as their counsel. Follow the conduct of the
Spirit, and you shall have the comfort of the Spirit.

II\. He promises this great and unspeakable blessing to them, [Joh
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016), [Joh
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#017).

1\. It is promised that they shall have another comforter. This is the
great New Testament promise ([Act
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#004)), as that of the Messiah was of
the Old Testament; a promise adapted to the present distress of the
disciples, who were in sorrow, and needed a comforter. Observe here,

(1.) The blessing promised: allon paraklēton. The word is used only here
in these discourses of Christ's, and [Jo1
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001), where we translate it an
advocate. The Rhemists, and Dr. Hammond, are for retaining the Greek
word Paraclete; we read, [Act 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#031), of
the paraklēsis tou hagiou pneumatos, the comfort of the Holy Ghost,
including his whole office as a paraclete. \[1.\] You shall have another
advocate. The office of the Spirit was to be Christ's advocate with them
and others, to plead his cause, and take care of his concerns, on earth;
to be vicarius Christi - Christ's Vicar, as one of the ancients call
him; and to be their advocate with their opposers. When Christ was with
them he spoke for them as there was occasion; but now that he is leaving
them they shall not be run down, the Spirit of the Father shall speak in
them, [Mat 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#019), [Mat
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#020). And the cause cannot miscarry
that is pleaded by such an advocate. \[2.\] You shall have another
master or teacher, another exhorter. While they had Christ with them he
excited and exhorted them to their duty; but now that he is going he
leaves one with them that shall do this as effectually, though silently.
Jansenius thinks the most proper word to render it by is a patron, one
that shall both instruct and protect you. \[3.\] Another comforter.
Christ was expected as the consolation of Israel. One of the names of
the Messiah among the Jews was Menahem - the Comforter. The Targum calls
the days of the Messiah the years of consolation. Christ comforted his
disciples when he was with them, and now that he was leaving them in
their greatest need he promises them another.

(2.) The giver of this blessing: The Father shall give him, my Father
and your Father; it includes both. The same that gave the Son to be our
Saviour will give his Spirit to be our comforter, pursuant to the same
design. The Son is said to send the Comforter ([Joh
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026)), but the Father is the prime
agent.

(3.) How this blessing is procured - by the intercession of the Lord
Jesus: I will pray the Father. He said ([Joh
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#014)) I will do it; here he saith, I
will pray for it, to show not only that he is both God and man, but that
he is both king and priest. As priest he is ordained for men to make
intercession, as king he is authorized by the Father to execute
judgment. When Christ saith, I will pray the Father, it does not suppose
that the Father is unwilling, or must be importuned to it, but only that
the gift of the Spirit is a fruit of Christ's mediation, purchased by
his merit, and taken out by his intercession.

(4.) The continuance of this blessing: That he may abide with you for
ever. That is, \[1.\] "With you, as long as you live. You shall never
know the want of a comforter, nor lament his departure, as you are now
lamenting mine." Note, It should support us under the loss of those
comforts which were designed us for a time that there are everlasting
consolations provided for us. It was not expedient that Christ should be
with them for ever, for they who were designed for public service, must
not always live a college-life; they must disperse, and therefore a
comforter that would be with them all, in all places alike, wheresoever
dispersed and howsoever distressed, was alone fit to be with them for
ever. \[2.\] "With your successors, when you are gone, to the end of
time; your successors in Christianity, in the ministry." \[3.\] If we
take for ever in its utmost extent, the promise will be accomplished in
those consolations of God which will be the eternal joy of all the
saints, pleasures for ever.

2\. This comforter is the Spirit of truth, whom you know, [Joh
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016), [Joh
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#017). They might think it impossible
to have a comforter equivalent to him who is the Son of God: "Yea,"
saith Christ, "you shall have the Spirit of God, who is equal in power
and glory with the Son."

(1.) The comforter promised is the Spirit, one who should do his work in
a spiritual way and manner, inwardly and invisibly, by working on men's
spirits.

(2.) "He is the Spirit of truth." He will be true to you, and to his
undertaking for you, which he will perform to the utmost. He will teach
you the truth, will enlighten your minds with the knowledge of it, will
strengthen and confirm your belief of it, and will increase your love to
it. The Gentiles by their idolatries, and the Jews by their traditions,
were led into gross errors and mistakes; but the Spirit of truth shall
not only lead you into all truth, but others by your ministry. Christ is
the truth, and he is the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit that he was
anointed with.

(3.) He is one whom the world cannot receive; but you know him.
Therefore he abideth with you. \[1.\] The disciples of Christ are here
distinguished from the world, for they are chosen and called out of the
world that lies in wickedness; they are the children and heirs of
another world, not of this. \[2.\] It is the misery of those that are
invincibly devoted to the world that they cannot receive the Spirit of
truth. The spirit of the world and of God are spoken of as directly
contrary the one to the other ([Co1
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#012)); for where the spirit of the
world has the ascendant, the Spirit of God is excluded. Even the princes
of this world, though, as princes, they had advantages of knowledge,
yet, as princes of this world, they laboured under invincible
prejudices, so that they knew not the things of the Spirit of God, [Co1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008). \[3.\] Therefore men cannot
receive the Spirit of truth because they see him not, neither know him.
The comforts of the Spirit are foolishness to them, as much as ever the
cross of Christ was, and the great things of the gospel, like those of
the law, are counted as a strange thing. These are judgments far above
out of their sight. Speak to the children of this world of the
operations of the Spirit, and you are as a barbarian to them. \[4.\] The
best knowledge of the Spirit of truth is that which is got by
experience: You know him, for he dwelleth with you. Christ had dwelt
with them, and by their acquaintance with him they could not but know
the Spirit of truth. They had themselves been endued with the Spirit in
some measure. What enabled them to leave all to follow Christ, and to
continue with him in his temptations? What enabled them to preach the
gospel, and work miracles, but the Spirit dwelling in them? The
experiences of the saints are the explications of the promises;
paradoxes to others are axioms to them. \[5.\] Those that have an
experimental acquaintance with the Spirit have a comfortable assurance
of his continuance: He dwelleth with you, and shall be in you, for the
blessed Spirit doth not use to shift his lodging. Those that know him
know how to value him, invite him and bid him welcome; and therefore he
shall be in them, as the light in the air, as the sap in the tree, as
the soul in the body. Their communion with him shall be intimate, and
their union with him inseparable. \[6.\] The gift of the Holy Ghost is a
peculiar gift, bestowed upon the disciples of Christ in a distinguishing
way - them, and not the world; it is to them hidden manna, and the white
stone. No comforts comparable to those which make no show, make no
noise. This is the favour God bears to his chosen; it is the heritage of
those that fear his name.

[John 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 14:18</span></span>

When friends are parting, it is a common request they make to each
other, "Pray let us hear from you as often as you can:" this Christ
engaged to his disciples, that out of sight they should not be out of
mind.

I. He promises that he would continue his care of them ([Joh
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#018)): "I will not leave you orphans,
or fatherless; for, though I leave you, yet I leave you this comfort, I
will come to you." His departure from them was that which grieved them;
but it was not so bad as they apprehended, for it was neither total nor
final. 1. Not total. "Though I leave you without my bodily presence, yet
I do not leave you without comfort." Though children, and left little,
yet they had received the adoption of sons, and his Father would be
their Father, with whom those who otherwise would be fatherless find
mercy. Note, The case of true believers, though sometimes it may be
sorrowful, is never comfortless, because they are never orphans: for God
is their Father, who is an everlasting Father. 2. Not final: I will come
to you, erchomai - I do come; that is, (1.) "I will come speedily to you
at my resurrection, I will not be long away, but will be with you again
in a little time." He had often said, The third day I will rise again.
(2.) "I will be coming daily to you in my Spirit;" in the tokens of his
love, and visits of his grace, he is still coming. (3.) "I will come
certainly at the end of time; surely I will come quickly to introduce
you into the joy of your Lord." Note, The consideration of Christ's
coming to us saves us from being comfortless in his removals from us;
for, if he depart for a season, it is that we may receive him for ever.
Let this moderate our grief, The Lord is at hand.

II\. He promises that they should continue their acquaintance with him
and interest in him ([Joh 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#019), [Joh
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#020)): Yet a little while, and the
world sees me no more, that is, Now I am no more in the world. After his
death, the world saw him no more, for, though he rose to life, he never
showed himself to all the people, [Act
10:41](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#041). The malignant world thought
they had seen enough of him, and cried, Away with him; crucify him; and
so shall their doom be; they shall see him no more. Those only that see
Christ with an eye of faith shall see him for ever. The world sees him
no more till his second coming; but his disciples have communion with
him in his absence.

1\. You see me, and shall continue to see me, when the world sees me no
more. They saw him with their bodily eyes after his resurrection, for he
showed himself to them by many infallible proofs, [Act
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#008). And then were the disciples glad
when they saw the Lord. They saw him with an eye of faith after his
ascension, sitting at God's right hand, as Lord of all; saw that in him
which the world saw not.

2\. Because I live, you shall live also. That which grieved them was,
that their Master was dying, and they counted upon nothing else but to
die with him. No, saith Christ, (1.) I live; this the great God glories
in, I live, saith the Lord, and Christ saith the same; not only, I shall
live, as he saith of them, but, I do live; for he has life in himself,
and lives for evermore. We are not comfortless, while we know that our
Redeemer lives. (2.) Therefore you shall live also. Note, The life of
Christians is bound up in the life of Christ; as sure and as long as he
lives, those that by faith are united to him shall live also; they shall
live spiritually, a divine life in communion with God. This life is hid
with Christ; if the head and root live, the members and branches live
also. They shall live eternally; their bodies shall rise in the virtue
of Christ's resurrection; it will be well with them in the world to
come. It cannot but be well with all that are his, [Isa
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019).

3\. You shall have the assurance of this ([Joh
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#020)): At that day, when I am
glorified, when the Spirit is poured out, you shall know more clearly
and certainly than you do now that I am in my Father, and you in me, and
I in you. (1.) These glorious mysteries will be fully known in heaven;
At that day, when I shall receive you to myself, you shall know
perfectly that which now you see through a glass darkly. Now it appears
not what we shall be, but then it will appear what we were. (2.) They
were more fully known after the pouring out of the Spirit upon the
apostles; at that day divine light should shine, and their eyes should
see more clearly, their knowledge should greatly advance and increase
then, would become more extensive and more distinct, and like the blind
man's at the second touch of Christ's hand, who at first only saw men as
trees walking. (3.) They are known by all that receive the Spirit of
truth, to their abundant satisfaction, for in the knowledge of this is
founded their fellowship with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ. They
know, \[1.\] That Christ is in the Father, is one with the Father, by
their experience of what he has wrought for them and in them; they find
what an admirable consent and harmony there is between Christianity and
natural religion, that that is grafted into this, and so they know that
Christ is in the Father. \[2.\] That Christ is in them; experienced
Christians know by the Spirit that Christ abides in them, [Jo1
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#024). \[3.\] That they are in Christ,
for the relation is mutual, and equally near on both sides, Christ in
them and they in Christ, which speaks an intimate and inseparable union;
in the virtue of which it is that because he lives they shall live also.
Note, First, Union with Christ is the life of believers; and their
relation to him, and to God through him, is their felicity. Secondly,
The knowledge of this union is their unspeakable joy and satisfaction;
they were now in Christ, and he in them, but he speaks of it as a
further act of grace that they should know it, and have the comfort of
it. An interest in Christ and the knowledge of it are sometimes
separated.

III\. He promises that he would love them, and manifest himself to them,
[Joh 14:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#021). Here observe,

1\. Who they are whom Christ will look upon, and accept, as lovers of
him; those that have his commandments, and keep them. By this Christ
shows that the kind things he here said to his disciples were intended
not for those only that were now his followers, but for all that should
believe in him through their word. Here is, (1.) The duty of those who
claim the dignity of being disciples. Having Christ's commandments, we
must keep them; as Christians in name and profession we have Christ's
commandments, we have them sounding in our ears, written before our
eyes, we have the knowledge of them; but this is not enough; would we
approve ourselves Christians indeed, we must keep them. Having them in
our heads, we must keep them in our hearts and lives. (2.) The dignity
of those that do the duty of disciples. They are looked upon by Christ
to be such as love him. Not those that have the greatest wit and know
how to talk for him, but those that keep his commandments. Note, The
surest evidence of our love to Christ is obedience to the laws of
Christ. Such is the love of a subject to his sovereign, a dutiful,
respectful, obediential love, a conformity to his will, and satisfaction
in his wisdom.

2\. What returns he will make to them for their love; rich returns;
there is no love lost upon Christ. (1.) They shall have the Father's
love: He that loveth me shall be loved of my Father. We could not love
God if he did not first, out of his good-will to us, give us his grace
to love him; but there is a love of complacency promised to those that
do love God, [Pro 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#017). He loves them,
and lets them know that he loves them, smiles upon them, and embraces
them. God so loves the Son as to love all those that love him. (2.) They
shall have Christ's love: And I will love him, as God-man, as Mediator.
God will love him as a Father, and I will love him as a brother, an
elder brother. The Creator will love him, and be the felicity of his
being; the Redeemer will love him, and be the protector of his
well-being. In the nature of God, nothing shines more brightly than
this, that God is love. And in the undertaking of Christ nothing appears
more glorious than this, that he loved us. Now both these loves are the
crown and comfort, the grace and glory, which shall be to all those that
love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. Christ was now leaving his
disciples, but promises to continue his love to them; for he not only
retains a kindness for believers, though absent, but is doing them
kindness while absent, for he bears them on his heart, and ever lives
interceding for them. (3.) They shall have the comfort of that love: I
will manifest myself to him. Some understand it of Christ's showing
himself alive to his disciples after his resurrection; but, being
promised to all that love him and keep his commandments, it must be
construed so as to extend to them. There is a spiritual manifestation of
Christ and his love made to all believers. When he enlightens their
minds to know his love, and the dimensions of it ([Eph
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#018), [Eph
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#019)), enlivens their graces, and
draws them into exercise, and thus enlarges their comforts in himself -
when he clears up the evidences of their interest in him, and gives them
tokens of his love, experience of his tenderness, and earnests of his
kingdom and glory, - then he manifests himself to them; and Christ is
manifested to none but those to whom he is pleased to manifest himself.

3\. What occurred upon Christ's making this promise.

(1.) One of the disciples expresses his wonder and surprise at it, [Joh
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#022). Observe, \[1.\] Who it was that
said this - Judas, not Iscariot. Judah, or Judas, was a famous name; the
most famous tribe in Israel was that of Judah; two of Christ's disciples
were of that name: one of them was the traitor, the other was the
brother of James ([Luk 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#016)), one of
those that were akin to Christ, [Mat
13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055). He is called Lebbeus and
Thaddeus, was the penman of the last of the epistles, which in our
translation, for distinction's sake, we call the epistle of Jude. This
was he that spoke here. Observe, First, There was a very good man, and a
very bad man, called by the same name; for names commend us not to God,
nor do they make men worse. Judas the apostle was never the worse, nor
Judas the apostate ever the better, for being namesakes. But, Secondly,
The evangelist carefully distinguishes between them; when he speaks of
this pious Judas, he adds, not Iscariot. Take heed of mistaking; let us
not confound the precious and the vile. \[2.\] What he said - Lord how
is it? which intimates either, First, the weakness of his understanding.
So some take it. He expected the temporal kingdom of the Messiah, that
it should appear in external pomp and power, such as all the world would
wonder after. "How, then," thinks he, "should it be confined to us
only?" ti gegonen - "what is the matter now, that thou wilt not show
thyself openly as is expected, that the Gentiles may come to thy light,
and kings to the brightness of thy rising?" Note, We create difficulties
to ourselves by mistaking the nature of Christ's kingdom, as if it were
of this world. Or, Secondly, as expressing the strength of his
affections, and the humble and thankful sense he had of Christ's
distinguishing favours to them: Lord, how is it? He is amazed at the
condescensions of divine grace, as David, [Sa2
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#018). What is there in us to deserve
so great a favour? Note, 1. Christ's manifesting himself to his
disciples is done in a distinguishing way - to them, and not to the
world that sits in darkness; to the base, and not to the mighty and
noble; to babes, and not to the wise and prudent. Distinguishing favours
are very obliging; considering who are passed by, and who are pitched
upon. 2. It is justly marvellous in our eyes; for it is unaccountable,
and must be resolved into free and sovereign grace. Even so, Father,
because it seemed good unto thee.

(2.) Christ, in answer hereto, explains and confirms what he had said,
[Joh 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023), [Joh
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#024). He overlooks what infirmity
there was in what Judas spoke, and goes on with his comforts.

\[1.\] He further explains the condition of the promise, which was
loving him, and keeping his commandments. And, as to this, he shows what
an inseparable connection there is between love and obedience; love is
the root, obedience is the fruit. First, Where a sincere love to Christ
is in the heart, there will be obedience: "If a man love me indeed, that
love will be such a commanding constraining principle in him, that, no
question, he will keep my words." Where there is true love to Christ
there is a value for his favour, a veneration for his authority, and an
entire surrender of the whole man to his direction and government. Where
love is, duty follows of course, is easy and natural, and flows from a
principle of gratitude. Secondly, On the other hand, where there is no
true love to Christ there will be no care to obey him: He that loveth me
not keepeth not my sayings, [Joh
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#024). This comes in here as a
discovery of those that do not love Christ; whatever they pretend,
certainly those do not love him that believe not his truths, and obey
not his laws, to whom Christ's sayings are but as idle tales, which he
heeds not, or hard sayings, which he likes not. It is also a reason why
Christ will not manifest himself to the world that doth not love him,
because they put this affront upon him, not to keep his sayings; why
should Christ be familiar with those that will be strange to him?

\[2.\] He further explains the promise ([Joh
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023)): If a man thus love me, I will
manifest myself to him. First, My Father will love him; this he had said
before ([Joh 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#021)), and here repeats
it for the confirming of our faith; because it is hard to imagine that
the great god should make those the objects of his love that had made
themselves vessels of his wrath. Jude wondered that Christ should
manifest himself to them; but this answers it, "If my Father love you,
why should not I be free with you?" Secondly, We will come unto him, and
make our abode with him. This explains the meaning of Christ's
manifesting himself to him, and magnifies the favour. 1. Not only,I
will, but, We will, I and the Father, who, in this, are one. See [Joh
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009). The light and love of God are
communicated to man in the light and love of the Redeemer, so that
wherever Christ is formed the image of God is stamped. 2. Not only, "I
will show myself to him at a distance," but, "We will come to him, to be
near him, to be with him," such are the powerful influences of divine
graces and comforts upon the souls of those that love Christ in
sincerity. 3. Not only, "I will give him a transient view of me, or make
him a short and running visit," but, We will take up our abode with him
which denotes complacency in him and constancy to him. God will not only
love obedient believers, but he will take a pleasure in loving them,
will rest in love to them, [Zep 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#017).
He will be with them as at his home.

\[3.\] He gives a good reason both to bind us to observe the condition
and encourage us to depend upon the promise. The word which you hear is
not mine, but his that sent me, [Joh
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#024). To this purport he had often
spoken ([Joh 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#016); [Joh
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#028); [Joh
12:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#044)), and here it comes in very
pertinently. First, the stress of duty is laid upon the precept of
Christ as our rule, and justly, for that word of Christ which we are to
keep is the Father's word, and his will the Father's will. Secondly, The
stress of our comfort is laid upon the promise of Christ. But forasmuch
as, in dependence upon that promise, we must deny ourselves, and take up
our cross, and quit all, it concerns us to enquire whether the security
be sufficient for us to venture our all upon; and this satisfies us that
it is, that the promise is not Christ's bare word, but the Father's
which sent him, which therefore we may rely upon.

[John 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 14:25</span></span>

Two things Christ here comforts his disciples with: -

I. That they should be under the tuition of his Spirit, [Joh
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#025), [Joh
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026), where we may observe,

1\. The reflection Christ would have them make upon the instructions he
had given them: These things have I spoken unto you (referring to all
the good lessons he had taught them, since they entered themselves into
his school), being yet present with you. This intimates, (1.) That what
he had said he did not retract nor unsay, but ratify it, or stand to it.
What he had spoken he had spoken, and would abide by it. (2.) That he
had improved the opportunity of his bodily presence with them to the
utmost: "As long as I have been yet present with them, you know I have
lost no time." Note, When our teachers are about to be removed from us
we should call to mind what they have spoken, being yet present with us.

2\. The encouragement given them to expect another teacher, and that
Christ would find out a way of speaking to them after his departure from
them, [Joh 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026). He had told them
before that the Father would give them this other comforter ([Joh
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016)), and here he returns to speak
of it again; for as the promise of the Messiah had been, so the promise
of the Spirit now was, the consolation of Israel. Two things he here
tells them further concerning the sending of the Holy Ghost: -

(1.) On whose account he should be sent: "The Father will send him in my
name; that is, for my sake, at my special instance and request:" or, "as
my agent and representative." He came in his Father's name, as his
ambassador: the Spirit comes in his name, as resident in his absence, to
carry on his undertaking, and to ripen things for his second coming.
Hence he is called the Spirit of Christ, for he pleads his cause, and
does his work.

(2.) On what errand he should be sent; two things he shall do: - \[1.\]
He shall teach you all things, as a Spirit of wisdom and revelation
Christ was a teacher to his disciples; if he leave them now that they
have made so little proficiency, what will become of them? Why, the
Spirit shall teach them, shall be their standing tutor. He shall teach
them all things necessary for them either to learn themselves, or to
teach others. For those that would teach the things of God must first
themselves be taught of God; this is the Spirit's work. See [Isa
59:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#021). \[2.\] He shall bring all
things to your remembrance whatsoever I have said unto you. Many a good
lesson Christ had taught them, which they had forgotten, and which would
be to seek when they had occasion for it. Many things they did not
retain the remembrance of, because they did not rightly understand the
meaning of them. The Spirit shall not teach them a new gospel, but bring
to their minds that which they had been taught, by leading them into the
understanding of it. The apostles were all of them to preach, and some
of them to write, the things that Jesus did and taught, to transmit them
to distant nations and future ages; now, if they had been left to
themselves herein, some needful things might have been forgotten, others
misrepresented, through the treachery of their memories; therefore the
Spirit is promised to enable them truly to relate and record what Christ
said unto them. And to all the saints the Spirit of grace is given to be
a remembrancer, and to him by faith and prayer we should commit the
keeping of what we hear and know.

II\. That they should be under the influence of his peace ([Joh
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027)): Peace I leave with you. When
Christ was about to leave the world he made his will. His soul he
committed to his Father; his body he bequeathed to Joseph, to be
decently interred; his clothes fell to the soldiers; his mother he left
to the care of John: but what should he leave to his poor disciples,
that had left all for him? Silver and gold he had none; but he left them
that which was infinitely better, his peace. "I leave you, but I leave
my peace with you. I not only give you a title to it, but put you in
possession of it." He did not part in anger, but in love; for this was
his farewell, Peace I leave with you, as a dying father leaves portions
to his children; and this is a worthy portion. Observe,

1\. The legacy that is here bequeathed Peace, my peace. Peace is put for
all good, and Christ has left us all needful good, all that is really
and truly good, as all the purchased promised good. Peace is put for
reconciliation and love; the peace bequeathed is peace with God, peace
with one another; peace in our own bosoms seems to be especially meant;
a tranquillity of mind arising from a sense of our justification before
God. It is the counterpart of our pardons, and the composure of our
minds. This Christ calls his peace, for he is himself our peace, [Eph
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014). It is the peace he purchased for
us and preached to us, and on which the angels congratulated men at his
birth, [Luk 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014).

2\. To whom this legacy is bequeathed: "To you, my disciples and
followers, that will be exposed to trouble, and have need of peace; to
you that are the sons of peace, and are qualified to receive it." This
legacy was left to them as the representatives of the church, to them
and their successors, to them and all true Christians in all ages.

3\. In what manner it is left: Not as the world giveth, give I unto you.
That is, (1.) "I do not compliment you with Peace be unto you; no, it is
not a mere formality, but a real blessing." (2.) "The peace I give is of
such a nature that the smiles of the world cannot give it, nor the
frowns of the world take it away." Or, (3.) "The gifts I give to you are
not such as this world gives to its children and votaries, to whom it is
kind." The world's gifts concern only the body and time; Christ's gifts
enrich the soul for eternity: the world gives lying vanities, and that
which will cheat us; Christ gives substantial blessings, which will
never fail us: the world gives and takes; Christ gives a good part that
shall never be taken away. (4.) The peace which Christ gives is
infinitely more valuable than that which the world gives. The world's
peace begins in ignorance, consists with sin, and ends in endless
troubles; Christ's peace begins in grace, consists with no allowed sin,
and ends at length in everlasting peace. As is the difference between a
killing lethargy and a reviving refreshing sleep, such is the difference
between Christ's peace and the world's.

4\. What use they should make of it: Let not your heart be troubled, for
any evils past or present, neither let it be afraid of any evil to come.
Note, Those that are interested in the covenant of grace, and entitled
to the peace which Christ gives, ought not to yield to overwhelming
griefs and fears. This comes in here as the conclusion of the whole
matter; he had said ([Joh 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001)), Let
not your heart be troubled, and here he repeats it as that for which he
had now given sufficient reason.

[John 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 14:28</span></span>

Christ here gives his disciples another reason why their hearts should
not be troubled for his going away; and that is, because his heart was
not. And here he tells them what it was that enabled him to endure the
cross and despise the shame, that they might look unto him, and run with
patience. He comforted himself,

I. That, though he went away, he should come again: "You have heard how
I have said, and now I say it again, I go away, and come again." Note,
What we have heard of the doctrine of Christ, especially concerning his
second coming, we have need to be told again and again. When we are
under the power of any transport of passion, grief, or fear, or care, we
forget that Christ will come again. See [Phi
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005). Christ encouraged himself with
this, in his sufferings and death, that he should come again, and the
same should comfort us in our departure at death; we go away to come
again; the leave we take of our friends at that parting is only a good
night, not a final farewell. See [Th1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#013), [Th1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#014).

II\. That he went to his Father: "If you loved me, as by your sorrow you
say you do, you would rejoice instead of mourning, because, though I
leave you, yet I said, I go unto the Father, not only mine, but yours,
which will be my advancement and your advantage; for my Father is
greater than I." Observe here, 1. It is matter of joy to Christ's
disciples that he is gone to the Father, to take possession for orphans,
and make intercession for transgressors. His departure had a bright side
as well as a dark side. Therefore he sent this message after his
resurrection ([Joh 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)), I ascend to
my Father and your Father, as most comfortable. 2. The reason of this
is, because the Father is greater than he, which, if it be a proper
proof of that for which it is alleged (as no doubt it is), must be
understood thus, that his state with his Father would be much more
excellent and glorious than his present state; his returning to his
Father (so Dr. Hammond) would be the advancing of him to a much higher
condition than that which he was now in. Or thus, His going to the
Father himself, and bringing all his followers to him there, was the
ultimate end of his undertaking, and therefore greater than the means.
Thus Christ raises the thoughts and expectations of his disciples to
something greater than that in which now they thought all their
happiness bound up. The kingdom of the Father, wherein he shall be all
in all, will be greater than the mediatorial kingdom. 3. The disciples
of Christ should show that they love him by their rejoicing in the
glories of his exaltation, rather than by lamenting the sorrows of his
humiliation, and rejoicing that he is gone to his Father, where he would
be, and where we shall be shortly with him. Many that love Christ, let
their love run out in a wrong channel; they think if they love him they
must be continually in pain because of him; whereas those that love him
should dwell at ease in him, should rejoice in Christ Jesus.

III\. That his going away, compared with the prophecies which went
before of it, would be a means of confirming the faith of his disciples
([Joh 14:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#029)): "I have told you before
it come to pass that I must die and rise again, and ascend to the
Father, and send the Comforter, that, when it is come to pass, you might
believe." See this reason, [Joh 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#019);
[Joh 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#004). Christ told his disciples
of his death, though he knew it would both puzzle them and grieve them,
because it would afterwards redound to the confirmation of their faith
in two things: - 1. That he who foretold these things had a divine
prescience, and knew beforehand what day would bring forth. When St.
Paul was going to Jerusalem, he knew not the things that did abide him
there, but Christ did. 2. That the things foretold were according to the
divine purpose and designation, not sudden resolves, but the
counterparts of an eternal counsel. Let them therefore not be troubled
at that which would be for the confirmation of their faith, and so would
redound to their real benefit; for the trial of our faith is very
precious, though it cost us present heaviness, through manifold
temptations, [Pe1 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#006).

IV\. That he was sure of a victory over Satan, with whom he knew he was
to have a struggle in his departure ([Joh
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030)): "Henceforth I will not talk
much with you, having not much to say, but what may be adjourned to the
pouring out of the Spirit." He had a great deal of good talk with them
after this (ch. 15 and 16), but, in comparison with what he had said, it
was not much. His time was now short, and he therefore spoke largely to
them now, because the opportunity would soon be over. Note, We should
always endeavour to talk to the purpose, because perhaps we may not have
time to talk much. We know not how soon our breath may be stopped, and
therefore should be always breathing something that is good. When we
come to be sick and die, perhaps we may not be capable of talking much
to those about us; and therefore what good counsel we have to give them,
let us give it while we are in health. One reason why he would not talk
much with them was because he had now other work to apply himself to:
The prince of this world comes. He called the devil the prince of this
world, [Joh 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031). The disciples
dreamed of their Master being the prince of this world, and they worldly
princes under him. But Christ tells them that the prince of this world
was his enemy, and so were the princes of this world, that were actuated
and ruled by him, [Co1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008). But he has
nothing in me. Observe here, 1. The prospect Christ had of an
approaching conflict, not only with men, but with the powers of
darkness. The devil had set upon him with his temptations (Mt. 4), had
offered him the kingdoms of this world, if he would hold them as
tributary to him, with an eye to which Christ calls him, in disdain, the
prince of this world. Then the devil departed from him for a season;
"But now," says Christ, "I see him rallying again, preparing to make a
furious onset, and so to gain by terrors that which he could not gain by
allurements;" to frighten from his undertaking, when he could not entice
from it. Note, The foresight of a temptation gives us great advantage in
our resistance of it; for, being fore-warned, we should be fore-armed.
While we are here, we may see Satan continually coming against us, and
ought therefore to be always upon our guard. 2. The assurance he had of
good success in the conflict: He hath nothing in me, ouk echei ouden -
He hath nothing at all. (1.) There was no guilt in Christ to give
authority to the prince of this world in his terrors. The devil is said
to have the power of death ([Heb
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014)); the Jews called him the angel
of death, as an executioner. Now Christ having done no evil, Satan had
no legal power against him, and therefore, though he prevailed to
crucify him, he could not prevail to terrify him; though he hurried him
to death, yet not to despair. When Satan comes to disquiet us, he has
something in us to perplex us with, for we have all sinned; but, when he
would disturb Christ, he found no occasion against him. (2.) There was
no corruption in Christ, to give advantage to the prince of this world
in his temptations. He could not crush his undertaking by drawing him to
sin, because there was nothing sinful in him, nothing irregular for his
temptations to fasten upon, no tinder for him to strike fire into; such
was the spotless purity of his nature that he was above the possibility
of sinning. The more Satan's interest in us is crushed and decays, the
more comfortably may we expect sufferings and death.

V. That his departure was in compliance with, and obedience to, his
Father. Satan could not force his life from him, and yet he would die:
that the world may know that I love the Father, [Joh
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#031). We may take this,

1\. As confirming what he had often said, that his undertaking, as
Mediator, was a demonstration to the world, (1.) Of his compliance with
the Father; hereby it appeared that he loved the Father. As it was an
evidence of his love to man that he died for his salvation, so it was of
his love to God that he died for his glory and the accomplishing of his
purposes. Let the world know that between the Father and the Son there
is not love lost. As the Father loved the Son, and gave all things into
his hands; so the Son loved the Father, and gave his spirit into his
hand. (2.) Of his obedience to his Father: "As the Father gave me
commandment, even so I did - did the thing commanded me in the manner
commanded." Note, The best evidence of our love to the Father is our
doing as he hath given us commandment. As Christ loved the Father, and
obeyed him, even to the death, so we must love Christ, and obey him.
Christ's eye to the Father's commandment, obliging him to suffer and
die, bore him up with cheerfulness, and overcame the reluctancies of
nature; this took off the offence of the cross, that what he did was by
order from the Father. The command of God is sufficient to bear us out
in that which is most disputed by others, and therefore should be
sufficient to bear us up in that which is most difficult to ourselves:
This is the will of him that made me, that sent me.

2\. As concluding what he had now said; having brought it to this, here
he leaves it: that the world may know that I love the Father. You shall
see how cheerfully I can meet the appointed cross: "Arise, let us go
hence to the garden;" so some; or, to Jerusalem. When we talk of
troubles at a distance, it is easy to say, Lord, I will follow thee
whithersoever thou goest; but when it comes to the pinch, when an
unavoidable cross lies in the way of duty, then to say, "Arise, let us
go to meet it," instead of going out of our way to miss it, this lets
the world know that we love the Father. If this discourse was at the
close of the passover-supper, it should seem that at these words he
arose from the table, and retired into the drawing-room, where he might
the more freely carry on the discourse with his disciples in the
following chapters, and pray with them. Dr. Goodwin's remark upon this
is, that Christ mentioning the great motive of his sufferings, his
Father's commandment, was in all haste to go forth to suffer and die,
was afraid of slipping the time of Judas's meeting him: Arise, says he,
let us go hence but he looks upon the glass, as it were, sees it not
quite out, and therefore sits down again, and preaches another sermon.
Now, (1.) In these words he gives his disciples an encouragement to
follow him. He does not say, I must go; but, Let us go. He calls them
out to no hardships but what he himself goes before them in as their
leader. They had promised they would not desert him: "Come," says he,
"let us go then; let us see how you will make the words good." (2.) He
gives them an example, teaching them at all times, especially in
suffering times, to sit loose to all things here below, and often to
think and speak of leaving them. Though we sit easy, and in the midst of
the delights of an agreeable conversation, yet we must not think of
being here always: Arise, let us go hence. If it was at the close of the
paschal and eucharistical supper, it teaches us that the solemnities of
our communion with God are not to be constant in this world. When we sit
down under Christ's shadow with delight, and say, It is good to be here;
yet we must think of rising and going hence; going down from the mount.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 15](joh015)

</div>
