<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jonah Index](jon)  
  [Previous](jon003)  [Next](mic000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jonah Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#001)

[Jonah](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jon 4:0</span></span>

We read, with a great deal of pleasure, in the close of the foregoing
chapter, concerning the repentance of Nineveh; but in this chapter we
read, with a great deal of uneasiness, concerning the sin of Jonah; and,
as there is joy in heaven and earth for the conversion of sinners, so
there is grief for the follies and infirmities of saints. In all the
book of God we scarcely find a "servant of the Lord" (and such a one we
are sure Jonah was, for the scripture calls him so) so very much out of
temper as he is here, so very peevish and provoking to God himself. In
the first chapter we had him fleeing from the face of God; but here we
have him, in effect, flying in the face of God; and, which is more
grieving to us, there we had an account of his repentance and return to
God; but here, though no doubt he did repent, yet, as in Solomon's case,
no account is left us of his recovering himself; but, while we read with
wonder of his perverseness, we read with no less wonder of God's
tenderness towards him, by which it appeared that he had not cast him
off. Here is, I. Jonah's repining at God's mercy to Nineveh, and the
fret he was in about it ([Jon 4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#001)).
II. The gentle reproof God gave him for it ([Jon
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#004)). III. Jonah's discontent at the
withering of the gourd, and his justifying himself in that discontent
([Jon 4:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#005)). IV. God's improving it
for his conviction, that he ought not to be angry at the sparing of
Nineveh ([Jon 4:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#010)). Man's badness
and God's goodness serve here for a foil to each other, that the former
may appear the more exceedingly sinful and the latter the more
exceedingly gracious.

[Jonah 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jon 4:1</span></span>

See here, I. How unjustly Jonah quarrelled with God for his mercy to
Nineveh, upon their repentance. This gives us occasion to suspect that
Jonah had only delivered the message of wrath against the Ninevites, and
had not at all assisted or encouraged them in their repentance, as one
would think he should have done; for when they did repent, and found
mercy,

1\. Jonah grudged them the mercy they found ([Jon
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#001)): It displeased Jonah exceedingly;
and (would you think it?) he was very angry, was in a great heat about
it. It was very wrong, (1.) That he had so little government of himself
as to be displeased and very angry; he had no rule over his own spirit,
and therefore, as a city broken down, lay exposed to temptations and
snares. (2.) That he had so little reverence of God as to be displeased
and angry at what he did, as David was when the Lord had made a breach
upon Uzza; whatever pleases God should please us, and, though we cannot
account for it, yet we must acquiesce in it. (3.) That he had so little
affection for men as to be displeased and very angry at the conversion
of the Ninevites and their reception into the divine favour. This was
the sin of the scribes and Pharisees, who murmured at our Saviour
because he entertained publicans and sinners; but is our eye evil
because his is good? But why was Jonah so uneasy at it, that the
Ninevites repented and were spared? It cannot be expected that we should
give any good reason for a thing so very absurd and unreasonable; no,
nor any thing that has the face or colour of a reason; but we may
conjecture what the provocation was. Hot spirits are usually high
spirits. Only by pride comes contention both with God and man. It was a
point of honour that Jonah stood upon and that made him angry. \[1.\] He
was jealous for the honour of his country; the repentance and
reformation of Nineveh shamed the obstinacy of Israel that repented not,
but hated to be reformed; and the favour God had shown to these
Gentiles, upon their repentance, was an ill omen to the Jewish nation,
as if they should be (as at length they were) rejected and cast out of
the church and the Gentiles substituted in their room. When it was
intimated to St. Peter himself that he should make no difference between
Jews and Gentiles he startled at the thing, and said, Not so, Lord; no
marvel then that Jonah looked upon it with regret that Nineveh should
become a favourite. Jonah herein had a zeal for God as the God of Israel
in a particular manner, but not according to knowledge. Note, Many are
displeased with God under pretence of concern for his glory. \[2.\] He
was jealous for his own honour, fearing lest, if Nineveh was not
destroyed within forty days, he should be accounted a false prophet, and
stigmatized accordingly; whereas he needed not be under any discontent
about that, for in the threatening of ruin it was implied that, for the
preventing of it, they should repent, and, if they did, it should be
prevented. And no one will complain of being deceived by him that is
better than his word; and he would rather gain honour among them, by
being instrumental to save them, than fall under any disgrace. But
melancholy men (and such a one Jonah seems to have been) are apt to make
themselves uneasy by fancying evils to themselves that are not, nor are
ever likely to be. Most of our frets, as well as our frights, are owing
to the power of imagination; and those are to be pitied as perfect
bond-slaves that are under the power of such a tyrant.

2\. He quarreled with God about it. When his heart was hot within him,
he spoke unadvisedly with his lips; and here he tells us what he said
([Jon 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#002), [Jon
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#003)): He prayed unto the Lord, but it
is a very awkward prayer, not like that which he prayed in the fish's
belly; for affliction teaches us to pray submissively, which Jonah now
forgot to do. Being in discontent, he applied to the duty of prayer, as
he used to do in his troubles, but his corruptions got head of his
graces, and, when he should have been praying for benefit by the mercy
of God himself, he was complaining of the benefit others had by that
mercy. Nothing could be spoken more unbecomingly. (1.) He now begins to
justify himself in fleeing from the presence of the Lord, when he was
first ordered to go to Nineveh, for which he had before, with good
reason, condemned himself: "Lord," said he, "was not this my saying when
I was in my own country? Did I not foresee that if I went to preach to
Nineveh they would repent, and thou wouldst forgive them, and then thy
word would be reflected upon and reproached as yea and nay?" What a
strange sort of man was Jonah, to dread the success of his ministry!
Many have been tempted to withdraw from their work because they had
despaired of doing good by it, but Jonah declined preaching because he
was afraid of doing good by it; and still he persists in the same
corrupt notion, for, it seems, the whale's belly itself could not cure
him of it. It was his saying when he was in his own country, but it was
a bad saying; yet here he stands to it, and, very unlike the other
prophets, desires the woeful day which he had foretold and grieves
because it does not come. Even Christ's disciples know not what manner
of spirit they are of; those did not who wished for fire from heaven
upon the city that did not receive them, much less did Jonah, who wished
for fire from heaven upon the city that did receive him, [Luk
9:55](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#055). Jonah thinks he has reason to
complain of that, when it is done, which he was before afraid of; so
hard is it to get a root of bitterness plucked out of the mind, when
once it is fastened there. And why did Jonah expect that God would spare
Nineveh? Because I knew that thou was a gracious God, indulgent and
easily pleased, that thou wast slow to anger and of great kindness, and
repentest thee of the evil. All this is very true; and Jonah could not
but know it by God's proclamation of his name and the experiences of all
ages; but it is strange and very unaccountable that that which all the
saints had made the matter of their joy and praise Jonah should make the
matter of reflection upon God, as if that were an imperfection of the
divine nature which is indeed the greatest glory of it - that God is
gracious and merciful. The servant that said, I knew thee to be a hard
man, said that which was false, and yet, had it been true, it was not
the proper matter of a complaint; but Jonah, though he says what is
true, yet, speaking it by way of reproach, speaks very absurdly. Those
have a spirit of contention and contradiction indeed that can find in
their hearts to quarrel with the goodness of God, and his sparing
pardoning mercy, to which we all owe it that we are out of hell. This is
making that to be to us a savour of death unto death which ought to be a
savour of life unto life. (2.) In a passion, he wishes for death ([Jon
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#003)), a strange expression of his
causeless passion! "Now, O Lord! take, I beseech thee, my life from me.
If Nineveh must live, let me die, rather than see thy word and mine
disproved, rather than see the glory of Israel transferred to the
Gentiles," as if there were not grace enough in God both for Jews and
Gentiles, or as if his countrymen were the further off from mercy for
the Ninevites being taken into favour. When the prophet Elijah had
laboured in vain, he wished he might die, and it was his infirmity, [Kg1
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#004). But Jonah labours to good
purpose, saves a great city from ruin, and yet wishes he may die, as if,
having done much good, he were afraid of living to do more; he sees of
the travail of his soul, and is dissatisfied. What a perverse spirit is
mingled with every word he says! When Jonah was brought alive out of the
whale's belly, he thought life a very valuable mercy, and was thankful
to that God who brought up his life from corruption, ([Jon
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#006)), and a great blessing his life
had been to Nineveh; yet now, for that very reason, it became a burden
to himself and he begs to be eased of it, pleading, It is better for me
to die than to live. Such a word as this may be the language of grace,
as it was in Paul, who desired to depart and be with Christ, which is
far better; but here it was the language of folly, and passion, and
strong corruption; and so much the worse, \[1.\] Jonah being now in the
midst of his usefulness, and therefore fit to live. He was one whose
ministry God wonderfully owned and prospered. The conversion of Nineveh
might give him hopes of being instrumental to convert the whole kingdom
of Assyria; it was therefore very absurd for him to wish he might die
when he had a prospect of living to so good a purpose and could be so
ill spared. \[2.\] Jonah being now so much out of temper and therefore
unfit to die. How durst he think of dying, and going to appear before
God's judgment-seat, when he was actually quarrelling with him? Was this
a frame of spirit proper for a man to go out of the world in? But those
who passionately desire death commonly have least reason to do it, as
being very much unprepared for it. Our business is to get ready to die
by doing the work of life, and then to refer ourselves to God to take
away our life when and how he pleases.

II\. See how justly God reproved Jonah for this heat that he was in
([Jon 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#004)): The Lord said, Doest thou
well to be angry? Is doing well a displeasure to thee? so some read it.
What! dost thou repent of thy good deeds? God might justly have rejected
him for this impious heat which he was in, might justly have taken him
at his word, and have struck him dead when he wished to die; but he
vouchsafes to reason with him for his conviction and to bring him to a
better temper, as the father of the prodigal reasoned with his elder
son, when, as Jonah here, he murmured at the remission and reception of
his brother. Doest thou well to be angry? See how mildly the great God
speaks to this foolish man, to teach us to restore those that have
fallen with a spirit of meekness, and with soft answers to turn away
wrath. God appeals to himself and to his own conscience: "Doest thou
well? Thou knowest thou does not." We should often put this question to
ourselves, Is it well to say thus, to do thus? Can I justify it? Must I
not unsay it and undo it again by repentance, or be undone forever? Ask,
1. Do I well to be angry? When passion is up, let it meet with this
check, "Do I well to be so soon angry, so often angry, so long angry, to
put myself into such a heat, and to give others such ill language in my
anger? Is this well, that I suffer these headstrong passions to get
dominion over me?" 2. "Do I well to be angry at the mercy of God to
repenting sinners?" That was Jonah's crime. Do we do well to be angry at
that which is so much for the glory of God and the advancement of his
kingdom among men - to be angry at that which angels rejoice in and for
which abundant thanksgivings will be rendered to God? We do ill to be
angry at that grace which we ourselves need and are undone without; if
room were not left for repentance, and hope given of pardon upon
repentance, what would become of us? Let the conversion of sinners,
which is the joy of heaven, be our joy, and never our grief.

[Jonah 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jon 4:5</span></span>

Jonah persists here in his discontent; for the beginning of strife both
with God and man is as the letting forth of waters, the breach grows
wider and wider, and, when passion gets head, bad is made worse; it
should therefore be silenced and suppressed at first. We have here,

I. Jonah's sullen expectation of the fate of Nineveh. We may suppose
that the Ninevites, giving credit to the message he brought, were ready
to give entertainment to the messenger that brought it, and to show him
respect, that they would have made him welcome to the best of their
houses and tables. But Jonah was out of humour, would not accept their
kindness, nor behave towards them with common civility, which one might
have feared would have prejudiced them against him and his word; but
when there is not only the treasure put into earthen vessels, but the
trust lodged with men subject to like passions as we are, and yet the
point gained, it must be owned that the excellency of the power appears
so much the more to be of God and not of man. Jonah retires, goes out of
the city, sits alone, and keeps silence, because he sees the Ninevites
repent and reform, [Jon 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#005). Perhaps
he told those about him that he went out of the city for fear of
perishing in the ruins of it; but he went to see what would become of
the city, as Abraham went up to see what would become of Sodom, [Gen
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#027). The forty days were now
expiring, or had expired, and Jonah hoped that, if Nineveh was not
overthrown, yet some judgement or other would come upon it, sufficient
to save his credit; however, it was with great uneasiness that he waited
the issue. He would not sojourn in a house, expecting it would fall upon
his head, but he made himself a booth of the boughs of trees, and sat in
that, though there he would lie exposed to wind and weather. Note, It is
common for those that have fretful uneasy spirits industriously to
create inconveniences themselves, that, resolving to complain, they may
still have something to complain of.

II\. God's gracious provision for his shelter and refreshment when he
thus foolishly afflicted himself and was still adding yet more and more
to his own affliction, [Jon 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#006). Jonah
was sitting in his booth, fretting at the cold of the night and the heat
of the day, which were both grievous to him, and God might have said, It
is his own choice, his own doing, a house of his own building, let him
make the best of it; but he looked on him with compassion, as the tender
mother does on the froward child, and relieved him against the
grievances which he by his own wilfulness created to himself. He
prepared a gourd, a plant with broad leaves, and full of them, that
suddenly grew up, and covered his hut or booth, so as to keep off much
of the injury of the cold and heat. It was a shadow over his head, to
deliver him from his grief, that, being refreshed in body, he might the
better guard against the uneasiness of his mind, which outward crosses
and troubles are often the occasion and increase of. See how tender God
is of his people in their afflictions, yea, though they are foolish and
froward, nor is he extreme to mark what they do amiss. God had before
prepared a great fish to secure Jonah from the injuries of the water,
and here a great gourd to secure him from the injuries of the air; for
he is the protector of his people against evils of every kind, has the
command of plants as well as animals, and can soon prepare them, to make
them serve his purposes, can make their growth sudden, which, in a
course of nature, is slow and gradual. A gourd, one would think, was but
a slender fortification at the best, yet Jonah was exceedingly glad of
the gourd; for, 1. It was really at that time a great comfort to him. A
thing in itself small and inconsiderable, yet, coming seasonably, may be
to us a very valuable blessing. A gourd in the right place may do us
more service than a cedar. The least creatures may be great plagues (as
flies and lice were to Pharaoh) or great comforts (as the gourd to
Jonah), according as God is pleased to make them. 2. He being now much
under the power of imagination took a greater complacency in it than
there was cause for. He was exceedingly glad of it, was proud of it, and
triumphed in it. Note, Persons of strong passions, as they are apt to be
cast down with a trifle that crosses them, so they are apt to be lifted
up with a trifle that pleases them. A small toy will serve sometimes to
pacify a cross child, as the gourd did Jonah. But wisdom and grace would
teach us both to weep for our troubles as though we wept not, and to
rejoice in our comforts as though we rejoiced not. Creature-comforts we
ought to enjoy and be thankful for, but we need not be exceedingly glad
of them; it is God only that must be our exceeding joy, [Psa
43:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#004).

III\. The sudden loss of this provision which God had made for his
refreshment, and the return of his trouble, [Jon
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#007), [Jon
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#008). God that had provided comfort for
him provided also an affliction for him in that very thing which was his
comfort; the affliction did not come by chance, but by divine direction
and appointment. 1. God prepared a worm to destroy the gourd. He that
gave took away, and Jonah ought to have blessed his name in both; but
because, when he took the comfort of the gourd, he did not give God the
praise of it, God deprived him of the benefit of it, and justly. See
what all our creature-comforts are, and what we may expect them to be;
they are gourds, have their root in the earth, are but a thin and
slender defence compared with the rock of ages; they are withering
things; they perish in the using, and we are soon deprived of the
comfort of them. The gourd withered the next day after it sprang up; our
comforts come forth like flowers and are soon cut down. When we please
ourselves most with them, and promise ourselves most from them, we are
disappointed. A little thing withers them; a small worm at the root
destroys a large gourd. Something unseen and undiscerned does it. Our
gourds wither, and we know not what to attribute it to. And perhaps
those wither first that we have been more exceedingly glad of; that
proves least safe that is most dear. God did not send an angel to pluck
up Jonah's gourd, but sent a worm to smite it; there it grew still, but
it stood him in no stead. Perhaps our creature-comforts are continued to
us, but they are embittered; the creature is continued, but the comfort
is gone; and the remains, or ruins of it rather, do but upbraid us with
our folly in being exceedingly glad of it. 2. He prepared a wind to make
Jonah feel the want of the gourd, v. 8. It was a vehement east wind,
which drove the heat of the rising sun violently upon the head of Jonah.
This wind was not as a fan to abate the heat, but as bellows to make it
more intense. Thus poor Jonah lay open to sun and wind.

IV\. The further fret that this put Jonah into ([Jon
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#008)): He fainted, and wished in
himself that he might die. "If the gourd be killed, if the gourd be
dead, kill me too, let me die with the gourd." Foolish man, that thinks
his life bound up in the life of a weed! Note, It is just that those who
love to complain should never be left without something to complain of,
that their folly may be manifested and corrected, and, if possible,
cured. And see here how the passions that run into an extreme one way
commonly run into an extreme the other way. Jonah, who was in transports
of joy when the gourd flourished, is in pangs of grief when the gourd
has withered. Inordinate affection lays a foundation for inordinate
affliction; what we are over-fond of when we have it we are apt to
over-grieve for when we lose it, and we may see our folly in both.

V. The rebuke God gave him for this; he again reasoned with him: Dost
thou well to be angry for the gourd? [Jon
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#009). Note, The withering of a gourd is
a thing which it does not become us to be angry at. When afflicting
providences deprive us of our relations, possessions, and enjoyments, we
must bear it patiently, must not be angry at God, must not be angry for
the gourd. It is comparatively but a small loss, the loss of a shadow;
that is the most we can make of it. It was a gourd, a withering thing;
we could expect no other than that it should wither. Our being angry for
the withering of it will not recover it; we ourselves shall shortly
wither like it. If one gourd be withered, another gourd may spring up in
the room of it; but that which should especially silence our discontent
is that though our gourd be gone our God is not gone, and there is
enough in him to make up all our losses.

Let us therefore own that we do ill, that we do very ill, to be angry
for the gourd; and let us under such events quiet ourselves as a child
that is weaned from his mother.

VI\. His justification of his passion and discontent; and it is very
strange, [Jon 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#009). He said, I do well
to be angry, even unto death. It is bad to speak amiss, yet if it be in
haste, if what is said amiss be speedily recalled and unsaid again, it
is the more excusable; but to speak amiss and stand to it is bad indeed.
So Jonah did here, though God himself rebuked him, and by appealing to
his conscience expected he would rebuke himself. See what brutish things
ungoverned passions are, and how much it is our interest, and ought to
be our endeavour, to chain up these roaring lions and ranging bears. Sin
and death are two very dreadful things, yet Jonah, in his heat, makes
light of them both. 1. He has so little regard for God as to fly in the
face of his authority, and to say that he did well in that which God
said was ill done. Passion often over-rules conscience, and forces it,
when it is appealed to, to give a false judgment, as Jonah here did. 2.
He has so little regard to himself as to abandon his own life, and to
think it no harm to indulge his passion even to death, to kill himself
with fretting. We read of wrath that kills the foolish man, and envy
that slays the silly one ([Job 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#002)),
and foolish silly ones indeed those are that cut their own throats with
their own passions, that fret themselves into consumptions and other
weaknesses, and put themselves into fevers with their own intemperate
heats.

VII\. The improvement of it against him for his conviction that he did
ill to murmur at the sparing of Nineveh. Out of his own mouth God will
judge him; and we have reason to think it overcame him; for he made no
reply, but, we hope, returned to his right mind and recovered his
temper, though he could not keep it, and all was well. Now,

1\. Let us see how God argued with him ([Jon
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#010), [Jon
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#011)): "Thou hast had pity on the
gourd, hast spared it" (so the word is), "didst what thou couldst, and
wouldst have done more, to keep it alive, and saidst, What a pity it is
that this gourd should ever wither! and should not I then spare Nineveh?
Should not I have as much compassion upon that as thou hadst upon the
gourd, and forbid the earthquake which would ruin that, as thou wouldst
have forbidden the worm that smote the gourd? Consider," (1.) "The gourd
thou hadst pity on was but one; but the inhabitants of Nineveh, whom I
have pity on, are numerous." It is a great city and very populous, as
appears by the number of the infants, suppose from two years old and
under; there are 120,000 such in Nineveh, that have not come to so much
use of understanding as to know their right hand from their left, for
they are yet but babes. These are taken notice of because the age of
infants is commonly looked upon as the age of innocence. So many there
were in Nineveh that had not been guilty of any actual transgression,
and consequently had not themselves contributed to the common guilt, and
yet, if Nineveh had been overthrown, they would all have been involved
in the common calamity; "and shall not I spare Nineveh then, with an eye
to them?" God has a tender regard to little children, and is ready to
pity and succour them, nay, here a whole city is spared for their sakes,
which may encourage parents to present their children to God by faith
and prayer, that though they are not capable of doing him any service
(for they cannot discern between their right hand and their left,
between good and evil, sin and duty), yet they are capable of
participating in his favours and of obtaining salvation. The great
Saviour discovered a particular kindness for the children that were
brought to him, when he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon
them, and blessed them. Nay, God took notice of the abundance of cattle
too that were in Nineveh, which he had more reason to pity and spare
than Jonah had to pity and to spare the gourd, inasmuch as the animal
life is more excellent than the vegetable. (2.) The gourd which Jonah
was concerned for was none of his own; it was that for which he did not
labour and which he made not to grow; but the persons in Nineveh whom
God had compassion on were all the work of his own hands, whose being he
was the author of, whose lives he was the preserver of, whom he planted
and made to grow; he made them, and his they were, and therefore he had
much more reason to have compassion on them, for he cannot despise the
work of his own hands ([Job 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#003)); and
thus Job there argues with him ([Jon
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#008), [Jon
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#009)), Thy hands have made me, and
fashioned me, have made me as the clay; and wilt thou destroy me, wilt
thou bring me into dust again? And thus he here argues with himself.
(3.) The gourd which Jonah had pity on was of a sudden growth, and
therefore of less value; it came up in a night, it was the son of a
night (so the word is); but Nineveh is an ancient city, of many ages
standing, and therefore cannot be so easily given up; "the persons I
spare have been many years in growing up, not so soon reared as the
gourd; and shall not I then have pity on those that have been so many
years the care of my providence, so many years my tenants?" (4.) The
gourd which Jonah had pity on perished in a night; it withered, and
there was an end of it. But the precious souls in Nineveh that God had
pity on are not so short-lived; they are immortal, and therefore to be
carefully and tenderly considered. One soul is of more value than the
whole world, and the gain of the world will not countervail the loss of
it; surely then one soul is of more value than many gourds, of more
value than many sparrows; so God accounts, and so should we, and
therefore have a greater concern for the children of men than for any of
the inferior creatures, and for our own and others' precious souls than
for any of the riches and enjoyments of this world.

2\. From all this we may learn, (1.) That though God may suffer his
people to fall into sin, yet he will not suffer them to lie still in it,
but will take a course effectually to show them their error, and to
bring them to themselves and to their right mind again. We have reason
to hope that Jonah, after this, was well reconciled to the sparing of
Nineveh, and was as well pleased with it as ever he had been displeased.
(2.) That God will justify himself in the methods of his grace towards
repenting returning sinners as well as in the course his justice takes
with those that persist in their rebellion; though there be those that
murmur at the mercy of God, because they do not understand it (for his
thoughts and ways therein are as far above ours as heaven above the
earth), yet he will make it evident that therein he acts like himself,
and will be justified when he speaks. See what pains he takes with Jonah
to convince him that it is very fit that Nineveh should be spared. Jonah
had said, I do well to be angry, but he could not prove it. God says and
proves it, I do well to be merciful; and it is a great encouragement to
poor sinners to hope that they shall find mercy with him, that he is so
ready to justify himself in showing mercy and to triumph in those whom
he makes the monuments of it, against those whose eye is evil because
his is good. Such murmurers shall be made to understand this doctrine,
that, how narrow soever their souls, their principles, are, and how
willing soever they are to engross divine grace to themselves and those
of their own way, there is one Lord over all, that is rich in mercy to
all that call upon him, and in every nation, in Nineveh as well as in
Israel, he that fears God and works righteousness is accepted of him; he
that repents, and turns from his evil way, shall find mercy with him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah Introduction](mic000)

</div>
