<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jonah Index](jon)  
  [Previous](jon001)  [Next](jon003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jonah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#001)

[Jonah](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jon 2:0</span></span>

We left Jonah in the belly of the fish, and had reason to think we
should hear no more of him, that if he were not destroyed by the waters
of the sea he would be consumed in the bowels of that leviathan, "out of
whose mouth go burning lamps, and sparks of fire, and whose breath
kindles coals," [Job 41:19](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#019), [Job
41:21](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#021). But God brings his people
through fire, and through water ([Psa
66:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#012)); and by his power, behold,
Jonah the prophet is yet alive, and is heard of again. In this chapter
God hears from him, for we find him praying; in the next Nineveh hears
from him, for we find him preaching. In his prayer we have, I. The great
distress and danger he was in ([Jon
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#002), [Jon
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#003), [Jon
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#005), [Jon
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#006)). II. The despair he was thereby
almost reduced to ([Jon 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#004)). III. The
encouragement he took to himself, in this deplorable condition ([Jon
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#004), [Jon
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#007)). IV. The assurance he had of
God's favour to him ([Jon 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#006), [Jon
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#007)). V. The warning and instruction
he gives to others ([Jon 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#008)). VI. The
praise and glory of all given to God ([Jon
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#009)). In the last verse we have
Jonah's deliverance out of the belly of the fish, and his coming safe
and sound upon dry land again.

[Jonah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jon 2:1</span></span>

God and his servant Jonah had parted in anger, and the quarrel began on
Jonah's side; he fled from his country that he might outrun his work;
but we hope to see them both together again, and the reconciliation
begins on God's side. In the close of the foregoing chapter we found God
returning to Jonah in a way of mercy, delivering him from going down to
the pit, having found a ransom; in this chapter we find Jonah returning
to God in a way of duty; he was called up in the former chapter to pray
to his God, but we are not told that he did so; however, now at length
he is brought to it. Now observe here,

I. When he prayed ([Jon 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#001)): Then
Jonah prayed; then when he was in trouble, under the sense of sin and
the tokens of God's displeasure against him for sin, then he prayed.
Note, When we are in affliction we must pray; then we have occasion to
pray, then we have errands at the throne of grace and business there;
then, if ever, we shall have a disposition to pray, when the heart is
humbled, and softened, and made serious; then God expects it (in their
affliction they will seek me early, seek me earnestly); and, though we
bring our afflictions upon ourselves by our sins, yet, if we pray in
humility and godly sincerity, we shall be welcome to the throne of
grace, as Jonah was. Then when he was in a hopeful way of deliverance,
being preserved alive by miracle, a plain indication that he was
reserved for further mercy, then he prayed. An apprehension of God's
good-will to us, notwithstanding our offences, gives us boldness of
access to him, and opens the lips in prayer which were closed with the
sense of guilt and dread of wrath.

II\. Where he prayed - in the fish's belly. No place is amiss for
prayer. I will that men pray every where. Wherever God casts us we may
find a way open to heaven-ward, if it be not our own fault. Undique ad
coelos tantundem est viae - The heavens are equally accessible from
every part of the earth. He that has Christ dwelling in his heart by
faith, wherever he goes carries the altar along with him, that
sanctifies the gift, and is himself a living temple. Jonah was here in
confinement; the belly of the fish was his prison, was a close and dark
dungeon to him; yet there he had freedom of access to God, and walked at
liberty in communion with him. Men may shut us out from communion with
one another, but not from communion with God. Jonah was now in the
bottom of the sea, yet out of the depths he cries to God; as Paul and
Silas prayed in the prison, in the stocks.

III\. To whom he prayed - to the Lord his God. He had been fleeing from
God, but now he sees the folly of it, and returns to him; by prayer he
draws near to that God whom he had gone aside from, and engages his
heart to approach him. In prayer he has an eye to him, not only as the
Lord, but as his God, a God in covenant with him; for, thanks be to God,
every transgression in the covenant does not throw us out of covenant.
This encourages even backsliding children to return. [Jer
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#022), Behold, we come unto thee, for
thou art the Lord our God.

IV\. What his prayer was. He afterwards recollected the substance of it,
and left it upon record. He reflects upon the workings of his heart
towards God when he was in his distress and danger, and the conflict
that was then in his breast between faith and sense, between hope and
fear.

1\. He reflects upon the earnestness of his prayer, and God's readiness
to hear and answer ([Jon 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#002)): He
said, I cried, by reason of my affliction, unto the Lord. Note, Many
that prayed not at all, or did but whisper prayer, when they were in
prosperity, are brought to pray, nay, are brought to cry, by reason of
their affliction; and it is for this end that afflictions are sent, and
they are in vain if this end be not answered. Those heap up wrath who
cry not when God binds them, [Job
36:13](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#013). "Out of the belly of hell and
the grave cried I." The fish might well be called a grave, and, as it
was a prison to which Jonah was condemned for his disobedience and in
which he lay under the wrath of God, it might well be called the belly
of hell. Thither this good man was cast, and yet thence he cried to God,
and it was not in vain; God heard him, heard the voice of his
affliction, the voice of his supplication. There is a hell in the other
world, out of which there is no crying to God with any hope of being
heard; but, whatever hell we may be in the belly of in this world, we
may thence cry to God. When Christ lay, as Jonah, three days and three
nights in the grave, though he prayed not, as Jonah did, yet his very
lying there cried to God for poor sinners, and the cry was heard.

2\. He reflects upon the very deplorable condition that he was in when
he was in the belly of hell, which, when he lay there, he was very
sensible of and made particular remarks upon. Note, If we would get good
by our troubles, we must take notice of our troubles, and of the hand of
God in them. Jonah observes here, (1.) How low he was thrown ([Jon
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#003)): Thou hadst cast me into the
deep. The mariners cast him there; but he looked above them, and saw the
hand of God casting him there. Whatever deeps we are cast into, it is
God that casts us into them, and he it is who, after he has killed, has
power to cast into hell. He was cast into the midst of the seas - the
heart of the seas (so the word is), and thence Christ borrows that
Hebrew phrase, when he applies it to his own lying so long in the heart
of the earth. For he that is laid dead in the grave, though it be ever
so shallow, is cut off as effectually from the land of the living as if
he were laid in the heart of the earth. (2.) How terribly he was beset:
The floods compassed me about. The channels and springs of the waters of
the sea surrounded him on every side; it was always high-water with him.
God's dear saints and servants are sometimes encompassed with the floods
of affliction, with troubles that are very forcible and violent, that
bear down on all before them, and that run constantly upon them, as the
waters of a river in a continual succession, one trouble upon the neck
of another, as Job's messengers of evil tidings; they are enclosed by
them on all sides, as the church complains, [Lam
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#007). He has hedged me about, that I
cannot get out, nor see which way I may flee for safety. All thy billows
and they waves passed over me. Observe, He calls them God's billows and
his waves, not only because he made them (the sea is his, and he made
it), and because he rules them (for even the winds and the seas obey
him), but because he had now commissioned them against Jonah, and
limited them, and ordered them to afflict and terrify him, but not to
destroy him. These words are plainly quoted by Jonah from [Psa
42:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#007), where, though the translations
differ a little, in the original David's complaint is the same verbatim
- word for word, with this of Jonah's: All thy billows and thy waves
passed over me. What David spoke figuratively and metaphorically Jonah
applied to himself as literally fulfilled. For the reconciling of
ourselves to our afflictions, it is good to search precedents, that we
may find there has no temptation taken us but such as is common to men.
If ever any man's case was singular, and not to be paralleled, surely
Jonah's was, and yet, to his great satisfaction, he finds even the man
after God's own heart making the same complaint of God's waves and
billows going over him that he has now occasion to make. When God
performs the thing that is appointed for us we shall find that many such
things are with him, that even our path of trouble is no untrodden path,
and that God deals with us no otherwise than as he uses to deal with
those that love his name. And therefore for our assistance in our
addresses to God, when we are in trouble, it is good to make use of the
complaints and prayers which the saints that have been before us made
use of in the like case. See how good it is to be ready in the
scriptures; Jonah, when he could make no use of his Bible, by the help
of his memory furnished himself from the scripture with a very proper
representation of his case: All thy billows and thy waves passed over
me. To the same purport, [Jon 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#005), The
waters compassed me about even to the soul; they threatened his life,
which was hereby brought into imminent danger; or they made an
impression upon his spirit; he saw them to be tokens of God's
displeasure, and in them the terrors of the Almighty set themselves in
array against him; this reached to his soul, and put that into
confusion. And this also is borrowed from David's complaint, [Psa
69:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#001). The waters have come in unto my
soul. When without are fightings it is no marvel that within are fears.
Jonah, in the fish's belly, finds the depths enclosing him round about,
so that if he would get out of his prison, yet he must unavoidably
perish in the waters. He feels the sea-weed (which the fish sucked in
with the water) wrapped about his head, so that he has no way left him
to help himself, nor hope that any one else can help him. Thus are the
people of God sometimes perplexed and entangled, that they may learn not
to trust in themselves, but in God that raises the dead, [Co2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#008), [Co2
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#009). (3.) How fast he was held ([Jon
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#006)): He went down to the bottom of
the mountains, to the rocks in the sea, upon which the hills and
promontories by the seaside seem to be bottomed; he lay among them, nay,
he lay under them; the earth with her bars was about him, so close about
him that it was likely to be about him for ever. The earth was so shut
and locked, so barred and bolted, against him, that he was quite cut off
from any hope of ever returning to it. Thus helpless, thus hopeless, did
Jonah's case seem to be. Those whom God contends with the whole creation
is at war with.

3\. He reflects upon the very black and melancholy conclusion he was
then ready to make concerning himself, and the relief he obtained
against it, [Jon 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#004), [Jon
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#007). (1.) He began to sink into
despair, and to give up himself for gone and undone to all intents and
purposes. When the waters compassed him about even to the soul no marvel
that his soul fainted within him, fainted away, so that he had not any
comfortable enjoyments or expectations; his spirits quite failed, and he
looked upon himself as a dead man. Then I said, I am cast out of thy
sight, and the apprehension of that was the thing that made his spirit
faint within him. He thought God had quite forsaken him, would never
return in mercy to him, nor show him any token for good again. He had no
example before him of any that were brought alive out of a fish's belly;
if he thought of Job upon the dunghill, Joseph in the pit, David in the
cave, yet these did not come up to his case. Nor was there any visible
way of escape open for him but by miracle; and what reason had he to
expect that a miracle of mercy should be wrought for him who was now
made a monument of justice? How own conscience told him that he had
wickedly fled from the presence of the Lord, and therefore he might
justly cast him away from his presence, and, in token of that, take away
his Holy Spirit from him, never to visit him more. What hopes could he
have of deliverance out of a trouble which his own ways and doings had
procured to himself? Observe, When Jonah would say the worst he could of
his case he says this, I am cast out of thy sight; those, and those
only, are miserable, whom God has cast out of his sight, whom he will no
longer own and favour. What is the misery of the damned in hell but
this, that they are cast out of God's sight? For what is the happiness
of heaven but the vision and fruition of God? Sometimes the condition of
God's people may be such in this world that they may think themselves
quite excluded from God's presence, so as no more to see him, or to be
regarded by him. Jacob and Israel said, My way is hidden from the Lord,
and my judgment is passed over from my God, [Isa
40:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#027). Zion said, The Lord has
forsaken me, my God has forgotten me, [Isa
49:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#014). But it is only the surmise of
unbelief, for God has not cast away his people whom he has chosen. (2.)
Yet he recovered himself from sinking into despair, with some
comfortable prospects of deliverance. Faith corrected and controlled the
surmises of fear and distrust. Here was a fierce struggle between sense
and faith, but faith had the last word and came off a conqueror. In
trying times, the issue will be good at last, providing our faith do not
fail; it was therefore the continuance of that in its vigour that Christ
secured to Peter. I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not, [Luk
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#032). David would have fainted if he
had not believed, [Psa 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#013). Jonah's
faith said, Yet I will look again towards thy holy temple. Thus, though
he was perplexed, yet not in despair; in the depth of the sea he had
this hope in him, as an anchor of the soul, sure and stedfast. That
which he supports himself with the hope of is that he shall yet look
again towards God's holy temple. \[1.\] That he shall live; he shall
look again heaven-ward, shall again see the light of the sun, though now
he seems to be cast into utter darkness. Thus against hope he believed
in hope. \[2.\] That he shall live, and praise God; and a good man does
not desire to live for any other purpose, [Psa
119:175](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#175). That he shall enjoy communion
with God again in holy ordinances, shall look towards, and go up to, the
holy temple, there to enquire, there to behold the beauty of the Lord.
When Hezekiah desired that he might be assured of his recovery, he
asked, What is the sign that I shall go up to the house of the Lord?
([Isa 38:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#022)), as if that were the only
thing for the sake of which he wished for health; so Jonah here hopes he
shall look again towards the temple; that way he had looked many a time
with pleasure, rejoicing when he was called to go up to the house of the
Lord; and the remembrance of it was his comfort, that, when he had
opportunity, he was no stranger to the holy temple. But now he could not
so much as look towards it; in the fish's belly he could not tell which
way it lay, but he hopes he shall be again able to look towards it, to
look on it, to look into it. Observe, How modestly Jonah expresses
himself; as one conscious to himself of guilt and unworthiness, he dares
not speak of dwelling in God's house, as David, knowing that he is no
more worthy to be called a son, but he hopes that he may be admitted to
look towards it. He calls it the holy temple, for the holiness of it
was, in his eye, the beauty of it, and that for the sake of which he
loved and looked towards it. The temple was a type of heaven; and he
promises himself that though being now a captive exile, he should never
be loosed, but die in the pit, yet he should look towards the heavenly
temple, and be brought safely thither. Though he die in the fish's
belly, in the bottom of the sea, yet thence he hopes his soul shall be
carried by angels into Abraham's bosom. Or these words may be taken as
Jonah's vow when he was in distress, and he speaks ([Jon
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#009)) of paying what he vowed; his vow
is that if God deliver him he will praise him in the gates of the
daughter of Zion, [Psa 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#013), [Psa
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#014). His sin for which God pursued
him was fleeing from the presence of the Lord, the folly of which he is
now convinced of, and promises not only that he will never again look
towards Tarshish, but that he will again look towards the temple, and
will go from strength to strength till he appear before God there. And
thus we see how faith and hope were his relief in his desponding
condition. To these he added prayer to God ([Psa
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#007)): "When my soul fainted within me,
then I remembered the Lord, I betook myself to that cordial." He
remembered what he is, how nigh to those that seem to be thrown at the
greatest distance by trouble, how merciful to those that seem to have
thrown themselves at a distance from him by sin. He remembered what he
had done for him, what he had done for others, what he could do, what he
had promised to do; and this kept him from fainting. Remembering God, he
made his addresses to him: "My prayer came in unto thee; I sent it in,
and expected to receive an answer to it." Note, Our afflictions should
put us in mind of God, and thereby put us upon prayer to him. When our
souls faint we must remember God; and, when we remember God, we must
send up a prayer to him, a pious ejaculation at least; when we think on
his name we should call on his name.

4\. He reflects upon the favour of God to him when thus in his distress
he sought to God and trusted him. (1.) He graciously accepted his
prayer, and gave admission and audience to it ([Psa
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#007)): My prayer, being sent to him,
came in unto him, even into his holy temple; it was heard in the highest
heavens, though it was prayed in the lowest deeps. (2.) He wonderfully
wrought deliverance for him, and, when he was in the depth of his
misery, gave him the earnest and assurance of it ([Psa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#006)): Yet hast thou brought up my life
from corruption, O Lord my God! Some think he said this when he was
vomited up on dry ground; and then it is the language of thankfulness,
and he sets it over-against the great difficulty of his case, that the
power of God might be the more magnified in his deliverance: The earth
with her bars was about me for ever, and yet thou hast brought up my
life from the pit, from the bars of the pit. Or, rather, we may suppose
it spoken while he was yet in the fish's belly, and then it is the
language of his faith: "Thou hast kept me alive here, in the pit, and
therefore thou canst, thou wilt, bring up my life from the pit;" and he
speaks of it with as much assurance as if it were done already: Thou has
brought up my life. Though he has not an express promise of deliverance,
he has an earnest of it, and on that he depends: he has life, and
therefore believes his life shall be brought up from corruption; and
this assurance he addresses to God: Thou has done it, O Lord my God!
Thou art the Lord, and therefore canst do it for me, my God, and
therefore wilt do it. Note, If the Lord be our God, he will be to us the
resurrection and the life, will redeem our lives from destruction, from
the power of the grave.

5\. He gives warning to others, and instructs them to keep close to God
([Psa 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#008)): Those that observe lying
vanities forsake their own mercy, that is, (1.) Those that worship other
gods, as the heathen mariners did, and call upon them, and expect relief
and comfort from them, forsake their own mercy; they stand in their own
light; they turn their back upon their own happiness, and go quite out
of the way of all good. Note, Idols are lying vanities, and those that
pay that homage to them which is due to God only act as contrarily to
their interests as to their duty. Or, (2.) Those that follow their own
inventions, as Jonah himself had done when he fled from the presence of
the Lord to go to Tarshish, forsake their own mercy, that mercy which
they might find in God, and might have such a covenant-right and title
to it as to be able to call it their own, if they would but keep close
to God and their duty. Those that think to go any where to be from under
the eye of God, as Jonah did - that think to better themselves by
deserting his service, as Jonah did - and that grudge his mercy to any
poor sinners, and pretend to be wiser than he in judging who are fit to
have prophets sent them and who are not, as Jonah did - they observe
lying vanities, are led away by foolish groundless fancies, and, like
him, they forsake their own mercy, and no good can come of it. Note,
Those that forsake their own duty forsake their own mercy; those that
run away from the work of their place and day run away from the comfort
of it.

6\. He solemnly binds his soul with a bond that, if God work deliverance
for him, the God of his mercies shall be the God of his praises, [Jon
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#009). He covenants with God, (1.) That
he will honour him in his devotions with the sacrifice of thanksgiving;
and God has said, for the encouragement of those that do so, that those
that offer praise glorify him. He will, according to the law of Moses,
bring a sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will offer that according to the
law of nature, with the voice of thanksgiving. The love and thankfulness
of the heart to God are the life and soul of this duty; without these
neither the sacrifice of thanksgiving nor the voice of thanksgiving will
avail any thing. But gratitude was then, by a divine appointment, to be
expressed by a sacrifice, in which the offerer presented the beast slain
to God, not in lieu of himself, but in token of himself; and it is now
to be expressed by the voice of thanksgiving, the calves of our lips
([Hos 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#002)), the fruit of our lips
([Heb 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015)), speaking forth, singing
forth, the high praises of our God. This Jonah here promises, that with
the sacrifice of thanksgiving he will mention the lovingkindness of the
Lord, to his glory, and the encouragement of others. (2.) That he will
honour him in his conversation by a punctual performance of his vows,
which he made in the fish's belly. Some think it was some work of
charity that he vowed, or such a vow as Jacob's was, Of all that thou
hast given me I will give the tenth unto thee. More probably his vow was
that if God would deliver him he would readily go wherever he should
please to send him, though it were to Nineveh. When we smart for
deserting our duty it is time to promise that we will adhere to it, and
abound in it. Or, perhaps, the sacrifice of thanksgiving is the thing he
vowed, and that is it which he will pay, as David, [Psa
116:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#017).

7\. He concludes with an acknowledgment of God as the Saviour of his
people: Salvation is of the Lord; it belongs to the Lord, [Psa
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#008). He is the God of salvation, [Psa
68:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#019), [Psa
68:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#020). He only can work salvation, and
he can do it be the danger and distress ever so great; he has promised
salvation to his people that trust in him. All the salvations of his
church in general, and of particular saints, were wrought by him; he is
the Saviour of those that believe, [Ti1
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#010). Salvation is still of him, as it
has always been; from him alone it is to be expected, and on him we are
to depend for it. Jonah's experience shall encourage others, in all
ages, to trust in God as the God of their salvation; all that read this
story shall say with assurance, say with admiration, that salvation is
of the Lord, and is sure to all that belongs to him.

[Jonah 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jon 2:10</span></span>

We have here Jonah's discharge from his imprisonment, and his
deliverance from that death which there he was threatened with - his
return, though not to life, for he lived in the fish's belly, yet to the
land of the living, for from that he seemed to be quite cut off - his
resurrection, though not from death, yet from the grave, for surely
never man was so buried alive as Jonah was in the fish's belly. His
enlargement may be considered, 1. As an instance of God's power over all
the creatures. God spoke to the fish, gave him orders to return him, as
before he had given him orders to receive him. God speaks to other
creatures, and it is done; they are all his ready obedient servants. But
to man he speaks once, yea, twice, and he perceives it not, regards it
not, but turns a deaf ear to what he says. Note, God has all creatures
at his command, makes what use he pleases of them, and serves his own
purposes by them. 2. As an instance of God's mercy to a poor penitent,
that in his distress prays to him. Jonah had sinned, and had done
foolishly, very foolishly; his own backslidings did not correct him, and
it appears by his after-conduct that his foolishness was not quite
driven from him, no, not by the rod of this correction; and yet, upon
his praying, and humbling himself before God, here is a miracle in
nature wrought for his deliverance, to intimate what a miracle of grace,
free grace, God's reception and entertainment of returning sinners are.
When God had him at his mercy he showed him mercy, and did not contend
for ever. 3. As a type and figure of Christ's resurrection. He died and
was buried, to lay in the grave, as Jonah did, three days and three
nights, a prisoner for our debt; but the third day he came forth, as
Jonah did, by his messengers to preach repentance, and remission of
sins, even to the Gentiles. And thus was another scripture fulfilled,
After two days he will receive us, and the third day he will raise us
up, [Hos 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#002). The earth trembled as if
full of her burden, as the fish was of Jonah.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jonah Chapter 3](jon003)

</div>
