<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos018)  [Next](jos020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 19:0</span></span>

In the description of the lots of Judah and Benjamin we have an account
both of the borders that surrounded them and of the cities contained in
them. In that of Ephraim and Manasseh we have the borders, but not the
cities; in this chapter Simeon and Dan are described by their cities
only, and not their borders, because they lay very much within Judah,
especially the former; the rest have both their borders described and
their cities names, especially frontiers. Here is, I. The lot of Simeon
([Jos 19:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#001)). II. Of Zebulun ([Jos
19:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#010)). III. Of Issachar ([Jos
19:17-23](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#017)). IV. Of Asher ([Jos
19:24-31](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#024)). V. Of Naphtali ([Jos
19:32-39](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#032)). VI. Of Dan ([Jos
19:40-48](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#040)). Lastly, The inheritance
assigned to Joshua himself and his own family ([Jos
19:49-51](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#049)).

[Joshua 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 19:1</span></span>

Simeon's lot was drawn after Judah's, Joseph's, and Benjamin's, because
Jacob had put that tribe under disgrace; yet it is put before the two
younger sons of Leah and the three sons of the handmaids. Not one person
of note, neither judge nor prophet, was of this tribe, that we know of.

I. The situation of their lot was within that of Judah ([Jos
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#001)) and was taken from it, [Jos
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#009). It seems, those that first
surveyed the land thought it larger than it was, and that it would have
held out to give every tribe in proportion as large a share as they had
carved out for Judah; but, upon a more strict enquiry, it was found that
it would not reach ([Jos 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#009)): The
part of the children of Judah was too much for them, more than they
needed, and more, as it proved, than fell to their share. Yet God did
not by the lot lessen it, but left it to their prudence and care
afterwards to discover and rectify the mistake, which when they did, 1.
The men of Judah did not oppose the taking away of the cities again,
which by the first distribution fell within their border, when they were
convinced that they had more than their proportion. In all such cases
errors must be excepted and a review admitted if there be occasion.
Though, in strictness, what fell to their lot was their right against
all the world, yet they would not insist upon it when it appeared that
another tribe would want what they had to spare. Note, We must look on
the things of others, and not on our own only. The abundance of some
must supply the wants of others, that there may be somewhat of an
equality, for which there may be equity where there is not law. 2. That
which was thus taken off from Judah to be put into a new lot Providence
directed to the tribe of Simeon, that Jacob's prophecy concerning this
tribe might be fulfilled, I will divide them in Jacob. The cities of
Simeon were scattered in Judah, with which tribe they were surrounded,
except on that side towards the sea. This brought them into a
confederacy with the tribe of Judah ([Jdg
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#003)), and afterwards was a happy
occasion of the adherence of many of this tribe to the house of David,
at the time of the revolt of the ten tribes to Jeroboam. [Ch2
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#009), out of Simeon they fell to Asa
in abundance. It is good being in a good neighbourhood.

II\. The cities within their lot are here named. Beersheba, or Sheba,
for these names seem to refer to the same place, is put first. Ziklag,
which we read of in David's story, is one of them. What course they took
to enlarge their borders and make room for themselves we find [Ch1
4:39](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#039), etc.

[Joshua 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 19:10</span></span>

This is the lot of Zebulun, who, though born of Leah after Issachar, yet
was blessed by Jacob and Moses before him; and therefore it was so
ordered that his lot was drawn before that of Issachar, north of which
it lay and south of Asher. 1. The lot of this tribe was washed by the
great sea on the west, and by the sea of Tiberias on the east, answering
Jacob's prophecy ([Gen 49:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#013)), Zebulun
shall be a haven of ships, trading ships on the great sea and fishing
ships on the sea of Galilee. 2. Though there were some places in this
tribe which were made famous in the Old Testament, especially Mount
Carmel, on which the famous trial was between God and Baal in Elijah's
time, yet it was made much more illustrious in the New Testament; for
within the lot of this tribe was Nazareth, where our blessed Saviour
spent so much of his time on earth, and from which he was called Jesus
of Nazareth, and Mount Tabor on which he was transfigured, and that
coast of the sea of Galilee on which Christ preached so many sermons and
wrought so many miracles.

[Joshua 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jos 19:17</span></span>

The lot of Issachar ran from Jordan in the east to the great sea in the
west, Manasseh on the south, and Zebulun on the north. A numerous tribe,
[Num 26:25](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#025). Tola, one of the judges,
was of this tribe, [Jdg 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#001). So was
Baasha, one of the kings of Israel, [Kg1
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#027). The most considerable places in
this tribe were, 1. Jezreel, in which was Ahab's palace, and near it
Naboth's vineyard. 2. Shunem, where lived that good Shunamite that
entertained Elisha. 3. The river Kishon, on the banks of which, in this
tribe, Sisera was beaten by Deborah and Barak. 4. The mountains of
Gilboa, on which Saul and Jonathan were slain, which were not far from
Endor, where Saul consulted the witch. 5. The valley of Megiddo, where
Josiah was slain near Hadad-rimmon, [Kg2
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#029); [Zac
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#011).

[Joshua 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jos 19:24</span></span>

The lot of Asher lay upon the coast of the great sea. We read not of any
famous person of this tribe but Anna the prophetess, who was a constant
resident in the temple at the time of our Saviour's birth, [Luk
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#036). Nor were there many famous
places in this tribe. Aphek (mentioned [Jos
19:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#030)) was the place near which
Benhadad was beaten by Ahad, [Kg1
20:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#030). But close adjoining to this
tribe were the celebrated sea-port towns of Tyre and Sidon, which we
read so much of. Tyre is called here that strong city ([Jos
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#029)), but Bishop Patrick thinks it
was not the same Tyre that we read of afterwards, for that was built on
an island; this old strong city was on the continent. And it is
conjectured by some that into these two strong-holds, Sidon and Tzor, or
Tyre, many of the people of Canaan fled and took shelter when Joshua
invaded them.

[Joshua 19:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jos 19:32</span></span>

Naphtali lay furthest north of all the tribes, bordering on Mount
Libanus. The city of Leshem, or Liash, lay on the utmost edge of it to
the north, and therefore when the Danites had made themselves masters of
it, and called it Dan, the length of Canaan from north to south was
reckoned from Dan to Beersheba. It had Zebulun on the south, Asher on
the west, and Judah upon Jordan, probably a city of that name, and so
distinguished from the tribe of Judah on the east. It was in the lot of
this tribe, near the waters of Merom, that Joshua fought and routed
Jabin, [Jos 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#001). etc. In this tribe
stood Capernaum and Bethsaida, on the north end of the sea of Tiberias,
in which Christ did so many mighty works; and the mountain (as is
supposed) on which Christ preached, [Mat
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001).

[Joshua 19:40](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">jos 19:40</span></span>

Dan, though commander of one of the four squadrons of the camp of
Israel, in the wilderness, that which brought up the rear, yet was last
provided for in Canaan, and his lot fell in the southern part of Canaan,
between Judah on the east and the land of the Philistines on the west,
Ephraim on the north and Simeon on the south. Providence ordered this
numerous and powerful tribe into a post of danger, as best able to deal
with those vexatious neighbours the Philistines, and so it was found in
Samson. Here is an account, 1. Of what fell to this tribe by lot, Zorah,
and Eshtaol, and the camp of Dan thereabouts, of which we read in the
story of Samson. And near there was the valley of Eshcol, whence the
spies brought the famous bunch of grapes. Japho, or Joppa was in this
lot. 2. Of what they got by their own industry and valour, which is
mentioned here ([Jos 19:47](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#047)), but
related at large, [Jdg 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#007), etc.

[Joshua 19:49](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">jos 19:49</span></span>

Before this account of the dividing of the land is solemnly closed up,
in the last verse, which intimates that the thing was done to the
satisfaction of all, here is an account of the particular inheritance
assigned to Joshua. 1. He was last served, though the eldest and
greatest man of all Israel, and who, having commanded in the conquest of
Canaan, might have demanded the first settlement in it for himself and
his family. But he would make it to appear that in all he did he sought
the good of his country, and not any private interest of his own. He was
content to be unfixed till he saw them all settled; and herein is a
great example to all in public places to prefer the common welfare
before their particular satisfaction. Let the public be first served. 2.
He had his lot according to the word of the Lord. It is probable that,
when God by Moses told Caleb what inheritance he should have ([Jos
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#009)), he gave the like promise to
Joshua, which he had an eye to in making his election: this made his
portion doubly pleasant, that he had it, not as the rest by common
providence, but by special promise. 3. He chose it in Mount Ephraim,
which belonged to his own tribe, with which he thereby put himself in
common, when he might by prerogative have chosen his inheritance in some
other tribe, as suppose that of Judah, and thereby have distinguished
himself from them. Let no man's preferment or honour make him ashamed of
his family or country, or estrange him from it. The tabernacle was set
up in the lot of Ephraim, and Joshua would forecast not to be far from
that. 4. The children of Israel are said to give it to him ([Jos
19:49](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#049)), which bespeaks his humility,
that he would not take it to himself without the people's consent and
approbation, as if he would thereby own himself, though major singulis -
greater than any one, yet minor universis - less than the whole
assemblage, and would hold even the estate of his family, under God, by
the grant of the people. 5. It was a city that must be built before it
was fit to be dwelt in. While others dwelt in houses which they built
not, Joshua must erect for himself (that he might be a pattern of
industry and contentment with mean things) such buildings as he could
hastily run up, without curiosity or magnificence. Our Lord Jesus thus
came and dwelt among us, not in pomp but poverty, providing rest for us,
yet himself not having where to lay his head. Even Christ pleased not
himself.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 20](jos020)

</div>
