<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos000)  [Next](jos002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

The book begins with the history, not of Joshua's life (many remarkable
passages of that we had before in the books of Moses) but of his reign
and government. In this chapter, I. God appoints him to the government
in the stead of Moses, gives him an ample commission, full instructions,
and great encouragements ([Jos 1:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)).
II. He accepts the government, and addresses himself immediately to the
business of it, giving orders to the officers of the people in general
([Jos 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#010), [Jos
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#011)) and particularly to the two
tribes and a half ([Jos 1:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#012)). III.
The people agree to it, and take an oath of fealty to him ([Jos
1:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#016)). A reign which thus began
with God could not but be honourable to the prince and comfortable to
the subject. The last words of Moses are still verified, "Happy art
thou, O Israel! Who is like unto thee, O people?" [Deu
33:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#029).

[Joshua 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 1:1</span></span>

Honour is here put upon Joshua, and great power lodged in his hand, by
him that is the fountain of honour and power, and by whom kings reign.
Instructions are given him by Infinite Wisdom, and encouragements by the
God of all consolation. God had before spoken to Moses concerning him
([Num 27:18](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#018)), but now he speaks to him
(v. 1), probably as he spoke to Moses ([Lev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)) out of the tabernacle of the
congregation, where Joshua had with Moses presented himself ([Deu
31:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#014)), to learn the way of attending
there. Though Eleazar had the breast-plate of judgment, which Joshua was
directed to consult as there was occasion ([Num
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#021)), yet, for his greater
encouragement, God here speaks to him immediately, some think in a dream
or vision (as [Job 33:15](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#015)); for though
God has tied us to instituted ordinances, in them to attend him, yet he
has not tied himself to them, but that he may without them make himself
known to his people, and speak to their hearts otherwise than by their
ears. Concerning Joshua's call to the government observe here,

I. The time when it was given him: After the death of Moses. As soon as
ever Moses was dead, Joshua took upon him the administration, by virtue
of his solemn ordination in Moses's life-time. An interregnum, though
but for a few days, might have been of bad consequence; but it is
probable that God did not speak to him to go forward towards Canaan till
after the thirty days of mourning for Moses were ended; not, as the Jews
say, because the sadness of his spirit during those days unfitted him
for communion with God (he sorrowed not as one that had no hope), but by
this solemn pause, and a month's adjournment of the public councils,
even now when time was so very precious to them, God would put an honour
upon the memory of Moses, and give time to the people not only to lament
their loss of him, but to repent of their miscarriages towards him
during the forty years of his government.

II\. The place Joshua had been in before he was thus preferred. He was
Moses's minister, that is, an immediate attendant upon his person and
assistant in business. The Septuagint translates it hupourgos, a workman
under Moses, under his direction and command. Observe, 1. He that was
here called to honour had been long bred to business. Our Lord Jesus
himself took upon him the form of a servant, and then God highly exalted
him. 2. He was trained up in subjection and under command. Those are
fittest to rule that have learnt to obey. 3. He that was to succeed
Moses was intimately acquainted with him, that he might fully know his
doctrine and manner of life, his purpose and long-suffering ([Ti2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#010)), might take the same measures,
walk in the same spirit, in the same steps, having to carry on the same
work. 4. He was herein a type of Christ, who might therefore be called
Moses's minister, because he was made under the law and fulfilled all
the righteousness of it.

III\. The call itself that God gave him, which is very full.

1\. The consideration upon which he was called to the government: Moses
my servant is dead, v. 2. All good men are God's servants; and it is no
disparagement, but an honour, to the greatest of men to be so: angels
themselves are his ministers. Moses was called to extraordinary work,
was a steward in God's house, and in the discharge of the trusts reposed
in him he served not himself but God who employed him; he was faithful
as a servant, and with an eye to the Son, as is intimated, [Heb
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#005), where what he did is said to be
for a testimony of the things that should be spoken after. God will own
his servants, will confess them in the great day. But Moses, though
God's servant, and one that could ill be spared, is dead; for God will
change hands, to show that whatever instruments he uses he is not tied
to any. Moses, when he has done his work as a servant, dies and goes to
rest from his labours, and enters into the joy of his Lord. Observe, God
takes notice of the death of his servants. It is precious in his sight,
[Psa 116:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#015).

2\. The call itself. Now therefore arise. (1.) "Though Moses is dead,
the work must go on; therefore arise, and go about it." Let not weeping
hinder sowing, nor the withering of the most useful hands be the
weakening of ours; for, when God has work to do, he will either find or
make instruments fit to carry it on. Moses the servant is dead, but God
the Master is not: he lives for ever. (2.) "Because Moses is dead,
therefore the work devolves upon thee as his successor, for hereunto
thou wast appointed. Therefore there is need of thee to fill up his
place; up, and be doing." Note, \[1.\] The removal of useful men should
quicken survivors to be so much the more diligent in doing good. Such
and such are dead, and we must die shortly, therefore let us work while
it is day. \[2.\] It is a great mercy to a people, if, when useful men
are taken away in the midst of their usefulness, others are raised up in
their stead to go on where they broke off. Joshua must arise to finish
what Moses began. Thus the latter generations enter into the labours of
the former. And thus Christ, our Joshua, does that for us which could
never be done by the law of Moses, - justifies ([Act
13:39](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#039)), and sanctifies, [Rom
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003). The life of Moses made way for
Joshua, and prepared the people for what was to be done by him. Thus the
law is a schoolmaster to bring us to Christ: and then the death of Moses
made room for Joshua; thus we are dead to the law, our first husband,
that we may be married to Christ, [Rom
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#004).

3\. The particular service he was now called out to: "Arise, go over
this Jordan, this river which you have in view, and on the banks of
which you lie encamped." This was a trial to the faith of Joshua,
whether he would give orders to make preparation for passing the river
when there was no visible way of getting over it, at least not at this
place and at this time, when all the banks were overflown, [Jos
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#015). He had no pontoons or bridge of
boats by which to convey them over, and yet he must believe that God,
who had ordered them over, would open a way for them. Going over Jordan
was going into Canaan; thither Moses might not, could not, bring them,
[Deu 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#002). Thus the honour of bringing
the many sons to glory is reserved for Christ the captain of our
salvation, [Heb 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#010).

4\. The grant of the land of Canaan to the children of Israel is here
repeated ([Jos 1:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#002)): I do give it
them. To the patriarchs it was promised, I will give it; but, now that
the fourth generation had expired, the iniquity of the Amorites was
full, and the time had come for the performance of the promise, it is
actually conveyed, and they are put in possession of that which they had
long been in expectation of: "I do give it, enter upon it, it is all
your own; nay ([Jos 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#003)), I have given
it; though it be yet unconquered, it is as sure to you as if it were in
your hands." Observe, (1.) The persons to whom the conveyance is made:
To them, even to the children of Israel ([Jos
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#002)), because they are the seed of
Jacob, who was called Israel at the time when this promise was made to
him, [Gen 35:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#010), [Gen
35:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#012). The children of Israel, though
they had been very provoking in the wilderness, yet, for their fathers'
sakes, should have the entail preserved. And it was the children of the
murmurers that God said should enter Canaan, [Num
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#031). (2.) The land itself that is
conveyed: From the river Euphrates eastward, to the Mediterranean Sea
westward, [Jos 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#004). Though their sin
cut them short of this large possession, and they never replenished all
the country within the bounds here mentioned, yet, had they been
obedient, God would have given them this and much more. Out of all these
countries, and many others, there were in process of time proselytes to
the Jewish religion, as appears, [Act
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#005), etc. If their church was
enlarged, though their nation was not multiplied, it cannot be said that
the promise was of no effect. And, if this promise had not its full
accomplishment in the letter, believers might thence infer that it had a
further meaning, and was to be fulfilled in the kingdom of the Messiah,
both that of grace and that of glory. (3.) The condition is here implied
upon which this grant is made, in those words, as I said unto Moses,
that is, "upon the terms that Moses told you of many a time, if you will
keep my statutes, you shall go in and possess that good land. Take it
under those provisos and limitations, and not otherwise." The precept
and promise must not be separated. (4.) It is intimated with what ease
they should gain the possession of this land, if it were not their own
fault, in these words, "Every place that the sole of your foot shall
tread upon (within the following bounds) shall be your own. Do but set
your foot upon it and you have it."

5\. The promises God here makes to Joshua for his encouragement. (1.)
That he should be sure of the presence of God with him in this great
work to which he was called ([Jos
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#005)): "As I was with Moses, to direct
and strengthen him, to own and prosper him, and give him success in
bringing Israel out of Egypt and leading them through the wilderness, so
I will be with thee to enable thee to settle them in Canaan." Joshua was
sensible how far he came short of Moses in wisdom and grace; But what
Moses did was done by virtue of the presence of God with him, and,
though Joshua had not always the same presence of mind that Moses had,
yet, if he had always the same presence of God, he would do well enough.
Note, it is a great comfort to the rising generation of ministers and
Christians that the same grace which was sufficient for those that went
before them shall not be wanting to them if they be not wanting to
themselves in the improvement of it. It is repeated here again (v. 9).
"The Lord thy God is with thee as a God of power, and that power engaged
for thee whithersoever thou goest." Note, Those that go where God sends
them shall have him with them wherever they go and they need desire no
more to make them easy and prosperous. (2.) That the presence of God
should never be withdrawn from him: I will not fail thee, nor forsake
thee, v. 5. Moses had assured him of this ([Deu
31:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#008)), that, though he must now leave
him, God never would: and here God himself confirms that word of his
servant Moses ([Isa 44:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#026)), and
engages never to leave Joshua. We need the presence of God, not only
when we are beginning our work to set us in, but in the progress of it
to further us with a continual help. If that at any time fail us, we are
gone; this we may be sure, that the Lord is with us while we are with
him. This promise here made to Joshua is applied to all believers, and
improved as an argument against covetousness, [Heb
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#005), Be content with such things as
you have, for he hath said, I will never leave thee. (3.) That he should
have victory over all the enemies of Israel ([Jos
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#005)): There shall not any man that
comes against thee be able to stand before thee. Note, There is no
standing before those that have God on their side. If he be for us, who
can be against us? God promises him clear success - the enemy should not
make any head against him; and constant success - all the days of his
life. However it might be with Israel when he was gone, all his reign
should be graced with triumphs. What Joshua had himself encouraged the
people with long ago ([Num 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#009)) God
here encourages him with. (4.) That he should himself have the dividing
of this land among the people of Israel, v. 6. It was a great
encouragement to him in beginning this work that he was sure to see it
finished and his labour should not be in vain. Some make it a reason why
he should arm himself with resolution, and be of good courage, because
of the bad character of the people whom he must cause to inherit that
land. He knew well what a froward discontented people they were, and how
unmanageable they had been in his predecessor's time; let him therefore
expect vexation from them and be of good courage.

6\. The charge or command he gives to Joshua, which is,

(1.) That he conform himself in every thing to the law of God, and make
this his rule v. 7, 8. God does, as it were, put the book of the law
into Joshua's hand; as, when Joash was crowned, they gave him the
testimony, [Kg2 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#012). And concerning
this book he is charged, \[1.\] To meditate therein day and night, that
he might understand it and have it ready in him upon all occasions. If
ever any man's business might have excused him from meditation, and
other acts of devotion, one would think Joshua's might at this time. It
was a great trust that was lodged in his hands; the care of it was
enough to fill him, if he had had ten souls, and yet he must find time
and thoughts for meditation. Whatever affairs of this world we have to
mind, we must not neglect the one thing needful. \[5.\] Not to let it
depart out of his mouth; that is, all his orders to the people, and his
judgments upon appeals made to him, must be consonant to the law of God;
upon all occasions he must speak according to this rule, [Isa
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#020). Joshua was to maintain and carry
on the work that Moses had begun, and therefore he must not only
complete the salvation Moses had wrought for them, but must uphold the
holy religion he had established among them. There was no occasion to
make new laws; but that good thing which was committed to him he must
carefully and faithfully keep, [Ti2
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#014). \[3.\] He must observe to do
according to all this law. To this end he must meditate therein, not for
contemplation sake only, or to fill his head with notions, or that he
might find something to puzzle the priests with, but that he might, both
as a man and as a magistrate, observe to do according to what was
written therein; and several things were written there which had
particular reference to the business he had now before him, as the laws
concerning their wars, the destroying of the Canaanites and the dividing
of Canaan; etc.; these he must religiously observe. Joshua was a man of
great power and authority, yet he must himself be under command and do
as he is bidden. No man's dignity or dominion, how great soever, sets
him above the law of God. Joshua must not only govern by law, and take
care that the people observed the law, but he must observe it himself,
and so by his own example maintain the honour and power of it. First, He
must do what was written. It is not enough to hear and read the word, to
commend and admire it, to know and remember it, to talk and discourse of
it, but we must do it. Secondly, He must do according to what was
written, exactly observing the law as his copy, and doing, not only that
which was there required, but in all circumstances according to the
appointment. Thirdly, He must do according to all that was written,
without exception or reserve, having a respect to all God's
commandments, even those which are most displeasing to flesh and blood.
Fourthly, He must observe to do so, observe the checks of conscience,
the hints of providence; and all the advantages of opportunity. Careful
observance is necessary to universal obedience. Fifthly, He must not
turn from it, either in his own practice or in any act of government, to
the right hand or to the left, for there are errors on both hands, and
virtue is in the mean. Sixthly, He must be strong and courageous, that
he might do according to the law. So many discouragements there are in
the way of duty that those who will proceed and persevere in it must put
on resolution. And, lastly, to encourage him in his obedience, he
assures him that then he shall do wisely (as it is in the margin) and
make his way prosperous, [Jos 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#007),
[Jos 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#008). Those that make the word of
God their rule, and conscientiously walk by that rule, shall both do
well and speed well; it will furnish them with the best maxims by which
to order their conversation ([Psa
111:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#010)); and it will entitle them to
the best blessings: God shall give them the desire of their heart.

(2.) That he encourage himself herein with the promise and presence of
God, and make these his stay ([Jos
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#006)): Be strong and of a good courage.
And again ([Jos 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#007)), as if this was
the one thing needful: Only be strong and very courageous. And he
concludes with this ([Jos 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#009)): Be
strong and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed.
Joshua had long since signalized his valour, in the war with Amalek, and
in his dissent from the report of the evil spies; and yet God sees fit
thus to inculcate this precept upon him. Those that have grace have need
to be called upon again and again to exercise grace and to improve in
it. Joshua was humble and low in his own eyes, not distrustful of God,
and his power, and promise, but diffident of himself, and of his own
wisdom, and strength, and sufficiency for the work, especially coming
after so great a man as Moses; and therefore God repeats this so often,
"Be strong and of a good courage; let not the sense of thy own
infirmities dishearten thee; God is all-sufficient. Have not I commanded
thee?" \[1.\] "I have commanded the work to be done, and therefore it
shall be done, how invincible soever the difficulties may seem that lie
in the way." Nay, \[2.\] "I have commanded, called, and commissioned,
thee to do it, and therefore will be sure to own thee, and strengthen
thee, and bear thee out in. it." Note, When we are in the way of our
duty we have reason to be strong and very courageous; and it will help
very much to animate and embolden us if we keep our eye upon the divine
warrant, hear God saying, "Have not I commanded thee? I will therefore
help thee, succeed thee, accept thee, reward thee." Our Lord Jesus, as
Joshua here, was borne up under his sufferings by a regard to the will
of God and the commandment he had received from his Father, [Joh
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018).

[Joshua 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 1:10</span></span>

Joshua, being settled in the government, immediately applies himself to
business; not to take state or to take his pleasure, but to further the
work of God among, the people over whom God had set him. As he that
desires the office of a minister ([Ti1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001)), so he that desires the office of
a magistrate, desires a work, a good work; neither is preferred to be
idle.

I. He issues out orders to the people to provide for a march; and they
had been so long encamped in their present post that it would be a work
of some difficulty to decamp. The officers of the people that commanded
under Joshua in their respective tribes and families attended him for
orders, which they were to transmit to the people. Inferior magistrates
are as necessary and as serviceable to the public good in their places
as the supreme magistrate in his. What could Joshua have done without
officers? We are therefore required to be subject, not only to the king
as supreme, but to governors as to those that are sent by him, [Pe1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#013), [Pe1
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#014). By these officers, 1. Joshua
gives public notice that they were to pass over Jordan within three
days. These orders, I suppose, were not given till after the return of
the spies that were sent to bring an account of Jericho, though the
story of that affair follows, ch. 2. And perhaps that was such an
instance of his jealousy, and excessive caution, as made it necessary
that he should be so often bidden as he was to be strong and of a good
courage. Observe with what assurance Joshua says to the people, because
God had said it to him, You shall pass over Jordan, and shall possess
the land. We greatly honour the truth of God. 2. He gives them
directions to prepare victuals, not to prepare transport vessels. He
that bore Egypt upon eagle's wings would in like manner bear them into
Canaan, to bring them to himself, [Exo
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#004). But those that were desirous to
have other victuals besides the manna, which had not yet ceased, must
prepare it and have it ready against the time appointed. Perhaps, though
the manna did not quite cease till they came into Canaan ([Jos
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#012)), yet since they had come into a
land inhabited ([Exo 16:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#035)), where
they might be furnished in part with other provisions, it did not fall
so plentifully, nor did they gather so much as when they had it first
given to them in the wilderness, but decreased gradually, and therefore
they are ordered to provide other victuals, in which perhaps was
included all other things necessary to their march. And some of the
Jewish writer, considering that having manna they needed not to provide
other victuals, understand it figuratively, that they must repent of
their sins, and make their peace with God, and resolve to live a new
life, that they might be ready to receive this great favour. See [Exo
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#010), [Exo
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#011).

II\. He reminds the two tribes and a half of the obligations they were
under to go over Jordan with their brethren, though they left their
possessions and families on this side. Interest would make the other
tribes glad to go over Jordan, but in these it was an act of
self-denial, and against the grain; therefore it was needful to produce
the agreement which Moses had made with them, when he gave them their
possession before their brethren ([Jos
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#013)): Remember the word which Moses
commanded you. Some of them perhaps were ready to think now that Moses
was dead, who they thought was too hard upon them in this matter, they
might find some excuse or other to release themselves from this
engagement, or might prevail with Joshua to dispense with them; but he
holds them to it, and lets them know that, though Moses was dead, his
commands and their promises were still in full force. He reminds them,
1. Of the advantages they had received in being first settled: "The Lord
your God hath given you rest. He has given your minds rest; you know
what you have to trust to, and are not as the rest of the tribes waiting
the issue of the war first and then of the lot. He has also given your
families rest, your wives and children, whose settlement is your
satisfaction. He has given you rest by giving you this land, this good
land, of which you are in full and quiet possession." Note, When God by
his providence has given us rest we ought to consider how we may honour
him with the advantages of it, and what service we may do to our
brethren who are unsettled, or not so well settled as we are When God
had given David rest ([Sa2 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#001)), see
how restless he was till he had found out a habitation for the ark, [Psa
132:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#004), [Psa
132:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#005). When God has given us rest, we
must take heed of slothfulness and of settling upon our lees. 2. He
reminds them of their agreement to help their brethren in the wars of
Canaan till God had in like manner given them rest, [Jos
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#014), [Jos
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#015). This was, (1.) Reasonable in
itself. So closely were all the tribes incorporated that they must needs
look upon themselves as members one of another. (2.) It was enjoined
them by Moses, the servant of the Lord; he commanded them to do this,
and Joshua his successor would see his commands observed. (3.) It was
the only expedient they had to save themselves from the guilt of a great
sin in settling on that side Jordan, a sin which would one time or other
find them out, [Num 32:23](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#023). (4.) It was
the condition of the grant Moses had made them of the land they were
possessed of, so that they could not be sure of a good title to, or a
comfortable enjoyment of, the land of their possession, as it is here
called ([Jos 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#015)), if they did not
fulfil the condition. (5.) They themselves had covenanted and agreed
thereunto ([Num 32:25](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#025)): Thy servants
will do as my Lord commandeth. Thus we all lie under manifold
obligations to strengthen the hands one of another, and not to seek our
own welfare only, but one another's.

[Joshua 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 1:16</span></span>

This answer was given not by the two tribes and a half only (though they
are spoken of immediately before), but by the officers of all the people
([Jos 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#010)), as their representatives,
concurring with the divine appointment, by which Joshua was set over
them, and they did it heartily, and with a great deal of cheerfulness
and resolution.

I. They promise him obedience (v. 16), not only as subjects to their
prince, but as soldiers to their general, of whose particular orders
they are to be observant. He that hath soldiers under him saith to this
man, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he cometh, [Mat
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#009). Thus the people of Joshua; "All
that thou commandest us we will readily do, without murmuring or
disputing; and whithersoever thou sends us, though upon the most
difficult and perilous expedition, we will go." We must thus swear
allegiance to our Lord Jesus, as the captain of our salvation, and bind
ourselves to do what he commands us by his word, and to go where he
sends us by his providence. And since Joshua, being humbly conscious to
himself how far short he came of Moses, feared he should not have such
an influence upon the people and such an interest in them as Moses had,
they here promise that they will be as obedient to him as ever they had
been to Moses, [Jos 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#017). To speak
truth, they had no reason to boast of their obedience to Moses; he had
found them a stiff-necked people, [Deu
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#024). But they meant that they would
be as observant of Joshua as they should have been, and as some of them
were (and the generality of them at least sometimes) of Moses. Note, We
must not so magnify those that are gone, how eminent soever they were,
either in the magistracy or in the ministry, as to be wanting in the
honour and duty we owe to those that survive and succeed them, though in
gifts they may come short of them. Obedience for conscience' sake will
continue, though Providence change the hands by which it rules and acts.

II\. They pray for the presence of God with him ([Jos
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#017)): "Only the Lord thy God be with
thee, to bless and prosper thee, and give thee success, as he was with
Moses." Prayers and supplications are to be made for all in authority,
[Ti1 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001), [Ti1
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#002). And the best thing we can ask of
God for our magistrates is that they may have the presence of God with
them; this will make them blessings to us, so that in seeking this for
them we consult our own interest. A reason is here intimated why they
would obey him as they had obeyed Moses, because they believed (and in
faith prayed) that God's presence would be with him as it was with
Moses. Those that we have reason to think have favour from God should
have honour and respect from us. Some understand it as a limitation of
their obedience: "We will obey only as far as we perceive the Lord is
with thee, but no further. while thou keepest close to God we will keep
close to thee; hitherto shall our obedience come, but no further." But
they were so far from having any suspicion of Joshua's deviating from
the divine rule that there needed not such a proviso.

III\. They pass an act to make it death for any Israelite to disobey
Joshua's orders, or rebel against his commandment, [Jos
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#018). Perhaps if such a law had been
made in Moses's time it might have prevented many of the rebellions that
were formed against him; for most men fear the sword of the magistrate
more than the justice of God. Yet there was a special reason for the
making of this law now that they were entering upon the wars of Canaan;
for in times of war the severity of military discipline is more
necessary than at other times. Some think that in this statute they had
an eye to that law concerning the prophet God would raise up like unto
Moses, which they think, though it refer chiefly to Christ, yet takes in
Joshua by the way as a type of him, that whosoever would not hearken to
him should be cut off from his people. [Deu
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#019), I will require it of him.

IV\. They animate him to go on with cheerfulness in the work to which
God had called him; and, in desiring that he would be strong and of a
good courage, they did in effect promise him that they would do all they
could, by an exact, bold, and cheerful observance of all his orders, to
encourage him. It very much heartens those that lead in a good work to
see those that follow follow with a good will. Joshua, though of
approved valour, did not take it as an affront, but as a great kindness,
for the people to bid him be strong and of a good courage.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 2](jos002)

</div>
