<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos019)  [Next](jos021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 20:0</span></span>

This short chapter is concerning the cities of refuge, which we often
read of in the writings of Moses, but this is the last time that we find
mention of them, for now that matter was thoroughly settled. Here is, I.
The law God gave concerning them ([Jos
20:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#001)). II. The people's designation
of the particular cities for that use ([Jos
20:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#007)). And this remedial law was a
figure of good things to come.

[Joshua 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 20:1</span></span>

Many things were by the law of Moses ordered to be done when they came
to Canaan and this among the rest, the appointing of sanctuaries for the
protecting of those that were guilty of casual murder, which was a
privilege to all Israel, since no man could be sure but some time or
other it might be his own case; and it was for the interest of the land
that the blood of an innocent person, whose hand only was guilty but not
his heart, should not be shed, no, not by the avenger of blood: of this
law, which was so much for their advantage, God here reminds them, that
they might remind themselves of the other laws he had given them, which
concerned his honour. 1. Orders are given for the appointing of these
cities ([Jos 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#002)), and very
seasonably at this time when the land was newly surveyed, and so they
were the better able to divide the coasts of it into three parts, as God
had directed them, in order to the more convenient situation of these
cities of refuge, [Deu 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#003). Yet it is
probable that it was not done till after the Levites had their portion
assigned them in the next chapter, because the cities of refuge were all
to be Levites' cities. As soon as ever God had given them cities of
rest, he bade them appoint cities of refuge, to which none of them knew
but they might be glad to escape. Thus God provided, not only for their
ease at all times, but for their safety in times of danger, and such
times we must expect and prepare for in this world. And it intimates
what God's spiritual Israel have and shall have, in Christ and heaven,
not only rest to repose themselves in, but refuge to secure themselves
in. And we cannot think these cities of refuge would have been so often
and so much spoken of in the law of Moses, and have had so much care
taken about them (when the intention of them might have been effectually
answered, as it is in our law, by authorizing the courts of judgment to
protect and acquit the manslayer in all those cases wherein he was to
have privilege of sanctuary), if they were not designed to typify the
relief which the gospel provides for poor penitent sinners, and their
protection from the curse of the law and the wrath of God, in our Lord
Jesus, to whom believers flee for refuge ([Heb
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#018)), and in whom they are found
([Phi 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#009)) as in a sanctuary, where
they are privileged from arrests, and there is now no condemnation to
them, [Rom 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001). 2. Instructions are
given for the using of these cities. The laws in this matter we had
before, [Num 35:10](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#010), etc., where they
were opened at large. (1.) It is supposed that a man might possibly kill
a person, it might be his own child or dearest friend, unawares and
unwittingly ([Jos 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#003)), not only whom
he hated not, but whom he truly loved beforetime ([Jos
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#005)); for the way of man is not in
himself. What reason have we to thank God who has kept us both from
slaying and from being slain by accident! In this case, it is supposed
that the relations of the person slain would demand the life of the
slayer, as a satisfaction to that ancient law that whoso sheds man's
blood, by man shall his blood be shed. (2.) It is provided that if upon
trial it appeared that the murder was done purely by accident, and not
by design, either upon an old grudge or a sudden passion, then the
slayer should be sheltered from the avenger of blood in any one of these
cities, [Jos 20:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#004). By this law he
was entitled to a dwelling in that city, was taken into the care of the
government of it, but was confined to it, as prisoner at large; only, if
he survived the high priest, then, and not till then, he might return to
his own city. And the Jews say, "If he died before the high priest in
the city of his refuge and exile, and was buried there, yet, at the
death of the high priest, his bones should be removed with respect to
the place of his fathers' sepulchres."

[Joshua 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 20:7</span></span>

We have here the nomination of the cities of refuge in the land of
Canaan, which was made by the advice and authority of Joshua and the
princes ([Jos 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#007)); and upon occasion
of the mention of this is repeated the nomination of the other three in
the lot of the other two tribes and a half, which was made by Moses
([Deu 4:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#043)), but (as bishop Patrick
thinks) they had not the privilege till now. 1. They are said to
sanctify these cities, that is the original word for appointed, [Jos
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#007). Not that any ceremony was used
to signify the consecration of them, only they did by a public act of
court solemnly declare them cities of refuge, and as such sacred to the
honour of God, as the protector of exposed innocency. If they were
sanctuaries, it was proper to say they were sanctified. Christ, our
refuge, was sanctified by his Father; nay, for our sakes he sanctified
himself, [Joh 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#019). 2. These cities
(as those also on the other side Jordan) stood in the three several
parts of the country, so conveniently that a man might (they say) in
half a day reach some one of them from any corner of the country. Kedesh
was in Naphtali, the most northern tribe, Hebron in Judah, the most
southern, and Shechem in Ephraim, which lay in the middle, about equally
distant from the other two. God is a refuge at hand. 3. They were all
Levites' cities, which put an honour upon God's tribe, making them
judges in those cases wherein divine Providence was so nearly concerned,
and protectors to oppressed innocency. It was also a kindness to the
poor refugee, that when he might not go up to the house of the Lord, nor
tread his courts, yet he had the servants of God's house with him, to
instruct him, and pray for him, and help to make up the want of public
ordinances. If he must be confined, it shall be to a Levite-city, where
he may, if he will, improve his time. 4. These cities were upon hills to
be seen afar off, for a city on a hill cannot be hid; and this would
both direct and encourage the poor distressed man that was making that
way; and, though therefore his way at last was up-hill, yet this would
comfort him, that he would be in his place of safety quickly, and if he
could but get into the suburbs of the city he was well enough off. 5.
Some observe a significancy in the names of these cities with
application to Christ our refuge. I delight not in quibbling upon names,
yet am willing to take notice of these. Kedesh signifies holy, and our
refuge is the holy Jesus. Shechem, a shoulder, and the government is
upon his shoulder. Hebron, fellowship, and believers are called into the
fellowship of Christ Jesus our Lord. Bezer, a fortification, for he is a
strong-hold to all those that trust in him. Ramoth, high or exalted, for
him hath God exalted with his own right hand. Golan, joy or exultation,
for in him all the saints are justified, and shall glory. Lastly,
Besides all these, the horns of the altar, wherever it was, were a
refuge to those who took hold of them, if the crime were such as that
sanctuary allowed. This is implied in that law ([Exo
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#014)), that a wilful murderer shall
be taken from God's altar to be put to death. And we find the altar used
for this purpose. [Kg1 1:50](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#050); [Kg1
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#028). Christ is our altar, who not
only sanctifies the gift, but protects the giver.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 21](jos021)

</div>
