<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos016)  [Next](jos018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 17:0</span></span>

The half tribe of Manasseh comes next to be provided for; and here we
have, I. The families of that tribe that were to be portioned ([Jos
17:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#001)). II. The country that fell to
their lot ([Jos 17:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#007)). III. The
joint request of the two tribes that descended from Joseph, for the
enlargement of their lot, and Joshua's answer to that request ([Jos
17:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#014)).

[Joshua 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 17:1</span></span>

Manasseh was itself but one half of the tribe of Joseph, and yet was
divided and subdivided. 1. It was divided into two parts, one already
settled on the other side Jordan, consisting of those who were the
posterity of Machir, [Jos 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#001). This
Machir was born to Manasseh in Egypt; there he had signalized himself as
a man of war, probably in the contests between the Ephraimites and the
men of Gath, [Ch1 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#021). His warlike
disposition descended to his posterity, and therefore Moses gave them
Gileaxdand Bashan, on the other side Jordan, of which before, [Jos
13:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#031). It is here said that the lot
came to Manasseh, for he was the first-born of Joseph. Bishop Patrick
thinks it should be translated, though he was the first-born of Joseph,
and then the meaning is plain, that the second lot was for Manasseh,
because, though he was the first-born, yet Jacob had preferred Ephraim
before him. See the names of those heads of the families that settled on
the other side Jordan, [Ch1 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#024). 2.
That part on this side Jordan as subdivided into ten families, [Jos
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#005). There were six sons of Gilead
here named ([Jos 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#002)), the same that
are recorded [Num 26:30-32](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#030), only that
he who is there called Jezeer is here called Abiezer. Five of these sons
had each of them their portion; the sixth, which was Hepher, had his
male line cut off in his son Zelophehad, who left daughters only, five
in number, of whom we have often read, and these five had each of them a
portion; though perhaps, they claiming under Hepher, all their five
portions were but equal to one of the portions of the five sons. Or if
Hepher had other sons besides Zelophehad, in whom the name of his family
was kept up, their posterity married to the daughters of Zelophehad the
elder brother, and in their right had these portions assigned them. See
[Num 36:12](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#012). Here is, (1.) The claim
which the daughters of Zelophehad made, grounded upon the command God
gave to Moses concerning them, [Jos
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#004). They had themselves, when they
were young, pleaded their own cause before Moses, and obtained the grant
of an inheritance with their brethren, and now they would not lose the
benefit of that grant for want of speaking to Joshua, but seasonably put
in their demand themselves, as it should seem, and not their husbands
for them. (2.) The assignment of their portions according to their
claim. Joshua knew very well what God had ordered in their case, and did
not object that they having not served in the wars of Canaan there was
no reason why they should share in the possessions of Canaan, but
readily gave them as inheritance among the brethren of their father. And
now they reaped the benefit of their own pious zeal and prudent forecast
in this matter. Thus those who take care in the wilderness of this world
to make sure to themselves a place in the inheritance of the saints in
light will certainly have the comfort of it in the other world, while
those that neglect it now will lose it for ever.

[Joshua 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 17:7</span></span>

We have here a short account of the lot of this half tribe. It reached
from Jordan on the east to the great sea on the west; on the south it
lay all along contiguous to Ephraim, but on the north it abutted upon
Asher and Issachar. Asher lay north-west, and Issachar north-east, which
seems to be the meaning of that ([Jos
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#010)), that they (that is, Manasseh
and Ephraim, as related to it, both together making the tribe of Joseph)
met in Asher on the north and Issachar on the east, for Ephraim itself
reached not those tribes. Some things are particularly observed
concerning this lot: - 1. That there was great communication between
this tribe and that of Ephraim. The city of Tappuah belonged to Ephraim,
but the country adjoining to Manasseh ([Jos
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#008)); there were likewise many cities
of Ephraim that lay within the border of Manasseh ([Jos
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#009)), of which before, [Jos
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#009). 2. That Manasseh likewise had
cities with their appurtenances in the tribes of Issachar and Asher
([Jos 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#011)), God so ordering it, that
though every tribe had its peculiar inheritance, which might not be
alienated from it, yet they should thus intermix one with another, to
keep up mutual acquaintance and correspondence among the tribes, and to
give occasion for the doing of good offices one to another, as became
those who, though of different tribes, were all one Israel, and were
bound to love as brethren. 3. That they suffered the Canaanites to live
among them, contrary to the command of God, serving their own ends by
conniving at them, for they made them tributaries, [Jos
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#012), [Jos
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#013). The Ephraimites had done the
same ([Jos 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#010)), and from them
perhaps the Manassites learned it, and with their example excused
themselves in it. The most remarkable person of this half tribe in
after-time was Gideon, whose great actions were done within this lot. He
was of the family of Abiezer; Cesarea was in this lot, and Antipatris,
famed in the latter ages of the Jewish state.

[Joshua 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 17:14</span></span>

Here, I. The children of Joseph quarrel with their lot; if they had had
any just cause to quarrel with it, we have reason to think Joshua would
have relieved them, by adding to it, or altering it, which it does not
appear he did. It is probable, because Joshua was himself of the tribe
of Ephraim, they promised themselves that they should have some
particular favour shown them, and should not be confined to the decision
of the lot so closely as the other tribes; but Joshua makes them know
that in the discharge of his office, as a public person, he had no more
regard to his own tribe than to any other, but would administer
impartially, without favour or affection, wherein he has left an
excellent example to all in public trusts. It was a very competent
provision that was made for them, as much, for aught that appears, as
they were able to manage, and yet they call it in disdain but one lot,
as if that which was assigned to them both was scarcely sufficient for
one. The word for complainers ([Jde
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#016)) is mempsimoiroi, blamers of
their lot: - 1. That they were very numerous, through the blessing of
God upon them ([Jos 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#014)): I am a
great people, for the Lord has blessed me; and we have reason to hope
that he that hath sent mouths will send meat. "I am a great people, and
in so small a lot shall not have room to thrive." Yet observe, when they
speak thankfully of their present increase, they do not speak
confidently of the continuance of it. "The Lord has blessed me hitherto,
however he may see fit to deal with me for the future." The uncertainty
of what may be must not make us unthankful for what has been and is done
in kindness to us. 2. That a good part of that country which had now
fallen to their lot was in the hands of the Canaanites, and that they
were formidable enemies, who brought into the field of battle chariots
of iron ([Jos 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#016)), that is,
chariots with long scythes fastened to the sides of them, or the
axle-tree, which made great destruction of all that came in their way,
mowing them down like corn. They urge that though they had a good
portion assigned them, yet it was in bad hands, and they could not come
to the possession of it, wishing to have their lot in those countries
that were more thoroughly reduced than this was.

II\. Joshua endeavours to reconcile them to their lot. He owns they were
a great people, and being two tribes ought to have more than one lot
only ([Jos 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#017)), but tells them that
what had fallen to their share would be a sufficient lot for them both,
if they would but work and fight. They desired a lot in which they might
indulge themselves in ease and luxury. "No," says Joshua, "you must not
count upon that; in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread is a
sentence in force even in Canaan itself." He retorts their own argument,
that they were a great people. "If so, you are the better able to help
yourselves, and have the less reason to expect help from others. If thou
hast many mouths to be filled, thou hast twice as many hands to be
employed; earn, and then eat." 1. He bids them work for more ([Jos
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#015)): "Get thee up to the
wood-country, which is within thy own border, and let all hands be set
to work to cut down the trees, rid the rough lands, and make them, with
art and industry, good arable ground." Note, Many wish for larger
possessions who do not cultivate and make the best of what they have,
think they should have more talents given them who do not trade with
those with which they are entrusted. Most people's poverty is the effect
of their idleness; would they dig, they need not beg. 2. He bids them
fight for more ([Jos 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#017), [Jos
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#018)), when they pleaded that they
could not come at the wood-lands he spoke of because in the valley
between them and it were Canaanites whom they durst not enter the lists
with. "Never fear them," said Joshua, "thou hast God on thy side, and
thou shalt drive out the Canaanites, if thou wilt set about it in good
earnest, though they have iron chariots." We straiten ourselves by
apprehending the difficulties in the way of our enlargement to be
greater than really they are. What can be insuperable to faith and holy
resolution?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 18](jos018)

</div>
