<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos009)  [Next](jos011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 10:0</span></span>

We have in this chapter an account of the conquest of the kings and
kingdoms of the southern part of the land of Canaan, as, in the next
chapter, of the reduction of the northern parts, which together
completed the glorious successes of the wars of Canaan. In this chapter
we have an account, I. Of the routing of their forces in the field, in
which observe, 1. Their confederacy against the Gibeonites ([Jos
10:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#001)). 2. The Gibeonites' request to
Joshua to assist them ([Jos 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#006)). 3.
Joshua's speeds march under divine encouragement for their relief ([Jos
10:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#007)). 4. The defeat of the armies
of these confederate kings ([Jos
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#010), [Jos
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#011)). 5. The miraculous prolonging
of the day by the standing still of the sun in favour of the conquerors
([Jos 10:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#012)). II. Of the execution
of the kings that escaped out of the battle ([Jos
10:15-27](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#015)). III. Of the taking of the
particular cities, and the total destruction of all that were found in
them. Makkedah ([Jos 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#028)). Libnah
([Jos 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#029), [Jos
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#030)). Lachish ([Jos
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#031), [Jos
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#032)) and the king of Gezer that
attempted its rescue ([Jos 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#033)).
Eglon ([Jos 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#034), [Jos
10:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#035)). Hebron ([Jos
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#036), [Jos
10:37](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#037)). Debir ([Jos
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#038), [Jos
10:39](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#039)). And the bringing of all that
country into the hands of Israel ([Jos
10:40-42](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#040)). And, lastly, the return of
the army to the head-quarters ([Jos
10:43](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#043)).

[Joshua 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 10:1</span></span>

Joshua and the hosts of Israel had now been a good while in the land of
Canaan, and no great matters were effected; they were made masters of
Jericho by a miracle, of Ai by stratagem, and of Gibeon by surrender,
and that was all; hitherto the progress of their victories had not
seemed proportionable to the magnificence of their entry and the glory
of their beginnings. Those among them that were impatient of delays, it
is probable, complained of Joshua's slowness, and asked why they did not
immediately penetrate into the heart of the country, before the enemy
could rally their forces to make head against them, why they stood
trifling, while they were so confident both of their title and of their
success. Thus Joshua's prudence, perhaps, was censured as slothfulness,
cowardice, and want of spirit. But, 1. Canaan was not to be conquered in
a day. God had said that by little and little he would drive out the
Canaanites, [Exo 23:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#030). He that
believeth will not make haste, or conclude that the promise will never
be performed because it is not performed so soon as he expected. 2.
Joshua waited for the Canaanites to be the aggressors; let them first
make an onset upon Israel, or the allies of Israel, and then their
destruction will be, or at least will appear to be, the more just and
more justifiable. Joshua had warrant sufficient to set upon them, yet he
stays till they strike the first stroke, that he might provide for
honest things in the sight, not only of God, but of men; and they would
be the more inexcusable in their resistance, now that they had seen what
favour the Gibeonites found with Israel. 3. It was for the advantage of
Israel to sit still awhile, that the forces of these little kings might
unite in one body, and so might the more easily be cut off at one blow.
This God had in his eye when he put it into their hearts to combine
against Israel; though they designed thereby to strengthen one another,
that which he intended was to gather them as sheaves into the floor, to
fall together under the flail, [Mic
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#012). Thus oftentimes that seeming
paradox proves wholesome counsel, Stay awhile, and we shall have done
the sooner.

After Israel had waited awhile for an occasion to make war upon the
Canaanites, a fair one offers itself. 1. Five kings combine against the
Gibeonites. Adoni-zedec king of Jerusalem was the first mover and
ring-leader of this confederacy. He had a good name (it signifies lord
of righteousness), being a descendant perhaps from Melchizedek, king of
righteousness; but, notwithstanding the goodness of his name and family,
it seems he was a bad man, and an implacable enemy to the posterity of
that Abraham to whom his predecessor, Melchizedek, was such a faithful
friend. He called upon his neighbours to join against Israel either
because he was the most honourable prince, and had the precedency among
these kings (perhaps they had some dependence upon him, at least they
paid a deference to him, as the most public, powerful, and active man
they had among them), or because he was first or most apprehensive of
the danger his country was in, not only by the conquest of Jericho and
Ai, but the surrender of Gibeon, which, it seems, was the chief thing
that alarmed him, it being one of the most considerable frontier towns
they had. Against Gibeon therefore all the force he would raise must be
leveled. Come, says he, and help me, that we may smite Gibeon. This he
resolves to do, either, (1.) In policy, that he might retake the city,
because it was a strong city, and of great consequence to this country
in whose hands it was; or, (2.) In passion, that he might chastise the
citizens for making peace with Joshua, pretending that they had
perfidiously betrayed their country and strengthened the common enemy,
whereas they had really done the greatest kindness imaginable to their
country, by setting them a good example, if they would have followed it.
Thus Satan and his instruments make war upon those that make peace with
God. Marvel not if the world hate you, and treat those as deserters who
are converts to Christ. 2. The Gibeonites send notice to Joshua of the
distress and danger they are in, [Jos
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#006). Now they expect benefit from the
league they had made with Israel, because, though it was obtained by
deceit, it was afterwards confirmed when the truth came out. They think
Joshua obliged to help them, (1.) In conscience, because they were his
servants; not in compliment, as they had said in their first address
([Jos 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#008)), We are thy servants, but
in reality made servants to the congregation; and it is the duty of
masters to take care of the poorest and meanest of their servants, and
not to see them wronged when it is in the power of their hand to right
them. Those that pay allegiance may reasonably expect protection. Thus
David pleads with God ([Psa 119:94](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#094)), I
am thine, save me; and so may we, if indeed we be his. (2.) In honour,
because the ground of their enemies' quarrel with them was the respect
they had shown to Israel, and the confidence they had in a covenant with
them. Joshua cannot refuse to help them when it is for their affection
to him, and to the name of his God, that they are attacked. David thinks
it a good plea with God ([Psa 69:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#007)),
For thy sake I have borne reproach. When our spiritual enemies set
themselves in array against us, and threaten to swallow us up, let us,
by faith and prayer, apply to Christ, our Joshua, for strength and
succour, as Paul did, and we shall receive the same answer of peace, My
grace is sufficient for thee, [Co2
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#008), [Co2
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009).

[Joshua 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 10:7</span></span>

Here, I. Joshua resolves to assist the Gibeonites, and God encourages
him in this resolve. 1. He ascended from Gilgal ([Jos
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#007)), that is, he designed,
determined, and prepared for, this expedition to relieve Gibeon, for it
is probable it was before he stirred a step that God spoke to him to
encourage him. It was generous and just in Joshua to help his new
allies, though perhaps the king of Jerusalem, when he attacked them,
little thought that Joshua would be so ready to help them, but expected
he would abandon them as Canaanites, the rather because they had
obtained their league with him by fraud; therefore he speaks with
assurance ([Jos 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#004)) of smiting
Gibeon. But Joshua knew that his promise to let them live obliged him,
not only not to slay them himself, but not to stand by and see them
slain when it was in the power of his hand to prevent it, [Pro
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#011), [Pro
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#012). He knew that when they embraced
the faith and worship of the God of Israel they came to trust under the
shadow of his wings ([Rut 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#012)), and
therefore, as his servants, he was bound to protect them. 2. God
animated him for his undertaking, ([Jos
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#008)): Fear not, that is, (1.) "Doubt
not of the goodness of thy cause and the clearness of thy call; though
it be to assist Gibeonites, thou art in the way of duty, and God is with
thee of a truth." (2.) "Dread not the power of the enemy; though so many
kings are confederate against thee, and are resolved to make their
utmost efforts for the reduction of Gibeon, and it may be will fight
desperately in a desperate cause, yet let not this discourage thee, I
have delivered them into thy hand;" and those can make neither
resistance nor escape whom God has marked for destruction.

II\. Joshua applies himself to execute this resolve, and God assists him
in the execution. Here we have,

1\. The great industry of Joshua, and the power of God working with it
for the defeat of the enemy. In this action, (1.) Joshua showed his
good-will in the haste he made for the relief of Gibeon ([Jos
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#009)): He came unto them suddenly, for
the extremity was such as would not admit delay. If one of the tribes of
Israel had been in danger, he could not have shown more care or zeal for
its relief than here for Gibeon, remembering in this, as in other cases,
there must be one law for the stranger that was proselyted and for him
that was born in the land. Scarcely had the confederate princes got
their forces together, and sat down before Gibeon, when Joshua was upon
them, the surprise of which would put them into the greatest confusion.
Now that the enemy were actually drawn up into a body, which had all as
it were but one neck, despatch was as serviceable to his cause as before
delay was, while he waited for this general rendezvous; and now that
things were ripe for execution no man more expeditious than Joshua, who
before had seemed slow. Now it shall never be said, He left that to be
done tomorrow which he could do today. When Joshua found he could not
reach Gibeon in a day, lest he should lose any real advantages against
the enemy, or so much as seem to come short or to neglect his new
allies, he marched all night, resolving not to give sleep to his eyes,
nor slumber to his eye-lids, till he had accomplished this enterprise.
It was well the forces he took with him were mighty men of valour, not
only able-bodied men, but men of spirit and resolution, and hearty in
the cause, else they neither could nor would have borne this fatigue,
but would have murmured at their leader and would have asked, "Is this
the rest we were promised in Canaan?" But they well considered that the
present toil was in order to a happy settlement, and therefore were
reconciled to it. Let the good soldiers of Jesus Christ learn hence to
endure hardness, in following the Lamb whithersoever he goes, and not
think themselves undone if their religion lose them now and then a
night's sleep; it will be enough to rest when we come to heaven. But why
needed Joshua to put himself and his men so much to the stretch? Had not
God promised him that without fail he would deliver the enemies into his
hand? It is true he had; but God's promises are intended, not to slacken
and supersede, but to quicken and encourage our endeavours. He that
believeth doth not make haste to anticipate providence, but doth make
haste to attend it, with a diligent, not a distrustful, speed. (2.) God
showed his great power in defeating the enemies whom Joshua so
vigorously attacked, [Jos 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#010), [Jos
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#011). Joshua had a very numerous and
powerful army with him, hands enough to despatch a dispirited enemy, so
that the enemy might have been scattered by the ordinary fate of war;
but God himself would appear in this great and decisive battle, and draw
up the artillery of heaven against the Canaanites, to demonstrate to
this people that they got not this land in possession by their own
sword, neither did their own arm save them, but God's right hand and his
arm, [Psa 44:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#003). The Lord discomfited
them before Israel. Israel did what they could, and yet God did all.
\[1.\] It must needs be a very great terror and confusion to the enemy
to perceive that heaven itself fought against them; for who can contest
with, flee from, or fence against, the powers of heaven? They had
affronted the true God and robbed him of his honour by worshipping the
host of heaven, giving that worship to the creature which is due to the
Creator only; and now the host of heaven fights against them, and even
that part of the creation which they had idolized is at war with them,
and even triumphs in their ruin, [Jer
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#002). There is no way of making any
creature propitious to us, no, not by sacrifice nor offering, but only
by making our peace with God and keeping ourselves in his love. This had
been enough to make them an easy prey to the victorious Israelites, yet
this was not all. \[2.\] Besides the terror struck upon them, there was
a great slaughter made of them by hail-stones, which were so large, and
came down with such a force, that more were killed by the hail-stones
than by the sword of the Israelites, though no doubt they were busy. God
himself speaks to Job of treasures, or magazines, of snow and hail,
which he has reserved for the day of battle and war ([Job
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#022), [Job
38:23](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#023)), and here they are made use of
to destroy the Canaanites. Here was hail, shot from God's great
ordnance, that, against whomsoever it was directed, was sure to hit (and
never glanced upon the Israelites mixed with them), and wherever it hit
was sure to kill. See here how miserable those are that have God for
their enemy, and how sure to perish; it is a fearful thing to fall into
his hands, for there is no fleeing out of them. Some observe that
Beth-horon lay north of Gibeon, Azekah and Makkedah lay south, so that
they fled each way but, which way soever they fled, the hail-stones
pursued them, and met them at every turn.

2\. The great faith of Joshua, and the power of God crowning it with the
miraculous arrest of the sun, that the day of Israel's victories might
be prolonged, and so the enemy totally defeated. The hail-stones had
their rise no higher than the clouds, but, to show that Israel's help
came from above the clouds, the sun itself, who by his constant motion
serves the whole earth, by halting when there was occasion served the
Israelites, and did them a kindness. The sun and moon stood still in
their habitation, at the light of thy arrows which gave the signal, [Hab
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#011).

(1.) Here is the prayer of Joshua that the sun might stand still. I call
it his prayer, because it is said ([Jos
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#012)) he spoke to the Lord; as
Elijah, though we read ([Kg1 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001))
only of his prophesying of the drought, yet is said ([Jam
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017)) to pray for it. Observe, \[1.\]
An instance of Joshua's unwearied activity in the service of God and
Israel, that though he had marched all night and fought all day, and,
one might expect, would be inclined to repose himself and get a little
sleep, and give his army some time to rest - that, like the hireling, he
would earnestly desire the shadow, and bid the night welcome, when he
had done such a good day's work - yet, instead of this, he wishes for
nothing so much as the prolonging of the day. Note, Those that wait on
the Lord and work for him shall renew their strength, shall run and not
be weary, shall walk and not faint, [Isa
40:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#031). \[2.\] An instance of his great
faith in the almighty power of God, as above the power of nature, and
able to control and alter the usual course of it. No doubt Joshua had an
extraordinary impulse or impression upon his spirit, which he knew to be
of divine origin, prompting him to desire that this miracle might be
wrought upon this occasion, else it would have been presumption in him
to desire or expect; the prayer would not have been granted by the
divine power, if it had not been dictated by the divine grace. God
wrought this faith in him, and then said, "According to thy faith, and
thy prayer of faith, be it unto thee." It cannot be imagined, however,
that such a thing as this should have entered into his mind if God had
not put it there; a man would have had a thousand projects in his head
for the completing of the victory before he would have thought of
desiring the sun to stand still; but even in the Old Testament saints
the Spirit made intercession according to the will of God. What God will
give he inclines the hearts of his praying people to ask, and for what
he will do he will be enquired of, [Eze
36:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#037). Now, First, It looked great for
Joshua to say, Sun, stand thou still. His ancestor Joseph had indeed
dreamed that the sun and moon did homage to him; but who would have
thought that, after it had been fulfilled in the figure, it should be
again fulfilled in the letter to one of his posterity? The prayer is
thus expressed with authority, because it was not an ordinary prayer,
such as is directed and supported only by God's common providence or
promise, but the prayer of a prophet at this time divinely inspired for
this purpose; and yet it intimates to us the prevalency of prayer in
general, so far as it is regulated by the word of God, and may remind us
of that honour put upon prayer ([Isa
45:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#011)), Concerning the work of my
hands command you me. He bids the sun stand still upon Gibeon, the place
of action and the seat of war, intimating that what he designed in this
request was the advantage of Israel against their enemies; it is
probable that the sun was now declining, and that he did not call for
the lengthening out of the day until he observed it hastening towards it
period. He does likewise, in the name of the King of kings, arrest the
moon, perhaps because it was requisite for the preserving of the harmony
and good order of the spheres that the course of the rest of the
heavenly bodies should be stayed likewise, otherwise, while the sun
shone, he needed not the moon; and here he mentions the valley of
Ajalon, which was near to Gibeon, because there he was at that time.
Secondly, It was bold indeed to say so before Israel, and argues a very
strong assurance of faith. If the event had not answered the demand,
nothing could have been a greater slur upon him; the Israelites would
have concluded he was certainly going mad, or he would never have talked
so extravagantly. But he knew very well God would own and answer a
petition which he himself directed to be drawn up and presented, and
therefore was not afraid to say before all Israel, calling them to
observe this work of wonder, Sun, stand thou still, for he was confident
in him whom he had trusted. He believed the almighty power of God, else
he could not have expected that the sun, going on in its strength,
driving in a full career, and rejoicing as a strong man to run a race,
should be stopped in an instant. He believed the sovereignty of God in
the kingdom of nature, else he could not have expected that the
established law and course of nature should be changed and interrupted,
the ordinances of heaven, and the constant usage according to these
ordinances, broken in upon. And he believed God's particular favour to
Israel above all people under the sun, else he could not have expected
that, to favour them upon an emergency with a double day, he should
(which must follow of course) amaze and terrify so great a part of the
terrestrial globe with a double night at the same time. It is true, he
causeth the sun to shine upon the just and the unjust; but for this once
the unjust shall wait for it beyond the usual time, while, in favour to
righteous Israel, it stands still.

(2.) The wonderful answer to this prayer. No sooner said than done ([Jos
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#013)): The sun stood still, and the
moon staid. Notwithstanding the vast distance between the earth and the
sun, at the word of Joshua the sun stopped immediately; for the same God
that rules in heaven above rules at the same time on this earth, and,
when he pleases, even the heavens shall hear the earth, as here.
Concerning this great miracle it is here said, \[1.\] That it continued
a whole day, that is, the sun continued as long again above the horizon
as otherwise it would have done. It is commonly supposed to have been
about the middle of summer that this happened, when, in that country, it
was about fourteen hours between sun and sun, so that this day was about
twenty-eight hours long; yet, if we suppose it to have been at that time
of the year when the days are at the shortest, it will be the more
probable that Joshua should desire and pray for the prolonging of the
day. \[2.\] That hereby the people had full time to avenge themselves of
their enemies, and to give them a total defeat. We often read in history
of battles which the night put an end to, the shadows of which favoured
the retreat of the conquered; to prevent this advantage to the enemy in
their flight, the day was doubled, that the hand of Israel might find
out all their enemies; but the eye and hand of God can find them out
without the help of the sun's light, for to him the night shineth as the
day, [Psa 139:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#012). Note, Sometimes God
completes a great salvation in a little time, and makes but one day's
work of it. Perhaps this miracle is alluded to [Zac
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#006), [Zac
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#007), where the day of God's fighting
against the nations is said to be one day, and that at evening time it
shall be light, as here. And, \[3.\] That there was never any day like
it, before or since, in which God put such an honour upon faith and
prayer, and upon Israel's cause; never did he so wonderfully comply with
the request of a man, nor so wonderfully fight for his people. \[4.\]
This is said to be written in the book of Jasher, a collection of
state-poems, in which the poem made upon this occasion was preserved
among the rest; probably the same with that book of the wars of the Lord
([Num 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#014)), which afterwards was
continued and carried on by one Jasher. Those words, Sun, stand thou
still upon Gibeon, and thou moon in the valley of Ajalon, sounding
metrical, are supposed to be taken from the narrative of this event as
it was found in the book of Jasher. Not that the divine testimony of the
book of Joshua needed confirmation from the book of Jasher, a human
composition; but to those who had that book in their hands it would be
of use to compare this history with it, which warrants the appeals the
learned make to profane history for corroborating the proofs of the
truth of sacred history. \[5.\] But surely this stupendous miracle of
the standing still of the sun was intended for something more than
merely to give Israel so much the more time to find out and kill their
enemies, which, without this, might have been done the next day. First,
God would hereby magnify Joshua ([Jos
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#007)), as a particular favourite, and
one whom he did delight to honour, being a type of him who has all power
both in heaven and in earth and whom the winds and the seas obey.
Secondly, He would hereby notify to all the world what he was doing for
his people Israel here in Canaan; the sun, the eye of the world, must be
fixed for some hours upon Gibeon and the valley of Ajalon, as if to
contemplate the great works of God there for Israel, and so to engage
the children of men to look that way, and to enquire of this wonder done
in the land, [Ch2 32:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#031). Proclamation
was hereby made to all the neighbouring nations. Come, behold the works
of the Lord ([Psa 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#008)), and say, What
nation is there so great as Israel is, who has God so nigh unto them?
One would have supposed that this would bring such real ambassadors as
the Gibeonites pretended to be from a very far country, to court the
friendship of Israel because of the name of the Lord their God. Thirdly,
He would hereby convince and confound those idolaters that worshipped
the sun and moon and gave divine honours to them, by demonstrating that
they were subject to the command of the God of Israel, and that, as high
as they were, he was above them; and thus he would fortify his people
against temptations to this idolatry, which he foresaw they would be
addicted to ([Deu 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#019)), and which,
notwithstanding this, they afterwards corrupted themselves with.
Fourthly, This miracle signified (it is the learned bishop Pierson's
notion) that in the latter days, when the light of the world was tending
towards a light of darkness, the Sun of righteousness, even our Joshua,
should arise ([Mal 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)), give check to
the approaching night, and be the true light. To which let me add that
when Christ conquered our spiritual enemies upon the cross the miracle
wrought on the sun was the reverse of this; it was then darkened as if
it had gone down at noon, for Christ needed not the light of the sun to
carry on his victories: he then made darkness his pavilion. And, Lastly,
The arresting of the sun and moon in this day of battle prefigured the
turning of the sun into darkness, and the moon into blood, in the last
great and terrible day of the Lord.

[Joshua 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 10:15</span></span>

It was a brave appearance, no doubt, which the five kings made when they
took the field for the reducing of Gibeon, and a brave army they had
following them; but they were all routed, put into disorder first, and
then brought to destruction by the hail-stones. And now Joshua thought,
his work being done, he might go with his army into quarters of
refreshment. Accordingly it was resolved, perhaps in a council of war,
that they should presently return to the camp at Gilgal ([Jos
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#015)), till they should receive
orders from God to take possession of the country they had now
conquered; but he soon finds he has more work cut out for him. The
victory must be pursued, that the spoils might be divided. Accordingly
he applies himself to it with renewed vigour.

I. The forces that had dispersed themselves must be followed and
smitten. When tidings were brought to Joshua where the kings were he
ordered a guard to be set upon them for the present ([Jos
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#018)), reserving them for another day
of destruction, and to be brought forth to a day of wrath, [Job
21:30](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#030). He directs his men to pursue
the common soldiers, as much as might be, to prevent their escaping to
the garrisons, which would strengthen them, and make the reduction of
them the more difficult, [Jos 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#019).
Like a prudent general, he does that first which is most needful, and
defers his triumphs till he has completed his conquests; nor was he in
such haste to insult over the captive kings but that he would first
prevent the rallying again of their scattered forces. The result of this
vigorous pursuit was, 1. That a very great slaughter was made of the
enemies of God and Israel. And, 2. The field was cleared of them, so
that none remained but such as got into fenced cities, where they would
not long be safe themselves, nor were they capable of doing any service
to the cities that sheltered them, unless they could have left their
fears behind them. 3. None moved his tongue against any of the children
of Israel, [Jos 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#021). This expression
intimates, (1.) Their perfect safety and tranquillity; some think it
should be read (from [Exo 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#007)),
Against any of the children of Israel did not a dog move his tongue; no,
not against any one man of them. They were not threatened by any danger
at all after their victory, no, not so much as the barking of a dog. Not
one single Israelite (for the original makes it so particular) was
brought into any distress, either in the battle or in the pursuit. (2.)
Their honour and reputation; no man had any reproach to cast upon them,
nor an ill word to give them. God not only tied the hands, but stopped
the mouths, of their enraged enemies, and put lying lips to silence.
(3.) The Chaldee paraphrase makes it an expression of their unalloyed
joy for this victory, reading it, There was no hurt nor loss to the
children of Israel, for which any man should afflict his soul. When the
army came to be reviewed after the battle, there was none slain, none
wounded, none missing. Not one Israelite had occasion to lament either
the loss of a friend or the loss of a limb, so cheap, so easy, so
glorious, was this victory.

II\. The kings that had hidden themselves must now be called to an
account, as rebels against the Israel of God, to whom, by the divine
promise and grant, this land did of right belong and should have been
surrendered upon demand. See here,

1\. How they were secured. The cave which they fled to, and trusted in
for a refuge, became their prison, in which they were clapped up, till
Joshua sat in judgment on them, [Jos
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#018). It seems they all escaped both
the hail-stones and the sword, God so ordering it, not in kindness to
them, but that they might be reserved for a more solemn and terrible
execution; as, for this cause, Pharaoh survived the plagues of Egypt,
and was made to stand, that God might in him show his power, [Exo
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#016). They all fled, and met at the
same place, Providence directing them; and now those who were lately
consulting against Israel were put upon new counsels to preserve
themselves and agreed to take shelter in the same cave. The information
brought to Joshua of this is an evidence that there were those of the
country, who knew the holes and fastnesses of it, that were in his
interests. And the care Joshua took to keep them there when they were
there, as it is an instance of his policy and presence of mind, even in
the heat of action, so, in the result of their project, it shows how
those not only deceive themselves, but destroy themselves, who think to
hide themselves from God. Their refuge of lies will but bind them over
to God's judgment.

2\. How they were triumphed over. Joshua ordered them to be brought
forth out of the cave, set before him as at the bar, and their names
called over, [Jos 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#022), [Jos
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#023). And when they either were bound
and cast upon the ground unable to help themselves, or threw themselves
upon the ground, humbly to beg for their lives, he called for the
general officers and great men, and commanded them to trample upon these
kings, and set their feet upon their necks, not in sport and to make
themselves and the company merry, but with the gravity and decorum that
became the ministers of the divine justice who were not herein to
gratify any pride or passion of their own, but to give glory to the God
of Israel as higher than the highest, who treads upon princes as mortar
([Isa 41:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#025)), and is terrible to the
kings of the earth, [Psa 76:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#012). The
thing does indeed look barbarous, thus to insult over men in misery, who
had suddenly fallen from the highest pitch of honour into this disgrace.
It was hard for crowned heads to be thus trodden upon, not by Joshua
himself (that might better have been borne), at least not by him only,
but by all the captains of the army. Certainly it ought not to be drawn
into a precedent, for the case was extraordinary, and we have reason to
think it was by divine direction and impulse that Joshua did this. (1.)
God would hereby punish the abominable wickedness of these kings, the
measure of whose iniquity was now full. And, by this public act of
justice done upon these ringleaders of the Canaanites in sin, he would
possess his people with the greater dread and detestation of those sins
of the nations that God cast out from before them, which they would be
tempted to imitate. (2.) He would hereby have the promise by Moses made
good ([Deu 33:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#029)), Thou shalt tread
upon their high places, that is, their great men, which should the
rather be speedily fulfilled in the letter because they are the very
last words of Moses that we find upon record. (3.) He would hereby
encourage the faith and hope of his people Israel in reference to the
wars that were yet before them. Therefore Joshua said ([Jos
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#025)): Fear not, nor be dismayed.
\[1.\] "Fear not these kings, nor any of theirs, as if there were any
danger of having this affront now put upon them in after-time revenged
upon yourselves, a consideration which keeps many from being insolent
towards those they have at their mercy, because they know not how soon
the uncertain fate of war may turn the same wheel upon themselves; but
you need not fear that any should rise up ever to revenge this quarrel."
\[2.\] "Fear not any other kings, who may at any time be in confederacy
against you, for you see these brought down, whom you thought
formidable. Thus shall the Lord do to all your enemies; now that they
begin to fall, to fall so low that you may set your feet on their necks,
you may be confident that they shall not prevail, but shall surely fall
before you," [Est 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#013). (4.) He would
hereby give a type and figure of Christ's victories over the powers of
darkness, and believers' victories through him. All the enemies of the
Redeemer shall be made his footstool, [Psa
110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001). And see [Psa
18:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#040). The kings of the earth set
themselves against him ([Psa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002)), but
sooner or later we shall see all things put under Him ([Heb
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#008)), and principalities and powers
made a show of, [Col 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#015). And in
these triumphs we are more than conquerors, may tread upon the lion and
adder ([Psa 91:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#013)), may ride on the
high places of the earth ([Isa 58:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#014)),
and may be confident that the God of peace shall tread Satan under our
feet, shall do it shortly and do it effectually, [Rom
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#020). See [Psa
149:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#008), [Psa
149:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#009).

3\. How they were put to death. Perhaps, when they had undergone that
terrible mortification of being trodden upon by the captains of Israel,
they were ready to say, as Agag, Surely the bitterness of death is past,
and that sufficient unto them was this punishment which was inflicted by
many; but their honours cannot excuse their lives, their forfeited
devoted lives. Joshua smote them with the sword, and then hanged up
their bodies till evening, when they were taken down, and thrown into
the cave in which they had hidden themselves, [Jos
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#026), [Jos
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#027). That which they thought would
have been their shelter was made their prison first and then their
grave; so shall we be disappointed in that which we flee to from God:
yet to good people the grave is still a hiding-place, [Job
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#013). If these five kings had humbled
themselves in time, and had begged peace instead of waging war, they
might have saved their lives; but now the decree had gone forth, and
they found no place for repentance, or the reversal of the judgment; it
was too late to expect it, though perhaps they sought it carefully with
tears.

[Joshua 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jos 10:28</span></span>

We are here informed how Joshua improved the late glorious victory he
had obtained and the advantages he had gained by it, and to do this well
is a general's praise.

I. Here is a particular account of the several cities which he
immediately made himself master of. 1. The cities of three of the kings
whom he had conquered in the field he went and took possession of,
Lachish ([Jos 10:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#031), [Jos
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#032)), Eglon ([Jos
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#034), [Jos
10:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#035)), and Hebron, [Jos
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#036), [Jos
10:37](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#037). The other two, Jerusalem and
Jarmuth, were not taken at this time; perhaps his forces were either so
much fatigued with what they had done or so well content with what they
had got that they had no mind to attack those places, and so they let
slip the fairest opportunity they could ever expect of reducing them
with ease, which afterwards was not done without difficulty, [Jdg
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#008); [Sa2
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006). 2. Three other cities, and royal
cities too, he took: Makkedah, into the neighbourhood of which the five
kings had fled, which brought Joshua and his forces thither in pursuit
of them, and so hastened its ruin ([Jos
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#028)), Libnah ([Jos
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#029), [Jos
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#030)), and Debir, [Jos
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#038), [Jos
10:39](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#039). 3. One king that brought in his
forces for the relief of Lachish, that had lost its king, proved to
meddle to his own hurt; it was Horam king of Gezer, who, either in
friendship to his neighbours or for his own security, offered to stop
the progress of Joshua's arms, and was cut off with all his forces, [Jos
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#033). Thus wicked men are often
snared in their counsels, and, by opposing God in the way of his
judgments, bring them the sooner on their own heads.

II\. A general account of the country which was hereby reduced and
brought into Israel's hands ([Jos
10:40-42](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#040)), that part of the land of
Canaan of which they first got possession, which lay south of Jerusalem,
and afterwards fell, for the most part, to the lot of the tribe of
Judah. Observe in this narrative,

1\. The great speed Joshua made in taking these cities, which, some
think, is intimated in the manner of relating it, which is quick and
concise. He flew like lightning from place to place; and though they all
stood it out to the last extremity, and none of these cities opened
their gates to him, yet in a little time he got them all into his hands,
summoned them, and seized them, the same day ([Jos
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#028)), or in two days, [Jos
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#032). Now that they were struck with
fear, by the defeat of their armies and the death of their kings, Joshua
prudently followed his blow. See what a great deal of work may be done
in a little time, if we will but be busy and improve our opportunities.

2\. The great severity Joshua used towards those he conquered. He gave
no quarter to man, woman, nor child, put to the sword all the souls
([Jos 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#028), [Jos
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#030), [Jos
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#032), [Jos
10:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#035), etc.), utterly destroyed all
that breathed ([Jos 10:40](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#040)), and left
none remaining. Nothing could justify this military execution but that
herein they did as the Lord God of Israel commanded ([Jos
10:40](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#040)), which was sufficient not only
to bear them out, and save them for the imputation of cruelty, but to
sanctify what they did, and make it an acceptable piece of service to
his justice. God would hereby, (1.) Manifest his hatred of the
idolatries and other abominations which the Canaanites had been guilty
of, and leave us to judge how great the provocation was which they had
given him by the greatness of the destruction which was brought upon
them when the measure of their iniquity was full. (2.) He would hereby
magnify his love to his people Israel, in giving so many men for them,
and people for their life, [Isa 43:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#004).
When the heathen are to be cast out to make room for this vine ([Psa
80:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008)) divine justice appears more
prodigal than ever of human blood, that the Israelites might find
themselves for ever obliged to spend their lives to the glory of that
God who had sacrificed so many of the lives of his creatures to their
interest. (3.) Hereby was typified the final and eternal destruction of
all the impenitent implacable enemies of the Lord Jesus, who, having
slighted the riches of his grace, must for ever feel the weight of his
wrath, and shall have judgment without mercy. Nations that forget God
shall be turned into hell, and no reproach at all to God's infinite
goodness.

3\. The great success of this expedition. The spoil of these cities was
now divided among the men of war that plundered them; and the cities
themselves, with the land about them, were shortly to be divided among
the tribes, for the Lord fought for Israel, [Jos
10:42](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#042). They could not have gotten the
victory if God had not undertaken the battle; then we conquer when God
fights for us; and, if he be for us, who can be against us?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 11](jos011)

</div>
