<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos008)  [Next](jos010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 9:0</span></span>

Here is in this chapter, I. The impolite confederacy of the kings of
Canaan against Israel ([Jos 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#001), [Jos
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#002)). II. The polite confederacy of
the inhabitants of Gibeon with Israel, 1. How it was subtly proposed and
petitioned for by the Gibeonites pretending to come from a far country
([Jos 9:3-13](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#003)). 2. How it was unwarily
consented to by Joshua and the Israelites, to the disgust of the
congregation when the fraud was discovered ([Jos
9:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#014)). 3. How the matter was
adjusted to the satisfaction of all sides, by giving these Gibeonites
their lives because they had covenanted with them, yet depriving them of
their liberties because the covenant was not fairly obtained ([Jos
9:19-27](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#019)).

[Joshua 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 9:1</span></span>

Hitherto the Canaanites had acted defensively; the Israelites were the
aggressors upon Jericho and Ai. But here the kings of Canaan are in
consultation to attack Israel, and concert matters for a vigorous effort
of their united forces to check the progress of their victorious arms.
Now, 1. It was strange they did not do this sooner. They had notice long
since of their approach; Israel's design upon Canaan was no secret; one
would have expected that a prudent concern for their common safety would
put them upon taking some measures to oppose their coming over Jordan,
and maintain that pass against them, or to give them a warm reception as
soon as they were over. It was strange they did not attempt to raise the
siege of Jericho, or at least fall in with the men of Ai, when they had
given them a defeat. But they were, either through presumption or
despair, wonderfully infatuated and at their wits' end. Many know not
the things that belong to their peace till they are hidden from their
eyes. 2. It was more strange that they did it now. Now that the conquest
of Jericho had given such a pregnant proof of God's power, and that of
Ai of Israel's policy, one would have thought the end of their
consultation should be, not to fight with Israel, but to make peace with
them, and to gain the best terms they could for themselves. This would
have been their wisdom ([Luk 14:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#032)),
but their minds were blinded, and their hearts hardened to their
destruction. Observe, (1.) What induced them now at last to enter upon
this consultation. When they heard thereof ([Jos
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#001)), not only of the conquest of
Jericho and Ai, but of the convention of the states of Mount Ebal, of
which we have an account immediately before, - when they heard that
Joshua, as if he thought himself already completely master of the
country, had had all his people together, and had read the laws to them
by which they must be governed, and taken their promises to submit to
those laws, - then they perceived the Israelites were in good earnest,
and thought it was high time for them to bestir themselves. The pious
devotion of God's people sometimes provokes and exasperates their
enemies more than any thing else. (2.) How unanimous they were in their
resolves. Though they were many kings of different nations, Hittites,
Amorites, Perizzites, etc., doubtless of different interests, and that
had often been at variance one with another, yet they determined, nemine
contradicente - unanimously, to unite against Israel. O that Israel
would learn this of Canaanites, to sacrifice private interests to the
public welfare, and to lay aside all animosities among themselves, that
they may cordially unite against the common enemies of God's kingdom
among men!

[Joshua 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 9:3</span></span>

Here, I. The Gibeonites desire to make peace with Israel, being alarmed
by the tidings they heard of the destruction of Jericho, [Jos
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#003). Other people heard those tidings,
and were irritated thereby to make war upon Israel; but the Gibeonites
heard them and were induced to make peace with them. Thus the discovery
of the glory and grace of God in the gospel is to some a savour of life
unto life, but to others a savour of death unto death, [Co2
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016). The same sun softens wax and
hardens clay. I do not remember that we read any where of a king of
Gibeon. Had their government been at this time in a single person,
perhaps his heart would have been too high to yield to Israel, and he
would have joined with the rest of the kings against Israel. But these
four united cities (mentioned [Jos
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#017)) seem to have been governed by
elders, or senators ([Jos 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#011)), who
consulted the common safety more than their own personal dignity. The
inhabitants of Gibeon did well for themselves. We have,

II\. The method they took to compass it. They knew that all the
inhabitants of the land of Canaan were to be cut off; perhaps they had
some spies in the congregation at Ebal, when the law was read, who
observed and brought them notice of the command given to Israel ([Deu
7:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001)), that they should show no mercy
to the Canaanites, give them no quarter in battle, which made them
afraid of fighting them, and that they should make no covenant with
them, which made them despair of gaining any advantage by treating with
them; and therefore there was no way of saving their lives from the
sword of Israel unless they could, by disguising themselves, make Joshua
believe that they came from some very country, which the Israelites were
not commanded to make war upon nor forbidden to make peace with, but
were particularly appointed to offer peace to, [Deu
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#010), [Deu
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#015). Unless they could be admitted
under this notion, they saw there was but one way with them: they must
submit to the fate of Jericho and Ai. Though the neighbouring princes
knew that all the men thereof were mighty ([Jos
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#002)), and they knew it themselves,
yet they durst not contend with Israel, who had an Almighty God on their
side. This therefore is the only game they have to play, and observe,

1\. They play it very artfully and successfully. Never was any such
thing more craftily managed.

(1.) They come under the character of ambassadors from a foreign state,
which they thought would please the princes of Israel, and make them
proud of the honour of being courted by distant countries: we find
Hezekiah fond of those that came to him from a far country ([Isa
39:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#003)); they were not used to be thus
courted.

(2.) They pretended to have undergone the fatigues of a very long
journey, and produced what passed for an ocular demonstration of it. It
should seem it was then usual for those that undertook long journeys to
take with them, as we do now for long voyages, all manner of provision
in kind, the country not being furnished as ours is now with houses of
entertainment, for the convenience of which, when we have occasion to
make use of them, we have reason to be very thankful. Now they here
pretended that their provision, when they brought it from home, was
fresh and new, but now it appeared to be old and dry, whereas it might
well be presumed they had not loitered, but made the best of their way;
so that hence it must be inferred that they came, as they said they did,
from a very far country: their sacks or portmanteaus were old; the wine
was all drunk, and the bottles in which it had been were broken; their
shoes and clothes were worse than those of the Israelites in forty
years, and their bread was mouldy, [Jos
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#004), [Jos
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#005), and again, [Jos
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#012), [Jos
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#013). Thus God's Israel have often
been deceived and imposed upon with a show of antiquity. But (as bishop
Hall expresses it) errors are never the older for being patched, and so
seeming old; but those that will be caught with this Gibeonitish
stratagem prove they have not consulted with God. And thus there are
those who make themselves poor with the badges of want and distress and
yet have great riches ([Pro 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#007)), or
at least have no need of relief, by which fraud charity is misplaced and
diverted from those that are real objects of it.

(3.) When they were suspected, and more strictly examined as to whence
they came, they industriously declined telling the name of their
country, till the agreement was settled. \[1.\] The men of Israel
suspected a fraud ([Jos 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#007)):
"Peradventure you dwell among us, and then we may not, we must not, make
any league with you." This might have discouraged the Gibeonites from
urging the matter any further, concluding that if the peace were made
the Israelites would not think themselves obliged to keep it, having
thus solemnly protested against it in case they dwelt among them; but,
knowing that there was no hope at all if they stood it out, they bravely
ventured a submission. "Who knows but the people of Israel may save us
alive, though thus inveigled into a promise; and if we tell them at last
we shall but die." \[2.\] Joshua put the questions to them, Who are you?
and whence come you? He finds himself concerned to stand upon his guard
against secret fraud as well as against open force. We in our spiritual
warfare must stand against the wiles of the devil, remembering he is a
subtle serpent as well as a roaring lion. In all leagues of relation and
friendship we must first try and then trust, lest we repent at leisure
agreements made in haste. \[3.\] They would not tell whence they came;
but still repeat the same thing: We have come from a very far country,
[Jos 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#009). They will have it thought
that it is a country Joshua knows nothing of nor ever heard of, and
therefore would be never the wiser if they should tell him the name of
it.

(4.) They profess a respect for the God of Israel, the more to
ingratiate themselves with Joshua, and we charitably believe they were
sincere in this profession: "We have come because of the name of the
Lord thy God (v. 9), because of what we have heard of that name, which
has convinced us that it is above every name, and because we have a
desire towards that name and the remembrance of it, and would gladly
come under its protection."

(5.) They fetch their inducements from what had been done some time
before in Moses's reign, the tidings whereof might easily be supposed
ere this to have reached distant regions, the plagues of Egypt and the
destruction of Sihon and Og (v. 9, 10), but prudently say nothing of the
destruction of Jericho and Ai (though this was the true inducement, v.
3), because they will have it supposed that they came from home long
before those conquests were made. We need not be long to seek for
reasons why we should submit to the God of Israel; we may be furnished
either with new or old, which we will.

(6.) They make a general submission - We are our servants; and humbly
sue for a general agreement - Make a league with us, v. 11. They insist
not upon terms, but will be glad of peace upon any terms; nor will the
case admit of delays, lest the fraud be discovered; they would fain have
the bargain struck up immediately; if Joshua will but make a league with
them, they have all they come for, and they hope their ragged clothes
and clouted shoes will be no exception against them. God and Israel
reject none for their poverty. But,

2\. There is a mixture of good and evil in their conduct. (1.) Their
falsehood cannot be justified, nor ought it to be drawn into a
precedent. We must not do evil that good may come. Had they owned their
country but renounced the idolatries of it, resigning the possession of
it to Israel and themselves to the God of Israel, we have reason to
think Joshua would have been directed by the oracle of God to spare
their lives, and they needed not to have made these pretensions. It is
observable that when they had once said, We have come from a far country
([Jos 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#006)), they found themselves
necessitated to say it again ([Jos
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#009)), and to say what was utterly
false concerning their bread, their bottles, and their clothes ([Jos
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#012), [Jos
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#013)), for one lie is an inlet to
another, and that to a third, and so on. The way of that sin is
down-hill. But, (2.) Their faith and prudence are to be greatly
commended. Our Lord commended even the unjust steward, because he had
done wisely and well for himself, [Luk
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#008). In submitting to Israel, they
submitted to the God of Israel, which implied a renunciation of the god
they had served, a resignation to the laws of true religion. They had
heard enough to convince them of the infinite power of the God of
Israel, and thence might infer his other perfections of wisdom and
goodness; and how can we do better for ourselves than surrender at
discretion to infinite wisdom, and cast ourselves upon the mercy of a
God of infinite goodness. The submission of these Gibeonites was the
more laudable because it was, \[1.\] Singular. Their neighbours took
another course, and expected they should join with them. \[2.\] Speedy.
They did not stay till Israel had besieged their cities; then it would
have been too late to capitulate; but when they were at some distance
they desired conditions of peace. Thy way to avoid a judgment is to meet
it by repentance. Let us imitate these Gibeonites, and make our peace
with God in the rags of humiliation, godly sorrow, and mortification, so
our iniquity shall not be our ruin. Let us be servants to Jesus, our
blessed Joshua, and make a league with him and the Israel of God, and we
shall live.

[Joshua 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 9:15</span></span>

Here is, I. The treaty soon concluded with the Gibeonites, [Jos
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#015). The thing was not done with much
formality, but in short, 1. They agreed to let them live, and more the
Gibeonites did not ask. In a common war this would have been but a small
matter to be granted; but in the wars of Canaan, which were to make a
general destruction, it was a great favour to a Canaanite to have his
life given him for a prey, [Jer 45:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#005).
2. This agreement was made not by Joshua only, but by the princes of the
congregation in conjunction with him. Though Joshua had an extraordinary
call to the government, and extraordinary qualifications for it, yet he
would not act in an affair of this nature without the counsel and
concurrence of the princes, who were neither kept in the dark nor kept
under foot, but were treated by him as sharers in the government. 3. It
was ratified by an oath; they swore unto them, not by any of the gods of
Canaan, but by the God of Israel only, [Jos
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#019). Those that mean honestly do not
startle at assurances, but satisfy those with whom they treat, and
glorify God by calling him to witness to the sincerity of their
intentions. 4. Nothing appears to have been culpable in all this but
that it was done rashly; they took of their victuals, by which they
satisfied themselves that it was indeed old and dry, but did not
consider that his was no proof of their bringing it fresh from home; so
that, making use of their senses only, but not their reason, they
received the men (as the margin reads it) because of their victuals,
perceiving perhaps, upon the view and taste of their bread, not only
that now it was old, but that it had been fine and very good at first,
whence they inferred that they were persons of some quality, and
therefore the friendship of their country was not to be despised. But
they asked not counsel at the mouth of the Lord. They had the Urim and
Thummim with them, which they might have advised with in this difficult
case, and which would have told them no lie, would have led them into no
error; but they relied so much on their own politics that they thought
it needless to bring the matter to the oracle. Joshua himself was not
altogether without blame herein. Note, We make more haste than good
speed in any business when we stay not to take God along with us, and by
the word and prayer to consult him. Many a time we see cause to reflect
upon it with regret that such and such an affair miscarried, because we
asked not counsel at the mouth of the Lord; would we acknowledge him in
all our ways, we should find them more safe, easy, and successful.

II\. The fraud soon discovered, by which this league was procured. A
lying tongue is but for a moment, and truth will be the daughter of
time. Within three days they found, to their great surprise, that the
cities which these ambassadors had treated for were very near them, but
one night's foot-march from the camp at Gilgal, [Jos
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#009). Either their own scouts or the
parties that sallied out to acquaint themselves with the country, or
perhaps some deserters that came over to them from the enemy, informed
them of the truth in this matter. Those that suffer themselves to be
deceived by the wiles of Satan will soon be undeceived to their
confusion, and will find that near, even at the door, which they
imagined was very far off.

III\. The disgust of the congregation at this. They did indeed submit to
the restraints which this league laid upon them, and smote not the
cities of the Gibeonites, neither slew the persons nor seized the prey;
but it vexed them to have their hands thus tied, and they murmured
against the princes ([Jos 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#018)) it is
to be feared, more from a jealousy for their own profit than from a zeal
for the fulfilling of God's command, though some of them perhaps had a
regard to that. Many are forward to arraign and censure the actions of
princes while they are ignorant of the springs of those actions and are
incompetent judges of the reasons of state that govern them. While
therefore we are satisfied in general that those who are over us aim at
nothing but the public good, and sincerely seek the welfare of their
people, we ought to make the best of what they do and not exercise
ourselves in things above us.

IV\. The prudent endeavour of the princes to pacify the discontented
congregation, and to accommodate the matter; herein all the princes
concurred and were unanimous, which doubtless disposed the people to
acquiesce.

1\. They resolved to spare the lives of the Gibeonites, for so they had
expressly sworn to do ([Jos 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#015)), to
let them live. (1.) The oath was lawful, else it had not bound them any
more than Herod's oath bound him to cut off John Baptist's head; it is
true God had appointed them to destroy all the Canaanites, but the law
must be construed, in favorem vitae - with some tender allowance, to
mean those only that stood it out and would not surrender their country
to them, and not to bind them so far to put off the sense of honour and
humanity as to slay those who had never lifted up a hand against them
nor ever would, but before they were reduced to any extremity, or ever
attempted any act of hostility, with one consent humbled themselves; the
kings of Israel were certainly more merciful kings than to do so ([Kg1
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#031)), and the God of Israel a more
merciful God than to order it so. Satis est prostrasse leoni - It is
enough to have laid the lion prostrate. And besides, the reason of the
law is the law; the mischief designed to be prevented by that law was
the infecting of the Israelites with their idolatry, [Deu
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#004). But if the Gibeonites renounce
their idolatry, and become friends and servants to the house of God, the
danger is effectually prevented, the reason of the law ceases, and
consequently the obligation of it, especially to a thing of this nature.
The conversion of sinners shall prevent their ruin. (2.) The oath being
lawful, both the princes and the people for whom they transacted were
bound by it, bound in conscience, bound in honour to the God of Israel,
by whom they had sworn, and whose name would have been blasphemed by the
Canaanites if they had violated this oath. They speak as those that
feared an oath ([Ecc 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#002)), when they
argued thus: We will let them live, lest wrath be upon us, because of
the oath which we swore, [Jos 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#020). He
that ratifies a promise with an oath imprecates the divine vengeance if
he wilfully break his promise, and has reason to expect that divine
justice will take him at his word. God is not mocked, and therefore
oaths are not to be jested with. The princes would keep their word,
\[1.\] Though they lost by it. A citizen of Zion swears to his own hurt
and changes not, [Psa 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#004). Joshua and
the princes, when they found it was to their prejudice that they had
thus bound themselves, did not apply to Eleazar for a dispensation, much
less did they pretend that no faith is to be kept with heretics, with
Canaanites; no, they were strangers to the modern artifices of the
Romish church to elude the most sacred bonds, and even to sanctify
perjuries \[2.\] Though the people were uneasy at it, and their
discontent might have ended in a mutiny, yet the princes would not
violate their engagement to the Gibeonites; we must never be over-awed,
either by majesty or multitude, to do a sinful thing, and go against our
consciences. \[3.\] Though they were drawn into this league by a wile,
and might have had a very plausible pretence to declare it null and
void, yet they adhered to it. They might have pleaded that though those
were the men with whom they exchanged the ratifications, yet these were
not the cities intended in the league; they had promised to spare
certain cities, without names, that were very far off, and upon the
express consideration of their being so; but these were very near, and
therefore not the cities that they covenanted with. And many learned men
have thought that they were so grossly imposed upon by the Gibeonites
that it would have been lawful for them to have recalled their promise,
but to preserve their reputation, and to keep up in Israel a veneration
of an oath, they would stand to it; but it is plain that they thought
themselves indispensably obliged by it, and were apprehensive that the
wrath of God would fall upon them if they broke it. And, however their
adherence to it might be displeasing to the congregation, it is plain
that it was acceptable to God; for when, in pursuance of this league,
they undertook the protection of the Gibeonites, God gave them the most
glorious victory that ever they had in all their wars (ch. 10), and long
afterwards severely avenged the wrong Saul did to the Gibeonites in
violation of this league, [Sa2 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001).
Let this convince us all how religiously we ought to perform our
promises, and make good our bargains; and what conscience we ought to
make of our words when they are once given. If a covenant obtained by so
many lies and deceits might not be broken, shall we think to evade the
obligation of those that have been made with all possible honesty and
fairness? If the fraud of others will not justify or excuse our
falsehood, certainly the honesty of others in dealing with us will
aggravate and condemn our dishonesty in dealing with them.

2\. Though they spared their lives, yet they seized their liberties, and
sentenced them to be hewers of wood and drawers of water to the
congregation, [Jos 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#021). By this
proposal the discontented congregation was pacified; for, (1.) Those who
were angry that the Gibeonites lived might be content when they saw them
condemned to that which, in the general apprehension, is worse than
death, perpetual servitude. (2.) Those who were angry that they were not
spoiled might be content when their serving the congregation would be
more to the public advantage than their best effects could be; and, in
short, the Israelites would be not losers either in honour or profit by
this peace with the Gibeonites; convince them of this, and they will be
satisfied.

[Joshua 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jos 9:22</span></span>

The matter is here settled between Joshua and the Gibeonites, and an
explanation of the league agreed upon. We may suppose that now, not the
messengers who were first sent, but the elders of Gibeon, and of the
cities that were dependent upon it, were themselves present and treated
with, that the matter might be fully compromised.

I. Joshua reproves them for their fraud, [Jos
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#022). And they excuse it as well as
they can, [Jos 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#024). 1. Joshua gives
the reproof very mildly: Wherefore have you beguiled us? He does not
load them with any ill names, does not give them any harsh provoking
language, does not call them, as they deserved to be called, base liars,
but only asks them, Why have you beguiled us? Under the greatest
provocations, it is our wisdom and duty to keep our temper, and to
bridle our passion; a just cause needs not anger to defend it, and a bad
one is made never the better by it. 2. They make the best excuse for
themselves, that the thing would bear, [Jos
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#024). They found by the word of God
that sentence of death was passed upon them (the command was to destroy
all the inhabitants of the land, without exception), and they found by
the works of God already wrought that there was no opposing the
execution of this sentence; they considered that God's sovereignty is
incontestable, his justice inflexible, his power irresistible, and
therefore resolved to try what his mercy was, and found it was not in
vain to cast themselves upon it. They do not go about to justify their
lie, but in effect beg pardon for it, pleading it was purely to save
their lives that they did it, which every man that finds in himself the
force of the law of self-preservation will therefore make great
allowances for, especially in such a case as this, where the fear was
not merely of the power of man (if that were all, one might flee from
that to the divine protection), but of the power of God himself, which
they saw engaged against them.

II\. Joshua condemns them to servitude, as a punishment of their fraud
([Jos 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#023)), and they submit to the
sentence ([Jos 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#025)), and for aught
that appears both sides are pleased.

1\. Joshua pronounces them perpetual bondmen. They had purchased their
lives with a lie, but, that being no good consideration, he obliges them
to hold their lives under the rent and reservation of their continual
labours, in hewing wood and drawing water, the meanest and most toilsome
employments. Thus their lie was punished; had they dealt fairly and
plainly with Israel, perhaps they would have had more honourable
conditions granted them, but now, since they gain their lives with
ragged clothes and clouted shoes, the badges of servitude, they are
condemned for ever to wear such, so must their doom be. And thus the
ransom of their lives is paid; dominion is acquired by the preservation
of a life that lies at mercy (servus dicitur a servando - a servant is
so called from the act of saving); they owe their service to those to
whom they owe their lives. Observe how the judgment is given against
them. (1.) Their servitude is made a curse to them. "Now you are cursed
with the ancient curse of Canaan," from whom these Hivites descended, a
servant of servants shalt thou be, [Gen
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#025). What shall be done to the false
tongue but this? Cursed shall it be. (2.) Yet this curse is turned into
a blessing; they must be servants, but it shall be for the house of my
God. The princes would have them slaves unto all the congregation ([Jos
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#021)), at least they chose to express
themselves so, for the pacifying of the people that were discontented;
but Joshua mitigates the sentence, both in honour to God and in favour
to the Gibeonites: it would be too hard upon them to make them every
man's drudge; if they must be hewers of wood and drawers of water, than
which there cannot be a greater disparagement, especially to those who
are citizens of a royal city, and all mighty men ([Jos
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#002)), yet they shall be so to the
house of my God, than which there cannot be a greater preferment: David
himself could have wished to be a door-keeper there. Even servile work
becomes honourable when it is done for the house of our God and the
offices thereof. \[1.\] They were hereby excluded from the liberties and
privileges of true-born Israelites, and a remaining mark of distinction
was put upon their posterity throughout all their generations. \[2.\]
They were hereby employed in such services as required their personal
attendance upon the altar of God in the place which he should choose
([Jos 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#027)), which would bring them to
the knowledge of the law of God, keep them strictly to that holy
religion to which they were proselyted, and prevent their revolt to the
idolatries of their fathers. \[3.\] This would be a great advantage to
the priests and Levites to have so many, and those mighty men, constant
attendants upon them, and engaged by office to do all the drudgery of
the tabernacle. A great deal of wood must be hewed for fuel for God's
house, not only to keep the fire burning continually upon the altar, but
to boil the flesh of the peace-offerings, etc. And a great deal of water
must be drawn for the divers washings which the law prescribed. These
and other such servile works, such as washing the vessels, carrying out
ashes, sweeping the courts, etc., which otherwise the Levites must have
done themselves, these Gibeonites were appointed to do. \[4.\] They were
herein servants to the congregation too; for whatever promotes and helps
forward the worship of God is real service to the commonwealth. It is
the interest of every Israelite that the altar of God be well attended.
Hereby also the congregation was excused from much of that servile work
which perhaps would otherwise have been expected from some of them. God
had made a law that the Israelites should never make any of their
brethren bondmen; if they had slaves, they must be of the heathen that
were round about them, [Lev 25:44](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#044). Now
in honour of this law, and of Israel that was honoured by it, God would
not have the drudgery, no, not of the tabernacle itself, to be done by
Israelites, but by Gibeonites, who were afterwards called Nethinim, men
given to the Levites, as the Levites were to the priests ([Num
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#009)), to minister to them in the
service of God. \[5.\] This may be looked upon as typifying the
admission of the Gentiles into the gospel church. Now they were taken in
upon their submission to be under-officers, but afterwards God promises
that he will take of them for priests and Levites, [Isa
66:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#021).

2\. They submit to this condition, [Jos
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#025). Conscious of a fault in framing
a lie whereby to deceive the Israelites, and sensible also how narrowly
they escaped with their lives and what a kindness it was to have them
spared, they acquiesce in the proposal: Do as it seemeth right unto
thee. Better live in servitude, especially such servitude, than not live
at all. Those of the very meanest and most despicable condition are
described to be hewers of wood and drawers of water, [Deu
29:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#011). But skin for skin, liberty, and
labour, and all that a man has, will he give for his life, and no ill
bargain. Accordingly the matter was determined. (1.) Joshua delivered
them out of the hands of the Israelites that they should not be slain,
[Jos 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#026). It seems there were those
who would have fallen upon them with the sword if Joshua had not
interposed with his authority; but wise generals know when to sheathe
the sword, as well as when to draw it. (2.) He then delivered them again
into the hands of the Israelites to be enslaved, [Jos
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#027). They were not to keep possession
of their cities, for we find afterwards that three of them fell to the
lot of Benjamin and one to that of Judah; nor were they themselves to be
at their own disposal, but, as bishop Patrick thinks, were dispersed
into the cities of the priests and Levites, and came up with them in
their courses to serve at the altar, out of the profits of which, it is
probable, they were maintained. And thus Israel's bondmen became the
Lord's freemen, for his service in the meanest office is liberty, and
his work is its own wages. And this they got by their early submission.
Let us, in like manner, submit to our Lord Jesus, and refer our lives to
him, saying, "We are in thy hand, do unto us as seemeth good and right
unto thee; only save our souls, and we shall not repent it:" if he
appoint us to bear his cross, and draw in his yoke, and serve at his
altar, this shall be afterwards neither shame nor grief to us, while the
meanest office in God's service will entitle us to a dwelling in the
house of the Lord all the days of our life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 10](jos010)

</div>
