<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos017)  [Next](jos019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 18:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. The setting up of the tabernacle at Shiloh
([Jos 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001)). II. The stirring up of
the seven tribes that were yet unsettled to look after their lot, and
the putting of them in a method for it, by Joshua ([Jos
18:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#002)). III. The distributing of the
land into seven lots, by certain men employed for that purpose ([Jos
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#008), [Jos
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#009)). IV. The determining of these
seven portions to the seven tribes yet unprovided for by lot ([Jos
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#010)). V. The particular lot of the
tribe of Benjamin, the borders of it ([Jos
18:11-20](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#011)). And the cities contained in
it ([Jos 18:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#021)). The other six
tribes we shall find well provided for in the next chapter.

[Joshua 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 18:1</span></span>

In the midst of the story of the dividing of the land comes in this
account of the setting up of the tabernacle, which had hitherto
continued in its old place in the centre of their camp; but now that
three of the four squadrons that used to surround it in the wilderness
were broken and diminished, those of Judah, Ephraim, and Reuben, by the
removal of those tribes to their respective possessions, and that of Dan
only remained entire, it was time to think of removing the tabernacle
itself into a city. Many a time the priests and Levites had taken it
down, carried it, and set it up again in the wilderness, according to
the directions given them ([Num 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#005),
etc.); but now they must do it for good and all, not one of the stakes
thereof must any more be removed, nor any of the cords thereof broken,
[Isa 33:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#020). Observe,

I. The place to which the tabernacle was removed, and in which it was
set up. It was Shiloh, a city in the lot of Ephraim, but lying close
upon the lot of Benjamin. Doubtless God himself did some way or other
direct them to this place, for he had promised to choose the place where
he would make his name to dwell, [Deu
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#011). It is most probable God made
known his mind in this matter by the judgment of Urim. This place was
pitched upon, 1. Because it was in the heart of the country, nearer the
centre than Jerusalem was, and therefore the more convenient for the
meeting of all Israel there from the several parts of the country; it
had been in the midst of their camp in the wilderness, and therefore
must now be in the midst of their nation, as that which sanctified the
whole, and was the glory in the midst of them. See [Psa
46:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#005). 2. Because it was in the lot of
that tribe of which Joshua was, who was now their chief magistrate, and
it would be both for his honour and convenience and for the advantage of
the country to have it near him. The testimony of Israel and the thrones
of judgment do well together, [Psa
122:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#004), [Psa
122:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#005). 3. Some think there was an eye
to the name of the place, Shiloh being the name by which the Messiah was
known in dying Jacob's prophecy ([Gen
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)), which prophecy, no doubt, was
well known among the Jews; the setting up of the tabernacle in Shiloh
gave them a hint that in that Shiloh whom Jacob spoke of all the
ordinances of this worldly sanctuary should have their accomplishment in
a greater and more perfect tabernacle, [Heb
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#001), [Heb
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#011). And Dr. Lightfoot thinks that
the place where the tabernacle was set up was therefore called Shiloh,
because of the peaceableness of the land at this time; as afterwards in
Salem was his temple, which also signifies peaceable.

II\. The solemn manner of doing it: The whole congregation assembled
together to attend the solemnity, to do honour to the ark of God, as the
token of his presence, and to bid it welcome to its settlement. Every
Israelite was interested in it, and therefore all testified their joy
and satisfaction upon this occasion. See [Sa2
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#015). It is probable those tribes that
were yet encamped when the tabernacle was removed to Shiloh decamped
from Gilgal and pitched about Shiloh, for every true Israelite will
desire to fix where God's tabernacle fixed. Mention is made, on this
occasion, of the land being subdued before them, to intimate that the
country, hereabouts at least, being thoroughly reduced, they met with no
opposition, nor were they apprehensive of any danger, but thought it
time to make this grateful acknowledgment of God's goodness to them in
the constant series of successes with which he had blessed them. It was
a good presage of a comfortable settlement to themselves in Canaan, when
their first care was to see the ark well settled as soon as they had a
safe place ready to settle it in. Here the ark continued about 300
years, till the sins of Eli's house forfeited the ark, lost it and
ruined Shiloh, and its ruins were long after made use of as warnings to
Jerusalem. Go, see what I did to Shiloh, [Jer
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#012); [Psa
78:60](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#060).

[Joshua 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 18:2</span></span>

Here, I. Joshua reproves those tribes which were yet unsettled that they
did not bestir themselves to gain a settlement in the land which God had
given them. Seven tribes were yet unprovided for, though sure of an
inheritance, yet uncertain where it should be, and it seems in no great
care about it, [Jos 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#002). And with
them Joshua reasons ([Jos 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#003)): How
long are you slack? 1. They were too well pleased with their present
condition, liked well enough to live in a body together, the more the
merrier, and, like the Babel-builders, had no mind to be scattered
abroad and break good company. The spoil of the cities they had taken
served them to live plentifully upon for the present, and they banished
the thoughts of time to come. Perhaps the tribes of Judah and Joseph,
who had already received their inheritance in the countries next
adjoining, were generous in entertaining their brethren who were yet
unprovided for, so that they went from one good house to another among
their friends, with which, instead of grudging that they were postponed,
they were so well pleased that they cared not for going to houses of
their own. 2. They were slothful and dilatory. It may be they wished the
thing done, but had not spirit to stir in it, or move towards the doing
of it, though it was so much for their own advantage; like the sluggard,
that hides his hand in his bosom, and it grieves him to bring it to his
mouth again. The countries that remained to be divided lay at a
distance, and some parts of them in the hands of the Canaanites. If they
go to take possession of them, the cities must be rebuilt or repaired,
they must drive their flocks and herds a great way, and carry their
wives and children to strange places, and this will not be done without
care and pains, and breaking through some hardships; thus he that
observes the wind shall not sow, and he that regards the clouds shall
not reap, [Ecc 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#004). Note, Many are
diverted from real duties, and debarred from real comforts, by seeming
difficulties. God by his grace has given us a title to a good land, the
heavenly Canaan, but we are slack to take possession; we enter not into
that rest, as we might by faith, and hope, and holy joy; we live not in
heaven, as we might by setting our affections on things above and having
our conversation there. How long shall it be thus with us? How long
shall we thus stand in our own light, and forsake our own mercies for
lying vanities? Joshua was sensible of the inconveniences of this delay,
that, while they neglected to take possession of the land that was
conquered, the Canaanites were recovering strength and spirit, and
fortifying themselves in the places that were yet in their hands, which
would make the total expulsion of them the more difficult. They would
lose their advantages by not following their blow; and therefore, as an
eagle stirreth up her nest, so Joshua stirs them up to take possession
of their lot. He is ready to do his part, if they will but do theirs.

II\. He puts them in a way to settle themselves.

1\. The land that remained must be surveyed, an account taken of the
cities, and the territories belonging to them, [Jos
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#004). These must be divided into seven
equal parts, as near as they could guess at their true value, which they
must have an eye to, and not merely to the number of the cities and
extent of the country. Judah is fixed on the south and Joseph on the
north of Shiloh, to protect the tabernacle ([Jos
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#005)), and therefore they need not
describe their country, but those countries only that were yet
undisposed of. He gives a reason ([Jos
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#007)) why they must divide it into
seven parts only, because the Levites were to have no temporal estate
(as we say), but their benefices only, which were entailed upon their
families: The priesthood of the Lord is their inheritance, and a very
honourable, comfortable, plentiful inheritance it was. Gad and Reuben,
with half of the tribe of Manasseh, were already fixed, and needed not
to have any further care taken of them. Now, (1.) The surveyors were
three men out of each of the seven tribes that were to be provided for
([Jos 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#004)), one-and-twenty in all,
who perhaps for greater expedition, because they had already lost time,
divided themselves into three companies, one of each tribe in each
company, and took each their district to survey. The matter was thus
referred equally, that there might be neither any partiality used in
making up the seven lots, nor any shadow of suspicion given, but all
might be satisfied that they had right done them. (2.) The survey was
accordingly made, and brought in to Joshua, [Jos
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#008), [Jos
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#009). Josephus says it was seven
months in the doing. And we must in it observe, \[1.\] The faith and
courage of the persons employed: abundance of Canaanites remained in the
land, and all raging against Israel, as a bear robbed of her whelps; the
business of these surveyors would soon be known, and what could they
expect but to be way-laid, and have their brains knocked out by the
fierce observers? But in obedience to Joshua's command, and in
dependence upon God's power, they thus put their lives in their hands to
serve their country. \[2.\] The good providence of God in protecting
them from the many deaths they were exposed to, and bringing them all
safely again to the host at Shiloh. When we are in the way of our duty
we are under the special protection of the Almighty.

2\. When it was surveyed, and reduced to seven lots, then Joshua would,
by appeal to God, and direction from him, determine which of these lots
should belong to each tribe ([Jos
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#006)): That I may cast lots for you
here at the tabernacle (because it was a sacred transaction) before the
Lord our God, to whom each tribe must have an eye, with thankfulness for
the conveniences and submission to the inconveniences of their
allotment. What we have in the world we must acknowledge God's property
in, and dispose of it as before him, with justice, and charity, and
dependence upon Providence. The heavenly Canaan is described to us in a
book, the book of the scriptures, and there are in it mansions and
portions sufficient for all God's spiritual Israel. Christ is our Joshua
that divides it to us. On him we must attend, and to him we must apply
for an inheritance with the saints in light. See [Joh
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#002), [Joh
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003).

[Joshua 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 18:11</span></span>

We have here the lot of the tribe of Benjamin, which Providence cast
next to Joseph on the one hand, because Benjamin was own and only
brother to Joseph, and was little Benjamin ([Psa
68:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#027)), that needed the protection of
great Joseph, and yet had a better protector, for the Lord shall cover
him all the day long, [Deu 33:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#012). And
it was next to Judah on the other hand, that this tribe might hereafter
unite with Judah in an adherence to the throne of David and the temple
at Jerusalem. Here we have, 1. The exact borders and limits of this
tribe, which we need not be exact in the explication of. As it had Judah
on the south and Joseph on the north, so it had Jordan on the east and
Dan on the west. The western border is said to compass the corner of the
sea southward ([Jos 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#014)), whereas no
part of the lot of this tribe came near to the great sea. Bishop Patrick
thinks the meaning is that it ran along in a parallel line to the great
sea, though at a distance. Dr. Fuller suggests that since it is not
called the great sea, but only the sea, which often signifies any lake
or mere, it may be meant of the pool of Gibeon, which may be called a
corner or canton of the sea; it is called the great waters of Gibeon
([Jer 41:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#012)), and it is compassed by
the western border of this tribe. 2. The particular cities in this
tribe, not all, but the most considerable. Twenty-six are here named.
Jericho is put first, though dismantled, and forbidden to be rebuilt as
a city with gates and walls, because it might be built and inhabited as
a country village, and so was not useless to this tribe. Gilgal, where
Israel first encamped when Saul was made king ([Sa1
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#015)), was in this tribe. It was
afterwards a very profane place. [Hos
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#015), All their wickedness is in
Gilgal. Beth-el was in this tribe, a famous place. Though Benjamin
adhered to the house of David, yet Beth-el, it seems, was in the
possession of the house of Joseph ([Jdg
1:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#023)), and there Jeroboam set up
one of his calves. In this tribe was Gibeon, where the altar was in the
beginning of Solomon's time, [Ch2 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#003).
Gibeah likewise, that infamous place where the Levite's concubine was
abused. Mizpeh, and near it Samuel's Ebenezer, and also Anathoth,
Jeremiah's city, were in this tribe, as was the northern part of
Jerusalem. Paul was the honour of this tribe ([Rom
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001); [Phi
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#005)); but where his land lay we know
not: he sought the better country.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 19](jos019)

</div>
