<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos015)  [Next](jos017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 16:0</span></span>

It is a pity that this and the following chapter should be separated,
for both of them give us the lot of the children of Joseph, Ephraim and
Manasseh, who, next to Judah, were to have the post of honour, and
therefore had the first and best portion in the northern part of Canaan,
as Judah now had in the southern part. In this chapter we have, I. A
general account of the lot of these two tribes together ([Jos
16:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#001)). II. The borders of the lot of
Ephraim in particular ([Jos 16:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#005)).
That of Manasseh following in the next chapter.

[Joshua 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 16:1</span></span>

Though Joseph was one of the younger sons of Jacob, yet he was his
eldest by his most just and best beloved wife Rachel, was himself his
best beloved son, and had been the greatest ornament and support of his
family, kept it from perishing in a time of famine, and had been the
shepherd and stone of Israel, and therefore his posterity were very much
favoured by the lot. Their portion lay in the very heart of the land of
Canaan. It extended from Jordan in the east ([Jos
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#001)) to the sea, the Mediterranean
Sea, in the west, so that it took up the whole breadth of Canaan from
side to side; and no question the fruitfulness of the soil answered the
blessings both of Jacob and Moses, [Gen
49:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#025), [Gen
49:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#026), and [Deu
33:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#013), etc. The portions allotted to
Ephraim and Manasseh are not so particularly described as those of the
other tribes; we have only the limits and boundaries of them, not the
particular cities in them, as before we had the cities of Judah and
afterwards those of the other tribes. For this no reason can be
assigned, unless we may suppose that Joshua being himself of the
children of Joseph they referred it to him alone to distribute among
them the several cities that lay within their lot, and therefore did not
bring in the names of their cities to the great council of their princes
who sat upon this affair, by which means it came to pass that they were
not inserted with the rest in the books.

[Joshua 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 16:5</span></span>

Here, 1. The border of the lot of Ephraim is set down, by which it was
divided on the south from Benjamin and Dan, who lay between it and
Judah, and on the north from Manasseh; for east and west it reached from
Jordan to the great sea. The learned, who aim to be exact in drawing the
line according to the directions here, find themselves very much at a
loss, the description being short and intricate. The report of those who
in these latter ages have travelled those countries will not serve to
clear the difficulties, so vastly unlike is it now to what it was then;
not only cities have been so destroyed as that no mark nor footstep of
them remains, but brooks are dried up, rivers alter their courses, and
even the mountain falling cometh to nought, and the rock is removed out
of his place, [Job 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#018). Unless I
could hope to solve the doubts that arise upon this draught of the
border of Ephraim, it is to no purpose to mention them: no doubt it was
then perfectly understood, so as that the first intention of recording
it was effectually answered, which was to notify the ancient landmarks,
which posterity must by no means remove. 2. Some separate cities are
spoken of, that lay not within these borders, at least not if the line
was drawn direct, but lay within the lot of Manasseh ([Jos
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#009)), which might better be read, and
there were separate cities for the children of Ephraim among the
inheritance of the children of Manasseh, because it proved that Manasseh
could spare them, and Ephraim had need of them, and it might be hoped
that no inconvenience would arise from this mixture of these two tribes
together, who were both the sons of Joseph, and should love as brethren.
And by this it appears that though, when the tribes were numbered in the
plains of Moab, Manasseh had got the start of Ephraim in number, for
Manasseh was then 52,000, and Ephraim but 32,000 ([Num
26:34](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#034), [Num
26:37](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#037)), yet by the time they were well
settled in Canaan the hands were crossed again, and the blessing of
Moses was verified, [Deu 33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017), They
are the ten thousands of Ephraim and they are the thousands of Manasseh.
Families and kingdoms are diminished and increased, increased and
diminished again, as God pleases. 3. A brand is put upon the
Ephraimites, that they did not drive out the Canaanites from Gezer ([Jos
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#010)), either through carelessness or
cowardice, either for want of faith in the promise of God, that he would
give them success if they would make a vigorous effort, or for want of
zeal for the command of God, which obliged them utterly to drive out the
Canaanites, and to make no peace with them. And, though they hoped to
satisfy the law by putting them under tribute, yet (as Calvin thinks)
this made the matter worse, for it shows that they spared them out of
covetousness, that they might be profited by their labours, and by
dealing with them for their tribute they were in danger of being
infected with their idolatry; yet some think that, when they brought
them under tribute, they obliged them to renounce their idols, and to
observe the seven precepts of the sons of Noah; and I should think so,
but that we find in the sequel of the story that the Israelites were so
far from restraining idolatry in others that they soon fell into it
themselves. Many famous places were within this lot of the tribe of
Ephraim, though not mentioned here. In it were Ramah, Samuel's city
(called in the New Testament Arimathea, of which Joseph was, that took
care of our Saviour's burial), and Shiloh, where the tabernacle was
first set up. Tirzah also, the royal city of Jeroboam and his
successors, and Deborah's palm-tree, under which she judged Israel, were
in this tribe. Samaria, built by Omri after the burning of the royal
palace of Tirzah, was in this tribe, and was long the royal city of the
kingdom of the ten tribes; not far from it were Shechem, and the
mountains Ebal and Gerizim, and Sychar, near which was Jacob's well,
where Christ talked with the woman of Samaria. We read much of Mount
Ephraim in the story of the Judges, and of a city called Ephraim, it is
probable in this tribe, to which Christ retired, [Joh
11:54](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#054). The whole kingdom of the ten
tribes is often, in the prophets, especially in Hosea, called Ephraim.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 17](jos017)

</div>
