<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos010)  [Next](jos012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 11:0</span></span>

This chapter continues and concludes the history of the conquest of
Canaan; of the reduction of the southern parts we had an account in the
foregoing chapter, after which we may suppose Joshua allowed his forces
some breathing-time; now here we have the story of the war in the north,
and the happy success of that war. I. The confederacy of the northern
crowns against Israel ([Jos 11:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#001)).
II. The encouragement which God gave to Joshua to engage them ([Jos
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#006)). III. His victory over them
([Jos 11:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#007)). IV. The taking of their
cities ([Jos 11:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#010)). V. The
destruction of the Anakim ([Jos 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#021),
[Jos 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#022)). VI. The general
conclusion of the story of this war ([Jos
11:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#016), [Jos
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#023)).

[Joshua 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 11:1</span></span>

We are here entering upon the story of another campaign that Joshua
made, and it was a glorious one, no less illustrious than the former in
the success of it, though in respect of miracles it was inferior to it
in glory. The wonders God then wrought for them were to animate and
encourage them to act vigorously themselves. Thus the war carried on by
the preaching of the gospel against Satan's kingdom was at first
forwarded by miracles; but, the war being by them sufficiently proved to
be of God, the managers of it are now left to the ordinary assistance of
divine grace in the use of the sword of the Spirit, and must not expect
hail-stones nor the standing still of the sun. In this story we have,

I. The Canaanites taking the field against Israel. They were the
aggressors, God hardening their hearts to begin the war, that Israel
might be justified beyond exception in destroying them. Joshua and all
Israel had returned to the camp at Gilgal, and perhaps these kings knew
no other than that they intended to sit down content with the conquest
they had already made, and yet they prepare war against them. Note,
Sinners bring ruin upon their own heads, so that God will be justified
when he speaks, and they alone shall bear the blame for ever. Judah had
now couched as a lion gone up from the prey; if the northern kings rouse
him up, it is at their peril, [Gen
49:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#009). Now, 1. Several nations joined
in this confederacy, some in the mountains and some in the plains, [Jos
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#002). Canaanites from east and west,
Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, etc. ([Jos
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#003)), of different constitutions and
divided interests among themselves, and yet they here unite against
Israel as against a common enemy. Thus are the children of this world
more unanimous, and therein wiser, than the children of light. The
oneness of the church's enemies should shame the church's friends out of
their discords and divisions, and engage them to be one. 2. The head of
this confederacy was Jabin king of Hazor ([Jos
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#001)), as Adoni-zedec was of the
former; it is said ([Jos 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#010)) Hazor
had been the head of all those kingdoms, which could not have revolted
without occasioning ill-will; but this was forgotten and laid aside upon
this occasion, by consent of parties, [Luk
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#012). When they had all drawn up
their forces together, every kingdom bringing in its quota, they were a
very great army, much greater than the former, as the sand on the sea
shore in multitude, and upon this account much stronger and more
formidable, that they had horses and chariots very many, which we do not
find the southern kings had; hereby they had a great advantage against
Israel, for their army consisted only of foot, and they never brought
horses nor chariots into the field. Josephus tells us that the army of
the Canaanites consisted of 300,000 foot, 10,000 horses, and 20,000
chariots. Many there be that rise up against God's Israel; doubtless
their numbers made them very confident of success, but it proved that so
much the greater slaughter was made of them.

II\. The encouragement God gave to Joshua to give them the meeting, even
upon the ground of their own choosing ([Jos
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#006)): Be not afraid because of them.
Joshua was remarkable for his courage - it was his master grace, and yet
it seems he had need to be again and again cautioned not to be afraid.
Fresh dangers and difficulties make it necessary to fetch in fresh
supports and comforts from the word of God, which we have always nigh
unto us, to be made use of in every time of need. Those that have God on
their side need not be disturbed at the number and power of their
enemies; more are those that are with us than those that are against us;
those have the hosts of the Lord that have the Lord of hosts engaged for
them. For his encouragement, 1. God assures him of success, and fixes
the hour: Tomorrow about this time, when an engagement (it is probable)
was expected and designed on both sides, I will deliver them up slain.
Though they were to be slain by the sword of Israel, yet it is spoken of
as God's work, that he would deliver them up. 2. He appoints him to
hough their horses, hamstring them, lame them, and burn their chariots,
not only that Israel might not use them hereafter, but that they might
not fear them now, their God designing this contempt to be put upon
them. Let Israel look upon their chariots but as rotten wood designed
for the fire, and their horses of war as disabled things, scarcely good
enough for the cart. This encouragement which God here gave to Joshua no
doubt he communicated to the people, who perhaps were under some
apprehensions of danger from this vast army, notwithstanding the
experience they had had of God's power engaged for them. And the wisdom
and goodness of God are to be observed, (1.) In infatuating the counsels
of the enemy, that all the kings of Canaan, who were not dispersed at
such a distance from each other but that they might have got all
together in a body, did not at first confederate against Israel, but
were divided into the southern and northern combination, and so became
the less formidable. And, (2.) In preparing his people to encounter the
greater force, by breaking the less. They first engage with five kings
together, and now with many more. God proportions our trials to our
strength and our strength to our trials.

III\. Joshua's march against these confederate forces, [Jos
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#007). He came upon them suddenly, and
surprised them in their quarters. He made this haste, 1. That he might
put them into the greater confusion, by giving them an alarm, when they
little thought he was near them. 2. That he might be sure not to come
short of the honour God had fixed, to give him the meeting at the
enemies' camp, tomorrow about this time. It is fit we should keep time
with God.

IV\. His success, [Jos 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#008). He
obtained the honour and advantage of a complete victory; he smote them
and chased them, in the several ways they took in their flight; some
fled towards Zidon, which lay to the northwest, others towards Mizpeh,
eastward, but the parties Joshua sent out pursued them each way. So the
Lord delivered them into the hand of Israel; they would not deliver
themselves into the hands of Israel to be made proselytes and
tributaries, and so offered up to God's grace ([Rom
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016)), and therefore God delivered
them into their hands to be made sacrifices to his justice; for God will
be honoured by us or upon us.

V. His obedience to the orders given him, in destroying the horses and
chariots ([Jos 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#009)), which was an
instance, 1. Of his subjection to the divine will, as one under
authority, that must do as he is bidden. 2. Of his self-denial, and
crossing his own genius and inclination in compliance with God's
command. 3. Of his confidence in the power of God engaged for Israel,
which enabled them to despise the chariots and horses which others
trusted in, [Psa 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007); [Psa
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#017). 4. Of his care to keep up in
the people the like confidence in God, by taking that from them which
they would be tempted to trust too much to. This was cutting of a right
hand.

[Joshua 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 11:10</span></span>

We have here the same improvement made of this victory as was made of
that in the foregoing chapter. 1. The destruction of Hazor is
particularly recorded, because in it, and by the king thereof, this
daring design against Israel was laid, [Jos
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#010), [Jos
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#011). The king of Hazor, it seems,
escaped with his life out of the battle, and thought himself safe when
he had got back into his own city, and Joshua had gone in pursuit of the
scattered troops another way. But it proved that that which he thought
would be for his welfare was his trap; in it he was taken as in an evil
net; there he was slain, and his city, for his sake, burned. Yet we find
that the remains of it being not well looked after by Israel the
Canaanites rebuilt it, and settled there under another king of the same
name, [Jdg 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#002). 2. The rest of the
cities of that part of the country are spoken of only in general, that
Joshua got them all into his hands, but did not burn them as he did
Hazor, for Israel was to dwell in great and goodly cities which they
builded not ([Deu 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#010)) and in these
among the rest. And here we find Israel rolling in blood and treasure.
(1.) In the blood of their enemies; they smote all the souls ([Jos
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#001)), neither left they any to
breathe ([Jos 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#014)), that there might
be none to infect them with the abominations of Canaan, and none to
disturb them in the possession of it. The children were cut off, lest
they should afterwards lay claim to any part of this land in the right
of their parents. (2.) In the wealth of their enemies. The spoil, and
the cattle, they took for a prey to themselves, [Jos
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#014). As they were enriched with the
spoil of their oppressors when they came out of Egypt, wherewith to
defray the charges of their apprenticeship in the wilderness, so they
were now enriched with the spoil of their enemies for a stock wherewith
to set up in the land of Canaan. Thus is the wealth of the sinner laid
up for the just.

[Joshua 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 11:15</span></span>

We have here the conclusion of this whole matter.

I. A short account is here given of what was done in four things: - 1.
The obstinacy of the Canaanites in their opposition to the Israelites.
It was strange that though it appeared so manifestly that God fought for
Israel, and in every engagement the Canaanites had the worst of it, yet
they stood it out to the last; not one city made peace with Israel, but
the Gibeonites only, who understood the things that belonged to their
peace better than their neighbours, [Jos
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#019). It is intimated that other
cities might have made as good terms for themselves, without ragged
clothes and clouted shoes, if they would have humbled themselves, but
they never so much as desired conditions of peace. We here are told
whence this unaccountable infatuation came: It was of the Lord to harden
their hearts, [Jos 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#020). As Pharaoh's
heart was hardened by his own pride and wilfulness first, and afterwards
by the righteous judgment of God, to his destruction, so were the hearts
of these Canaanites. To punish them for all their other follies, God
left them to this, to make those their enemies whom they might have made
their friends. This was it that ruined them: they came against Israel in
battle, and gave the first blow, and therefore might have no favour
shown them. Those know not what they do who give the provocation to
divine justice, or the authorized instruments of it. Are we stronger
than God? Observe here, That hardness of heart is the ruin of sinners.
Those that are stupid and secure, and heedless of divine warnings, are
already marked for destruction. What hope is there of those concerning
whom God has said, Go, make their hearts fat? 2. The constancy of the
Israelites in prosecuting this war ([Jos
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#018)): Joshua made war a long time;
some reckon it five years, others seven, that were spent in subduing
this land: so long God would train up Israel to war, and give them
repeated instances of his power and goodness in every new victory that
he gave them. 3. The conquest of the Anakim at last, [Jos
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#021), [Jos
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#022). Either this was done as they
met with them where they were dispersed, as some think, or rather it
should seem the Anakim had retired to their fastnesses, and so were
hunted out and cut off at last, after all the rest of Israel's enemies.
The mountains of Judah and Israel were the habitations of those
mountains of men; but not their height, nor the strength of their caves,
nor the difficulty of the passes to them, could secure, no, not these
mighty men, from the sword of Joshua. The cutting off of the sons of
Anak is particularly mentioned because these had been such a terror to
the spies forty years before, and their bulk and strength had been
thought an insuperable difficulty in the way of the reducing of Canaan,
[Num 13:28](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#028), [Num
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#033). Even that opposition which
seemed invincible was got over. Never let the sons of Anak be a terror
to the Israel of God, for even their day will come to fall. Giants are
dwarfs to Omnipotence; yet this struggle with the Anakim was reserved
for the latter end of the war, when the Israelites had become more
expert in the arts of war, and had had more experience of the power and
goodness of God. Note, God sometimes reserves the sharpest trials of his
people by affliction and temptation for the latter end of their days.
Therefore let not him that girds on the harness boast as he that puts it
off. Death, that tremendous son of Anak, is the last enemy that is to be
encountered; but it is to be destroyed, [Co1
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#026). Thanks be to God, who will give
us the victory. 4. The end and issue of this long war. The Canaanites
were rooted out, not perfectly (as we shall find after in the book of
Judges), but in a good measure; they were not able to make any head
either, (1.) So as to keep the Israelites out of possession of the land:
Joshua took all that land, [Jos 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#016),
[Jos 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#017). And we may suppose the
people dispersed themselves and their families into the countries they
had conquered, at least those that lay nearest to the head-quarters at
Gilgal, until an orderly distribution should be made by lot, that every
man might know his own. Or, (2.) So as to keep them in action, or give
them any molestation ([Jos 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#023)): The
land rested from war. It ended not in a peace with the Canaanites (that
was forbidden), but in a peace from them. There is a rest, a rest from
war, remaining for the people of God, into which they shall enter when
their warfare is accomplished.

II\. That which was now done is here compared with that which had been
said to Moses. God's word and his works, if viewed and considered
together, will mutually illustrate each other. It is here observed in
the close, 1. That all the precepts God had given to Moses relating to
the conquest of Canaan were obeyed on the people's part, at least while
Joshua lived. See how solemnly this is remarked ([Jos
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#015)): As the Lord commanded Moses
his servant, by whose hand the law was given, so did Moses command
Joshua, for Moses was faithful, as a law-giver, to him that appointed
him; he did his part, and then he died: but were the commands of Moses
observed when he was in his grave? Yes, they were: So did Joshua, who
was, in his place, as faithful as Moses in his. He left nothing undone
(Heb. he removed nothing) of all that the Lord commanded Moses. Those
that leave their duty undone do what they can to remove or make void the
command of God, by which they are bound to do it; but Joshua, by
performing the precept, confirmed it, as the expression is, [Deu
27:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026). Joshua was himself a great
commander, and yet nothing was more his praise than his obedience. Those
that rule others at their will must themselves be ruled by the divine
will; then their power is indeed their honour, and not otherwise. The
pious obedience for which Joshua is here commended respects especially
the command to destroy the Canaanites, and to break down their altars
and burn their images, [Deu 7:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#002);
[Exo 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#024); [Exo
34:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#013). Joshua, in his zeal for the
Lord of hosts, spared neither the idols nor the idolaters. Saul's
disobedience, or rather his partial obedience, to the command of God,
for the utter destruction of the Amalekites, cost him his kingdom. It
should seem Joshua himself gives this account of his most careful and
punctual observance of his orders in the execution of his commission,
that in all respects he had done as Moses commanded him; and then it
intimates that he had more pleasure and satisfaction in reflecting upon
his obedience to the commands of God in all this war, and valued himself
more upon that, than upon all the gains and triumphs with which he was
enriched and advanced. 2. That all the promises God had given to Moses
relating to this conquest were accomplished on his part, [Jos
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#023). Joshua took the whole land,
conquered it, and took possession of it, according to all that the Lord
said unto Moses. God had promised to drive out the nations before them
([Exo 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#002); [Exo
34:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#011)), and to bring them down, [Deu
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#003). And now it was done. There failed
not one word of the promise. Our successes and enjoyments are then
doubly sweet and comfortable to us when we see them flowing to us from
the promise (this is according to what the Lord said), as our obedience
is then acceptable to God when it has an eye to the precept. And, if we
make conscience of our duty, we need not question the performance of the
promise.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 12](jos012)

</div>
