<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1007)  [Next](kg1009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 8:0</span></span>

The building and furniture of the temple were very glorious, but the
dedication of it exceeds in glory as much as prayer and praise, the work
of saints, exceed the casting of metal and the graving of stones, the
work of the craftsman. The temple was designed for the keeping up of the
correspondence between God and his people; and here we have an account
of the solemnity of their first meeting there. I. The representatives of
all Israel were called together ([Kg1
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#001), [Kg1
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#002)), to keep a feast to the honour of
God, for fourteen days ([Kg1 8:65](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#065)).
II. The priests brought the ark into the most holy place, and fixed it
there ([Kg1 8:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#003)). III. God took
possession of it by a cloud ([Kg1
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#010), [Kg1
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#011)). IV. Solomon, with thankful
acknowledgments to God, informed the people touching the occasion of
their meeting ([Kg1 8:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#012)). V. In a
long prayer he recommended to God's gracious acceptance all the prayers
that should be made in or towards this place (v. 22-53). VI. He
dismissed the assembly with a blessing and an exhortation ([Kg1
8:54-61](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#054)). VII. He offered abundance of
sacrifices, on which he and his people feasted, and so parted, with
great satisfaction ([Kg1 8:62-66](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#062)).
These were Israel's golden days, days of the Son of man in type.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 8:1</span></span>

The temple, though richly beautified, yet while it was without the ark
was like a body without a soul, or a candlestick without a candle, or
(to speak more properly) a house without an inhabitant. All the cost and
pains bestowed on this stately structure are lost if God do not accept
them; and, unless he please to own it as the place where he will record
his name, it is after all but a ruinous heap. When therefore all the
work is ended ([Kg1 7:51](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#051)), the one
thing needful is yet behind, and that is the bringing in of the ark.
This therefore is the end which must crown the work, and which here we
have an account of the doing of with great solemnity.

I. Solomon presides in this service, as David did in the bringing up of
the ark to Jerusalem; and neither of them thought it below him to follow
the ark nor to lead the people in their attendance on it. Solomon
glories in the title of the preacher ([Ecc
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001)), and the master of assemblies,
[Ecc 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#011). This great assembly he
summons ([Kg1 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#001)), and he is the
centre of it, for to him they all assembled ([Kg1
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#002)) at the feast in the seventh
month, namely, the feast of tabernacles, which was appointed on the
fifteenth day of that month, [Lev
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#034). David, like a very good man,
brings the ark to a convenient place, near him; Solomon, like a very
great man, brings it to a magnificent place. As every man has received
the gift, so let him minister; and let children proceed in God's service
where their parents left off.

II\. All Israel attend the service, their judges and the chief of their
tribes and families, all their officers, civil and military, and (as
they speak in the north) the heads of their clans. A convention of these
might well be called an assembly of all Israel. These came together, on
this occasion, 1. To do honour to Solomon, and to return him the thanks
of the nation for all the good offices he had done in kindness to them.
2. To do honour to the ark, to pay respect to it, and testify their
universal joy and satisfaction in its settlement. The advancement of the
ark in external splendour, though it has often proved too strong a
temptation to its hypocritical followers, yet, because it may prove an
advantage to its true interests, is to be rejoiced in (with trembling)
by all that wish well to it. Public mercies call for public
acknowledgments. Those that appeared before the Lord did not appear
empty, for they all sacrificed sheep and oxen innumerable, [Kg1
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#005). The people in Solomon's time were
very rich, very easy, and very cheerful, and therefore it was fit that,
on this occasion, they should consecrate not only their cheerfulness,
but a part of their wealth, to God and his honour.

III\. The priests do their part of the service. In the wilderness, the
Levites were to carry the ark, because then there were not priests
enough to do it; but here (it being the last time that the ark was to be
carried) the priests themselves did it, as they were ordered to do when
it surrounded Jericho. We are here told, 1. What was in the ark, nothing
but the two tables of stone ([Kg1
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#009)), a treasure far exceeding all the
dedicated things both of David and Solomon. The pot of manna and Aaron's
rod were by the ark, but not in it. 2. What was brought up with the ark
([Kg1 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#004)): The tabernacle of the
congregation. It is probable that both that which Moses set up in the
wilderness, which was in Gibeon, and that which David pitched in Zion,
were brought to the temple, to which they did, as it were, surrender all
their holiness, merging it in that of the temple, which must
henceforward be the place where God must be sought unto. Thus will all
the church's holy things on earth, that are so much its joy and glory,
be swallowed up in the perfection of holiness above. 3. Where it was
fixed in its place, the place appointed for its rest after all its
wanderings ([Kg1 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#006)): In the oracle
of the house, whence they expected God to speak to them, even in the
most holy place, which was made so by the presence of the ark, under the
wings of the great cherubim which Solomon set up ([Kg1
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#027)), signifying the special
protection of angels, under which God's ordinances and the assemblies of
his people are taken. The staves of the ark were drawn out, so as to be
seen from under the wings of the cherubim, to direct the high priest to
the mercy-seat, over the ark, when he went in, once a year, to sprinkle
the blood there; so that still they continued of some use, though there
was no longer occasion for them to carry it by.

IV\. God graciously owns what is done and testifies his acceptance of
it, [Kg1 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#010), [Kg1
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#011). The priests might come into the
most holy place till God manifested his glory there; but, thenceforward,
none might, at their peril, approach the ark, except the high priest, on
the day of atonement. Therefore it was not till the priests had come out
of the oracle that the Shechinah took possession of it, in a cloud,
which filled not only the most holy place, but the temple, so that the
priests who burnt incense at the golden altar could not bear it. By this
visible emanation of the divine glory, 1. God put an honour upon the
ark, and owned it as a token of his presence. The glory of it had been
long diminished and eclipsed by its frequent removes, the meanness of
its lodging, and its being exposed too much to common view; but God will
now show that it is as dear to him as ever, and he will have it looked
upon with as much veneration as it was when Moses first brought it into
his tabernacle. 2. He testified his acceptance of the building and
furnishing of the temple as good service done to his name and his
kingdom among men. 3. He struck an awe upon this great assembly; and, by
what they saw, confirmed their belief of what they read in the books of
Moses concerning the glory of God's appearance to their fathers, that
hereby they might be kept close to the service of the God of Israel and
fortified against temptations to idolatry. 4. He showed himself ready to
hear the prayer Solomon was now about to make; and not only so, but took
up his residence in this house, that all his praying people might there
be encouraged to make their applications to him. But the glory of God
appeared in a cloud, a dark cloud, to signify, (1.) The darkness of that
dispensation in comparison with the light of the gospel, by which, with
open face, we behold, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord. (2.) The
darkness of our present state in comparison with the vision of God,
which will be the happiness of heaven, where the divine glory is
unveiled. Now we can only say what he is not, but then we shall see him
as he is.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg1 8:12</span></span>

Here, I. Solomon encourages the priests, who came out of the temple from
their ministration, much astonished at the dark cloud that overshadowed
them. The disciples of Christ feared when they entered into the cloud,
though it was a bright cloud ([Luk
9:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#034)), so did the priests when they
found themselves wrapped in a thick cloud. To silence their fears, 1. He
reminds them of that which they could not but know, that this was a
token of God's presence ([Kg1 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#012)):
The Lord said he would dwell in the thick darkness. It is so far from
being a token of his displeasure that it is an indication of his favour;
for he had said, I will appear in a cloud, [Lev
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#002). Note, Nothing is more effectual
to reconcile us to dark dispensations than to consider what God hath
said, and to compare his word and works together; as [Lev
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#003), This is that which the Lord hath
said. God is light ([Jo1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005)), and he
dwells in light ([Ti1 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)), but he
dwells with men in the thick darkness, makes that his pavilion, because
they could not bear the dazzling brightness of his glory. Verily thou
art a God that hidest thyself. Thus our holy faith is exercised and our
holy fear is increased. Where God dwells in light faith is swallowed up
in vision and fear in love. 2. He himself bids it welcome, as worthy of
all acceptation; and since God, by this cloud, came down to take
possession, he does, in a few words, solemnly give him possession ([Kg1
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#013)): "Surely I come," says God.
"Amen," says Solomon, "Even so, come, Lord,. The house is thy own,
entirely thy own, I have surely built it for thee, and furnished it for
thee; it is for ever thy own, a settled place for thee to abide in for
ever; it shall never be alienated nor converted to any other use; the
ark shall never be removed from it, never unsettled again." It is
Solomon's joy that God has taken possession; and it is his desire that
he would keep possession. Let not the priests therefore dread that in
which Solomon so much triumphs.

II\. He instructs the people, and gives them a plain account concerning
this house, which they now saw God take possession of. He spoke briefly
to the priests, to satisfy them (a word to the wise), but turned his
face about ([Kg1 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#014)) from them to
the congregation that stood in the outer court, and addressed himself to
them largely.

1\. He blessed them. When they saw the dark cloud enter the temple they
blessed themselves, being astonished at it and afraid lest the thick
darkness should be utter darkness to them. The amazing sight, such as
they had never seen in their days, we may suppose, drove every man to
his prayers, and the vainest minds were made serious by it. Solomon
therefore set in with their prayers, and blessed them all, as one having
authority (for the less is blessed of the better); in God's name, he
spoke peace to them, and a blessing, like that with which the angel
blessed Gideon when he was in a fright, upon a similar occasion. [Jdg
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#022), [Jdg
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#023), Peace be unto thee. Fear not;
thou shalt not die. Solomon blessed them, that is, he pacified them, and
freed them from the consternation they were in. To receive this
blessing, they all stood up, in token of reverence and readiness to hear
and accept it. It is a proper posture to be in when the blessing is
pronounced.

2\. He informed them concerning this house which he had built and was
now dedicating.

(1.) He began his account with a thankful acknowledgment of the good
hand of his God upon him hitherto: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel,
[Kg1 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#015). What we have the pleasure
of God must have the praise of. He thus engaged the congregation to lift
up their hearts in thanksgivings to God, which would help to still the
tumult of spirit which, probably, they were in. "Come," says he, "let
God's awful appearances not drive us from him, but draw us to him; let
us bless the Lord God of Israel." Thus Job, under a dark scene, blessed
the name of the Lord. Solomon here blessed God, \[1.\] For his promise
which he spoke with his mouth to David. \[2.\] For the performance, that
he had now fulfilled it with his hand. We have then the best sense of
God's mercies, and most grateful both to ourselves and to our God, when
we run up those streams to the fountain of the covenant, and compare
what God does with what he has said.

(2.) Solomon is now making a solemn surrender or dedication of this
house unto God, delivering it to God by his own act and deed. Grants and
conveyances commonly begin with recitals of what has been before done,
leading to what is now done: accordingly, here is a recital of the
special causes and considerations moving Solomon to build this house.
\[1.\] He recites the want of such a place. It was necessary that this
should be premised; for, according to the dispensation they were under,
there must be but one place in which they must expect God to record his
name. If, therefore, there were any other chosen, this would be a
usurpation. But he shows, from what God himself had said, that there was
no other ([Kg1 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#016)): I chose no city
to build a house in for my name; therefore there is occasion for the
building of this. \[2.\] He recites David's purpose to build such a
place. God chose the person first that should rule his people (I chose
David, [Kg1 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#016)) and then put it into
his heart to build a house for God's name, [Kg1
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#017). It was not a project of his own,
for the magnifying of himself; but his good father, of blessed memory,
laid the first design of it, though he lived not to lay the first stone.
\[3.\] He recites God's promise concerning himself. God approved his
father's purpose ([Kg1 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#018)): Thou
didst well, that it was in thy heart. Note, Sincere intentions to do
good shall be graciously approved and accepted of God, though Providence
prevent our putting them in execution. The desire of a man is his
kindness. See [Co2 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#012). God accepted
David's good will, yet would not permit him to do the good work, but
reserved the honour of it for his son ([Kg1
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#019)): He shall build the house to my
name; so that what he had done was not of his own head, nor for his own
glory, but the work itself was according to his father's design and his
doing it was according to God's designation. \[4.\] He recites what he
himself had done, and with what intention: I have built a house, not for
my own name, but for the name of the Lord God of Israel ([Kg1
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#020)), and set there a place for the
ark, [Kg1 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#021). Thus all the right,
title, interest, claim, and demand, whatsoever, which he or his had or
might have in or to this house, or any of its appurtenances, he resigns,
surrenders, and gives up, to God for ever. It is for his name, and his
ark. In this, says he, the Lord hath performed his word that he spoke.
Note, Whatever good we do, we must look upon it as the performance of
God's promise to us, rather than the performance of our promises to him.
The more we do for God the more we are indebted to him; for our
sufficiency is of him, and not of ourselves.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg1 8:22</span></span>

Solomon having made a general surrender of this house to God, which God
had signified his acceptance of by taking possession, next follows
Solomon's prayer, in which he makes a more particular declaration of the
uses of that surrender, with all humility and reverence, desiring that
God would agree thereto. In short, it is his request that this temple
may be deemed and taken, not only for a house of sacrifice (no mention
is made of that in all this prayer, that was taken for granted), but a
house of prayer for all people; and herein it was a type of the gospel
church; see [Isa 56:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#007), compared with
[Mat 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#013). Therefore Solomon opened
this house, not only with an extraordinary sacrifice, but with an
extraordinary prayer.

I. The person that prayed this prayer was great. Solomon did not appoint
one of the priests to do it, nor one of the prophets, but did it
himself, in the presence of all the congregation of Israel, [Kg1
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#022). 1. It was well that he was able
to do it, a sign that he had made a good improvement of the pious
education which his parents gave him. With all his learning, it seems,
he learnt to pray well, and knew how to express himself to God in a
suitable manner, pro re nata - on the spur of the occasion, without a
prescribed form. In the crowd of his philosophical transactions, his
proverbs, and songs, he did not forget his devotions. He was a gainer by
prayer ([Kg1 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#011), etc.), and, we may
suppose, gave himself much to it, so that he excelled, as we find here,
in praying gifts. 2. It was well that he was willing to do it, and not
shy of performing divine service before so great a congregation. He was
far from thinking it any disparagement to him to be his own chaplain and
the mouth of the assembly to God; and shall any think themselves too
great to do this office for their own families? Solomon, in all his
other glory, even on his ivory throne, looked not so great as he did
now. Great men should thus support the reputation of religious exercises
and so honour God with their greatness. Solomon was herein a type of
Christ, the great intercessor for all over whom he rules.

II\. The posture in which he prayed was very reverent, and expressive of
humility, seriousness, and fervency in prayer. He stood before the altar
of the Lord, intimating that he expected the success of his prayer in
virtue of that sacrifice which should be offered up in the fulness of
time, typified by the sacrifices offered at that altar. But when he
addressed himself to prayer, 1. He kneeled down, as appears, [Kg1
8:54](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#054), where he is said to rise from
his knees; compare [Ch2 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#013). Kneeling
is the most proper posture for prayer, [Eph
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#014). The greatest of men must not
think it below them to kneel before the Lord their Maker. Mr. Herbert
says, "Kneeling never spoiled silk stocking." 2. He spread forth his
hands towards heaven, and (as it should seem by [Kg1
8:54](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#054)) continued so to the end of the
prayer, hereby expressing his desire towards, and expectations from,
God, as a Father in heaven. He spread forth his hands, as it were to
offer up the prayer from an open enlarged heart and to present it to
heaven, and also to receive thence, with both arms, the mercy which he
prayed for. Such outward expressions of the fixedness and fervour of
devotion ought not to be despised or ridiculed.

III\. The prayer itself was very long, and perhaps much longer than is
here recorded. At the throne of grace we have liberty of speech, and
should use our liberty. It is not making long prayers, but making them
for a pretence, that Christ condemns. In this excellent prayer Solomon
does, as we should in every prayer,

1\. Give glory to God. This he begins with, as the most proper act of
adoration. He addresses himself to God as the Lord God of Israel, a God
in covenant with them And, (1.) He gives him the praise of what he is,
in general, the best of beings in himself ("There is no God like thee,
none of the powers in heaven or earth to be compared with thee"), and
the best of masters to his people: "Who keepest covenant and mercy with
thy servants; not only as good as thy word in keeping covenant, but
better than thy word in keeping mercy, doing that for them of which thou
hast not given them an express promise, provided they walk before thee
with all their heart, are zealous for thee, with an eye to thee." (2.)
He gives him thanks for what he had done, in particular, for his family
([Kg1 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#024)): "Thou hast kept with thy
servant David, as with thy other servants, that which thou promisedst
him." The promise was a great favour to him, his support and joy, and
now performance is the crown of it: Thou hast fulfilled it, as it is
this day. Fresh experiences of the truth of God's promises call for
enlarged praises.

2\. He sues for grace and favour from God.

(1.) That God would perform to him and his the mercy which he had
promised, [Kg1 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#025), [Kg1
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#026). Observe how this comes in. He
thankfully acknowledges the performance of the promise in part; hitherto
God had been faithful to his word: "Thou hast kept with thy servant
David that which thou promisedst him, so far that his son fills his
throne and has built the intended temple; therefore now keep with thy
servant David that which thou hast further promised him, and which yet
remains to be fulfilled in its season." Note, The experiences we have
had of God's performing his promises should encourage us to depend upon
them and plead them with God: and those who expect further mercies must
be thankful for former mercies. Hitherto God has helped, [Co2
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#010). Solomon repeats the promise
([Kg1 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#025)): There shall not fail thee
a man to sit on the throne, not omitting the condition, so that thy
children take heed to their way; for we cannot expect God's performance
of the promise but upon our performance of the condition. And then he
humbly begs this entail ([Kg1 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#026)):
Now, O God of Israel! let thy word be verified. God's promises (as we
have often observed) must be both the guide of our desires and the
ground of our hopes and expectations in prayer. David had prayed ([Sa2
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#025)): Lord, do as thou hast said.
Note, Children should learn of their godly parents how to pray, and
plead in prayer.

(2.) That God would have respect to this temple which he had now taken
possession of, and that his eyes might be continually open towards it
([Kg1 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#029)), that he would graciously
own it, and so put an honour upon it. To this purpose,

\[1.\] He premises, First, A humble admiration of God's gracious
condescension ([Kg1 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#027)): "But will
God indeed dwell on the earth? Can we imagine that a Being infinitely
high, and holy, and happy, will stoop so low as to let it be said of him
that he dwells upon the earth and blesses the worms of the earth with
his presence - the earth, that is corrupt, and overspread with sin -
cursed, and reserved to fire? Lord, how is it?" Secondly, A humble
acknowledgment of the incapacity of the house he had built, though very
capacious, to contain God: "The heaven of heavens cannot contain thee,
for no place can include him who is present in all places; even this
house is too little, too mean to be the residence of him that is
infinite in being and glory." Note, When we have done the most we can
for God we must acknowledge the infinite distance and disproportion
between us and him, between our services and his perfections.

\[2.\] This premised, he prays in general, First, That God would
graciously hear and answer the prayer he was now praying, [Kg1
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#028). It was a humble prayer (the
prayer of thy servant), an earnest prayer (such a prayer as is a cry), a
prayer made in faith (before thee, as the Lord, and my God): "Lord,
hearken to it, have respect to it, not as the prayer of Israel's king
(no man's dignity in the world, or titles of honour, will recommend him
to God), but as the prayer of thy servant." Secondly, That God would in
like manner hear and answer all the prayers that should, at any time
hereafter, be made in or towards this house which he had now built, and
of which God had said, My name shall be there ([Kg1
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#029)), his own prayers (Hearken to the
prayers which thy servant shall make), and the prayers of all Israel,
and of every particular Israelite ([Kg1
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#030)): "Hear it in heaven, that is
indeed thy dwelling-place, of which this is but a figure; and, when thou
hearest, forgive the sin that separates between them and God, even the
iniquity of their holy things." a. He supposes that God's people will
ever be a prayer people; he resolves to adhere to that duty himself. b.
He directs them to have an eye, in their prayers, to that place where
God was pleased to manifest his glory as he did not any where else on
earth. None but priests might come into that place; but, when they
worshipped in the courts of the temple, it must be with an eye towards
it, not as the object of their worship (that were idolatry), but as an
instituted medium of their worship, helping the weakness of their faith,
and typifying the mediation of Jesus Christ, who is the true temple, to
whom we must have an eye in every thing wherein we have to do with God.
Those that were at a distance looked towards Jerusalem, for the sake of
the temple, even when it was in ruins, [Dan
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#010). c. He begs that God will hear
the prayers, and forgive the sins, of all that look this way in their
prayers. Not as if he thought all the devout prayers offered up to God
by those who had no knowledge of this house, or regard to it, were
therefore rejected; but he desired that the sensible tokens of the
divine presence with which this house was blessed might always give
sensible encouragement and comfort to believing petitioners.

\[3.\] More particularly, he here puts divers cases in which he supposed
application would be made to God by prayer in or towards this house of
prayer.

First, If God were appealed to by an oath for the determining of any
controverted right between man and man, and the oath were taken before
this altar, he prayed that God would, in some way or other, discover the
truth, and judge between the contending parties, [Kg1
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#031), [Kg1
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#032). He prayed that, in difficult
matters, this throne of grace might be a throne of judgment, from which
God would right the injured that believingly appealed to it, and punish
the injurious that presumptuously appealed to it. It was usual to swear
by the temple and altar ([Mat 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#016),
[Mat 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#018)), which corruption perhaps
took its rise from this supposition of an oath taken, not by the temple
or altar, but at or near them, for the greater solemnity.

Secondly, If the people of Israel were groaning under any national
calamity, or any particular Israelite under any personal calamity, he
desired that the prayers they should make in or towards this house might
be heard and answered.

a\. In case of public judgments, war ([Kg1
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#033)), want of rain ([Kg1
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#035)), famine, or pestilence ([Kg1
8:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#037)), and he ends with an et cetera -
any plague or sickness; for no calamity befals other people which may
not befal God's Israel. Now he supposes, (a.) That the cause of the
judgment would be sin, and nothing else. "If they be smitten before the
enemy, if there be no rain, it is because they have sinned against
thee." It is sin that makes all the mischief. (b.) That the consequence
of the judgment would be that they would cry to God, and make
supplication to him in or towards that house. Those that slighted him
before would solicit him then. Lord, in trouble have they visited thee.
In their afflictions they will seek me early and earnestly. (c.) That
the condition of the removal of the judgment was something more than
barely praying for it. He could not, he would not, ask that their prayer
might be answered unless they did also turn from their sin ([Kg1
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#035)) and turn again to God ([Kg1
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#033)), that is, unless they did truly
repent and reform. On no other terms may we look for salvation in this
world or the other. But, if they did thus qualify themselves for mercy,
he prays, \[a.\] That God would hear from heaven, his holy temple above,
to which they must look, through this temple. \[b.\] That he would
forgive their sin; for then only are judgments removed in mercy when sin
is pardoned. \[c.\] That he would teach them the good way wherein they
should walk, by his Spirit, with his word and prophets; and thus they
might be both profited by their trouble (for blessed is the man whom God
chastens and teaches), and prepared for deliverance, which then comes in
love when it finds us brought back to the good way of God and duty.
\[d.\] That he would then remove the judgment, and redress the
grievance, whatever it might be - not only accept the prayer, but give
in the mercy prayed for.

b\. In case of personal afflictions, [Kg1
8:38-40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#038). "If any man of Israel has an
errand to thee, here let him find thee, here let him find favour with
thee." He does not mention particulars, so numerous, so various, are the
grievances of the children of men. (a.) He supposes that the
complainants themselves would very sensibly feel their own burden, and
would open that case to God which otherwise they kept to themselves and
did not make any man acquainted with: They shall know every man the
plague of his own heart, what it is that pains him, and (as we say)
where the shoe pinches, and shall spread their hands, that is, spread
their case, as Hezekiah spread the letter, in prayer, towards this
house; whether the trouble be of body or mind, they shall represent it
before God. Inward burdens seem especially meant. Sin is the plague of
our own heart; our indwelling corruptions are our spiritual diseases.
Every Israelite indeed endeavours to know these, that he may mortify
them and watch against the risings of them. These he complains of. This
is the burden he groans under: O wretched man that I am! These drive him
to his knees, drive him to the sanctuary. Lamenting these, he spreads
forth his hands in prayer. (b.) He refers all cases of this kind, that
should be brought hither, to God. \[a.\] To his omniscience: "Thou, even
thou only, knowest the hearts of all the children of men, not only the
plagues of their hearts, their several wants and burdens" (these he
knows, but he will know them from us), "but the desire and intent of the
heart, the sincerity or hypocrisy of it. Thou knowest which prayer comes
from the heart, and which from the lips only." The hearts of kings are
not unsearchable to God. \[b.\] To his justice: Give to every man
according to his ways; and he will not fail to do so, by the rules of
grace, not the law, for then we should all be undone. \[c.\] To his
mercy: Hear, and forgive, and do ([Kg1
8:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#039)), that they may fear thee all
their days, [Kg1 8:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#040). This use we
should make of the mercy of God to us in hearing our prayers and
forgiving our sins, we should thereby he engaged to fear him while we
live. Fear the Lord and his goodness. There is forgiveness with him,
that he may be feared.

c\. The case of the stranger that is not an Israelite is next mentioned,
a proselyte that comes to the temple to pray to the God of Israel, being
convinced of the folly and wickedness of worshipping the gods of his
country. (a.) He supposed that there would be many such ([Kg1
8:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#041), [Kg1
8:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#042)), that the fame of God's great
works which he had wrought for Israel, by which he proved himself to be
above all gods, nay, to be God alone, would reach to distant countries:
"Those that live remote shall hear of thy strong hand, and thy
stretched-out arm; and this will bring all thinking considerate people
to pray towards this house, that they may obtain the favour of a God
that is able to do them a real kindness." (b.) He begged that God would
accept and answer the proselyte's prayer ([Kg1
8:43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#043)): Do according to all that the
stranger calleth to thee for. Thus early, thus ancient, were the
indications of favour towards the sinners of the Gentiles: as there was
then one law for the native and for the stranger ([Exo
12:49](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#049)), so there was one gospel for
both. (c.) Herein he aimed at the glory of God and the propagating of
the knowledge of him: "O let the stranger, in a special manner, speed
well in his addresses, that he may carry away with him to his own
country a good report of the God of Israel, that all people may know
thee and fear thee (and, if they know thee aright, they will fear thee)
as do thy people Israel." So far was Solomon from monopolizing the
knowledge and service of God, and wishing to have them confined to
Israel only (which was the envious desire of the Jews in the days of
Christ and his apostles), that he prayed that all people might fear God
as Israel did. Would to God that all the children of men might receive
the adoption, and be made God's children! Father, thus glorify thy name.

d\. The case of an army going forth to battle is next recommended by
Solomon to the divine favour. It is supposed that the army is encamped
at a distance, somewhere a great way off, sent by divine order against
the enemy, [Kg1 8:44](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#044). "When they are
ready to engage, and consider the perils and doubtful issues of battle,
and put up a prayer to God for protection and success, with their eye
towards this city and temple, then hear their prayer, encourage their
hearts, strengthen their hands, cover their heads, and so maintain their
cause and give them victory." Soldiers in the field must not think it
enough that those who tarry at home pray for them, but must pray for
themselves, and they are here encouraged to hope fore a gracious answer.
Praying should always go along with fighting.

e\. The case of poor captives is the last that is here mentioned as a
proper object of divine compassion. (a.) He supposes that Israel will
sin. He knew them, and himself, and the nature of man, too well to think
this a foreign supposition; for there is no man that sinneth not, that
does not enough to justify God in the severest rebukes of his
providence, no man but what is in danger of falling into gross sin, and
will if God leave him to himself. (b.) He supposes, what may well be
expected, that, if Israel revolt from God, God will be angry with them,
and deliver them into the hand of their enemies, to be carried captive
into a strange country, [Kg1 8:46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#046).
(c.) He then supposes that they will bethink themselves, will consider
their ways (for afflictions put men upon consideration), and, when once
they are brought to consider, they will repent and pray, will confess
their sins, and humble themselves, saying, We have sinned and have done
perversely ([Kg1 8:47](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#047)), and in the
land of their enemies will return to God, whom they had forsaken in
their own land. (d.) He supposes that in their prayers they will look
towards their own land, the holy land, Jerusalem, the holy city, and the
temple, the holy house, and directs them so to do ([Kg1
8:48](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#048)), for his sake who gave them that
land, chose that city, and to whose honour that house was built. (e.) He
prays that then God would hear their prayers, forgive their sins, plead
their cause, and incline their enemies to have compassion on them, [Kg1
8:49](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#049). 50. God has all hearts in his
hand, and can, when he pleases, turn the strongest stream the contrary
way, and make those to pity his people who have been their most cruel
persecutors. See this prayer answered, [Psa
106:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#046). He made them to be pitied of
those that carried them captive, which, if it did not release them, yet
eased their captivity. (f.) He pleads their relation to God, and his
interest in them: "They are thy people, whom thou hast taken into thy
covenant and under thy care and conduct, thy inheritance, from which,
more than from any other nation, thy rent and tribute of glory issue and
arise ([Kg1 8:51](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#051)), separated from
among all people to be so and by distinguishing favours appropriated to
thee," [Kg1 8:53](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#053).

Lastly, After all these particulars, he concludes with this general
request, that God would hearken to all his praying people in all that
they call unto him for, [Kg1 8:52](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#052). No
place now, under the gospel, can be imagined to add any acceptableness
to the prayers made in or towards it, as the temple then did. That was a
shadow: the substance is Christ; whatever we ask in his name, it shall
be given us.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 8:54](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">kg1 8:54</span></span>

Solomon, after his sermon in Ecclesiastes, gives us the conclusion of
the whole matter; so he does here, after this long prayer; it is called
his blessing the people, [Kg1 8:55](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#055). He
pronounced it standing, that he might be the better heard, and because
he blessed as one having authority. Never were words more fitly spoken,
nor more pertinently. Never was congregation dismissed with that which
was more likely to affect them and abide with them.

I. He gives God the glory of the great and kind things he had done for
Israel, [Kg1 8:56](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#056). He stood up to
bless the congregation ([Kg1 8:55](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#055)),
but began with blessing God; for we must in every thing give thanks. Do
we expect God should do well for us and ours? let us take all occasion
to speak well of him and his. He blesses God who has given, he does not
say wealth, and honour, and power, and victory, to Israel, but rest, as
if that were a blessing more valuable than any of those. Let not those
who have rest under-value that blessing, though they want some others.
He compares the blessings God had bestowed upon them with the promises
he had given them, that God might have the honour of his faithfulness
and the truth of that word of his which he has magnified above all his
name. 1. He refers to the promises given by the hand of Moses, as he did
([Kg1 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#015), [Kg1
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#024)) to those which were made to
David. There were promises given by Moses, as well as precepts. It was
long ere God gave Israel the promised rest, but they had it at last,
after many trials. The day will come when God's spiritual Israel will
rest from all their labours. 2. He does, as it were, write a receipt in
full on the back of these bonds: There has not failed one word of all
his good promises. This discharge he gives in the name of all Israel, to
the everlasting honour of the divine faithfulness, and the everlasting
encouragement of all those that build upon the divine promises.

II\. He blesses himself and the congregation, expressing his earnest
desire and hope of these four things: - 1. The presence of God with
them, which is all in all to the happiness of a church and nation and of
every particular person. This great congregation was now shortly to be
scattered, and it was not likely that they would ever be all together
again in this world. Solomon therefore dismisses them with this
blessing: "The Lord be present with us, and that will be comfort enough
when we are absent from each other. The Lord our God be with us, as he
was with our fathers ([Kg1 8:57](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#057)); let
him not leave us, let him be to us to day, and to ours for ever, what he
was to those that went before us." 2. The power of his grace upon them:
"Let him be with us, and continue with us, not that he may enlarge our
coasts and increase our wealth, but that he may incline our hearts to
himself, to walk in all his ways and to keep his commandments," [Kg1
8:58](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#058). Spiritual blessings are the best
blessings, with which we should covet earnestly to be blessed. Our
hearts are naturally averse to our duty, and apt to decline from God; it
is his grace that inclines them, grace that must be obtained by prayer.
3. An answer to the prayer he had now made: "Let these my words be nigh
unto the Lord our God day and night, [Kg1
8:59](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#059). Let a gracious return be made to
every prayer that shall be made here, and that will be a continual
answer to this prayer." What Solomon asks here for his prayer is still
granted in the intercession of Christ, of which his supplication was a
type; that powerful prevailing intercession is before the Lord our God
day and night, for our great Advocate attends continually to this very
thing, and we may depend upon him to maintain our cause (against the
adversary that accuses us day and night, [Rev
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010)) and the common cause of his
people Israel, at all times, upon all occasions, as the matter shall
require, so as to speak for us the word of the day in its day, as the
original here reads it, from which we shall receive grace sufficient,
suitable, and seasonable, in every time of need. 4. The glorifying of
God in the enlargement of his kingdom among men. Let Israel be thus
blessed, thus favoured; not that all people may become tributaries to us
(Solomon sees his kingdom as great as he desires), but that all people
may know that the Lord is God, and he only, and may come and worship
him, [Kg1 8:60](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#060). With this Solomon's
prayers, like the prayers of his father David, the son of Jesse, are
ended ([Psa 72:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#019), [Psa
72:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#020)): Let the whole earth be filled
with his glory. We cannot close our prayers with a better summary than
this, Father, glorify thy name.

III\. He solemnly charges his people to continue and persevere in their
duty to God. Having spoken to God for them, he here speaks from God to
them, and those only would fare the better for his prayers that were
made better by his preaching. His admonition, at parting, is, "Let your
heart be perfect with the Lord our God, [Kg1
8:61](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#061). Let your obedience be universal,
without dividing - upright, without dissembling - constant, without
declining;" this is evangelical perfection.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 8:62](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#062)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_062">kg1 8:62</span></span>

We read before that Judah and Israel were eating and drinking, and very
cheerful under their own vines and fig-trees; here we have them so in
God's courts. Now they found Solomon's words true concerning Wisdom's
ways, that they are ways of pleasantness.

I. They had abundant joy and satisfaction while they attended at God's
house, for there, 1. Solomon offered a great sacrifice, 22,000 oxen and
120,000 sheep, enough to have drained the country of cattle if it had
not been a very fruitful land. The heathen thought themselves very
generous when they offered sacrifices by hundreds (hecatombs they called
them), but Solomon out-did them: he offered them by thousands. When
Moses dedicated his altar, the peace-offerings were twenty-four
bullocks, and of rams, goats, and lambs, 180 ([Num
7:88](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#088)); then the people were poor, but
now that they had increased in wealth more was expected from them. Where
God sows plentifully he must reap accordingly. All these sacrifices
could not be offered in one day, but in the several days of the feast.
Thirty oxen a day served Solomon's table, but thousands shall go to
God's altar. Few are thus minded, to spend more on their souls than on
their bodies. The flesh of the peace-offerings, which belonged to the
offerer, it is likely, Solomon treated the people with. Christ fed those
who attended him. The brazen altar was not large enough to receive all
these sacrifices, so that, to serve the present occasion, they were
forced to offer many of them in the middle of the court, ([Kg1
8:64](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#064)), some think on altars, altars of
earth or stone, erected for the purpose and taken down when the
solemnity was over, others think on the bare ground. Those that will be
generous in serving God need not stint themselves for want of room and
occasion to be so. 2. He kept a feast, the feast of tabernacles, as it
should seem, after the feast of dedication, and both together lasted
fourteen days ([Kg1 8:65](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#065)), yet they
said not, Behold, what a weariness is this!

II\. They carried this joy and satisfaction with them to their own
houses. When they were dismissed they blessed the king ([Kg1
8:66](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#066)), applauded him, admired him, and
returned him the thanks of the congregation, and then went to their
tents joyful and glad of heart, all easy and pleased. God's goodness was
the matter of their joy, so it should be of ours at all times. They
rejoiced in God's blessing both on the royal family and on the kingdom;
thus should we go home rejoicing from holy ordinances, and go on our way
rejoicing for God's goodness to our Lord Jesus (of whom David his
servant was a type, in the advancement and establishment of his throne,
pursuant to the covenant of redemption), and to all believers, his
spiritual Israel, in their sanctification and consolation, pursuant to
the covenant of grace. If we rejoice not herein always it is our own
fault.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 9](kg1009)

</div>
