<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1017)  [Next](kg1019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 18:0</span></span>

We left the prophet Elijah wrapt up in obscurity. It does not appear
that either the increase of the provision or the raising of the child
had caused him to be taken notice of at Zarephath, for then Ahab would
have discovered him; he would rather do good than be known to do it. But
in this chapter his appearance was as public as before his retirement
was close; the days appointed for his concealment (which was part of the
judgment upon Israel) being finished, he is not commanded to show
himself to Ahab, and to expect rain upon the earth ([Kg1
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001)). Pursuant to this order we have
here, I. His interview with Obadiah, one of Ahab's servants, by whom he
sends notice to Ahab of his coming ([Kg1
18:2-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#002)). II. His interview with Ahab
himself ([Kg1 18:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#017)). III. His
interview with all Israel upon Mount Carmel, in order to a public trial
of titles between the Lord and Baal; a most distinguished solemnity it
was, in which, 1. Baal and his prophets were confounded. 2. God and
Elijah were honoured (v. 21-39). IV. The execution he did upon the
prophets of Baal ([Kg1 18:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#040)). V. The
return of the mercy of rain, at the word of Elijah ([Kg1
18:41-46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#041)). It is a chapter in which
are many things very observable.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 18:1</span></span>

In these verses we find,

I. The sad state of Israel at this time, upon two accounts: -

1\. Jezebel cut off the prophets of the Lord ([Kg1
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#004)), slew them, [Kg1
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#013). Being an idolater, she was a
persecutor, and made Ahab one. Even in those bad times, when the calves
were worshipped and the temple at Jerusalem deserted, yet there were
some good people that feared God and served him, and some good prophets
that instructed them in the knowledge of him and assisted them in their
devotions. The priests and the Levites had all gone to Judah and
Jerusalem ([Ch2 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#013), [Ch2
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#014)), but, instead of them, God
raised up these prophets, who read and expounded the law in private
meetings, or in the families that retained their integrity, for we read
not of any synagogues at this time; they had not the spirit of prophecy
as Elijah, nor did they offer sacrifice, or burn incense, but taught
people to live well, and keep close to the God of Israel. These Jezebel
aimed to extirpate, and put many of them to death, which was as much a
public calamity as a public iniquity, and threatened the utter ruin of
religion's poor remains in Israel. Those few that escaped the sword were
forced to abscond, and hide themselves in caves, where they were buried
alive and cut off, though not from life, yet from usefulness, which is
the end and comfort of life; and, when the prophets were persecuted and
driven into corners, no doubt their friends, those few good people that
were in the land, were treated in like manner. Yet, bad as things were,

(1.) There was one very good man, who was a great man at court, Obadiah,
who answered his name - a servant of the Lord, one who feared God and
was faithful to him, and yet was steward of the household to Ahab.
Observe his character: He feared the Lord greatly ([Kg1
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#003)), was not only a good man, but
zealously and eminently good; his great place put a lustre upon his
goodness, and gave him great opportunities of doing good; and he feared
the Lord from his youth ([Kg1 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#012)),
he began betimes to be religious and had continued long. Note, Early
piety, it is to be hoped, will be eminent piety; those that are good
betimes are likely to be very good; he that feared God from his youth
came to fear him greatly. He that will thrive must rise betimes. But it
is strange to find such an eminently good man governor of Ahab's house,
an office of great honour, power, and trust. \[1.\] It was strange that
so wicked a man as Ahab would prefer him to it and continue him in it;
certainly it was because he was a man of celebrated honesty, industry,
and ingenuity, and one in whom he could repose a confidence, whose eyes
he could trust as much as his own, as appears here, [Kg1
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#005). Joseph and Daniel were preferred
because there were none so fit as they for the places they were
preferred to. Note, Those who profess religion should study to recommend
themselves to the esteem even of those that are without by their
integrity, fidelity, and application to business. \[2.\] It was strange
that so good a man as Obadiah would accept of preferment in a court so
addicted to idolatry and all manner of wickedness. We may be sure it was
not made necessary to qualify him for preferment that he should be of
the king's religion, that he should conform to the statues of Omri, or
the law of the house of Ahab. Obadiah would not have accepted the place
if he could not have had it without bowing the knee to Baal, nor was
Ahab so impolitic as to exclude those from offices that were fit to
serve him, merely because they would not join with him in his devotions.
That man that is true to his God will be faithful to his prince. Obadiah
therefore could with a good conscience enjoy the place, and therefore
would not decline it, nor give it up, though he foresaw he could not do
the good he desired to do in it. Those that fear God need not go out of
the world, bad as it is. \[3.\] It was strange that either he did not
reform Ahab or Ahab corrupt him; but it seems they were both fixed; he
that was filthy would be filthy still, and he that was holy would be
holy still. Those fear God greatly that keep up the fear of him in bad
times and places; thus Obadiah did. God has his remnant among all sorts,
high and low; there were saints in Nero's household, and in Ahab's.

(2.) This great good man used his power for the protection of God's
prophets. He hid 100 of them in two caves, when the persecution was hot,
and fed them with bread and water, [Kg1
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#004). He did not think it enough to
fear God himself, but, having wealth and power wherewith to do it, he
thought himself obliged to assist and countenance others that feared
God; nor did he think his being kind to them would excuse him from being
good himself, but he did both, he both feared God greatly himself and
patronised those that feared him likewise. See how wonderfully God
raises up friends for his ministers and people, for their shelter in
difficult times, even where one would least expect them. Bread and water
were now scarce commodities, yet Obadiah will find a competence of both
for God's prophets, to keep them alive for service hereafter, though now
they were laid aside.

2\. When Jezebel cut off God's prophets God cut off the necessary
provisions by the extremity of the drought. Perhaps Jezebel persecuted
God's prophets under pretence that they were the cause of the judgment,
because Elijah had foretold it. Christianos ad leones - Away with
Christians to the lions. But God made them know the contrary, for the
famine continued till Baal's prophets were sacrificed, and so great a
scarcity of water there was that the king himself and Obadiah went in
person throughout the land to seek for grass for the cattle, [Kg1
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#005), [Kg1
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#006). Providence ordered it so, that
Ahab might, with his own eyes, see how bad the consequences of this
judgment were, that so he might be the better inclined to hearken to
Elijah, who would direct him into the only way to put an end to it.
Ahab's care was not to lose all the beasts, many being already lost; but
he took no care about his soul, not to lose that; he took a deal of
pains to seek grass, but none to seek the favour of God, fencing against
the effect, but not enquiring how to remove the cause. The land of Judah
lay close to the land of Israel, yet we find no complaint there of the
want of rain; for Judah yet ruled with God, and was faithful with the
saints and prophets ([Hos 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#012)), by
which distinction Israel might plainly have seen the ground of God's
controversy, when God caused it to rain upon one city and not upon
another ([Amo 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#007), [Amo
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#008)); but they blinded their eyes, and
hardened their hearts, and would not see.

II\. The steps taken towards redressing the grievance, by Elijah's
appearing again upon the stage, to act as a Tishbite, a converter or
reformer of Israel, for so (some think) that title of his signifies.
Turn them again to the Lord God of hosts, from whom they have revolted,
and all will be well quickly; this must be Elijah's doing. See [Luk
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#016), [Luk
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017).

1\. Ahab had made diligent search for him ([Kg1
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#010)), had offered rewards to any one
that would discover him, sent spies into every tribe and lordship of his
own dominions, as some understand it, or, as others, into all the
neighbouring nations and kingdoms that were in alliance with him; and,
when they denied that they knew any thing of him, he would not believe
them unless they swore it, and, as should seem, promised likewise upon
oath that, if ever they found him among them, they would discover him
and deliver him up. It should seem, he made this diligent search for
him, not so much that he might punish him for what he had done in
denouncing the judgment as that he might oblige him to undo it again, by
recalling the sentence, because he had said it should be according to
his word, having such an opinion of him as men foolishly conceive of
witches (that, if they can but compel them to bless that which they have
bewitched, it will be well again), or such as the king of Moab had of
Balaam. I incline to this because we find, when they came together,
Elijah, knowing what Ahab wanted him for, appointed him to meet him on
Mount Carmel, and Ahab complied with the appointment, though Elijah took
such a way to revoke the sentence and bless the land as perhaps he
little thought of.

2\. God, at length, ordered Elijah to present himself to Ahab, because
the time had now come when he would send rain upon the earth ([Kg1
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001)), or rather upon the land. Above
two years he had lain hid with the widow at Zarephath, after he had been
concealed one year by the brook Cherith; so that the third year of his
sojourning there, here spoken of ([Kg1
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001)), was the fourth of the famine,
which lasted in all three years and six months, as we find, [Luk
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#025); [Jam
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017). Such was Elijah's zeal, no
doubt, against the idolatry of Baal, and such his compassion to his
people, that he thought it long to be thus confined to a corner; yet he
appeared not till God bade him: "Go and show thyself to Ahab, for now
thy hour has come, even the time to favour Israel." Note, It bodes well
to any people when God calls his ministers out of their corners, and
bids them show themselves - a sign that he will give rain on the earth;
at least we may the better be content with the bread of affliction while
our eyes see our teachers, [Isa 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#020),
[Isa 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#021).

3\. Elijah first surrendered, or rather discovered, himself to Obadiah.
He knew, by the Spirit, where to meet him, and we are here told what
passed between them.

(1.) Obadiah saluted him with great respect, fell on his face, and
humbly asked, Art thou that my lord Elijah? [Kg1
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#007). As he had shown the tenderness
of a father to the sons of the prophets, so he showed the reverence of a
son to this father of the prophets; and by this made it appear that he
did indeed fear God greatly, that he did honour to one that was his
extraordinary ambassador and had a great interest in heaven.

(2.) Elijah, in answer to him, \[1.\] Transfers the title of honour he
gave him to Ahab: "Call him thy lord, not me;" that is a fitter title
for a prince than for a prophet, who seeks not honour from men. Prophets
should be called seers, and shepherds, and watchmen, and ministers,
rather than lords, as those that mind duty more than dominion. \[2.\] He
bids Obadiah go and tell the king that he is there to speak with him:
Tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah is forth-coming, [Kg1
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#008). He would have the king know
before, that it might not be a surprise to him and that he might be sure
it was the prophet's own act to present himself to him.

(3.) Obadiah begs to be excused from carrying this message to Ahab, for
it might prove as much as his life was worth. \[1.\] He tells Elijah
what great search Ahab had made for him and how much his heart was upon
it to find him out, [Oba 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010). \[2.\]
He takes it for granted that Elijah would again withdraw ([Oba
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012)): The Spirit of the Lord shall
carry thee (as it is likely he had done sometimes, when Ahab thought he
had been sure of him) whither I know not. See [Kg2
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#016). He thought Elijah was not in
good earnest when he bade him tell Ahab where he was, but intended only
to expose the impotency of his malice; for he knew Ahab was not worthy
to receive any kindness from the prophet and it was not fit that the
prophet should receive any mischief from him. \[3.\] He is sure Ahab
would be so enraged at the disappointment that he would put him to death
for making a fool of him, or for not laying hands on Elijah himself,
when he had him in his reach, [Kg1
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#012). Tyrants and persecutors, in
their passion, are often unreasonably outrageous, even towards their
friends and confidants. \[4.\] He pleads that he did not deserve to be
thus exposed, and put in peril of his life: What have I said amiss? [Kg1
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#009). Nay ([Kg1
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#013)), Was it not told my lord how I
hid the prophets? He mentions this, not in pride or ostentation, but to
convince Elijah that though he was Ahab's servant he was not in his
interest, and therefore deserved not to be bantered as one of the tools
of his persecution. He that had protected so many prophets, he hoped,
should not have his own life hazarded by so great a prophet.

(4.) Elijah satisfied him that he might with safety deliver this message
to Ahab, by assuring him, with an oath, that he would, this very day,
present himself to Ahab, [Kg1 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#015).
Let but Obadiah know that he spoke seriously and really intended it, and
he will make no scruple to carry the message to Ahab. Elijah swears by
the Lord of hosts, who has all power in his hands, and is therefore able
to protect his servants against all the powers of hell and earth.

(5.) Notice is hereby soon brought to Ahab that Elijah had sent him a
challenge to meet him immediately at such a place, and Ahab accepts the
challenge: He went to meet Elijah, [Kg1
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#016). We may suppose it was a great
surprise to Ahab to hear that Elijah, whom he had so long sought and not
found, was now found without seeking. He went in quest of grass, and
found him from whose word, at God's mouth, he must expect rain. Yet his
guilty conscience gave him little reason to hope for it, but, rather, to
fear some other more dreadful judgment. Had he, by his spies, surprised
Elijah, he would have triumphed over him; but, now that he was thus
surprised by him, we may suppose he even trembled to look him in the
face, hated him, and yet feared him, as Herod did John.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg1 18:17</span></span>

We have here the meeting between Ahab and Elijah, as bad a king as ever
the world was plagued with and as good a prophet as ever the church was
blessed with. 1. Ahab, like himself, basely accused Elijah. He durst not
strike him, remembering that Jeroboam's hand withered when it was
stretched out against a prophet, but gave him bad language, which was no
less an affront to him that sent him. It was a very coarse compliment
with which he accosted him at the first word: Art thou he that troubleth
Israel? [Kg1 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#017). How unlike was
this to that with which his servant Obadiah saluted him ([Kg1
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#007)): Art thou that my lord Elijah?
Obadiah feared God greatly; Ahab had sold himself to work wickedness;
and both discovered their character by the manner of their address to
the prophet. One may guess how people stand affected to God by observing
how they stand affected to his people and ministers. Elijah now came to
bring blessings to Israel, tidings of the return of the rain; yet he was
thus affronted. Had it been true that he was the troubler of Israel,
Ahab, as king, would have been bound to animadvert upon him. There are
those who trouble Israel by their wickedness, whom the conservators of
the public peace are concerned to enquire after. But it was utterly
false concerning Elijah; so far was he from being an enemy to Israel's
welfare that he as the stay of it, the chariots and horsemen of Israel.
Note, It has been the lot of the best and most useful men to be called
and counted the troublers of the land, and to be run down as public
grievances. Even Christ and his apostles were thus misrepresented, [Act
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#006). 2. Elijah, like himself, boldly
returned the charge upon the king, and proved it upon him, that he was
the troubler of Israel, [Kg1 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#018).
Elijah is not the Achan: "I have not troubled Israel, have neither done
them any wrong nor designed them any hurt." Those that procure God's
judgments do the mischief, not he that merely foretels them and gives
warning of them, that the nation may repent and prevent them. I would
have healed Israel, but they would not be healed. Ahab is the Achan, the
troubler, who follows Baalim, those accursed things. Nothing creates
more trouble to a land than the impiety and profaneness of princes and
their families. 3. As one having authority immediately from the King of
kings, he ordered a convention of the states to be forthwith summoned to
meet at Mount Carmel, where there had been an altar built to God, [Kg1
18:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#030). Probably on that mountain they
had an eminent high place, where formerly the pure worship of God had
been kept up as well as it could be any where but at Jerusalem. Thither
all Israel must come, to give Elijah the meeting; and the prophets of
Baal who were dispersed all the country over, with those of the groves
who were Jezebel's domestic chaplains, must there make their personal
appearance. 4. Ahab issued out writs accordingly, for the convening of
this great assembly ([Kg1 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#020)),
either because he feared Elijah and durst not oppose him (Saul stood in
awe of Samuel more than of God), or because he hoped Elijah would bless
the land, and speak the word that they might have rain, and upon those
terms they would be all at his beck. Those that slighted and hated his
counsels would gladly be beholden to him for his prayers. Now God made
those who said they were Jews and were not, but were of the synagogue of
Satan, to come, and, in effect, to worship at his feet, and to know that
God had loved him, [Rev 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#009).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg1 18:21</span></span>

Ahab and the people expected that Elijah would, in this solemn assembly,
bless the land, and pray for rain; but he had other work to do first.
The people must be brought to repent and reform, and then they may look
for the removal of the judgment, but not till then. This is the right
method. God will first prepare our heart, and then cause his ear to
hear, will first turn us to him, and then turn to us, [Psa
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#017); [Psa
80:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#003). Deserters must not look for
God's favour till they return to their allegiance. Elijah might have
looked for rain seventy times seven times, and not have seen it, if he
had not thus begun his work at the right end. Three years and a half's
famine would not bring them back to God. Elijah would endeavour to
convince their judgments, and no doubt it was by special warrant and
direction from heaven that he put the controversy between God and Baal
upon a public trial. It was great condescension in God that he would
suffer so plain a case to be disputed, and would permit Baal to be a
competitor with him; but thus God would have every mouth to be stopped
and all flesh to become silent before him. God's cause is so
incontestably just that it needs not fear to have the evidences of its
equity searched into and weighed.

I. Elijah reproved the people for mixing the worship of God and the
worship of Baal together. Not only some Israelites worshipped God and
others Baal, but the same Israelites sometimes worshipped one and
sometimes the other. This he calls ([Kg1
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#021)) halting between two opinions,
or thoughts. They worshipped God to please the prophets, but worshipped
Baal to please Jezebel and curry favour at court. They thought to trim
the matter, and play on both sides, as the Samaritans, [Kg2
17:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#033). Now Elijah shows them the
absurdity of this. He does not insist upon their relation to Jehovah -
"Is he not yours, and the God of your fathers, while Baal is the god of
the Sidonians? And will a nation change their god?" [Jer
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#011). No, he waives the prescription,
and enters upon the merits of the cause: - "There can be but one God,
but one infinite and but one supreme: there needs but one God, one
omnipotent, one all-sufficient. What occasion for addition to that which
is perfect? Now if, upon trial, it appears that Baal is that one
infinite omnipotent Being, that one supreme Lord and all-sufficient
benefactor, you ought to renounce Jehovah and cleave to Baal only: but,
if Jehovah be that one God, Baal is a cheat, and you must have no more
to do with him." Note, 1. It is a very bad thing to halt between God and
Baal. "In reconcilable differences (says bishop Hall) nothing more safe
than indifferency both of practice and opinion; but, in cases of such
necessary hostility as betwixt God and Baal, he that is not with God is
against him." Compare [Mar 9:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#038), [Mar
9:39](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#039), with [Mat
21:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#030). The service of God and the
service of sin, the dominion of Christ and the dominion of our lusts,
these are the two thoughts which it is dangerous halting between. Those
halt between them that are unresolved under their convictions, unstable
and unsteady in their purposes, promise fair, but do not perform, begin
well, but do not hold on, that are inconsistent with themselves, or
indifferent and lukewarm in that which is good. Their heart is divided
([Hos 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#002)), whereas God will have all
or none. 2. We are fairly put to our choice whom we will serve, [Jos
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#015). If we can find one that has
more right to us, or will be a better master to us, than God, we may
take him at our peril. God demands no more from us than he can make out
a title to. To this fair proposal of the case, which Elijah here makes,
the people knew not what to say: They answered him not a word. They
could say nothing to justify themselves, and they would say nothing to
condemn themselves, but, as people confounded, let him say what he
would.

II\. He proposed to bring the matter to a fair trial; and it was so much
the fairer because Baal had all the external advantages on his side. The
king and court were all for Baal; so was the body of the people. The
managers of Baal's cause were 450 men, fat and well fed ([Kg1
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#022)), besides 400 more, their
supporters or seconds, [Kg1 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#019). The
manager of God's cause was but one man, lately a poor exile, hardly kept
from starving; so that God's cause has nothing to support it but its own
right. However, it is put to this experiment, "Let each side prepare a
sacrifice, and pray to its God, and the God that answereth by fire, let
him be God; if neither shall thus answer, let the people turn Atheists;
if both, let them continue to halt between two." Elijah, doubtless, had
a special commission from God to put it to this test, otherwise he would
have tempted God and affronted religion; but the case was extraordinary,
and the judgment upon it would be of use, not only then, but in all
ages. It is an instance of the courage of Elijah that he durst stand
alone in the cause of God against such powers and numbers; and the issue
encourages all God's witnesses and advocates never to fear the face of
man. Elijah does not say, "The God that answers by water" (though that
was the thing the country needed), but "that answers by fire, let him be
God;" because the atonement was to be made by sacrifice, before the
judgment could be removed in mercy. The God therefore that has power to
pardon sin, and to signify it by consuming the sin-offering, must needs
be the God that can relieve us against the calamity. He that can give
fire can give rain; see [Mat 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002), [Mat
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#006).

III\. The people join issue with him: It is well spoken, [Kg1
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#024). They allow the proposal to be
fair and unexceptionable "God has often answered by fire; if Baal cannot
do so, let him be cast out for a usurper." They were very desirous to
see the experiment tried, and seemed resolved to abide by the issue,
whatever it should be. Those that were firm for God doubted not but it
would end to his honour; those that were indifferent were willing to be
determined; and Ahab and the prophets of Baal durst not oppose for fear
of the people, and hoped that either they could obtain fire from heaven
(though they never had yet), and the rather because, as some think, they
worshipped the sun in Baal, or that Elijah could not, because not at the
temple, where God was wont thus to manifest his glory. If, in this
trial, they could but bring it to a drawn battle, their other advantages
would give them the victory. Let it go on therefore to a trial.

IV\. The prophets of Baal try first, but in vain, with their god. They
covet the precedency, not only for the honour of it, but that, if they
can but in the least seem to gain their point, Elijah may not be
admitted to make the trial. Elijah allows it to them ([Kg1
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#025)), gives them the lead for their
greater confusion; only, knowing that the working of Satan is with lying
wonders, he takes care to prevent a fraud: Be sure to put no fire under.
Now in their experiment observe,

I. How importunate and noisy the prophets of Baal were in their
applications to him. They got their sacrifices ready; and we may well
imagine what a noise 450 men made, when they cried as one man, and with
all their might, O Baal! hear us, O Baal! answer us; as it is in the
margin: and this for some hours together, longer than Diana's
worshippers made their cry, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, [Act
19:34](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#034). How senseless, how brutish,
were they in their addresses to Baal! (1.) Like fools, they leaped upon
the altar, as if they would themselves become sacrifices with their
bullock; or thus they expressed their great earnestness of mind. They
leaped up and down, or danced about the altar (so some): they hoped, by
their dancing, to please their deity, as Herodias did Herod, and so to
obtain their request. (2.) Like madmen they cut themselves in pieces
with knives and lancets ([Kg1 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#028))
for vexation that they were not answered, or in a sort of prophetic
fury, hoping to obtain the favour of their god by offering to him their
own blood, when they could not obtain it with the blood of their
bullock. God never required his worshippers thus to honour him; but the
service of the devil, though in some instances it pleases and pampers
the body, yet in other things it is really cruel to it, as in envy and
drunkenness. It seems, this was the manner of the worshippers of Baal.
God expressly forbade his worshippers to cut themselves, [Deu
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001). He insists upon it that we
mortify our lusts and corruptions; but corporeal penances and
severities, such as the Papists use, which have no tendency to that, are
no pleasure to him. Who has required these things at your hands?

2\. How sharp Elijah was upon them, [Kg1
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#027). He stood by them, and patiently
heard them for so many hours praying to an idol, yet with secret
indignation and disdain; and at noon, when the sun was at the hottest,
and they too expecting fire (then if ever), he upbraided them with their
folly; and notwithstanding the gravity of his office, and the
seriousness of the work he had before him, bantered them: "Cry aloud,
for he is a god, a goodly god that cannot be made to hear without all
this clamour. Surely you think he is talking or meditating (as the word
is) or he is pursuing some deep thoughts, (in a brown study, as we say),
thinking of somewhat else and not minding his own matter, when not your
credit only, but all his honour lies at stake, and his interest in
Israel. His new conquest will be lost if he do not look about him
quickly." Note, The worship of idols is a most ridiculous thing, and it
is but justice to represent it so and expose it to scorn. This will, by
no means, justify those who ridicule the worshippers of God in Christ
because the worship is not performed just in their way. Baal's prophets
were so far from being convinced and put to shame by the just reproach
Elijah cast upon them that it made them the more violent and led them to
act more ridiculously. A deceived heart had turned them aside, they
could not deliver their souls by saying, Is there not a lie in our right
hand?

3\. How deaf Baal was to them. Elijah did not interrupt them, but let
them go on till they were tired, and quite despaired of success, which
was not till the time of the evening sacrifice, [Kg1
18:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#029). During all that time some of
them prayed, while others of them prophesied, sang hymns, perhaps to the
praise of Baal, or rather encouraged those that were praying to proceed,
telling them that Baal would answer them at last; but there was no
answer, nor any that regarded. Idols could do neither good nor evil. The
prince of the power of the air, if God has permitted him, could have
caused fire to come down from heaven on this occasion, and gladly would
have done it for the support of his Baal. We find that the beast which
deceived the world does it. He maketh fire come down from heaven in the
sight of men and so deceiveth them, [Rev
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#013), [Rev
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#014). But God would not suffer the
devil to do it now, because the trial of his title was put on that issue
by consent of parties.

V. Elijah soon obtains from his God an answer by fire. The Baalites are
forced to give up their cause, and now it is Elijah's turn to produce
his. Let us see if he speed better.

1\. He fitted up an altar. He would not make use of theirs, which had
been polluted with their prayers to Baal, but, finding the ruins of an
altar there, which had formerly been used in the service of the Lord, he
chose to repair that ([Kg1 18:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#030)), to
intimate to them that he was not about to introduce any new religion,
but to revive the faith and worship of their fathers' God, and reduce
them to their first love, their first works. He could not bring them to
the altar at Jerusalem unless he could unite the two kingdoms again
(which, for correction to both, God designed should not now be done),
therefore, by his prophetic authority, he builds an altar on Mount
Carmel, and so owns that which had formerly been built there. When we
cannot carry a reformation so far as we would we must do what we can,
and rather comply with some corruptions than not do our utmost towards
the extirpation of Baal. He repaired this altar with twelve stones,
according to the number of the twelve tribes, [Kg1
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#031). Though ten of the tribes had
revolted to Baal, he would look upon them as belonging to God still, by
virtue of the ancient covenant with their fathers: and, though those ten
were unhappily divided from the other two in civil interest, yet in the
worship of the God of Israel they had communion with each other, and
they twelve were one. Mention is made of God's calling their father
Jacob by the name of Israel, a prince with God ([Kg1
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#031)), to shame his degenerate seed,
who worshipped a god which they saw could not hear nor answer them, and
to encourage the prophet who was now to wrestle with God as Jacob did;
he also shall be a prince with God. [Psa
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#006), Thy face, O Jacob! [Hos
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#004). There he spoke with us.

2\. Having built his altar in the name of the Lord ([Kg1
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#032)), by direction from him and with
an eye to him, and not for his own honour, he prepared his sacrifice,
[Kg1 18:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#033). Behold the bullock and the
wood; but where is the fire? [Gen
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#007), [Gen
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#008). God will provide himself fire.
If we, in sincerity, offer our hearts to God, he will, by his grace,
kindle a holy fire in them. Elijah was no priest, nor were his
attendants Levites. Carmel had neither tabernacle nor temple; it was a
great way distant from the ark of the testimony and the place God had
chosen; this was not the altar that sanctified the gift; yet never was
any sacrifice more acceptable to God than this. The particular Levitical
institutions were so often dispensed with (as in the time of the Judges,
Samuel's time, and now) that one would be tempted to think they were
more designed for types to be fulfilled in the evangelical anti-types
than for laws to be fulfilled in the strict observance of them. Their
perishing thus is the using, as the apostle speaks of them ([Col
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#022)), was to intimate the utter
abolition of them after a little while, [Heb
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#013).

3\. He ordered abundance of water to be poured upon his altar, which he
had prepared a trench for the reception of ([Kg1
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#032)), and, some think, made the
altar hollow. Twelve barrels of water (probably sea-water, for the sea
was near, and so much fresh water in this time of drought was too
precious for him to be so prodigal of it), thrice four, he poured upon
his sacrifice, to prevent the suspicion of any fire under (for, if there
had been any, this would have put it out), and to make the expected
miracle the more illustrious.

4\. He then solemnly addressed himself to God by prayer before his
altar, humbly beseeching him to turn to ashes his burnt-offering (as the
phrase is, [Psa 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#003)), and to testify
his acceptance of it. His prayer was not long, for he used no vain
repetitions, nor thought he should be heard for his much speaking; but
it was very grave and composed, and showed his mind to be calm and
sedate, and far from the heats and disorders that Baal's prophets were
in, [Kg1 18:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#036), [Kg1
18:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#037). Though he was not at the place
appointed, he chose the appointed time of the offering of the evening
sacrifice, thereby to testify his communion with the altar at Jerusalem.
Though he expected an answer by fire, yet he came near to the altar with
boldness, and feared not that fire. He addressed himself to God as the
God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, acting faith on God's ancient
covenant, and reminding people too (for prayer may prevail) of their
relation both to God and to the patriarchs. Two things he pleads here: -
(1.) The glory of God: "Lord, hear me, and answer me, that it may be
known (for it is now by the most denied or forgotten) that thou art God
in Israel, to whom alone the homage and devotion of Israel are due, and
that I am thy servant, and do all that I have done, am doing, and shall
do, as thy agent, at thy word, and not to gratify any humour or passion
of my own. Thou employest me; Lord, make it appear that thou dost so;"
see [Num 16:28](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#028), [Num
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#029). Elijah sought not his own glory
but in subserviency to God's, and for his own necessary vindication.
(2.) The edification of the people: "That they may know that thou art
the Lord, and may experience thy grace, turning their heart, by this
miracle, as a means, back again to thee, in order to thy return in a way
of mercy to them."

5\. God immediately answered him by fire, [Kg1
18:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#038). Elijah's God was neither
talking nor pursuing, needed not to be either awakened or quickened;
while he was yet speaking, the fire of the Lord fell, and not only, as
at other times ([Lev 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#024); [Ch1
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#026); [Ch2
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#001)) consumed the sacrifice and the
wood, in token of God's acceptance of the offering, but licked up all
the water in the trench, exhaling that, and drawing it up as a vapour,
in order to the intended rain, which was to be the fruit of this
sacrifice and prayer, more than the product of natural causes. Compare
[Psa 135:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#007). He causeth vapours to
ascend, and maketh lightnings for the rain; for this rain he did both.
As for those who fall as victims to the fire of God's wrath, no water
can shelter them from it, any more than briers or thorns, [Isa
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#004), [Isa
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#005). But this was not all; to
complete the miracle, the fire consumed the stones of the altar, and the
very dust, to show that it was no ordinary fire, and perhaps to intimate
that, though God accepted this occasional sacrifice from this altar, yet
for the future they ought to demolish all the altars on their high
places, and, for their constant sacrifices, make use of that at
Jerusalem only. Moses's altar and Solomon's were consecrated by the fire
from heaven; but this was destroyed, because no more to be used. We may
well imagine what a terror the fire struck on guilty Ahab and all the
worshippers of Baal, and how they fled from it as far and as fast as
they could, saying, Lest it consume us also, alluding to [Num
16:34](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#034).

VI\. What was the result of this fair trial. The prophets of Baal had
failed in their proof, and could give no evidence at all to make out
their pretensions on behalf of their god, but were perfectly non-suited
Elijah had, by the most convincing and undeniable evidence, proved his
claims on behalf of the God of Israel. And now, 1. The people, as the
jury, gave in their verdict upon the trial, and they are all agreed in
it; the case is so plain that they need not go from the bar to consider
of their verdict or consult about it: They fell on their faces, and all,
as one man, said, "Jehovah, he is the God, and not Baal; we are
convinced and satisfied of it: Jehovah, he is the God" ([Kg1
18:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#039)), whence, one would think, they
should have inferred, "If he be the God, he shall be our God, and we
will serve him only," as [Jos 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#024).
Some, we hope, had their hearts thus turned back, but the generality of
them were convinced only, not converted, yielded to the truth of God,
that he is the God, but consented not to his covenant, that he should be
theirs. Blessed are those that have not seen what they saw and yet have
believed and been wrought upon by it more than those that saw it. Let it
for ever be looked upon as a point adjudged against all pretenders (for
it was carried, upon a full hearing, against one of the most daring and
threatening competitors that ever the God of Israel was affronted by)
that Jehovah, he is God, God alone. 2. The prophets of Baal, as
criminals, are seized, condemned, and executed, according to law, [Kg1
18:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#040). If Jehovah be the true God,
Baal is a false God, to whom these Israelites had revolted, and seduced
others to the worship of him; and therefore, by the express law of God,
they were to be put to death, [Deu
13:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#001). There needed no proof of the
fact; all Israel were witnesses of it: and therefore Elijah (acting
still by an extraordinary commission, which is not to be drawn into a
precedent) orders them all to be slain immediately as the troublers of
the land, and Ahab himself is so terrified, for the present, with the
fire from heaven, that he dares not oppose it. These were the 450
prophets of Baal; the 400 prophets of the groves (who, some think, were
Sidonians), though summoned (v. 19), yet, as it should seem, did not
attend, and so escaped this execution, which fair escape perhaps Ahab
and Jezebel thought themselves happy in; but it proved they were
reserved to be the instruments of Ahab's destruction, some time after,
by encouraging him to go up to Ramoth-Gilead, [Deu
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#006).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">kg1 18:41</span></span>

Israel being thus far reformed that they had acknowledged the Lord to be
God, and had consented to the execution of Baal's prophets, that they
might not seduce them any more, though this was far short of a thorough
reformation, yet it was so far accepted that God thereupon opened the
bottles of heaven, and poured out blessings upon his land, that very
evening (as it should seem) on which they did this good work, which
should have confirmed them in their reformation; see [Hag
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#018), [Hag
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#019).

I. Elijah sent Ahab to eat and drink, for joy that God had now accepted
his works, and that rain was coming; see [Ecc
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#007). Ahab had continued fasting all
day, either religiously, it being a day of prayer, or for want of
leisure, it being a day of great expectation; but now let him eat and
rink for, though others perceive no sign of it, Elijah, by faith, hears
the sound of abundance of rain, [Kg1
18:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#041). God reveals his secrets to his
servants the prophets; and yet, without a revelation, we may foresee
that when man's judgments run down like a river God's mercy will. Rain
is the river of God, [Psa 65:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#009).

II\. He himself retired to pray (for though God had promised rain, he
must ask it, [Zac 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#001)), and to give
thanks for God's answer by fire, now hoping for an answer by water. What
he said we are not told; but, 1. He withdrew to a strange place, to the
top of Carmel, which was very high and very private. Hence we read of
those that hide themselves in the top of Carmel, [Amo
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#003). There he would be alone. Those
who are called to appear and act in public for God must yet find time to
be private with him and keep up their converse with him in solitude.
There he set himself, as it were, upon his watch-tower, like the
prophet, [Hab 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001). 2. He put himself
into a strange posture. He cast himself down on his knees upon the
earth, in token of humility, reverence, and importunity, and put his
face between his knees (that is, bowed his head so low that it touched
his knees), thus abasing himself in the sense of his own meanness now
that God had thus honoured him.

III\. He ordered his servant to bring him notice as soon as he discerned
a cloud arising out of the sea, the Mediterranean Sea, which he had a
large prospect of from the top of Carmel. The sailors at this day call
it Cape Carmel. Six times his servant goes to the point of the hill and
sees nothing, brings no good news to his master; yet Elijah continues
praying, will not be diverted so far as to go and see with his own eyes,
but still sends his servant to see if he can discover any hopeful cloud,
while he keeps his mind close and intent in prayer, and abides by it, as
one that has taken up his father Jacob's resolution, I will not let thee
go except thou bless me. Note, Though the answer of our fervent and
believing supplications may not come quickly, yet we must continue
instant in prayer, and not faint nor desist; for at the end it shall
speak and not lie.

IV\. A little cloud at length appeared, no bigger than a man's hand,
which presently overspread the heavens and watered the earth, [Kg1
18:44](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#044), [Kg1
18:45](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#045). Great blessings often arise
from small beginnings, and showers of plenty from a cloud of a span
long. Let us therefore never despise the day of small things, but hope
and wait for great things from it. This was not as a morning cloud,
which passes away (though Israel's goodness was so), but one that
produced a plentiful rain ([Psa 68:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#009)),
and an earnest of more.

V. Elijah hereupon hastened Ahab home, and attended him himself. Ahab
rode in his chariot, at ease and in state, [Kg1
18:45](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#045). Elijah ran on foot before him.
If Ahab had paid the respect to Elijah that he deserved he would have
taken him into his chariot, as the eunuch did Philip, that he might
honour him before the elders of Israel, and confer with him further
about the reformation of the kingdom. But his corruptions got the better
of his convictions, and he was glad to get clear of him, as Felix of
Paul, when he dismissed him, and adjourned his conference with him to a
more convenient season. But, since Ahab invites him not to ride with
him, he will run before him ([Kg1
18:46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#046)) as one of his footmen, that he
may not seem to be lifted up with the great honour God had put upon him
or to abate in his civil respect to his prince, though he reproved him
faithfully. God's ministers should make it appear that, how great soever
they look when they deliver God's message, yet they are far from
affecting worldly grandeur: let them leave that to the kings of the
earth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 19](kg1019)

</div>
