<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1014)  [Next](kg1016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 15:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have an abstract of the history, I. Of two of the
kings of Judah, Abijam, the days of whose reign were few and evil ([Kg1
15:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#001)), and Asa, who reigned well and
long (v. 9-24). II. Of two of the kings of Israel, Nadab the son of
Jeroboam, and Baasha the destroyer of Jeroboam's house ([Kg1
15:25-34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#025)).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 15:1</span></span>

We have here a short account of the short reign of Abijam the son of
Rehoboam king of Judah. He makes a better figure, 2 Chr. 13, where we
have an account of his war with Jeroboam, the speech which he made
before the armies engaged, and the wonderful victory he obtained by the
help of God. There he is called Abijah - My father is the Lord, because
no wickedness is there laid to his charge. But here, where we are told
of his faults, Jah, the name of God, is, in disgrace to him, taken away
from his name, and he is called Abijam. See [Jer
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#024).

I. Few particulars are related concerning him. 1. Here began his reign
in the beginning of Jeroboam's eighteenth year; for Rehoboam reigned but
seventeen, [Kg1 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#021). Jeroboam indeed
survived Rehoboam, but Rehoboam's Abijah lived to succeed him and to be
a terror to Jeroboam, while Jeroboam's Abijah (whom we read of [Kg1
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#001)) died before him. 2. He reigned
scarcely three years, for he died before the end of Jeroboam's twentieth
year, [Kg1 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#009). Being made proud and
secure by his great victory over Jeroboam ([Ch2
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#021)), God cut him off, to make way
for his son Asa, who would be a better man. 3. His mother's name was
Maachah, the daughter of Abishalom, that is, Absalom, David's son, as I
am the rather inclined to think because two other of Rehoboam's wives
were his near relations ([Ch2 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#018)),
one the daughter of Jerimoth, David's son, and another the daughter of
Eliab, David's brother. He took warning by his father not to marry
strangers; yet thought it below him to marry his subjects, except they
were of the royal family. 4. He carried on his father's wars with
Jeroboam. As there was continual war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam, not
set battles (these were forbidden, [Kg1
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#024)), but frequent encounters,
especially upon the borders, one making incursions and reprisals on the
other, so there was between Abijam and Jeroboam ([Kg1
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#007)), till Jeroboam, with a great
army, invaded him, and then Abijam, not being forbidden to act in his
own defence, routed him, and weakened him, so that he compelled him to
be quiet during the rest of his reign, [Ch2
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#020).

II\. But, in general, we are told, 1. That he was not like David, had no
hearty affection for the ordinances of God, though, to serve his purpose
against Jeroboam, he pleaded his possession of the temple and
priesthood, as that upon which he valued himself, [Ch2
13:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#010). Many boast of their
profession of godliness who are strangers to the power of it, and plead
the truth of their religion who yet are not true to it. His heart was
not perfect with the Lord his God. He seemed to have zeal, but he wanted
sincerity; he began pretty well, but he fell off, and walked in all the
sins of his father, followed his bad example, though he had seen the bad
consequences of it. He that was all his days in war ought to have been
so wise as to make and keep his peace with God, and not to make him his
enemy, especially having found him so good a friend in his war with
Jeroboam, [Ch2 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#018). Let favour be
shown to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness, [Isa
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#010). 2. That yet it was for David's
sake that he was advanced, and continued upon the throne; it was for his
sake ([Kg1 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#004), [Kg1
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#005)) that God thus set up his son
after him; not for his own sake, nor for the sake of his father, in
whose steps he trod, but for the sake of David, whose example he would
not follow. Note, It aggravates the sin of a degenerate seed that they
fare the better for the piety of their ancestors and owe their blessings
to it, and yet will not imitate it. They stand upon that ground, and yet
despise it, and trample upon it, and unreasonably ridicule and oppose
that which they enjoy the benefit of. The kingdom of Judah was
supported, (1.) That David might have a lamp, pursuant to the divine
ordination of a lamp for his anointed, [Psa
132:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#017). (2.) That Jerusalem might be
established, not only that the honours put upon it in David's and
Solomon's time might be preserved to it, but that it might be reserved
to the honours designed for it in after-times. The character here given
of David is very great - that he did that which was right in the eyes of
the Lord; but the exception is very remarkable - save only in the matter
of Uriah, including both his murder and the debauching of his wife. That
was a bad matter; it was a remaining blot upon his name, a bar in his
escutcheon, and the reproach of it was not wiped away, though the guilt
was. David was guilty of other faults, but they were nothing in
comparison of that; yet even that being repented of, though it be
mentioned for warning to others, did not prevail to throw him out of the
covenant, nor to cut off the entail of the promise upon his seed.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg1 15:9</span></span>

We have here a short account of the reign of Asa; we shall find a more
copious history of it [Ch2 14:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#001),
15, and [Ch2 16:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#001). Here is,

I. The length of it: He reigned forty-one years in Jerusalem, [Kg1
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#010). In the account we have of the
kings of Judah we find the number of the good kings and the bad ones
nearly equal; but then we may observe, to our comfort, that the reign of
the good kings was generally long, but that of the bad kings short, the
consideration of which will make the state of God's church not
altogether so bad within that period as it appears at first sight.
Length of days is in Wisdom's right hand. Honour thy father, much more
thy heavenly Father, that thy days may be long.

II\. The general good character of it ([Kg1
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#011)): Asa did that which was right
in the eyes of the Lord, and that is right indeed which is so in God's
eyes; those are approved whom he commends. He did as did David his
father, kept close to God, and to his instituted worship, was hearty and
zealous for that, which gave him this honourable character, that he was
like David, though he was not a prophet, or psalmist, as David was. If
we come up to the graces of those that have gone before us it will be
our praise with God, though we come short of their gifts. Asa was like
David, though he was neither such a conqueror nor such an author; for
his heart was perfect with the Lord all his days ([Kg1
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#014)), that is, he was both cordial
and constant in his religion. What he did for God he was sincere in,
steady and uniform, and did it from a good principle, with a single eye
to the glory of God.

III\. The particular instances of Asa's piety. His times were times of
reformation. For,

1\. He removed that which was evil. There reformation begins; and a
great deal of work of that kind his hand found to do. For, though it was
but twenty years after the death of Solomon that he began to reign, yet
very gross corruption had spread far and taken deep root. Immorality he
first struck at: He took away the sodomites out of the land, suppressed
the brothels; for how can either prince or people prosper while those
cages of unclean and filthy birds, more dangerous than pest-houses, are
suffered to remain? Then he proceeded against idolatry: He removed all
the idols, even those that his father had made, [Kg1
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#012). His father having made them, he
was the more concerned to remove them, that he might cut off the entail
of the curse, and prevent the visiting of that iniquity upon him and
his. Nay (which redounds much to his honour, and shows his heart was
perfect with God), when he found idolatry in the court, he rooted it out
thence, [Kg1 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#013). When it appeared
that Maachah his mother, or rather his grandmother (but called his
mother because she had the educating of him in his childhood), had an
idol in a grove, though she was his mother, his grandmother, - though,
it is likely, she had a particular fondness for it, - though, being old,
she could not live long to patronise it, - though she kept it for her
own use only, yet he would by no means connive at her idolatry.
Reformation must begin at home. Bad practices will never be suppressed
in the country while they are supported in the court. Asa, in every
thing else, will honour and respect his mother; he loves her well, but
he loves God better, and (like the Levite, [Deu
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#009)) readily forgets the relation
when it comes in competition with his duty. If she be an idolater, (1.)
Her idol shall be destroyed, publicly exposed to contempt, defaced, and
burnt to ashes by the brook Kidron, on which, it is probable, he strewed
the ashes, in imitation of Moses ([Exo
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#020)) and in token of his detestation
of idolatry and his indignation at it wherever he found it. Let no
remains of a court-idol appear. (2.) She shall be deposed, He removed
her from being queen, or from the queen, that is, from conversing with
his wife; he banished her from the court, and confined her to an obscure
and private life. Those that have power are happy when thus they have
hearts to use it well.

2\. He re-established that which was good ([Kg1
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#015)): He brought into the house of
God the dedicated things which he himself had vowed out of the spoils of
the Ethiopians he had conquered, and which his father had vowed, but
lived not to bring in pursuant to his vow. We must not only cease to do
evil, but learn to do well, not only cast away the idols of our
iniquity, but dedicate ourselves and our all to God's honour and glory.
When those who, in their infancy, were by baptism devoted to God, make
it their own act and deed to join themselves to him and vigorously
employ themselves in his service, this is bringing in the dedicated
things which they and their fathers have dedicated: it is necessary
justice - rendering to God the things that are his.

VI\. The policy of his reign. He built cities himself, to encourage the
increase of his people ([Kg1 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#023))
and to invite others to him by the conveniences of habitation; and he
was very zealous to hinder Baasha from building Ramah, because he
designed it for the cutting off of communication between his people and
Jerusalem and to hinder those who in obedience to God would come to
worship there. An enemy must by no means be suffered to fortify a
frontier town.

V. The faults of his reign. In both the things for which he was praised
he was found defective. The fairest characters are not without some but
or other in them. 1. Did he take away the idols? That was well; but the
high places were not removed ([Kg1
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#014)); therein his reformation fell
short. He removed all images which were rivals with the true God or
false representations of him; but the altars which were set up in high
places, and to which those sacrifices were brought which should have
been offered on the altar in the temple, those he suffered to stand,
thinking there was no great harm in them, they having been used by good
men before the temple was built, and being loth to disoblige the people,
who had a kindness to them and were wedded to them both by custom and
convenience; whereas in Judah and Benjamin, the only tribes under Asa's
government which lay so near Jerusalem and the altars there, there was
less pretence for them than in those tribes which lay more remote. They
were against the law, which obliged them to worship at one place, [Deu
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#011). They lessened men's esteem of
the temple and the altars there, and were an open gap for idolatry to
enter in at, while the people were so much addicted to it. It was not
well that Asa, when his hand was in, did not remove these. Nevertheless
his heart was perfect with the Lord. This affords us a comfortable note,
That those may be found honest and upright with God, and be accepted of
him, who yet, in some instances, come short of doing the good they might
and should do. The perfection which is made the indispensable condition
of the new covenant is not to be understood of sinlessness (then we were
all undone), but sincerity. 2. Did he bring in the dedicated things?
That was well; but he afterwards alienated the dedicated things, when he
took the gold and silver out of the house of God and sent them as a
bribe to Benhadad, to hire him to break his league with Baasha, and, by
making an inroad upon his country, to give him a diversion from the
building of Ramah, [Kg1 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#018), [Kg1
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#019). Here he sinned, (1.) In
tempting Benhadad to break his league, and so to violate the public
faith. If he did wrong in doing it, as certainly he did, Asa did wrong
in persuading him to do it. (2.) In that he could not trust God, who had
done so much for him, to free him out of this strait, without using such
indirect means to help himself. (3.) In taking the gold out of the
treasury of the temple, which was not to be made use of but on
extraordinary occasions. The project succeeded. Benhadad made a descent
upon the land of Israel, which obliged Baasha to retire with his whole
force from Ramah ([Kg1 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#020), [Kg1
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#021)), which gave Asa a fair
opportunity to demolish his works there, and the timber and stones
served him for the building of some cities of his own, [Kg1
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#022). But, though the design
prospered, we find it was displeasing to God; and though Asa valued
himself upon the policy of it, and promised himself that it would
effectually secure his peace, he was told by the prophet that he had
done foolishly, and that thenceforth he should have wars; see [Ch2
16:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#007).

VI\. The troubles of his reign. For the most part he prospered; but, 1.
Baasha king of Israel was a very troublesome neighbour to him. He
reigned twenty-four years, and all his days had war, more or less, with
Asa, [Kg1 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#016). This was the effect
of the division of the kingdoms, that they were continually vexing one
another, and so weakened one another, which made them both an easier
prey to the common enemy. 2. In his old age he was himself afflicted
with the gout: He was diseased in his feet, which made him less fit for
business and peevish towards those about him.

VII\. The conclusion of his reign. The acts of it were more largely
recorded in the common history (to which reference is here had, [Kg1
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#023)) than in this sacred one. He
reigned long, but finished at last with honour, and left his throne to a
successor no way inferior to him.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg1 15:25</span></span>

We are now to take a view of the miserable state of Israel, while the
kingdom of Judah was happy under Asa's good government. It was
threatened that they should be as a reed shaken in the water ([Kg1
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#015)), and so they were, when, during
the single reign of Asa, the government of their kingdom was in six or
seven different hands, as we find in this and the following chapter.
Jeroboam was upon the throne in the beginning of his reign and Ahab at
the end of it, and between them were Nadab, Baasha, Elah, Zimri, Tibni,
and Omri, undermining and destroying one another. This they got by
deserting the house both of God and of David. Here we have, 1. The ruin
and extirpation of the family of Jeroboam, according to the word of the
Lord by Ahijah. His son Nadab succeeded him. If the death of his brother
Abijah had had a due influence upon him to make him religious, and the
honour done him at his death had engaged him to follow his good example,
his reign might have been long and glorious; but he walked in the way of
his father ([Kg1 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#026)), kept up the
worship of his calves, and forbade his subjects to go up to Jerusalem to
worship, sinned and made Israel to sin, and therefore God brought ruin
upon him quickly, in the second year of his reign. He was besieging
Gibbethon, a city which the Philistines had taken from the Danites, and
was endeavouring to re-take it; and there, in the midst of his army, did
Baasha, with others, conspire against him and kill him, ([Kg1
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#027)), and so little interest had he
in the affections of his people that his army did not only not avenge
his death, but chose his murderer for his successor. Whether Baasha did
it upon a personal pique against Nadab, or to be avenged on the house of
Jeroboam for some affront received from them, or whether under pretence
of freeing his country from the tyranny of a bad prince, or whether
merely from a principle of ambition, to make way for himself to the
throne, does not appear; but he slew him and reigned in his stead, [Kg1
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#028). And the first thing he did when
he came to the crown was to cut off all the house of Jeroboam, that he
might the better secure himself and his own usurped government. He
thought it not enough to imprison or banish them, but he destroyed them,
left not only no males (as was foretold, [Kg1
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#010)), but none that breathed. Herein
he was barbarous, but God was righteous. Jeroboam's sin was punished
([Kg1 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#030)); for those that provoke
God do it to their own confusion; see [Jer
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#019). Ahijah's prophecy was
accomplished ([Kg1 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#029)); for no word
of God shall fall to the ground. Divine threatenings are not bugbears.
2. The elevation of Baasha. He shall be tried awhile, as Jeroboam was.
Twenty-four years he reigned ([Kg1
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#033)), but showed that it was not
from any dislike to Jeroboam's sin that he destroyed his family, but
from malice and ambition; for, when he had rooted out the sinner, he
himself clave to the sin, and walked in the way of Jeroboam ([Kg1
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#034)), though he had seen the end of
that way; so strangely was his heart hardened with the deceitfulness of
sin.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 16](kg1016)

</div>
