<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2002)  [Next](kg2004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 3:0</span></span>

We are now called to attend the public affairs of Israel, in which we
shall find Elisha concerned. Here is, I. The general character of
Jehoram, king of Israel ([Kg2 3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#001)).
II. A war with Moab, in which Jehoram and his allies were engaged ([Kg2
3:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#004)). III. The straits which the
confederate army were reduced to in their expedition against Moab, and
their consulting Elisha in that distress, with the answer of peace he
gave them ([Kg2 3:9-19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#009)). IV. The
glorious issue of this campaign ([Kg2
3:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#020)) and the barbarous method the
king of Moab took to oblige the confederate army to retire ([Kg2
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#026), [Kg2
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#027)). The house of Ahab is doomed to
destruction; and, though in this chapter we have both its character and
its condition better than before, yet the threatened ruin is not far
off.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 3:1</span></span>

Jehoram, the son of Ahab, and brother of Ahaziah, is here upon the
throne of Israel; and, though he was but a bad man, yet two commendable
things are here recorded of him: -

I. That he removed his father's idols. He did evil in many things, but
not like his father Ahab or his mother Jezebel, [Kg2
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#002). Bad he was, but not so bad, so
overmuch wicked, as Solomon speaks, [Ecc
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#017). Perhaps Jehoshaphat, though by
his alliance with the house of Ahab he made his own family worse, did
something towards making Ahab's better. Jehoram saw his father and
brother cut off for worshipping Baal, and wisely took warning by God's
judgments on them, and put away the image of Baal, resolving to worship
the God of Israel only, and consult none but his prophets. So far was
well, yet it did not prevent the destruction of Ahab's family, nay, that
destruction came in his days, and fell immediately upon him ([Kg2
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#024)), though he was one of the best
of the family, for then the measure of its iniquity was full. Jehoram's
reformation was next to none; for, 1. He only put away the image of Baal
which his father had made, and this probably in compliment to
Jehoshaphat, who otherwise would not have come into confederacy with
him, any more than with his brother, [Kg1
22:49](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#049). But he did not destroy the
worship of Baal among the people, for Jehu found it prevalent, [Kg2
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#019). It was well to reform his
family, but it was not enough; he ought to have used his power for the
reforming of his kingdom. 2. When he put away the image of Baal, he
adhered to the worship of the calves, that politic sin of Jeroboam, [Kg2
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#003). He departed not therefrom,
because that was the state engine by which the division between the two
tribes was supported. Those do not truly, nor acceptably, repent or
reform, who only part with the sins that they lose by, but continue
their affection to the sins that they get by. 3. He only put away the
image of Baal, he did not break it in pieces, as he ought to have done.
He laid it aside for the present, yet not knowing but he might have
occasion for it another time; and Jezebel, for reasons of state, was
content to worship her Baal in private.

II\. That he did what he could to recover his brother's losses. As he
had something more of the religion of an Israelite than his father, so
he had something more of the spirit of a king than his brother. Moab
rebelled against Israel, immediately upon the death of Ahab, [Kg2
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001). And we do not find that Ahaziah
made any attempt to chastise or reduce them, but tamely let go his
interest in them, rather than entertain the cares, undergo the fatigues,
and run the hazards, of a war with them. His folly and pusillanimity
herein, and his indifference to the public good, were the more
aggravated because the tribute which the king of Moab paid was a very
considerable branch of the revenue of the crown of Israel: 100,000
lambs, and 100,000 wethers, [Kg2 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#004).
The riches of kings then lay more in cattle than coin, and they thought
it not below them to know the state of their flocks and herds
themselves, because, as Solomon observes, the crown doth not endure to
every generation, [Pro 27:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#023), [Pro
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#024). Taxes were then paid not so
much in money as in the commodities of the country, which was an ease to
the subject, whether it was an advantage to the prince or no. The revolt
of Moab was a great loss to Israel, yet Ahaziah sat still in sloth and
ease. But an upper chamber in his house proved as fatal to him as the
high places of the field could have been ([Kg2
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#002)), and the breaking of his lattice
let into his throne a man of the more active genius, that would not lose
the dominion of Moab without making at least one push for its
preservation.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg2 3:6</span></span>

Jehoram has no sooner got the sceptre into his hand than he takes the
sword into his hand, to reduce Moab. Crowns bring great cares and perils
to the heads that wear them; no sooner in honour than in war. Now here
we have,

I. The concerting of this expedition between Jehoram king of Israel and
Jehoshaphat king of Judah. Jehoram levied an army ([Kg2
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#006)), and such an opinion he had of
the godly king of Judah that, 1. He courted him to be his confederate:
Wilt thou go with me against Moab? And he gained him. Jehoshaphat said,
I will go up. I am as thou art, [Kg2
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#007). Judah and Israel, though
unhappily divided from each other, yet can unite against Moab a common
enemy. Jehoshaphat upbraids them not with their revolt from the house of
David, nor makes it an article of their alliance that they shall return
to their allegiance, though he had good reason to insist upon it, but
treats with Israel as a sister-kingdom. Those are no friends to their
own peace and strength who can never find in their hearts to forgive and
forget an old injury, and unite with those that have formerly broken in
upon their rights. Quod initio non vulvit, tractu temporis invalescit -
That which was originally destitute of authority in the progress of time
acquires it. 2. He consulted him as his confidant, [Kg2
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#008). He took advice of Jehoshaphat,
who had more wisdom and experience than himself, which way they should
make their descent upon the country of Moab; and he advised that they
should not march against them the nearest way, over Jordan, but go round
through the wilderness of Edom, that they might take the king of Edom
(who was tributary to him) and his forces along with them If two be
better than one, much more will not a three-fold cord be easily broken.
Jehoshaphat had like to have paid dearly for joining with Ahab, yet he
joined with his son, and this expedition also had like to have been
fatal to him. There is nothing got by being yoked with unbelievers.

II\. The great straits that the army of the confederates was reduced to
in this expedition. Before they saw the face of an enemy they were all
in danger of perishing for want of water, [Kg2
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#009). This ought to have been
considered before they ventured a march through the wilderness, the same
wilderness (or very near it) where their ancestors wanted water, [Num
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#002). God suffers his people, by their
own improvidence, to bring themselves into distress, that the wisdom,
power, and goodness of his providence may be glorified in their relief.
What is more cheap and common than water? It is drink to every beast of
the field, [Psa 104:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#011). Yet the want
of it will soon humble and ruin kings and armies. The king of Israel
sadly lamented the present distress, and the imminent danger it put them
in of falling into the hands of their enemies the Moabites, to whom,
when weakened by thirst, they would be an easy prey, [Kg2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#010). it was he that had called these
kings together; yet he charges it upon Providence, and reflects upon
that as unkind: The Lord has called them together. Thus the foolishness
of man perverteth his way, and then his heart fretteth against the Lord,
[Pro 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#003).

III\. Jehoshaphat's good motion to ask counsel of God in this exigency,
[Kg2 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#011). The place they were now in
could not but remind them of the wonders of which their fathers told
them, the waters fetched out of the rock for Israel's seasonable supply.
The thought of this, we may suppose, encouraged Jehoshaphat to ask, Is
there not here a prophet of the Lord, like unto Moses? He was the more
concerned because it was by his advice that they fetched this compass
through the wilderness, [Kg2 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#008). It
was well that Jehoshaphat enquired of the Lord now, but it would have
been much better if he had done it sooner, before he engaged in this
war, or steered this course; so the distress might have been prevented.
Good men are sometimes remiss and forgetful, and neglect their duty till
necessity and affliction drive them to it.

IV\. Elisha recommended as a proper person for them to consult with [Kg2
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#011). And here we may wonder, 1. That
Elisha should follow the camp, especially in such a tedious march as
this, as a volunteer, unasked, unobserved, and in no post of honour at
all; not in the office of priest of the war ([Deu
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#002)) or president of the council of
war, but in such obscurity that none of the kings knew they had such a
jewel in the treasures of their camp, nor so good a friend in their
retinue. We may suppose it was by special direction from heaven that
Elisha attended the war, as the chariot of Israel and the horsemen
thereof. Thus does God anticipate his people with the blessings of his
goodness and provide his oracles for those that provide them not for
themselves. It would often be bad with us if God did not take more care
of us, both for soul and body, than we take for ourselves. 2. That a
servant of the king of Israel knew of his being there when the king
himself did not. Probably it was such a servant as Obadiah was to his
father Ahab, one that feared the Lord; to such a one Elisha made himself
known, not to the kings. The account he gives of him is that it was he
that poured water on the hands of Elijah, that is, he was his servant,
and particularly attended him when he washed his hands. He that will be
great, let him learn to minister: he that will rise high, let him begin
low.

V. The application which the kings made to Elisha. They went down to him
to his quarters, [Kg2 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#012).
Jehoshaphat had such an esteem for a prophet with whom the word of the
Lord was that he would condescend to visit him in his own person and not
send for him up to him. The other two were moved by the straits they
were in to make their court to the prophet. He that humbled himself was
thus exalted, and looked great, when three kings came to knock at his
door, and beg his assistance; see [Rev
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#009).

VI\. The entertainment which Elisha gave them. 1. He was very plain with
the wicked king of Israel ([Kg2 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#013)):
"What have I to do with thee? How canst thou expect an answer of peace
from me? Get thee to the prophets of thy father and mother, whom thou
hast countenanced and maintained in thy prosperity, and let them help
thee now in thy distress." Elisha was not imposed upon, as Jehoshaphat
was, by his partial and hypocritical reformation; he knew that, though
he had put away the image of Baal, Baal's prophets were still dear to
him, and perhaps some of the were now in his camp. "Go," said he, "go to
them. Get you to the gods whom you have served, [Jdg
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#014). The world and the flesh have
ruled you, let them help you; why should God be enquired of by you?"
[Eze 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#003). Elisha tells him to his
face, in a holy indignation at his wickedness, that he can scarcely find
in his heart to look towards him or to see him, [Kg2
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#014). Jehoram is to be respected as a
prince, but as a wicked man he is a vile person, and is to be condemned,
[Psa 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#004). Elisha, as a subject, will
honour him, but as a prophet he will cause him to know his iniquity. For
those that had such an extraordinary commission it was fit (though not
for a common person) to say to a king, Thou art wicked, [Job
34:18](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#018). Jehoram has so much
self-command as to take this plain dealing patiently; he cares not now
for hearing of the prophets of Baal, but is a humble suitor to the God
of Israel and his prophet, representing the present case as very
deplorable and humbly recommending it to the prophet's compassionate
consideration. In effect, he owns himself unworthy, but let not the
other kings be ruined for his sake. 2. Elisha showed a great respect to
the godly king of Judah, regarded his presence, and, for his sake, would
enquire of the Lord for them all. It is good being with those that have
God's favour and his prophet's love. Wicked people often fare the better
for the friendship and society of those that are godly. 3. He composed
himself to receive instructions from God. His mind was somewhat ruffled
and disturbed at the sight of Jehoram; though he was not put into a
sinful heat or passion, nor had spoken unadvisedly, yet his zeal for the
present indisposed him for prayer and the operations of the Spirit,
which required a mind very calm and sedate. He therefore called for a
musician ([Kg2 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#015)), a devout
musician, one accustomed to play upon his harp and sign psalms to it. To
hear God's praises sweetly sung, as David had appointed, would cheer his
spirits, and settle his mind, and help to put him into a right frame
both to speak to him and to hear from him. We find a company of prophets
prophesying with a psaltery and a tabret before them, [Sa1
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005). Those that desire communion with
God must keep their spirits quiet and serene. Elisha being refreshed,
and having the tumult of his spirits laid by this divine music, the hand
of the Lord came upon him, and his visit did him more honour than that
of three kings. 4. God, by him, gave them assurance that the issue of
the present distress would be comfortable and glorious. (1.) They should
speedily be supplied with water, [Kg2
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#016), [Kg2
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#017). To try their faith and
obedience, he bids them make the valley full of ditches to receive the
water. Those that expect God's blessings must prepare room for them, dig
the pools for the rain to fill, as they did in the valley of Baca, and
so made even that a well, [Psa 84:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#006).
To raise the wonder, he tells them they shall have water enough, and yet
there shall be neither wind nor rain. Elijah, by prayer, obtained water
out of the clouds, but Elisha fetches it nobody knows whence. The spring
of these waters shall be as secret as the head of the Nile. God is not
tied to second causes. Ordinarily it is by a plentiful rain that God
confirms his inheritance ([Psa 68:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#009)),
but here it is done without rain, at least without rain in that place.
Some of the fountains of the great deep, it is likely, were broken up on
this occasion; and, to increase the miracle, that valley only (as it
should seem) was filled with water, and no other place had any share of
it. (2.) That supply should be an earnest of victory ([Kg2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#018)): "This is but a light thing in
the sight of the Lord; you shall not only be saved from perishing, but
shall return in triumph." As God gives freely to the unworthy, so he
gives richly, like himself, more than we are able to ask or think. His
grants out-do our requests and expectations. Those that sincerely seek
for the dew of God's grace shall have it, and by it be made more than
conquerors. It is promised that they shall be masters of the rebellious
country, and they are permitted to lay it waste and ruin it, [Kg2
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#019). The law forbade them to fell
fruit-trees to be employed in their sieges ([Deu
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#019)), but not when it was intended,
in justice, for the starving of a country that had forfeited its fruits,
by denying tribute to those to whom tribute was due.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg2 3:20</span></span>

I. We have here the divine gift of both those things which God had
promised by Elisha - water and victory, and the former not only a pledge
of the latter, but a means of it. God, who created, and commands, all
the waters, both above and beneath the firmament, sent them an abundance
of water on a sudden, which did them double service.

1\. It relieved their armies, which were ready to perish, [Kg2
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#020). And, which was very observable,
this relief came just at the time of the offering of the morning
sacrifice upon the altar at Jerusalem, a certain time, and universally
known. That time Elisha chose for his hour of prayer (it is likely
looking towards the temple, for so there were to do in their prayers
when they were going out to battle and encamped at a distance, [Kg1
8:44](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#044)), in token of his communion with
the temple-service, and his expectation of success by virtue of the
great sacrifice. We now cannot pitch upon any hour more acceptable than
another, because our high priest is always appearing for us, to present
and plead his sacrifice. That time God chose for the hour of mercy to
put an honour upon the daily sacrifice, which had been despised. God
answered Daniel's prayer just at the time of the evening sacrifice ([Dan
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#021)); for he will acknowledge his own
institutions.

2\. It deceived their enemies, who were ready to triumph, into the
destruction. Notice was given to the Moabites of the advances of the
confederate army, to oppose which all that were able to put on armour
were posted upon the frontiers, where they were ready to give the
Israelites a warm reception (v. 21), promising themselves that it would
be easy dealing with an army fatigued by so long a march through the
wilderness of Edom. But see here,

(1.) How easily they were drawn into their own delusions. Observe the
steps of their self-deceit. \[1.\] They saw the water in the valley
where the army of Israel encamped, and conceited it was blood ([Kg2
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#022)), because they knew the valley to
be dry, and (there having been no rain) could not imagine it should be
water. The sun shone upon it, and probably the sky was red and lowering,
a presage of foul weather that day ([Mat
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#003)), and so it proved to them. But,
this making the water look red, their own fancies, which made them
willing to believe what made for them, suggested, This is blood, God
permitting them thus to impose upon themselves. \[2.\] If their camp was
thus full of blood, they conclude, "Certainly the kings have fallen out
(as confederates of different interests are apt to do) and they have
slain one another ([Kg2 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#023)), for who
else should slay them?" And, \[3.\] "If the armies have slain one
another, we have nothing to do but to divide the prey. Now therefore,
Moab, to the spoil." These were the gradual suggestions of some sanguine
spirits among them, that thought themselves wiser and happier in their
conjectures than their neighbours; and the rest, being desirous it
should be so, were forward to believe it was so. Quod volumus facile
credimus - What we wish we readily believe. Thus those that are to be
destroyed are first deceived ([Rev
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#008)), and none are so effectually
deceived as those that deceive themselves.

(2.) How fatally they thereby ran upon their own destruction. They
rushed carelessly into the camp of Israel, to plunder it, but were
undeceived when it was too late. The Israelites, animated by the
assurances Elisha had given them of victory, fell upon them with the
utmost fury, routed them, and pursued them into their own country ([Kg2
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#024)), which they laid waste ([Kg2
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#025)), destroyed the cities, marred
the ground, stopped up the wells, felled the timber, and left only the
royal city standing, in the walls of which they made great breaches with
their battering engines. This they got by rebelling against Israel. Who
ever hardened his heart against God and prospered?

II\. In the close of the chapter we are told what the king of Moab did
when he found himself reduced to the last extremity by the besiegers,
and that his capital city was likely to fall into their hands. 1. He
attempted that which was bold and brave. he got together 700 choice men,
and with them sallied out upon the intrenchments of the king of Edom,
who, being but a mercenary in this expedition, would not, he hoped, make
any great resistance if vigorously attacked, and so he might make his
escape that way. But it would not do; even the king of Edom proved too
hard for him, and obliged him to retire, [Kg2
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#026). 2. This failing, he did that
which was brutish and barbarous; he took his own son, his eldest son,
that was to succeed him, than whom nothing could be more dear to himself
and his people, and offered him for a burnt-offering upon the wall, [Kg2
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#027). He designed by this, (1.) To
obtain the favour of Chemosh his god, which, being a devil, delighted in
blood and murder, and the destruction of mankind. The dearer any thing
was to them the more acceptable those idolaters thought it must needs be
if offered in sacrifice to their gods, and therefore burnt their
children in the fire to their honour. (2.) To terrify the besiegers, and
oblige them to retire. Therefore he did it upon the wall, in their
sight, that they might see what desperate courses he resolved to take
rather than surrender, and how dearly he would sell his city and life.
He intended hereby to render them odious, and to exasperate and enrage
his own subjects against them. This effect it had: There was great
indignation against Israel for driving him to this extremity, whereupon
they raised the siege and returned. Tender and generous spirits will not
do that, though just, which will drive any man distracted, or make him
desperate.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 4](kg2004)

</div>
