<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2024)  [Next](ch1000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 25:0</span></span>

Ever since David's time Jerusalem had been a celebrated place, beautiful
for situation and the joy of the whole earth: while the book of psalms
lasts that name will sound great. In the New Testament we read much of
it, when it was, as here, ripening again for its ruin. In the close of
the Bible we read of a new Jerusalem. Every thing therefore that
concerns Jerusalem is worthy our regard. In this chapter we have, I. The
utter destruction of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans, the city besieged and
taken ([Kg2 25:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#001)), the houses burnt
([Kg2 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#008), [Kg2
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#009)), and wall broken down ([Kg2
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#010)), and the inhabitants carried
away into captivity ([Kg2 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#011), [Kg2
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#012)). The glory of Jerusalem was, 1.
That it was the royal city, where were set "the thrones of the house of
David;" but that glory has now departed, for the prince is made a most
miserable prisoner, the seed royal is destroyed ([Kg2
25:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#005)), and the principal officers
are put to death ([Kg2 25:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#018)). 2.
That it was the holy city, where was the testimony of Israel; but that
glory has departed, for Solomon's temple is burnt to the ground ([Kg2
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#009)) and the sacred vessels that
remained are carried away to Babylon ([Kg2
25:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#013)). Thus has Jerusalem become
as a widow, [Lam 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001). Ichabod - Where
is the glory? II. The distraction and dispersion of the remnant that was
left in Judah under Gedaliah ([Kg2
25:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#022)). III. The countenance which,
after thirty-seven years' imprisonment, was given to Jehoiachin the
captive king of Judah ([Kg2 25:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#027)).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 25:1</span></span>

We left king Zedekiah in rebellion against the king of Babylon ([Kg2
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#020)), contriving and endeavouring to
shake off his yoke, when he was no way able to do it, nor took the right
method by making God his friend first. Now here we have an account of
the fatal consequences of that attempt.

I. The king of Babylon's army laid siege to Jerusalem, [Kg2
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#001). What should hinder them when the
country was already in their possession? [Kg2
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#002). They built forts against the
city round about, whence, by such arts of war as they then had, they
battered it, sent into it instruments of death, and kept out of it the
necessary supports of life. Formerly Jerusalem had been compassed with
the favour of God as with a shield, but now their defence had departed
from them and their enemies surrounded them on every side. Those that by
sin have provoked God to leave them will find that innumerable evils
will compass them about. Two years this siege lasted; at first the army
retired, for fear of the king of Egypt ([Jer
37:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#011)), but, finding him not so
powerful as they thought, they soon returned, with a resolution not to
quit the city till they had made themselves masters of it.

II\. During this siege the famine prevailed ([Kg2
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#003)), so that for a long time they
ate their bread by weight and with care, [Eze
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#016). Thus they were punished for
their gluttony and excess, their fulness of bread and feeding themselves
without fear. At length there was no bread for the people of the land,
that is, the common people, the soldiers, whereby they were weakened and
rendered unfit for service. Now they ate their own children for want of
food. See this foretold by one prophet ([Eze
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#010)) and bewailed by another, [Lam
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#003), etc. Jeremiah earnestly persuaded
the king to surrender ([Jer 38:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#017)),
but his heart was hardened to his destruction.

III\. At length the city was taken by storm: it was broken up, [Kg2
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#004). The besiegers made a breach in
the wall, at which they forced their way into it. The besieged, unable
any longer to defend it, endeavoured to quit it, and make the best of
their way; and many, no doubt, were put to the sword, the victorious
army being much exasperated by their obstinacy.

IV\. The king, his family, and all his great men, made their escape in
the night, by some secret passages which the besiegers either had not
discovered or did not keep their eye upon, [Kg2
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#004). But those as much deceive
themselves who think to escape God's judgments as those who think to
brave them; the feet of him that flees from them will as surely fail as
the hands of him that fights against them. When God judges he will
overcome. Intelligence was given to the Chaldeans of the king's flight,
and which way he had gone, so that they soon overtook him, [Kg2
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#005). His guards were scattered from
him, every man shifting for his own safety. Had he put himself under
God's protection, that would not have failed him now. He presently fell
into the enemies' hands, and here we are told what they did with him. 1.
He was brought to the king of Babylon, and tried by a council of war for
rebelling against him who set him up, and to whom he had sworn fidelity.
God and man had a quarrel with him for this; see [Eze
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#016), etc. The king of Babylon now
lay at Riblah (which lay between Judea and Babylon), that he might be
ready to give orders both to his court at home and his army abroad. 2.
His sons were slain before his eyes, though children, that this doleful
spectacle, the last his eyes were to behold, might leave an impression
of grief and horror upon his spirit as long as he lived. In slaying his
sons, they showed their indignation at his falsehood, and in effect
declared that neither he nor any of his were fit to be trusted, and
therefore that they were not fit to live. 3. His eyes were put out, by
which he was deprived of that common comfort of human life which is
given even to those that are in misery, and to the bitter in soul, the
light of the sun, by which he was also disabled for any service. He
dreaded being mocked, and therefore would not be persuaded to yield
([Jer 38:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#019)), but that which he feared
came upon him with a witness, and no doubt added much to his misery;
for, as those that are deaf suspect that every body talks of them, so
those that are blind suspect that every body laughs at them. By this two
prophecies that seemed to contradict one another were both fulfilled.
Jeremiah prophesied that Zedekiah should be brought to Babylon, [Jer
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#005); [Jer
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#003). Ezekiel prophesied that he
should not see Babylon, [Eze 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#013). He
was brought thither, but, his eyes being put out, he did not see it.
Thus he ended his days, before he ended his life. 4. He was bound in
fetters of brass and so carried to Babylon. He that was blind needed not
be bound (his blindness fettered him), but, for his greater disgrace,
they led him bound; only, whereas common malefactors are laid in irons
([Psa 105:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#018); [Psa
107:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#010)), he, being a prince, was bound
with fetters of brass; but that the metal was somewhat nobler and
lighter was little comfort, while still he was in fetters. Let it not
seem strange if those that have been held in the cords of iniquity come
to be thus held in the cords of affliction, [Job
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#008).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 25:8</span></span>

Though we have reason to think that the army of the Chaldeans were much
enraged against the city for holding out with so much stubbornness, yet
they did not therefore put all to fire and sword as soon as they had
taken the city (which is too commonly done in such cases), but about a
month after (compare [Kg2 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#008) with
[Kg2 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#003)) Nebuzar-adan was sent with
orders to complete the destruction of Jerusalem. This space God gave
them to repent, after all the foregoing days of his patience, but in
vain; their hearts (for aught that appears) were still hardened, and
therefore execution is awarded to the utmost. 1. The city and temple are
burnt, [Kg2 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#009). It does not appear
that the king of Babylon designed to send any colonies to people
Jerusalem and therefore he ordered it to be laid in ashes, as a nest of
rebels. At the burning of the king's house and the houses of the great
men one cannot so much wonder (the inhabitants had, by their sins, made
them combustible), but that the house of the Lord should perish in these
flames, that that holy and beautiful house should be burnt with fire
([Isa 64:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#011)), is very strange. That
house which David prepared for, and which Solomon built at such a vast
expense - that house which had the eye and heart of God perpetually upon
it ([Kg1 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#003)) - might not that have
been snatched as a brand out of this burning? No, it must not be
fire-proof against God's judgments. This stately structure must be
turned into ashes, and it is probable the ark in it, for the enemies,
having heard how dearly the Philistines paid for the abusing of it,
durst not seize that, nor did any of its friends take care to preserve
it, for then we should have heard of it again in the second temple. One
of the apocryphal writers does indeed tell us that the prophet Jeremiah
got it out of the temple, and conveyed it to a cave in Mount Nebo on the
other side Jordan, and hid it there (2 Macc. 2:4, 5), but that could not
be, for Jeremiah was a close prisoner at that time. By the burning of
the temple God would show how little cares for the external pomp of his
worship when the life and power of religion are neglected. The people
trusted to the temple, as if that would protect them in their sins ([Jer
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004)), but God, by this, let them know
that when they had profaned it they would find it but a refuge of lies.
This temple had stood about 420, some say 430 years. The people having
forfeited the promises made concerning it, those promises must be
understood of the gospel-temple, which is God's rest for ever. It is
observable that the second temple was burnt by the Romans the same
month, and the same day of the month, that the first temple was burnt by
the Chaldeans, which, Josephus says, was the tenth of August. 2. The
walls of Jerusalem are demolished ([Kg2
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#010)), as if the victorious army
would be revenged on them for having kept them out so long, or at least
prevent the like opposition another time. Sin unwalls a people and takes
away their defence. These walls were never repaired till Nehemiah's
time. 3. The residue of the people are carried away captive to Babylon,
[Kg2 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#011). Most of the inhabitants
had perished by sword or famine, or had made their escape when the king
did (for it is said, [Kg2 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#005), His
army was scattered from him), so that there were very few left, who with
the deserters, making in all but 832 persons (as appears, [Jer
52:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#029)), were carried away into
captivity; only the poor of the land were left behind ([Kg2
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#012)), to till the ground and dress
the vineyards for the Chaldeans. Sometimes poverty is a protection; for
those that have nothing have nothing to lose. When the rich Jews, who
had been oppressive to the poor, were made strangers, nay, prisoners, in
an enemy's country, the poor whom they had despised and oppressed had
liberty and peace in their own country. Thus Providence sometimes
remarkably humbles the proud and favours those of low degree. 4. The
brazen vessels, and other appurtenances of the temple, are carried away,
those of silver and gold being most of them gone before. Those two
famous columns of brass, Jachin and Boaz, which signified the strength
and stability of the house of God, were broken to pieces and the brass
of them was carried to Babylon, [Kg2
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#013). When the things signified were
sinned away what should the signs stand there for? Ahaz had profanely
cut off the borders of the bases, and put the brazen sea upon a pavement
of stones ([Kg2 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#017)); justly
therefore are the brass themselves, and the brazen sea, delivered into
the enemy's hand. It is just with God to take away his ordinances from
those that profane and abuse them, that curtail and depress them. Some
things remained of gold and silver ([Kg2
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#015)) which were now carried off; but
most of this plunder was brass, such a vast quantity of it that it is
said to be without weight, [Kg2 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#016).
The carrying away of the vessels wherewith they ministered ([Kg2
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#014)) put an end to the ministration.
It was a righteous thing with God to deprive those of the benefit of his
worship who had slighted it so long and preferred false worships before
it. Those that would have many altars shall now have none. 5. Several of
the great men are slain in cold blood - Seraiah the chief priest (who
was the father of Ezra as appears, [Ezr
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#001)), the second priest (who, when
there was occasion, officiated for him), and three door-keepers of the
temple ([Kg2 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#018)), the general of
the army, five privy-counsellors (afterwards they made them up seven,
[Jer 52:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#025)), the secretary of war, or
pay-master of the army, and sixty country gentlemen who had concealed
themselves in the city. These, being persons of some rank, were brought
to the king of Babylon ([Kg2 25:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#019),
[Kg2 25:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#020)), who ordered them to be
all put to death ([Kg2 25:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#021)), when,
in reason, they might have hoped that surely the bitterness of death was
past. These the king of Babylon's revenge looked upon as most active in
opposing him; but divine justice, we may suppose, looked upon them as
ringleaders in that idolatry and impiety which were punished by these
desolations. This completed the calamity: So Judah was carried away out
of their land, about 860 years after they were put in possession of it
by Joshua. Now the scripture was fulfilled, The Lord shall bring thee,
and the king which thou shalt set over thee, into a nation which thou
hast not known, [Deu 28:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#036). Sin kept
their fathers forty years out of Canaan, and now turned them out. The
Lord is known by those judgments which he executes, and makes good that
word which he has spoken, [Amo 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#002).
You only have I known of all the families of the earth, therefore I will
punish you for all your iniquities.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg2 25:22</span></span>

In these verses we have,

I. The dispersion of the remaining people. The city of Jerusalem was
quite laid waste. Some people there were in the land of Judah ([Kg2
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#022)) that had weathered the storm,
and (which was no small favour at this time, [Jer
45:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#005)) had their lives given them for a
prey. Now see, 1. What a good posture they were put into. The king of
Babylon appointed Gedaliah, one of themselves, to be their governor and
protector under him, a very good man, and one that would make the best
of the bad, [Kg2 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#022). His father
Ahikam was one that countenanced and protected Jeremiah when the princes
had vowed his death, [Jer 26:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#024). It is
probable that this Gedaliah, by the advice of Jeremiah, had gone over
the Chaldeans, and had conducted himself so well that the king of
Babylon entrusted him with the government. He resided not at Jerusalem,
but at Mizpah, in the land of Benjamin, a place famous in Samuel's time.
Thither those came who had fled from Zedekiah ([Kg2
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#004)) and put themselves under his
protection ([Kg2 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#023)), which he
assured them of if they would be patient and peaceable under the
government of the king of Babylon, [Kg2
25:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#024). Gedaliah, though he had not the
pomp and power of a sovereign prince, yet might have been a greater
blessing to them than many of their kings had been, especially having
such a privy-council as Jeremiah, who was now with them, and interested
himself in their affairs, [Jer 40:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#005),
[Jer 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#006). 2. What a fatal breach was
made upon them, soon afterwards, by the death of Gedaliah, within two
months after he entered upon his government. The utter extirpation of
the Jews, for the present, was determined, and therefore it was in vain
for them to think of taking root again: the whole land must be plucked
up, [Jer 45:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#004). Yet this hopeful
settlement is dashed to pieces, not by the Chaldeans, but by some of
themselves. The things of their peace were so hidden from their eyes
that they knew not when they were well off, nor would believe when they
were told. (1.) They had a good governor of their own, and him they
slew, out of spite to the Chaldeans, because he was appointed by
Nebuchadnezzar, [Kg2 25:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#025). Ishmael,
who was of the royal family, envying Gedaliah's advancement and the
happy settlement of the people under him, though he could not propose to
set up himself, resolved to ruin him, and basely slew him and all his
friends, both Jews and Chaldeans. Nebuchadnezzar would not, could not,
have been a more mischievous enemy to their peace than this degenerate
branch of the house of David was. (2.) They were as yet in their own
good land, but they forsook it, and went to Egypt, for fear of the
Chaldeans, [Kg2 25:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#026). The Chaldeans
had reason enough to be offended at the murder of Gedaliah; but if those
that remained had humbly remonstrated, alleging that it was only the act
of Ishmael and his party, we may suppose that those who were innocent of
it, nay, who suffered greatly by it, would not have been punished for
it: but, under pretence of this apprehension, contrary to the counsel of
Jeremiah, they all went to Egypt, where, it is probable, they mixed with
the Egyptians by degrees, and were never heard of more as Israelites.
Thus was there a full end made of them by their own folly and
disobedience, and Egypt had the last of them, that the last verse of
that chapter of threatenings might be fulfilled, after all the rest,
[Deu 28:68](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#068), The Lord shall bring thee
into Egypt again. These events are more largely related by the prophet
Jeremiah, ch. 40 to [Jer 45:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#001).
Quaeque ipse miserrima vidit, et quorum pars magna fuit - Which scenes
he was doomed to behold, and in which he bore a melancholy part.

II\. The reviving of the captive prince. Of Zedekiah we hear no more
after he was carried blind to Babylon; it is probable that he did not
live long, but that when he died he was buried with some marks of
honour, [Jer 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#005). Of Jehoiachin, or
Jeconiah, who surrendered himself ([Kg2
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#012)), we are here told that as soon
as Evil-merodach came to the crown, upon the death of his father
Nebuchadnezzar, he released him out of prison (where he had lain
thirty-seven years, and was now fifty-five years old), spoke kindly to
him, paid more respect to him than to any other of the kings his father
had left in captivity ([Kg2 25:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#028)),
gave him princely clothing instead of his prison-garments, maintained
him in his own palace ([Kg2 25:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#029)),
and allowed him a pension for himself and his family in some measure
corresponding to his rank, a daily rate for every day as long as he
lived. Consider this, 1. As a very happy change of Jehoiachin's
condition. To have honour and liberty after he had been so long in
confinement and disgrace, the plenty and pleasure of a court after he
had been so long accustomed to the straits and miseries of a prison, was
like the return of the morning after a very dark and tedious night. Let
none say that they shall never see good again because they have long
seen little but evil; the most miserable know not what blessed turn
Providence may yet give to their affairs, nor what comforts they are
reserved for, according to the days wherein they have been afflicted,
[Psa 90:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#015). However the death of
afflicted saints is to them such a change as this was to Jehoiachin: it
will release them out of their prison, shake off the body, that
prison-garment, and open the way to their advancement; it will send them
to the throne, to the table, of the King of kings, the glorious liberty
of God's children. 2. As a very generous act of Evil-merodach's. He
thought his father made the yoke of his captives too heavy, and
therefore, with the tenderness of a man and the honour of a prince, made
it lighter. It should seem all the kings he had in his power were
favoured, but Jehoiachin above them all, some think for the sake of the
antiquity of his family and the honour of his renowned ancestors, David
and Solomon. None of the kings of the nations, it is likely, had
descended from so long a race of kings in a direct lineal succession,
and by a male line, as the king of Judah. The Jews say that this
Evil-merodach had been himself imprisoned by his own father, when he
returned from his madness, for some mismanagement at that time, and that
in prison he contracted a friendship with Jehoiachin, in consequence of
which, as soon as he had it in his power, he showed him this kindness as
a sufferer, as a fellow-sufferer. Some suggest that Evil-merodach had
learned from Daniel and his fellows the principles of the true religion,
and was well affected to them, and upon that account favoured
Jehoiachin. 3. As a kind dispensation of Providence, for the
encouragement of the Jews in captivity, and the support of their faith
and hope concerning their enlargement in due time. This happened just
about the midnight of their captivity. Thirty-six of the seventy years
were now past, and almost as many were yet behind, and now to see their
king thus advanced would be a comfortable earnest to them of their own
release in due time, in the set time. Unto the upright there thus
ariseth light in the darkness, to encourage them to hope, even in the
cloudy and dark day, that at evening time it shall be light; when
therefore we are perplexed, let us not be in despair.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Introduction](ch1000)

</div>
