<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2012)  [Next](kg2014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 13:0</span></span>

This chapter brings us again to the history of the kings of Israel, and
particularly of the family of Jehu. We have here an account of the
reign, I. Of his son Jehoahaz, which continued seventeen years. 1. His
bad character in general ([Kg2 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#001),
[Kg2 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#002)), the trouble he was brought
into ([Kg2 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#003)), and the low ebb of
his affairs ([Kg2 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#007)). 2. His
humiliation before God, and God's compassion towards him ([Kg2
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#004), [Kg2
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#005), and [Kg2
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#023)). 3. His continuance in his
idolatry notwithstanding ([Kg2 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#006)).
4. His death ([Kg2 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#008), [Kg2
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#009)). II. Of his grandson Joash,
which continued sixteen years. Here is a general account of his reign in
the usual form ([Kg2 13:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#010)), but a
particular account of the death of Elisha in his time. 1. The kind visit
the king made him ([Kg2 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#014)), the
encouragement he gave the king in his wars with Syria ([Kg2
13:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#015)). 2. His death and burial
([Kg2 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#020)), and a miracle wrought by
his bones ([Kg2 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#021)). And, lastly,
the advantages Joash gained against the Syrians, according to his
predictions ([Kg2 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#024), [Kg2
13:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#025)).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 13:1</span></span>

This general account of the reign of Jehoahaz, and of the state of
Israel during his seventeen years, though short, is long enough to let
us see two things which are very affecting and instructive: -

I. The glory of Israel raked up in the ashes, buried and lost, and
turned into shame. How unlike does Israel appear here to what it had
been and might have been! How is its crown profaned and its honour laid
in the dust! 1. It was the honour of Israel that they worshipped the
only living and true God, who is a Spirit, an eternal mind, and had
rules by which to worship him of his own appointment; but by changing
the glory of their incorruptible God into the similitude of an ox, the
truth of God into a lie, they lost this honour, and levelled themselves
with the nations that worshipped the work of their own hands. We find
here that the king followed the sins of Jeroboam ([Kg2
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#002)), and the people departed not
from them, but walked therein, [Kg2
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#006). There could not be a greater
reproach than these two idolized calves were to a people that were
instructed in the service of God and entrusted with the lively oracles.
In all the history of the ten tribes we never find the least shock given
to that idolatry, but, in every reign, still the calf was their god, and
they separated themselves to that shame. 2. It was the honour of Israel
that they were taken under the special protection of heaven; God himself
was their defence, the shield of their help and the sword of their
excellency. Happy wast thou, O Israel! upon this account. But here, as
often before, we find them stripped of this glory, and exposed to the
insults of all their neighbours. They by their sins provoked God to
anger, and then he delivered them into the hands of Hazael and Benhadad,
[Kg2 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#003). Hazael oppressed Israel
[Kg2 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#022). Surely never was any
nation so often plucked and pillaged by their neighbours as Israel was.
This the people brought upon themselves by sin; when they had provoked
God to pluck up their hedge, the goodness of their land did but tempt
their neighbours to prey upon them. So low was Israel brought in this
reign, by the many depravations which the Syrians made upon them, that
the militia of the kingdom and all the force they could bring into the
field were but fifty horsemen, ten chariots, and 10,000 footmen, a
despicable muster, [Kg2 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#007). Have the
thousands of Israel come to this? How has the gold become dim! The
debauching of a nation will certainly be the debasing of it.

II\. Some sparks of Israel's ancient honour appearing in these ashes. It
is not quite forgotten, notwithstanding all these quarrels, that this
people is the Israel of God and he is the God of Israel. For, 1. It was
the ancient honour of Israel that they were a praying people: and here
we find somewhat of that honour revived; for Jehoahaz their king, in his
distress, besought the Lord ([Kg2
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#004)), applied for help, not to the
calves (what help could they give him?) but to the Lord. It becomes
kings to be beggars at God's door, and the greatest of men to be humble
petitioners at the footstool of his throne. Need will drive them to it.
2. It was the ancient honour of Israel that they had God nigh unto them
in all that which they called upon him for ([Deu
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007)), and so he was here. Though he
might justly have rejected the prayer as an abomination to him, yet the
Lord hearkened unto Jehoahaz, and to his prayer for himself and for his
people ([Kg2 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#004)), and he gave Israel
a saviour ([Kg2 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#005)), not Jehoahaz
himself, for all his days Hazael oppressed Israel ([Kg2
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#022)), but his son, to whom, in
answer to his father's prayers, God gave success against the Syrians, so
that he recovered the cities which they had taken from his father, [Kg2
13:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#025). This gracious answer God gave
to the prayer of Jehoahaz, not for his sake, or the sake of that
unworthy people, but in remembrance of his covenant with Abraham ([Kg2
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#023)), which, in such exigencies as
these, he had long since promised to have respect to, [Lev
26:42](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#042). See swift God is to show mercy,
how ready to hear prayers, how willing to find out a reason to be
gracious, else he would not look so far back as that ancient covenant
which Israel had so often broken and forfeited all the benefit of. Let
this invite and engage us for ever to him, and encourage even those that
have forsaken him to return and repent; for there is forgiveness with
him, that he may be feared.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 13:10</span></span>

We have here Jehoash, or Joash, the son of Jehoahaz and grandson of
Jehu, upon the throne of Israel. Probably the house of Jehu intended
some respect to the house of David when they gave this heir-apparent to
the crown the same name with him that was then king of Judah.

I. The general account here given of him and his reign is much the same
with what we have already met with, and has little in it remarkable,
[Kg2 13:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#010). He was none of the
worst, and yet, because he kept up that ancient and politic idolatry of
the house of Jeroboam, it is said, He did that which was evil in the
sight of the Lord. That one evil was enough to leave an indelible mark
of infamy upon his name; for, how little evil soever men saw in it, it
was, in the sight of the Lord, a very wicked thing; and we are sure that
his judgment is according to truth. It is observable how lightly the
inspired penman passes over his acts, and his might wherewith he warred,
leaving it to the common historians to record them, while he takes
notice only of the respect he showed to Elisha. One good action shall
make a better figure in God's book than twenty great ones; and, in his
account, it gains a man a much better reputation to honour a prophet
than to conquer a king and his army.

II\. The particular account of what passed between him and Elisha has
several things in it remarkable.

1\. Elisha fell sick, [Kg2 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#014).
Observe, (1.) He lived long; for it was now about sixty years since he
was first called to be a prophet. It was a great mercy to Israel, and
especially to the sons of the prophets, that he was continued so long a
burning and shining light. Elijah finished his testimony in a fourth
part of that time. God's prophets have their day set them, some longer,
others shorter, as Infinite Wisdom sees fit. (2.) All the latter part of
his time, from the anointing of Jehu, which was forty-five years before
Joash began his reign, we find no mention made of him, or of any thing
he did, till we find him here upon his death-bed. He might be useful to
the last, and yet not so famous as he had sometimes been. The time of
his flourishing was less than the time of his living. Let not old people
complain of obscurity, but rather be well pleased with retirement. (3.)
The spirit of Elijah rested on Elisha, and yet he was not sent for to
heaven in a fiery chariot, as Elijah was, but went the common road out
of the world, and was visited with the visitation of all men. If God
honour some above others, who yet are not inferior to them in gifts or
graces, who shall find fault? May he not do what he will with his own?

2\. King Joash visited him in his sickness, and wept over him, [Kg2
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#014). This was an evidence of some
good in him, that he had a value and affection for a faithful prophet;
so far was he from hating and persecuting him as a troubler of Israel
that he loved and honoured him as one of the greatest blessings of his
kingdom, and lamented the loss of him. There have been those who would
not be obedient to the word of God, and yet have the faithful ministers
of it so manifested in their consciences that they could not but have an
honour for them. Observe here, (1.) When the king heard of Elisha's
sickness he came to visit him, and to receive his dying counsel and
blessing; and it was no disparagement to him, though a king, thus to
honour one whom God honoured. Note, It may turn much to our spiritual
advantage to attend the sick-beds and death-beds of good ministers and
other good men, that we may learn to die, and may be encouraged in
religion by the living comforts they have from it in a dying hour. (2.)
Though Elisha was very old, had been a great while useful, and, in the
course of nature, could not continue long, yet the king, when he saw him
sick and likely to die, wept over him. The aged are most experienced and
therefore can worst be spared. In many causes, one old witness is worth
ten young ones. (3.) He lamented him in the same words with which Elisha
had himself lamented the removal of Elijah: My father, my father. It is
probable he had heard or read them in that famous story. Note, Those
that give just honours to the generation that goes before them are often
recompensed with the like from the generation that comes after them. He
that watereth, that watereth with tears, shall be watered, shall be so
watered, also himself, when it comes to his own turn, [Pro
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#025). (4.) This king was herein
selfish; he lamented the loss of Elisha because he was as the chariot
and horsemen of Israel, and therefore could be ill spared when Israel
was so poor in chariots and horsemen, as we find they were ([Kg2
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#007)), when they had in all but fifty
horsemen and ten chariots. Those who consider how much good men
contribute to the defence of a nation, and the keeping off of God's
judgments, will see cause to lament the removal of them.

3\. Elisha gave the king great assurances of his success against the
Syrians, Israel's present oppressors, and encouraged him to prosecute
the war against them with vigour. Elisha was aware that therefore he was
loth to part with him because he looked upon him as the great bulwark of
the kingdom against that common enemy, and depended much upon his
blessings and prayers in his designs against them. "Well," says Elisha,
"if that be the cause of your grief, let not that trouble thee, for thou
shalt be victorious over the Syrians when I am in my grave. I die, but
God will surely visit you. He has the residue of the Spirit, and can
raise up other prophets to pray for you." God's grace is not tied to one
hand. He can bury his workmen and yet carry on his work. To animate the
king against the Syrians he gives him a sign, orders him to take bow and
arrows ([Kg2 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#015)), to intimate to
him that, in order to the deliverance of his kingdom from the Syrians,
he must put himself into a military posture and resolve to undergo the
perils and fatigues of war. God would be the agent, but he must be the
instrument. And that he should be successful he gives him a token, by
directing him,

(1.) To shoot an arrow towards Syria, [Kg2
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#016), [Kg2
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#017). The king, no doubt, knew how to
manage a bow better than the prophet did, and yet, because the arrow now
to be shot was to have its significancy from the divine institution, as
if he were now to be disciplined, he received the words of command from
the prophet: Put thy hand upon the bow - Open the window - Shoot. Nay,
as if he had been a child that never drew a bow before, Elisha put his
hands upon the king's hands, to signify that in all his expeditions
against the Syrians he must look up to God for direction and strength,
must reckon his own hands not sufficient for him, but go on in a
dependence upon divine aid. He teacheth my hands to war, [Psa
18:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#034); [Psa
144:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#001). The trembling hands of a dying
prophet, as they signified the concurrence and communication of the
power of God, gave this arrow more force than the hands of the king in
his full strength. The Syrians had made themselves masters of the
country that lay eastward, [Kg2 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#033).
Thitherward therefore the arrow was directed, and such an interpretation
given by the prophet of the shooting of this arrow, though shot in one
respect at random, as made it, \[1.\] A commission to the king to attack
the Syrians, notwithstanding their power and possession. \[2.\] A
promise of success therein. It is the arrow of the Lord's deliverance,
even the arrow of deliverance from Syria. It is God that commands
deliverance; and, when he will effect it, who can hinder? The arrow of
deliverance is his. He shoots out his arrows, and the work is done, [Psa
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#014). "Thou shalt smite the Syrians
in Aphek, where they are now encamped, or where they are to have a
general rendezvous of their forces, till thou have consumed those of
them that are vexatious and oppressive to thee and thy kingdom."

(2.) To strike with the arrows, [Kg2
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#018), [Kg2
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#019). The prophet having in God's
name assured him of victory over the Syrians, he will now try him and
see what improvement he will make of his victories, whether he will push
them on with more zeal than Ahab did when Benhadad lay at his mercy. For
the trial of this he bids him smite with the arrows on the ground:
"Believe them brought to the ground by the arrow of the Lord's
deliverance, and laid at thy feet; and now show me what thou wilt do to
them when thou hast them down, whether thou wilt do as David did when
God gave him the necks of his enemies, beat them small as the dust
before the wind," [Psa 18:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#040), [Psa
18:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#042). The king showed not that
eagerness and flame which one might have expected upon this occasion,
but smote thrice, and no more. Either out of foolish tenderness to the
Syrians, he smote as if he were afraid of hurting them, at least of
ruining them, willing to show mercy to those that never did, nor ever
would, show mercy to him or his people. Or, perhaps, he smote thrice,
and very coldly, because he thought it but a silly thing, that it looked
idle and childish for a king to beat the floor with his arrows; and
thrice was often enough for him to play the fool merely to please the
prophet. But, by contemning the sign, he lost the thing signified,
sorely to the grief of the dying prophet, who was angry with him, and
told him he should have smitten five or six times. Not being straitened
in the power and promise of God, why should he be straitened in his own
expectations and endeavours? Note, It cannot but be a trouble to good
men to see those they wish well to stand in their own light and forsake
their own mercies, to see them lose their advantages against their
spiritual enemies, and to give them advantage.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg2 13:20</span></span>

We must here attend,

I. The sepulchre of Elisha: he died in a good old age, and they buried
him; and what follows shows, 1. What power there was in his life to keep
off judgments; for, as soon as he was dead, the bands of the Moabites
invaded the land - not great armies to face them in the field, but
roving skulking bands, that murdered and plundered by surprise. God has
many ways to chastise a provoking people. The king was apprehensive of
danger only from the Syrians, but, behold, the Moabites invade him.
Trouble comes sometimes from that point whence we least feared it. The
mentioning of this immediately upon the death of Elisha intimates that
the removal of God's faithful prophets is a presage of judgments coming.
When ambassadors are recalled heralds may be expected. 2. What power
there was in his dead body: it communicated life to another dead body,
[Kg2 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#021). This great miracle, though
very briefly related, was a decided proof of his mission and a
confirmation of all his prophecies. It was also a plain indication of
another life after this. When Elisha died, there was not an end of him,
for then he could not have done this. From operation we may infer
existence. By this it appeared that the Lord was still the God of
Elisha; therefore Elisha still lived, for God is not the God of the
dead, but of the living. And it may, perhaps, have a reference to
Christ, by whose death and burial the grave is made to all believers a
safe and happy passage to life. It likewise intimated that though Elisha
was dead, yet, in virtue of the promises made by him, Israel's
interests, though they seemed quite sunk and lost, should revive and
flourish again. The neighbours were carrying the dead body of a man to
the grave, and, fearing to fall into the hands of the Moabites, a party
of whom they saw at a distance near the place where the body was to be
interred, they laid the corpse in the next convenient place, which
proved to be Elisha's sepulchre. The dead man, upon touching Elisha's
bones, revived, and, it is likely, went home again with his friends.
Josephus relates the story otherwise, That some thieves, having robbed
and murdered an honest traveller, threw his dead body into Elisha's
grave, and it immediately revived. Elijah was honoured in his departure.
Elisha was honoured after his departure. God thus dispenses honours as
he pleases, but, one way or other, the rest of all the saints will be
glorious, [Isa 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010). It is good being
near the saints and having our lot with them both in life and death.

II\. The sword of Joash king of Israel; and we find it successful
against the Syrians. 1. The cause of his success was God's favour ([Kg2
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#023)): The Lord was gracious to them,
had compassion on them in their miseries and respect unto them. The
several expressions here of the same import call upon us to observe and
admire the triumphs of divine goodness in the deliverance of such a
provoking people. It was of the Lord's mercies that they were not
consumed, because he would not destroy them as yet. He foresaw they
would destroy themselves at last, but as yet he would reprieve them, and
give them space to repent. The slowness of God's processes against
sinners must be construed to the honour of his mercy, not the
impeachment of his justice. 2. The effect of his success was Israel's
benefit. He recovered out of the hands of Benhadad the cities of Israel
which the Syrians were possessed of, [Kg2
13:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#025). This was a great kindness to
the cities themselves, which were hereby brought from under the yoke of
oppression, and to the whole kingdom, which was much strengthened by the
reduction of those cities. Thrice Joash beat the Syrians, just as often
as he had struck the ground with the arrows, and then a full stop was
put to the course of his victories. Many have repented, when it was too
late, of their distrusts and the straitness of their desires.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 14](kg2014)

</div>
