<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2019)  [Next](kg2021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 20:0</span></span>

i1

In this chapter we have, I. Hezekiah's sickness, and his recovery from
that, in answer to prayer, in performance of a promise, in the use of
means, and confirmed with a sign ([Kg2
20:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#001)). II. Hezekiah's sin, and his
recovery from that ([Kg2 20:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#012)). In
both of these, Isaiah was God's messenger to him. III. The conclusion of
his reign ([Kg2 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#020), [Kg2
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#021)).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 20:1</span></span>

The historian, having shown us blaspheming Sennacherib destroyed in the
midst of the prospects of life, here shows us praying Hezekiah delivered
in the midst of the prospects of death - the days of the former
shortened, of the latter prolonged.

I. Here is Hezekiah's sickness. In those days, that is, in the same year
in which the king of Assyria besieged Jerusalem; for he reigning
reigned? in all twenty-nine years, and surviving this fifteen years,
this must be in his fourteenth year, and so was that, [Kg2
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#013). Some think it was at the time
that the Assyrian army was besieging the city or preparing for it,
because God promises ([Kg2 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#006)): I
will defend the city, which promise was afterwards repeated, when the
danger came to be most imminent, [Kg2
19:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#034). Others think it was soon after
the defeat of Sennacherib; and then it shows us the uncertainty of all
our comforts in this world. Hezekiah, in the midst of his triumphs in
the favour of God, and over the forces of his enemies, is seized with
sickness, and under the arrest of death. We must therefore always
rejoice with trembling. It should seem he was sick of the plague, for we
read of the boil or plague-sore, [Kg2
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#007). The same disease which was
killing to the Assyrians was trying to him; God took it from him, and
put it upon his enemies. Neither greatness nor goodness can exempt us
from sickness, from sore and mortal sicknesses. Hezekiah, lately
favoured of heaven above most men, yet is sick unto death - in the midst
of his days (under forty) and yet sick and dying; and perhaps he was the
more apprehensive of its being fatal to him because his father died when
he was about his age, two or three years younger. "In the midst of life
we are in death."

II\. Warning brought him to prepare for death. It is brought by Isaiah,
who had been twice, as stated in the former chapter, a messenger of good
tidings to him. We cannot expect to receive from God's prophets any
other than what they have received from the Lord, and we must welcome
that, be it pleasing or unpleasing. The prophet tells him, 1. That his
disease is mortal, and, if he be not recovered by a miracle of mercy,
will certainly be fatal: Thou shalt die, and not live. 2. That therefore
he must, with all speed, get ready for death: Set thy house in order.
This we should feel highly concerned to do when we are in health, but
are most loudly called to do when we come to be sick. Set the heart in
order by renewed acts of repentance, and faith, and resignation to God,
with cheerful farewells to this world and welcomes to another; and, if
not done before (which is the best and wisest course), set the house in
order, make thy will, settle thy estate, put thy affairs in the best
posture thou canst, for the ease of those that shall come after thee.
Isaiah speaks not to Hezekiah of his kingdom, only of his house. David,
being a prophet, had authority to appoint who should reign after him,
but other kings did not pretend to bequeath their crowns as part of
their goods and chattels.

III\. His prayer hereupon: He prayed unto the Lord, [Kg2
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#002). Is any sick? Let him be prayed
for, let him be prayed with, and let him pray. Hezekiah had found, as
recorded in the foregoing chapter, that it was not in vain to wait upon
God, but that the prayers of faith bring in answers of peace; therefore
will he call upon God as long as he lives. Happy experiences of the
prevalency of prayer are engagements and encouragements to continue
instant in prayer. He had now received the sentence of death within
himself, and, if it was reversible, it must be reversed by prayer. When
God purposes mercy he will, for this, be enquired of, [Eze
36:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#037). We have not if we ask not, or
ask amiss. If the sentence was irreversible, yet prayer is one of the
best preparations for death, because by it we fetch in strength and
grace from God to enable us to finish well. Observe,

1\. The circumstances of this prayer. (1.) He turned his face to the
wall, probably as he lay in his bed. This he did perhaps for privacy; he
could not retire to his closet as he used to do, but he retired as well
as he could, turned from the company that were about him, to converse
with God. When we cannot be so private as we would be in our devotions,
nor perform them with the usual outward expressions of reverence and
solemnity, yet we must not therefore omit them, but compose ourselves to
them as well as we can. Or, as some think, he turned his face towards
the temple, to show how willingly he would have gone up thither, to pray
this prayer (as he did, [Kg2 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#001),
[Kg2 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#014)), if he had been able, and
remembering what encouragements were given to all the prayers that
should be made in or towards that house. Christ is our temple; to him we
must have an eye in all our prayers, for no man, no service, comes to
the Father but by him. (2.) He wept sorely. Some gather from this that
he was unwilling to die. It is in the nature of man to have some dread
of the separation of soul and body, and it was not strange if the Old
Testament saints, to whom another world was but darkly revealed, were
not so willing to leave this as Paul and other New Testament saints
were. There was also something peculiar in Hezekiah's case: he was now
in the midst of his usefulness, had begun a good work of reformation,
which he feared would, through the corruption of the people, fall to the
ground, if he should die. If this was before the defeat of the Assyrian
army, as some think, he might therefore be loth to die, because his
kingdom was in imminent danger of being ruined. However, it does not
appear that he had now any son: Manasseh, that succeeded him, was not
born till three years after; and, if he should die childless, both the
peace of his kingdom and the promise to David would be in danger. But
perhaps these were only tears of importunity, and expressions of a
lively affection in prayer. Jacob wept and made supplication; and our
blessed Saviour, though most willing to die, yet offered up strong
cries, with tears, to him whom he knew to be able to save him, [Heb
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007). Let Hezekiah's prayer interpret
his tears, and in that we find nothing that intimates him to have been
under any of that fear of death which has either bondage or torment.

2\. The prayer itself: "Remember now, O Lord! how I have walked before
thee in truth; and either spare me to live, that I may continue thus to
walk, if, if my work be done, receive me to that glory which thou hast
prepared for those that have thus walked." Observe here, (1.) The
description of Hezekiah's piety. He had had his conversation in the
world with right intentions ("I have walked before thee, as under thy
eye and with an eye ever towards thee"), from a right principle ("in
truth, and with an upright heart"), and by a right rule - "I have done
that which is good in thy sight." (2.) The comfort he now had in
reflecting upon it; it made his sick-bed easy. Note, The testimony of
conscience for us that we have walked with God in our integrity will be
much our support and rejoicing when we come to look death in the face,
[Co2 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012). (3.) The humble mention he
makes of it to God. Lord, remember it now; not as if God needed to be
put in mind of any thing by us (he is greater than our hearts, and knows
all things), or as if the reward were of debt, and might be demanded as
due (it is Christ's righteousness only that is the purchase of mercy and
grace); but our own sincerity may be pleaded as the condition of the
covenant which God has wrought in us: "It is the work of thy own hands.
Lord, own it." Hezekiah does not pray, "Lord, spare me," or, "Lord, take
me; God's will be done;" but, Lord, remember me; whether I live or die,
let me be thine.

IV\. The answer which God immediately gave to this prayer of Hezekiah.
The prophet had got but to the middle court when he was sent back with
another message to Hezekiah ([Kg2
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#004), [Kg2
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#005)), to tell him that he should
recover; not that there is with God yea and nay, or that he ever says
and unsays; but upon Hezekiah's prayer, which he foresaw and which his
Spirit inclined him to, God did that for him which otherwise he would
not have done. God here calls Hezekiah the captain of his people, to
intimate that he would reprieve him for his people's sake, because, in
this time of war, they could ill spare such a captain: he calls himself
the God of David, to intimate that he would reprieve him out of a regard
to the covenant made with David and the promise that he would always
ordain a lamp for him. In this answer, 1. God honours his prayers by the
notice he takes of them and the reference he has to them in this
message: I have heard thy prayers, I have seen thy tears. Prayers that
have much life and affection in them are in a special manner pleasing to
God. 2. God exceeds his prayers; he only begged that God would remember
his integrity, but God here promises (1.) To restore him from his
illness: I will heal thee. Diseases are his servants; as they go where
he sends them, so they come when he remands them. [Mat
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#008), [Mat
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#009). I am the Lord that healeth thee,
[Exo 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#026). (2.) To restore him to
such a degree of health that on the third day he should go up to the
house of the Lord, to return thanks. God knew Hezekiah's heart, how
dearly he loved the habitation of God's house and the place where his
honour dwelt, and that as soon as he was well he would go to attend on
public ordinances; thitherward he turned his face when he was sick, and
thitherward he would turn his feet when he was recovered; and therefore,
because nothing would please him better, he promises him this, Let my
soul live, and it shall praise thee. The man whom Christ healed was soon
after found in the temple, [Joh 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#014).
(3.) To add fifteen years to his life. This would not bring him to be an
old man; it would reach but to fifty-four or fifty-five; yet that was
longer than he had lately expected to live. His lease was renewed, which
he thought was expiring. We have not the instance of any other that was
told before-hand just how long he should live; that good man no doubt
made a good use of it; but God has wisely kept us at uncertainties, that
we may be always ready. (4.) To deliver Jerusalem from the king of
Assyria, [Kg2 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#006). This was the thing
which Hezekiah's heart was upon a much as his own recovery, and
therefore the promise of this is here repeated. If this was after the
raising of the siege, yet there was cause to fear Sennacherib's rallying
again. "No," says God, "I will defend this city."

V. The means which were to be used for his recovery, [Kg2
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#007). Isaiah was his physician. He
ordered an outward application, a very cheap and common thing: "Lay a
lump of figs to the boil, to ripen it and bring it to a head, that the
matter of the disease may be discharged that way." This might contribute
something to the cure, and yet, considering to what a height the disease
had come, and how suddenly it was checked, the cure was no less than
miraculous. Note, 1. It is our duty, when we are sick, to make use of
such means as are proper to help nature, else we do not trust God, but
tempt him. 2. Plain and ordinary medicines must not be despised, for
many such God has graciously made serviceable to man, in consideration
of the poor. 3. What God appoints he will bless and make effectual.

VI\. The sign which was given for the encouragement of his faith. 1. He
begged it, not in any distrust of the power or promise of God, or as if
he staggered at that, but because he looked upon the things promised to
be very great things and worthy to be so confirmed, and because it had
been usual with God thus to glorify himself and favour his people; and
he remembered how much Gos was displeased with his father for refusing
to ask a sign, [Isa 7:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#010). Observe,
Hezekiah asked What is the sign, not that I shall go up to the thrones
of judgment or up to the gate, but up to the house of the Lord? He
desired to recover that he might glorify God in the gates of the
daughter of Zion. It is not worth while to live for any other purpose
than to serve God. 2. It was put to his choice whether the sun should go
back or go forward; for it was equal to Omnipotence, and it would be the
more likely to confirm his faith if he chose that which he thought the
more difficult of the two. Perhaps to this that of this prophet may
refer ([Isa 45:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#011)), Ask me of things
to come concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my hands command
you me. It is supposed that the degrees were half hours, and that it was
just noon when the proposal was made, and the question is, "Shall the
sun go back to its place at seven in the morning or forward to its place
at five in the evening?" 3. He humbly desired the sun might go back ten
degrees, because, though either would be a great miracle, yet, it being
the natural course of the sun to go forward, its going back would seem
more strange, and would be more significant of Hezekiah's returning to
the days of his youth ([Job 33:25](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#025)) and
the lengthening out of the day of his life. It was accordingly done,
upon the prayer of Isaiah ([Kg2
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#011)): He cried unto the Lord by
special warrant and direction, and God brought the sun back ten degrees,
which appeared to Hezekiah (for the sign was intended for him) by the
going back of the shadow upon the dial of Ahaz, which, it is likely, he
could see through his chamber-window; and the same was observed upon all
other dials, even in Babylon, [Ch2
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#031). Whether this retrograde motion
of the sun was gradual or per saltum - suddenly - whether it went back
at the same pace that it used to go forward, which would make the day
ten hours longer than usual - or whether it darted back on a sudden,
and, after continuing a little while, was restored again to its usual
place, so that no change was made in the state of the heavenly bodies
(as the learned bishop Patrick thinks) - we are not told; but this work
of wonder shows the power of God in heaven as well as on earth, the
great notice he takes of prayer, and the great favour he bears to his
chosen. The most plausible idolatry of the heathen was theirs that
worshipped the sun; yet that was hereby convicted of the most egregious
folly and absurdity, for by this it appeared that their god was under
the check of the God of Israel. Dr. Lightfoot suggests that the fifteen
songs of degrees ([Psa 120:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#001), etc.)
might perhaps be so called because selected by Hezekiah to be sung to
his stringed instruments ([Isa 38:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#020))
in remembrance of the degrees on the dial which the sun went back and
the fifteen years added to his life; and he observes how much of these
psalms is applicable to Jerusalem's distress and deliverance and
Hezekiah's sickness and recovery.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 20:12</span></span>

Here is, I. An embassy sent to Hezekiah by the king of Babylon, to
congratulate him on his recovery, [Kg2
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#012). The kings of Babylon had
hitherto been only deputies and tributaries to the kings of Assyria, and
Nineveh was the royal city. We find Babylon subject to the king of
Assyria, [Kg2 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024). But this king of
Babylon began to set up for himself, and by degrees things were so
changed that Assyria became subject to the kings of Babylon. This king
of Babylon sent to compliment Hezekiah, and ingratiate himself with him
upon a double account. 1. Upon the account of religion. The Babylonians
worshipped the sun, and, perceiving what honour their god had done to
Hezekiah, in going back for his sake, they thought themselves obliged to
do honour to him likewise. It is good having those our friends whom we
perceive to be the favourites of heaven. 2. Upon the account of civil
interest. If the king of Babylon was now mediating a revolt from the
king of Assyria, it was policy to get Hezekiah into his interest, in
answer to whose prayers, and for whose protection, heaven had given that
fatal blow to the king of Assyria. He found himself obliged to Hezekiah,
and his God, for the weakening of the Assyrian forces, and had reason to
think he could not have a more powerful and valuable ally than one that
had so good an interest in the upper world. He therefore made his court
to him with all possible respect by ambassadors, letters, and a present.

II\. The kind entertainment Hezekiah gave to these ambassadors, [Kg2
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#013). It was his duty to be civil to
them, and receive them with the respect due to ambassadors; but he
exceeded, and was courteous to a fault. 1. He was too fond of them. He
hearkened unto them. Though they were idolaters, yet he became intimate
with them, was forward to come into a confederacy with the king their
master, and granted them all they came for. He was more open and free
than he should have been, and stood not so much upon his guard. What
reason had he that was in covenant with God so eagerly to catch at an
alliance with a heathen prince, or to value himself at all upon his
respectful notice? What honour could this embassy add to one whom God
had so highly favoured, that he should please himself so much with it?
2. He was too fond of showing them his palace, his treasures, and his
magazines, that they might see, and might report to their master, what a
great king he was, and how well worthy of the honour their master did
him. It is not said that he showed them the temple, the book of the law,
and the manner of his worship, that he might proselyte them to the true
religion, which he had now a fair opportunity of doing; but in
compliment to them, lest he should affront them, he waived that, and
showed them the rich furniture of his closet, that house of his precious
things, the wealth he had heaped up since the king of Assyria had
emptied his coffers, his silver, and gold, and spices. All the valuable
things he had he showed them, either himself or by his officers. And
what harm was there in this? What is more commonly, and (as we think)
more innocently, done, than to show strangers the riches and rarities of
a country - to show our friends our houses and their furniture, our
gardens, stables, and libraries? But if we do this in the pride of our
hearts, as Hezekiah did, to gain applause from men, and not giving
praise to God, it turns into sin to us, as it did to him.

III\. The examination of Hezekiah concerning this matter, [Kg2
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#014), [Kg2
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#015). Isaiah, who had often been his
comforter, is now his reprover. The blessed Spirit is both, [Joh
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007), [Joh
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#008). Ministers must be both, as there
is occasion. Isaiah spoke in God's name, and therefore called him to
account as one having authority: "Who are these? Whence come they? What
is their business? What have they seen?" Hezekiah not only submitted to
the examination (did not ask him, "Why should you concern yourself and
question me about this affair?"), but made an ingenuous confession:
There is nothing among my treasures that I have not shown them. Why then
did he not bring them to Isaiah, and show him to them who was without
doubt the best treasure he had in his dominions, and who by his prayers
and prophecies had been instrumental in all those wonders which these
ambassadors came to enquire into? I hope Hezekiah had the same value for
Isaiah now that he had in his distress; but it would have become him to
show it by bringing these ambassadors to him in the first place, which
might have prevented the false step he took.

IV\. The sentence passed upon him for his pride and vanity, and the too
great relish he had of the things of the world, after that intimate
acquaintance he had so lately been admitted into with divine things. The
sentence is ([Kg2 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#017), [Kg2
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#018)), 1. That the treasures he was
so proud of should hereafter become a prey, and his family should be
robbed of them all. It is just with God to take that from us which we
make the matter of our pride and in which we put our confidence. 2. That
the king of Babylon, with whom he was so fond of an alliance, should be
the enemy that should make a prey of them. Not that it was for this sin
that that judgment should be brought upon them: the sins of Manasseh,
his idolatries and murders, were the cause of that calamity; but it is
now foretold to Hezekiah, to convince him of the folly of his pride and
of the value he had for the king of Babylon, and to make him ashamed of
it. Hezekiah was fond of assisting the king of Babylon to rise, and to
reduce the exorbitant power of the kings of Assyria; but he is told that
the snake he is cherishing will ere long sting the bosom that cherishes
it, and that his royal seed shall become the king of Babylon's slave
(which was fulfilled, [Dan 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001), etc.),
than which there could not be any thing more mortifying to Hezekiah to
think of. Babylon will be the ruin of those that are fond of Babylon.
Wise therefore and happy are those that come out from her, [Rev
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004).

V. Hezekiah's humble and patient submission to this sentence, [Kg2
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#019). Observe how he argues himself
into this submission. 1. He lays it down for a truth that "good is the
word of the Lord, even this word, though a threatening; for every word
of his is so. It is not only just, but good; for, as he does no wrong to
any, so he means no hurt to good men. It is good; for he will bring good
out of it, and do me good by the foresight of it." We should believe
this concerning every providence, that it is good, is working for good.
2. He takes notice of that in this word which was good, that he should
not live to see this evil, much less to share in it. He makes the best
of the bad: "Is it not good? Yes, certainly it is, and better than I
deserve." Note, (1.) True penitents, when they are under divine rebukes,
call them not only just, but good; not only submit to the punishment of
their iniquity, but accept of it. So Hezekiah did, and by this it
appeared that he was indeed humbled for the pride of his heart. (2.)
When at any time we are under dark dispensations, or have dark
prospects, public or personal, we must take notice of what is for us as
well as what is against us, that we may by thanksgiving honour God, and
may in our patience possess our own souls. (3.) As to public affairs, it
is good, and we are bound to think it so, if peace and truth be in our
days. That is, \[1.\] Whatever else we want, it is good if we have peace
and truth, if we have the true religion professed and protected, Bibles
and ministers, and enjoy these in peace, not terrified with the alarms
of war or persecution. \[2.\] Whatever trouble may come when we are
gone, it is good if all be well in our days. Not that we should be
unconcerned for posterity; it is a grief to foresee evils: but we should
own that the deferring of judgments is a great favour in general, and to
have them deferred so long as what we may die in peace is a particular
favour to us, for charity begins at home. We know not how we shall bear
the trial, and therefore have reason to think it well if we may but get
safely to heaven before it comes.

Lastly, Here is the conclusion of Hezekiah's life and story, [Kg2
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#020), [Kg2
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#021). In 2 Chr. ch. 29-32 much more
is recorded of Hezekiah's work of reformation than in this book of
Kings; and it seems that in the civil chronicles, not now extant, there
were many things recorded of his might and the good offices he did for
Jerusalem, particularly his bringing water by pipes into the city. To
have water in plenty, without striving for it and without being
terrified with the noise of archers in the drawing of it, to have it at
hand and convenient for us, is to be reckoned a great mercy; for the
want of water would be a great calamity. But here this historian leaves
him asleep with his fathers, and a son in his throne that proved very
untoward; for parents cannot give grace to their children. Wicked Ahaz
was the son of a godly father and the father of a godly son; holy
Hezekiah was the son of a wicked father and the father of a wicked son.
When the land was not reformed, as it should have been, by a good reign,
it was plagued and ripened for ruin by a bad one; yet then tried again
with a good one, that it might appear how loth God was to cut off his
people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 21](kg2021)

</div>
