<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev017)  [Next](lev019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 18:0</span></span>

Here is, I. A general law against all conformity to the corrupt usages
of the heathen ([Lev 18:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#001)). II.
Particular laws, 1. Against incest ([Lev
18:6-18](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#006)). 2. Against beastly lusts,
and barbarous idolatries ([Lev
18:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#019)). III. The enforcement of
these laws from the ruin of the Canaanites ([Lev
18:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#024)).

[Leviticus 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 18:1</span></span>

After divers ceremonial institutions, God here returns to the
enforcement of moral precepts. The former are still of use to us as
types, the latter still binding as laws. We have here, 1. The sacred
authority by which these laws are enacted: I am the Lord your God ([Lev
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#001), [Lev
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#004), [Lev
18:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#030)), and I am the Lord, [Lev
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005), [Lev
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#006), [Lev
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#021). "The Lord, who has a right to
rule all; your God, who has a peculiar right to rule you." Jehovah is
the fountain of being, and therefore the fountain of power, whose we
are, whom we are bound to serve, and who is able to punish all
disobedience. "Your God to whom you have consented, in whom you are
happy, to whom you lie under the highest obligations imaginable, and to
whom you are accountable." 2. A strict caution to take heed of retaining
the relics of the idolatries of Egypt, where they had dwelt, and of
receiving the infection of the idolatries of Canaan, whither they were
now going, [Lev 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#003). Now that God was
by Moses teaching them his ordinances there was aliquid dediscendum -
something to be unlearned, which they had sucked in with their milk in
Egypt, a country noted for idolatry: You shall not do after the doings
of the land of Egypt. It would be the greatest absurdity in itself to
retain such an affection for their house of bondage as to be governed in
their devotions by the usages of it, and the greatest ingratitude to
God, who had so wonderfully and graciously delivered them. Nay, as if
governed by a spirit of contradiction, they would be in danger, even
after they had received these ordinances of God, of admitting the wicked
usages of the Canaanites and of inheriting their vices with their land.
Of this danger they are here warned, You shall not walk in their
ordinances. Such a tyrant is custom that their practices are called
ordinances, and they became rivals even with God's ordinances, and God's
professing people were in danger of receiving law from them. 3. A solemn
charge to them to keep God's judgments, statutes, and ordinances, [Lev
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#004), [Lev
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005). To this charge, and many similar
ones, David seems to refer in the many prayers and professions he makes
relating to God's laws in the 119th Psalm. Observe here, (1.) The great
rule of our obedience - God's statutes and judgments. These we must keep
to walk therein. We must keep them in our books, and keep them in our
hands, that we may practise them in our hearts and lives. Remember God's
commandments to do them, [Psa 103:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#018).
We must keep in them as our way to travel in, keep to them as our rule
to work by, keep them as our treasure, as the apple of our eye, with the
utmost care and value. (2.) The great advantage of our obedience: Which
if a man do, he shall live in them, that is, "he shall be happy here and
hereafter." We have reason to thank God, \[1.\] That this is still in
force as a promise, with a very favourable construction of the
condition. If we keep God's commandments in sincerity, though we come
short of sinless perfection, we shall find that the way of duty is the
way of comfort, and will be the way to happiness. Godliness has the
promise of life, [Ti1 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008). Wisdom has
said, Keep my commandments and live: and if through the Spirit we
mortify the deeds of the body (which are to us as the usages of Egypt
were to Israel) we shall live. \[2.\] That it is not so in force in the
nature of a covenant as that the least transgression shall for ever
exclude us from this life. The apostle quotes this twice as opposite to
the faith which the gospel reveals. It is the description of the
righteousness which is by the law, the man that doeth them shall live en
autois - in them ([Rom 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#005)), and is
urged to prove that the law is not of faith, [Gal
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#012). The alteration which the gospel
has made is in the last word: still the man that does them shall live,
but not live in them; for the law could not give life, because we could
not perfectly keep it; it was weak through the flesh, not in itself; but
now the man that does them shall live by the faith of the Son of God. He
shall owe his life to the grace of Christ, and not to the merit of his
own works; see [Gal 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#021), [Gal
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#022). The just shall live, but they
shall live by faith, by virtue of their union with Christ, who is their
life.

[Leviticus 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 18:6</span></span>

These laws relate to the seventh commandment, and, no doubt, are
obligatory on us under the gospel, for they are consonant to the very
light and law of nature: one of the articles, that of a man's having his
father's wife, the apostle speaks of as a sin not so much as named among
the Gentiles, [Co1 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001). Though some of
the incests here forbidden were practised by some particular persons
among the heathen, yet they were disallowed and detested, unless among
those nations who had become barbarous, and were quite given up to vile
affections. Observe,

I. That which is forbidden as to the relations here specified is
approaching to them to uncover their nakedness, [Lev
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#006).

1\. It is chiefly intended to forbid the marrying of any of these
relations. Marriage is a divine institution; this and the sabbath, the
eldest of all, of equal standing with man upon the earth: it is intended
for the comfort of human life, and the decent and honourable propagation
of the human race, such as became the dignity of man's nature above that
of the beasts. It is honourable in all, and these laws are for the
support of the honour of it. It was requisite that a divine ordinance
should be subject to divine rules and restraints, especially because it
concerns a thing wherein the corrupt nature of man is as apt as in any
thing to be wilful and impetuous in its desires, and impatient of check.
Yet these prohibitions, besides their being enacted by an incontestable
authority, are in themselves highly reasonable and equitable. (1.) By
marriage two were to become one flesh, therefore those that before were
in a sense one flesh by nature could not, without the greatest
absurdity, become one flesh by institution; for the institution was
designed to unite those who before were not united. (2.) Marriage puts
an equality between husband and wife. "Is she not thy companion taken
out of thy side?" Therefore, if those who before were superior and
inferior should intermarry (which is the case in most of the instances
here laid down), the order of nature would be taken away by a positive
institution, which must by no means be allowed. The inequality between
master and servant, noble and ignoble, is founded in consent and custom,
and there is no harm done if that be taken away by the equality of
marriage; but the inequality between parents and children, uncles and
nieces, aunts and nephews, either by blood or marriage, is founded in
nature, and is therefore perpetual, and cannot without confusion be
taken away by the equality of marriage, the institution of which, though
ancient, is subsequent to the order of nature. (3.) No relations that
are equals are forbidden, except brothers and sisters, by the whole
blood or half blood, or by marriage; and in this there is not the same
natural absurdity as in the former, for Adam's sons must of necessity
have married their own sisters; but it was requisite that it should be
made by a positive law unlawful and detestable, for the preventing of
sinful familiarities between those that in the days of their youth are
supposed to live in a house together, and yet cannot intermarry without
defeating one of the intentions of marriage, which is the enlargement of
friendship and interest. If every man married his own sister (as they
would be apt to do from generation to generation if it were lawful),
each family would be a world to itself, and it would be forgotten that
we are members one of another. It is certain that this has always been
looked upon by the more sober heathen as a most infamous and abominable
thing; and those who had not this law yet were herein a law to
themselves. The making use of the ordinance of marriage for the
patronizing of incestuous mixtures is so far from justifying them, or
extenuating their guilt, that it adds the guilt of profaning an
ordinance of God, and prostituting that to the vilest of purposes which
was instituted for the noblest ends. But,

2\. Uncleanness, committed with any of these relations out of marriage,
is likewise, without doubt, forbidden here, and no less intended than
the former: as also all lascivious carriage, wanton dalliance, and every
thing that has the appearance of this evil. Relations must love one
another, and are to have free and familiar converse with each other, but
it must be with all purity; and the less it is suspected of evil by
others the more care ought the persons themselves to take that Satan do
not get advantage against them, for he is a very subtle enemy, and seeks
all occasions against us.

II\. The relations forbidden are most of them plainly described; and it
is generally laid down as a rule that what relations of a man's own he
is bound up from marrying the same relations of his wife he is likewise
forbidden to marry, for they two are one. That law which forbids
marrying a brother's wife ([Lev 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#016))
had an exception peculiar to the Jewish state, that, if a man died
without issue, his brother or next of kin should marry the widow, and
raise up seed to the deceased ([Deu
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005)), for reasons which held good
only in that commonwealth; and therefore now that those reasons have
ceased the exception ceases, and the law is in force, that a man must in
no case marry his brother's widow. That article ([Lev
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#018)) which forbids a man to take a
wife to her sister supposes a connivance at polygamy, as some other laws
then did ([Exo 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#010); [Deu
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#015)), but forbids a man's marrying
two sisters, as Jacob did, because between those who had before been
equal there would be apt to arise greater jealousies and animosities
than between wives that were not so nearly related. If the sister of the
wife be taken for the concubine, or secondary wife, nothing can be more
vexing in her life, or as long as she lives.

[Leviticus 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lev 18:19</span></span>

Here is, I. A law to preserve the honour of the marriage-bed, that it
should not be unseasonably used ([Lev
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#019)), nor invaded by an adulterer,
[Lev 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#020).

II\. A law against that which was the most unnatural idolatry, causing
their children to pass through the fire to Moloch, [Lev
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#021). Moloch (as some think) was the
idol in and by which they worshipped the sun, that great fire of the
world; and therefore in the worship of it they made their own children
either sacrifices to this idol, burning them to death before it, or
devotees to it, causing them to pass between two fires, as some think,
or to be thrown through one, to the honour of this pretended deity,
imagining that the consecrating of but one of their children in this
manner to Moloch would procure good fortune for all the rest of their
children. Did idolaters thus give their own children to false gods, and
shall we think any thing too dear to be dedicated to, or to be parted
with for, the true God? See how this sin of Israel (which they were
afterwards guilty of, notwithstanding this law) is aggravated by the
relation which they and their children stood in to God. [Eze
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#020), Thou hast taken thy sons and
thy daughters, whom thou hast borne unto me, and these thou hast
sacrificed. Therefore it is here called profaning the name of their God;
for it looked as if they thought they were under greater obligations to
Moloch than to Jehovah; for to him they offered their cattle only, but
to Moloch their children.

III\. A law against unnatural lusts, sodomy and bestiality, sins not to
be named nor thought of without the utmost abhorrence imaginable, [Lev
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#022), [Lev
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#023). Other sins level men with the
beasts, but these sink them much lower. That ever there should have been
occasion for the making of these laws, and that since they are published
they should ever have been broken, is the perpetual reproach and scandal
of human nature; and the giving of men up to these vile affections was
frequently the punishment of their idolatries; so the apostle shows,
[Rom 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#024).

IV\. Arguments against these and the like abominable wickednesses. He
that has an indisputable right to command us, yet because he will deal
with us as men, and draw with the cords of a man, condescends to reason
with us. 1. Sinners defile themselves with these abominations: Defile
not yourselves in any of these things, [Lev
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#024). All sin is defiling to the
conscience, but these are sins that have a peculiar turpitude in them.
Our heavenly Father, in kindness to us, requires of us that we keep
ourselves clean, and do not wallow in the dirt. 2. The souls that commit
them shall be cut off, [Lev 18:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#029). And
justly; for, if any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy,
[Co1 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017). Fleshly lusts war against
the soul, and will certainly be the ruin of it if God's mercy and grace
prevent not. 3. The land is defiled, [Lev
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#025). If such wickednesses as these
be practised and connived at, the land is thereby made unfit to have
God's tabernacle in it, and the pure and holy God will withdraw the
tokens of his gracious presence from it. It is also rendered unwholesome
to the inhabitants, who are hereby infected with sin and exposed to
plagues and it is really nauseous and loathsome to all good men in it,
as the wickedness of Sodom was to the soul of righteous Lot. 4. These
have been the abominations of the former inhabitants, v, 24, 27.
Therefore it was necessary that these laws should be made, as antidotes
and preservatives from the plague are necessary when we go into an
infected place. And therefore they should not practise any such things,
because the nations that had practised them now lay under the curse of
God, and were shortly to fall by the sword of Israel. They could not but
be sensible how odious those people had made themselves who wallowed in
this mire, and how they stank in the nostrils of all good men; and shall
a people sanctified and dignified as Israel was make themselves thus
vile? When we observe how ill sin looks in others we should use this as
an argument with ourselves with the utmost care and caution to preserve
our purity. 5. For these and the like sins the Canaanites were to be
destroyed; these filled the measure of the Amorites' iniquity ([Gen
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#016)), and brought down that
destruction of so many populous kingdoms which the Israelites were now
shortly to be not only the spectators, but the instruments of: Therefore
I do visit the iniquity thereof upon it, [Lev
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#025). Note, The tremendous judgments
of God, executed on those that are daringly profane and atheistical, are
intended as warnings to those who profess religion to take heed of every
thing that has the least appearance of, or tendency towards, profaneness
or atheism. Even the ruin of the Canaanites is an admonition to the
Israelites not to do like them. Nay, to show that not only the Creator
is provoked, but the creation burdened, by such abominations as these,
it is added ([Lev 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#025)), The land
itself vomiteth out her inhabitants. The very ground they went upon did,
as it were, groan under them, and was sick of them, and not easy till it
had discharged itself of these enemies of the Lord, [Isa
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024). This bespeaks the extreme
loathsomeness of sin; sinful man indeed drinks in iniquity like water,
but the harmless part of the creation even heaves at it, and rises
against it. Many a house and many a town have spued out the wicked
inhabitants, as it were, with abhorrence, [Rev
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#016). Therefore take heed, saith God,
that the land spue not you out also, [Lev
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#028). It was secured to them, and
entailed upon them, and yet they must expect that, if they made the
vices of the Canaanites their own, with their land their fate would be
the same. Note, Wicked Israelites are as abominable to God as wicked
Canaanites, and more so, and will be as soon spued out, or sooner. Such
a warning as was here given to the Israelites is given by the apostle to
the Gentile converts, with reference to the rejected Jews, in whose room
they were substituted ([Rom 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#019),
etc.); they must take heed of falling after the same example of
unbelief, [Heb 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#011). Apply it more
generally; and let it deter us effectually from all sinful courses to
consider how many they have been the ruin of. Lay the ear of faith to
the gates of the bottomless pit, and hear the doleful shrieks and
outcries of damned sinners, whom earth has spued out and hell has
swallowed, that find themselves undone, for ever undone, by sin; and
tremble lest this be your portion at last. God's threatenings and
judgments should frighten us from sin.

V. The chapter concludes with a sovereign antidote against this
infection: Therefore you shall keep my ordinance that you commit not any
one of these abominable customs, [Lev
18:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#030). This is the remedy prescribed.
Note, 1. Sinful customs are abominable customs, and their being common
and fashionable does not make them at all the less abominable nor should
we the less abominate them, but the more; because the more customary
they are the more dangerous they are. 2. It is of pernicious consequence
to admit and allow of any one sinful custom, because one will make way
for many, Uno absurdo dato, mille sequuntur - Admit but a single
absurdity, you invite a thousand. The way of sin is downhill. 3. A close
and constant adherence to God's ordinances is the most effectual
preservative from the infection of gross sin. The more we taste of the
sweetness and feel of the power of holy ordinances the less inclination
we shall have to the forbidden pleasures of sinners' abominable customs.
It is the grace of God only that will secure us, and that grace is to be
expected only in the use of the means of grace. Nor does God ever leave
any to their own hearts' lusts till they have first left him and his
institutions.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 19](lev019)

</div>
