<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev002)  [Next](lev004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 3:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have the law concerning the peace-offerings, whether
they were, I. Of the heard, a bullock or a heifer ([Lev
3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001)). Or, II. Of the flock, either a
lamb ([Lev 3:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#006)) or a goat ([Lev
3:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#012)). The ordinances concerning
each of these are much the same, yet they are repeated, to show the care
we ought to take that all our services be done according to the
appointment and the pleasure God takes in the services that are so
performed. It is likewise to intimate what need we have of precept upon
precept, and line upon line.

[Leviticus 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 3:1</span></span>

The burnt-offerings had regard to God as in himself the best of beings,
most perfect and excellent; they were purely expressive of adoration,
and therefore were wholly burnt. But the peace-offerings had regard to
God as a benefactor to his creatures, and the giver of all good things
to us; and therefore these were divided between the altar, the priest,
and the owner. Peace signifies, 1. Reconciliation, concord, and
communion. And so these were called peace-offerings, because in them God
and his people did, as it were, feast together, in token of friendship.
The priest, who was ordained for men in things pertaining to God, gave
part of this peace-offering to God (that part which he required, and it
was fit he should be first served), burning it upon God's altar; part he
gave to the offerer, to be eaten by him with his family and friends; and
part he took to himself, as the days-man that laid his hand upon them
both. They could not thus eat together unless they were agreed; so that
it was a symbol of friendship and fellowship between God and man, and a
confirmation of the covenant of peace. 2. It signifies prosperity and
all happiness: Peace be to you was as much as, All good be to you; and
so the peace-offerings were offered either, (1.) By way of supplication
or request for some good that was wanted and desired. If a man was in
the pursuit or expectation of any mercy, he would back his prayer for it
with a peace-offering, and probably put up the prayer when he laid his
hand upon the head of his offering. Christ is our peace, our
peace-offering; for through him alone it is that we can expect to obtain
mercy, and an answer of peace to our prayers; and in him an upright
prayer shall be acceptable and successful, though we bring not a
peace-offering. The less costly our devotions are the more lively and
serious they should be. Or, (2.) By way of thanksgiving for some
particular mercy received. It is called a peace-offering of
thanksgiving, for so it was sometimes; as in other cases a vow, [Lev
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#015), [Lev
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#016). And some make the original word
to signify retribution. When they had received any special mercy, and
were enquiring what they should render, this they were directed to
render to the God of their mercies as a grateful acknowledgment for the
benefit done to them, [Psa 116:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#012). And
we must offer to God the sacrifice of praise continually, by Christ our
peace; and then this shall please the Lord better than an ox or bullock.
Observe,

I. As to the matter of the peace-offering, suppose it was of the herd,
it must be without blemish; and, if it was so, it was indifferent
whether it was male or female, [Lev
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001). In our spiritual offerings, it is
not the sex, but the heart, that God looks at, [Gal
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028).

II\. As to the management of it. 1. The offerer was, by a solemn
manumission, to transfer his interest in it to God ([Lev
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#002)), and, with his hand on the head
of the sacrifice, to acknowledge the particular mercies for which he
designed this a thank-offering, or, if it was a vow, to make his prayer.
2. It must be killed; and, although this might be done in any part of
the court, yet it is said to be at the door of the tabernacle, because
the mercies received or expected were acknowledged to come from God, and
the prayers or praises were directed to him, and both, as it were,
through that door. Our Lord Jesus has said, I am the door, for he is
indeed the door of the tabernacle. 3. The priest must sprinkle the blood
upon the altar, for it was the blood that made atonement for the soul;
and, though this was not a sin-offering, yet we must be taught that in
all our offerings we must have an eye to Christ as the propitiation for
sin, as those who know that the best of their services cannot be
accepted unless through him their sins be pardoned. Penitent confessions
must always go along with our thankful acknowledgments; and, whatever
mercy we pray for, in order to it we must pray for the removal of guilt,
as that which keeps good things from us. First take away all iniquity,
and then receive us graciously, or give good, [Hos
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#002). 4. All the fat of the inwards,
that which we call the tallow and suet, with the caul that encloses it
and the kidneys in the midst of it, were to be taken away, and burnt
upon the altar, as an offering made by fire, [Lev
3:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#003). And this was all that was
sacrificed to the Lord out of the peace-offering; how the rest was to be
disposed of we shall find, [Lev 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#011),
etc. It is ordered to be burnt upon the burnt-sacrifice, that is, the
daily burnt-offering, the lamb which was offered every morning before
any other sacrifice was offered; so that the fat of the peace-offerings
was an addition to that, and a continuation of it. The great sacrifice
of peace, that of the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the
world, prepares the altar for our sacrifices of praise, which are not
accepted till we are reconciled. Now the burning of this fat is supposed
to signify, (1.) The offering up of our good affections to God in all
our prayers and praises. God must have the inwards; for we must pour out
our souls, and lift up our hearts, in prayer, and must bless his name
with all that is within us. It is required that we be inward with God in
every thing wherein we have to do with him. The fat denotes the best and
choicest, which must always be devoted to God, who has made for us a
feast of fat things. (2.) The mortifying of our corrupt affections and
lusts, and the burning up of them by the fire of divine grace, [Col
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005). Then we are truly thankful for
former mercies, and prepared to receive further mercy, when we part with
our sins, and have our minds cleared from all sensuality by the spirit
of judgment and the spirit of burning, [Isa
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#004).

[Leviticus 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 3:6</span></span>

Directions are here given concerning the peace-offering, if it was a
sheep or a goat. Turtle-doves or young pigeons, which might be brought
for whole burnt offerings, were not allowed for peace-offerings, because
they have no fat considerable enough to be burnt upon the altar; and
they would be next to nothing if they were to be divided according to
the law of the peace-offerings. The laws concerning a lamb or goat
offered for a peace offering are much the same with those concerning a
bullock, and little now occurs here; but, 1. The rump of the mutton was
to be burnt with the fat of the inwards upon the altar, the whole rump
([Lev 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#009)), because in those countries
it was very fat and large. Some observe from this that, be a thing ever
so contemptible, God can make it honourable, by applying it to his
service. Thus God is said to give more abundant honour to that part
which lacked, [Co1 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#023), [Co1
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#024). 2. That which was burnt upon
the altar is called the food of the offering, [Lev
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#011), [Lev
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#016). It fed the holy fire; it was
acceptable to God as our food is to us; and since in the tabernacle God
did, as it were, keep house among them, by the offerings on the altar he
kept a good table, as Solomon in his court, [Kg1
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#022), etc. 3. Here is a general rule
laid down, that all the fat is the Lord's ([Lev
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#016)), and a law made thereupon, that
they should eat neither fat nor blood, no, not in their private houses,
[Lev 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#017). (1.) As for the fat, it is
not meant of that which is interlarded with the meat (that they might
eat, [Neh 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#010)), but the fat of the
inwards, the suet, which was always God's part out of the sacrificed
beasts; and therefore they must not eat of it, no, not out of the beasts
that they killed for their common use. Thus would God preserve the
honour of that which was sacred to himself. They must not only not feed
upon that fat which was to be the food of the altar, but not upon any
like it, lest the table of the Lord (as the altar is called), if
something were not reserved peculiar to it, should become contemptible,
and the fruit thereof, even its meat, contemptible, [Mal
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#007), [Mal
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#012). (2.) The blood was universally
forbidden likewise, for the same reason that the fat was, because it was
God's part of every sacrifice. The heathen drank the blood of their
sacrifices; hence we read of their drink-offerings of blood, [Psa
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#004). But God would not permit the
blood, that made atonement, to be used as a common thing ([Heb
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#029)), nor will he allow us, though
we have the comfort of the atonement made, to assume to ourselves any
share in the honour of making it. He that glories, let him glory in the
Lord, and to his praise let all the blood be poured out.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 4](lev004)

</div>
