<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev016)  [Next](lev018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 17:0</span></span>

After the law concerning the atonement to be made for all Israel by the
high priest, at the tabernacle, with the blood of bulls and goats, in
this chapter we have two prohibitions necessary for the preservation of
the honour of that atonement. I. That no sacrifice should be offered by
any other than the priests, nor any where but at the door of the
tabernacle, and this upon pain of death ([Lev
17:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#001)). II. That no blood should be
eaten, and this under the same penalty ([Lev
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#010), etc.).

[Leviticus 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 17:1</span></span>

This statute obliged all the people of Israel to bring all their
sacrifices to God's altar, to be offered there. And as to this matter we
must consider,

I. How it stood before. 1. It was allowed to all people to build altars,
and offer sacrifices to God, where they pleased. Wherever Abraham had a
tent he built an altar, and every master of a family was a priest to his
own family, as [Job 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#005). 2. This
liberty had been an occasion of idolatry. When every man was his own
priest, and had an altar of his own, by degrees, as they became vain in
their imaginations, they invented gods of their own, and offered their
sacrifices unto demons, [Lev 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#007). The
word signifies rough or hairy goats, because it is probable that in the
shape the evil spirits often appeared to them, to invite their
sacrifices and to signify their acceptance of them. For the devil, ever
since he became a revolter from God and a rebel against him, has set up
for a rival with him, and coveted to have divine honours paid him: he
had the impudence to solicit our blessed Saviour to fall down and
worship him. The Israelites themselves had learned in Egypt to sacrifice
to demons. And some of them, it should seem, practised it even since the
God of Israel had so gloriously appeared for them, and with them. They
are said to go a whoring after these demons; for it was such a breach of
their covenant with God as adultery is of the marriage covenant: and
they were as strongly addicted to their idolatrous worships, and as hard
to be reclaimed from them, as those that have given themselves over to
fornication, to work all uncleanness with greediness; and therefore it
is with reference to this that God calls himself a jealous God.

II\. How this law settled it. 1. Some think that the children of Israel
were by this law forbidden, while they were in the wilderness, to kill
any beef, or mutton, or veal, or lamb, or goat, even for their common
eating, but at the door of the tabernacle, where the blood and the fat
were to be offered to God upon the altar, and the flesh to be returned
back to the offerer to be eaten as a peace-offering, according to the
law. And the statute is so worded ([Lev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#003), [Lev
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#004)) as to favour this opinion, for
it speaks generally of killing any ox, or lamb, or goat. The learned Dr.
Cudworth puts this sense upon it, and thinks that while they had their
tabernacle so near them in the midst of their camp they ate no flesh but
what had first been offered to God, but that when they were entering
Canaan this constitution was altered ([Deu
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#021)), and they were allowed to kill
their beasts of the flock and herd at home, as well as the roebuck and
the hart; only thrice a year they were to see God at his tabernacle, and
to eat and drink before him there. And it is probable that in the
wilderness they did not eat much flesh but that of their
peace-offerings, preserving what cattle they had, for breed, against
they came to Canaan; therefore they murmured for flesh, being weary of
manna; and Moses on that occasion speaks as if they were very sparing of
the flocks and the herds, [Num 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#004),
[Num 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#022). Yet it is hard to construe
this as a temporary law, when it is expressly said to be a statute for
ever ([Lev 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#007)); and therefore, 2. It
should seem rather to forbid only the killing of beasts for sacrifice
any where but at God's altar. They must not offer sacrifice, as they had
done, in the open field ([Lev 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#005)),
no, not to the true God, but it must be brought to the priest, to be
offered on the altar of the Lord: and the solemnity they had lately
witnessed, of consecrating both the priests and the altar, would serve
for a good reason why they should confine themselves to both these that
God had so signally appointed and owned. This law obliged not only the
Israelites themselves, but the proselytes or strangers that were
circumcised and sojourned among them, who were in danger of retaining an
affection to their old ways of worship. If any should transgress this
law, and offer sacrifice any where but at the tabernacle, (1.) The guilt
was great: Blood shall be imputed to that man; he hath shed blood, [Lev
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#004). Though it was but a beast he had
killed, yet, killing it otherwise than God had appointed, he was looked
upon as a murderer. It is by the divine grant that we have the liberty
to kill the inferior creatures, to the benefit of which we are not
entitled, unless we submit to the limitations of it, which are that it
be not done either with cruelty or with superstition, [Gen
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#003), [Gen
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004). Nor was there ever any greater
abuse done to the inferior creatures than when they were made either
false gods or sacrifices to false gods, to which the apostle perhaps has
special reference when he speaks of the vanity and bondage of corruption
to which the creature was made subject, [Rom
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#020), [Rom
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021), and compare [Rom
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#023), [Rom
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025). Idolatrous sacrifices were
looked upon, not only as adultery, but as murder: he that offereth them
is as if he slew a man, [Isa 66:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#003).
(2.) The punishment should be severe: That man shall be cut off from
among his people. Either the magistrate must do it if it were manifest
and notorious, or, if not, God would take the work into his own hands,
and the offender should be cut off by some immediate stroke of divine
justice. The reasons why God thus strictly ordered all their sacrifices
to be offered at one place were, \[1.\] For the preventing of idolatry
and superstition. That sacrifices might be offered to God, and according
to the rule, and without innovations, they must always be offered by the
hands of the priests, who were servants in God's house, and under the
eye of the high priest, who was ruler of the house, and took care to see
every thing done according to God's ordinance. \[2.\] For the securing
of the honour of God's temple and altar, the peculiar dignity of which
would be endangered if they might offer their sacrifices any where else
as well as there. \[3.\] For the preserving of unity and brotherly love
among the Israelites, that meeting all at one altar, as all the children
of the family meet daily at one table, they might live and love as
brethren, and be as one man, of one mind in the Lord.

III\. How this law was observed. 1. While the Israelites kept their
integrity they had a tender and very jealous regard to this law, as
appears by their zeal against the altar which was erected by the two
tribes and a half, which they would by no means have left standing if
they had not been satisfied that it was never designed, nor should ever
be used, for sacrifice or offering, [Jos
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#012), etc. 2. The breach of this law
was for many ages the scandalous and incurable corruption of the Jewish
church, witness that complaint which so often occurs in the history even
of the good kings, Howbeit the high places were not taken away; and it
was an inlet to the grossest idolatries. 3. Yet this law was, in
extraordinary cases, dispensed with. Gideon's sacrifice ([Jdg
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#026)), Manoah's ([Jdg
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#019)), Samuel's ([Sa1
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#009); [Sa1
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#013); [Sa1
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#015)), David's ([Sa2
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#018)), and Elijah's ([Kg1
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#023)), were accepted, though not
offered at the usual place: but these were all either ordered by angels
or offered by prophets; and some think that after the desolation of
Shiloh, and before the building of the temple, while the ark and altar
were unsettled, it was more allowable to offer sacrifice elsewhere.

IV\. How the matter stands now, and what use we are to make of this law.
1. It is certain that the spiritual sacrifices we are now to offer are
not confined to any one place. Our Saviour has made this clear ([Joh
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#021)), and the apostle ([Ti1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008)), according to the prophecy, that
in every place incense should be offered, [Mal
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011). We have now no temple nor altar
that sanctifies the gift, nor does the gospel unity lie in one place,
but in one heart, and the unity of the spirit. 2. Christ is our altar,
and the true tabernacle ([Heb 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#002);
[Heb 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#010)); in him God dwells among
us, and it is in him that our sacrifices are acceptable to God, and in
him only, [Pe1 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005). To set up other
mediators, or other altars, or other expiatory sacrifices, is, in
effect, to set up other gods. He is the centre of unity, in whom all
God's Israel meet. 3. Yet we are to have respect to the public worship
of God, not forsaking the assemblies of his people, [Heb
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#025). The Lord loves the gates of
Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob, and so should we; see [Eze
20:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#040). Though God will graciously
accept our family offerings, we must not therefore neglect the door of
the tabernacle.

[Leviticus 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 17:10</span></span>

We have here, I. A repetition and confirmation of the law against eating
blood. We have met with this prohibition twice before in the levitical
law ([Lev 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#017); [Lev
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#026)), besides the place it had in the
precepts of Noah, [Gen 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004). But here,
1. The prohibition is repeated again and again, and reference had to the
former laws to this purport ([Lev
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#012)): I said to the children of
Israel, No soul of you shall eat blood; and again ([Lev
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#014)), You shall eat the blood of no
manner of flesh. A great stress is laid upon it, as a law which has more
in it than at first view one would think. 2. It is made binding, not
only on the house of Israel, but on the strangers that sojourned among
them ([Lev 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#010)), which perhaps was
one reason why it was thought advisable, for a time, to forbid blood to
the Gentile converts, [Act 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#029). 3.
The penalty annexed to this law is very severe ([Lev
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#010)): I will even set my face
against that soul that eateth blood, if he do it presumptuously, and
will cut him off; and again ([Lev
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#014)), He shall be cut off. Note,
God's wrath will be the sinner's ruin. Write that man undone, for ever
undone, against whom God sets his face; for what creature is able to
confront the Creator? 4. A reason is given for this law ([Lev
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#011)): because it is the blood that
makes atonement for the soul; and therefore it was appointed to make
atonement with, because the life of the flesh is the blood. The sinner
deserved to die; therefore the sacrifice must die. Now, the blood being
so the life that ordinarily beasts were killed for man's use by the
drawing out of all their blood, God appointed the sprinkling or pouring
out of the blood of the sacrifice upon the altar to signify that the
life of the sacrifice was given to God instead of the sinner's life, and
as a ransom or counter-price for it; therefore without shedding of blood
there was no remission, [Heb 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#022). For
this reason they must eat no blood, and, (1.) It was then a very good
reason; for God would by this means preserve the honour of that way of
atonement which he had instituted, and keep up in the minds of the
people a reverent regard to it. The blood of the covenant being then a
sensible object, no blood must be either eaten or trodden under foot as
a common thing, as they must have no ointment nor perfume like that
which God ordered them to make for himself. But, (2.) This reason is now
superseded, which intimates that the law itself was ceremonial, and is
now no longer in force: the blood of Christ who has come (and we are to
look for no other) is that alone which makes atonement for the soul, and
of which the blood of the sacrifices was an imperfect type: the coming
of the substance supersedes the shadow. The blood of beasts is no longer
the ransom, but Christ's blood only; and therefore there is not now that
reason for abstaining from blood which there was then, and we cannot
suppose it was the will of God that the law should survive the reason of
it. The blood, provided it be so prepared as not to be unwholesome, is
now allowed for the nourishment of our bodies, because it is no longer
appointed to make an atonement for the soul. (3.) Yet it has still
useful significancy. The life is in the blood; it is the vehicle of the
animal spirits, and God would have his people to regard the life even of
their beasts, and not to be cruel and hard-hearted, not to take delight
in any thing that is barbarous. They must not be a blood-thirsty people.
The blood then made atonement figuratively, now the blood of Christ
makes atonement really and effectually; to this therefore we must have a
reverent regard, and not use it as a common thing, for he will set his
face against those that do so, and they shall be cut off, [Heb
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#029).

II\. Some other precepts are here given as appendages to this law, and
hedges about it, 1. They must cover the blood of that which they took in
hunting, [Lev 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#013). They must not
only not eat it, but must give it a decent burial, in token of some
mystery which they must believe lay hidden in this constitution. the
Jews look upon this as a very weighty precept and appoint that the blood
should be covered with these words, Blessed be he that hath sanctified
us by his precepts, and commanded us to cover blood. 2. They must not
eat that which died of itself or was torn of beasts ([Lev
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#015)), for the blood was either not
at all, or not regularly, drawn out of them. God would have them to be
curious in their diet, not with the curiosity that gratifies the sensual
appetite, but with that which checks and restrains it. God would not
have his children to eat every thing that came in their way with
greediness, but to consider diligently what was before them, that they
might learn in other things to ask questions for conscience' sake. Those
that flew upon the spoiled sinned, [Sa1
14:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#032), [Sa1
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#033). If a man did, through ignorance
or inconsideration, eat the flesh of any beast not duly slain, he must
wash himself and his clothes, else he bore his iniquity, [Lev
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#015), [Lev
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#016). The pollution was ceremonial,
so was the purification from it; but if a man slighted the prescribed
method of cleansing, or would not submit, he thereby contracted moral
guilt. See the nature of a remedial law: he that obeys it has the
benefit of it; he that does not, not only remains under his former
guilt, but adds to that guilt of contemning the provisions made by
divine grace for his relief, and sins against the remedy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 18](lev018)

</div>
