<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk020)  [Next](luk022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#001)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 21:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. The notice Christ took, and the approbation
he gave, of a poor widow that cast two mites into the treasury ([Luk
21:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#001)). II. A prediction of future
events, in answer to his disciples' enquiries concerning them ([Luk
21:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#005)). 1. Of what should happen
between that and the destruction of Jerusalem - false Christs arising,
bloody wars and persecutions of Christ's followers ([Luk
21:8-19](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#008)). 2. Of that destruction
itself ([Luk 21:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#020)). 3. Of the
second coming of Jesus Christ to judge the world, under the type and
figure of that ([Luk 21:25-33](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#025)). III. A
practical application of this, by way of caution and counsel ([Luk
21:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#034)), and an account of Christ's
preaching and the people's attendance on it ([Luk
21:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#037), [Luk
21:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#038)).

[Luke 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 21:1</span></span>

This short passage of story we had before in Mark. It is thus recorded
twice, to teach us, 1. That charity to the poor is a main matter in
religion. Our Lord Jesus took all occasions to commend it and recommend
it. He had just mentioned the barbarity of the scribes, who devoured
poor widows (ch. 20); and perhaps this is designed as an aggravation of
it, that the poor widows were the best benefactors to the public funds,
of which the scribes had the disposal. 2. That Jesus Christ has his eye
upon us, to observe what we give to the poor, and what we contribute to
works of piety and charity. Christ, though intent upon his preaching,
looked up, to see what gifts were cast into the treasury, [Luk
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#001). He observes whether we give
largely and liberally, in proportion to what we have, or whether we be
sneaking and paltry in it; nay, his eye goes further, he observes
whether we give charitably and with a willing mind, or grudgingly and
with reluctance. This should make us afraid of coming short of our duty
in this matter; men may be deceived with excuses which Christ knows to
be frivolous. And this should encourage us to be abundant in it, without
desiring that men should know it; it is enough that Christ does; he sees
in secret, and will reward openly. 3. That Christ observes and accepts
the charity of the poor in a particular manner. Those that have nothing
to give may yet do a great deal in charity by ministering to the poor,
and helping them, and begging for them, that cannot help themselves, or
beg for themselves. But here was one that was herself poor and yet gave
what little she had to the treasury. It was but two mites, which make a
farthing; but Christ magnified it as a piece of charity exceeding all
the rest: She has cast in more than they all. Christ does not blame her
for indiscretion, in giving what she wanted herself, nor for vanity in
giving among the rich to the treasury; but commended her liberality, and
her willingness to part with what little she had for the glory of God,
which proceeded from a belief of and dependence upon God's providence to
take care of her. Jehovah-jireh - the Lord will provide. 4. That,
whatever may be called the offerings of God, we ought to have a respect
for, and to our power, yea, and beyond our power, to contribute
cheerfully to. These have cast in unto the offerings of God. What is
given to the support of the ministry and the gospel, to the spreading
and propagating of religion, the education of youth, the release of
prisoners, the relief of widows and strangers, and the maintenance of
poor families, is given to the offerings of God, and it shall be so
accepted and recompensed.

[Luke 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 21:5</span></span>

See here, I. With what admiration some spoke of the external pomp and
magnificence of the temple, and they were some of Christ's own disciples
too; and they took notice of it to him how it was adorned with goodly
stones and gifts, [Luk 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#005). The
outside was built up with goodly stones, and within it was beautified
and enriched with the presents that were offered up for that purpose,
and were hung up in it. They thought their Master should be as much
affected with those things as they were, and should as much regret the
destruction of them as they did. When we speak of the temple, it should
be of the presence of God in it, and of the ordinances of God
administered in it, and the communion which his people there have with
him. It is a poor thing, when we speak of the church, to let our
discourse dwell upon its pomps and revenues, and the dignities and
powers of its officers and rulers; for the king's daughter is all
glorious within.

II\. With what contempt Christ spoke of them, and with what assurance of
their being all made desolate very shortly ([Luk
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#006)): "As for those things which you
behold, those dear things which you are so much in love with, behold,
the days will come, and some now living may live to see them, in which
there shall not be left one stone upon another. This building, which
seems so beautiful that one would think none could, for pity, pull it
down, and which seems so strong that one would think none would be able
to pull it down, shall yet be utterly ruined; and this shall be done as
soon as ever the spiritual temple of the gospel church (the substance of
that shadow) begins to flourish in the world." Did we by faith foresee
the blasting and withering of all external glory, we should not set our
hearts upon it as those do that cannot see, or will not look, so far
before them.

III\. With what curiosity those about him enquire concerning the time
when this great desolation should be: Master, when shall these things
be? [Luk 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#007). It is natural to us to
covet to know future things and the time of them, which it is not for us
to know, when we are more concerned to ask what is our duty in the
prospect of these things, and how we may prepare for them, which it is
for us to know. They enquire what sign there shall be when these things
shall come to pass. They ask not for a present sign, to confirm the
prediction itself, and to induce them to believe it (Christ's word was
enough for that), but what the future signs will be of the approaching
accomplishment of the prediction, by which they may be put in mind of
it. These signs of the times Christ had taught them to observe.

IV\. With what clearness and fulness Christ answers their enquiries, as
far as was necessary to direct them in their duty; for all knowledge is
desirable as far as it is in order to practice.

1\. They must expect to hear of false Christs and false prophets
appearing, and false prophecies given out ([Luk
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#008)): Many shall come in my name; he
does not mean in the name of Jesus, though there were some deceivers who
pretended commissions from him (as [Act
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#013)), but usurping the title and
character of the Messiah. Many pretended to be the deliverers of the
Jewish church and nation from the Romans, and to fix the time when the
deliverance should be wrought, by which multitudes were drawn into a
snare, to their ruin. They shall say, hoti egō eimi - I am he, or I am,
as if they would assume that incommunicable name of God, by which he
made himself known when he came to deliver Israel out of Egypt, I am;
and, to encourage people to follow them, they added, "The time draws
near when the kingdom shall be restored to Israel, and all who will
follow me shall share in it." Now as to this, he gives them a needful
caution (1.) "Take heed that you be not deceived; do not imagine that I
shall myself come again in external glory, to take possession of the
throne of kingdoms. No, you must not expect any such thing, for my
kingdom is not of this world." When they asked solicitously and eagerly,
Master, when shall these things be? the first word Christ said was, Take
heed that you be not deceived. Note, Those that are most inquisitive in
the things of God (though it is very good to be so) are in most danger
of being imposed upon, and have most need to be upon their guard. (2.)
"Go you not after them. You know the Messiah is come, and you are not to
look for any other; and therefore do not so much as hearken to them, nor
have any thing to do with them." If we are sure that Jesus is the
Christ, and his doctrine is the gospel, of God, we must be deaf to all
intimations of another Christ and another gospel.

2\. They must expect to hear of great commotions in the nations, and
many terrible judgments inflicted upon the Jews and their neighbours.
(1.) There shall be bloody wars ([Luk
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#010)): Nation shall rise against
nation, one part of the Jewish nation against another, or rather the
whole against the Romans. Encouraged by the false Christs, they shall
wickedly endeavour to throw off the Roman yoke, by taking up arms
against the Roman powers; when they had rejected the liberty with which
Christ would have made them free they were left to themselves, to grasp
at their civil liberty in ways that were sinful, and therefore could not
be successful. (2.) There shall be earthquakes, great earthquakes, in
divers places, which shall not only frighten people, but destroy towns
and houses, and bury many in the ruins of them. (3.) There shall be
famines and pestilences, the common effects of war, which destroys the
fruits of the earth, and, by exposing men to ill weather and reducing
them to ill diet, occasions infectious diseases. God has various ways of
punishing a provoking people. The four sorts of judgments which the Old
Testament prophets so often speak of are threatened by the New Testament
prophets too; for, though spiritual judgments are more commonly
inflicted in gospel times, yet God makes use of temporal judgments also.
(4.) There shall be fearful sights and great signs from heaven, uncommon
appearances in the clouds, comets and blazing stars, which frighten the
ordinary sort of beholders, and have always been looked upon as ominous,
and portending something bad. Now, as to these, the caution he gives
them is, "Be not terrified. Others will be frightened at them, but be
not you frightened, [Luk 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#002). As to
the fearful sights, let them not be fearful to you, who look above the
visible heavens to the throne of God's government in the highest
heavens. Be not dismayed at the signs of heaven, for the heathen are
dismayed at them, [Jer 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#002). And, as
to the famines and pestilences, you fall into the hands of God, who has
promised to those who are his that in the days of famine they shall be
satisfied, and that he will keep them from the noisome pestilence; trust
therefore in him, and be not afraid. Nay, when you hear of wars, when
without are fightings and within are fears, yet then be not you
terrified; you know the worst that any of these judgments can do to you,
and therefore be not afraid of them; for," \[1.\] "It is your interest
to make the best of that which is, for all your fears cannot alter it:
these things must first come to pass; there is no remedy; it will be
your wisdom to make yourselves easy by accommodating yourselves to
them." \[2.\] "There is worse behind; flatter not yourselves with a
fancy that you will soon see an end of these troubles, no, not so soon
as you think of: the end is not by and by, not suddenly. Be not
terrified, for, if you begin so quickly to be discouraged, how will you
bear up under what is yet before you?"

3\. They must expect to be themselves for signs and wonders in Israel;
their being persecuted would be a prognostic of the destruction of the
city and temple, which he had now foretold. Nay, this would be the first
sign of their ruin coming: "Before all these, they shall lay their hands
on you. The judgment shall begin at the house of God; you must smart
first, for warning to them, that, if they have any consideration, they
may consider, If this be done to the green tree, what shall be done to
the dry? See [Pe1 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017), [Pe1
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#018). But this is not all; this must
be considered not only as the suffering of the persecuted, but as the
sin of the persecutors. Before God's judgments are brought upon them,
they shall fill up the measure of their iniquity by laying their hands
on you." Note, The ruin of a people is always introduced by their sin;
and nothing introduces a surer or sorer ruin than the sin of
persecution. This is a sign that God's wrath is coming upon a people to
the uttermost when their wrath against the servants of God comes to the
uttermost. Now as to this,

(1.) Christ tells them what hard things they should suffer for his
name's sake, much to the same purport with what he had told them when he
first called them to follow him, Mt. 10: They should know the wages of
it, that they might sit down and count the cost. St. Paul, who was the
greatest labourer and sufferer of them all, not being now among them,
was told by Christ himself what great things he should suffer for his
name's sake ([Act 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#016)), so necessary
is it that all who will live godly in Christ Jesus should count upon
persecution. The Christians, having themselves been originally Jews, and
still retaining an equal veneration with them for the Old Testament and
all the essentials of their religion, and differing only in ceremony,
might expect fair quarter with them; but Christ bids them not expect it:
"No, they shall be the most forward to persecute you." \[1.\] "They
shall use their own church-power against you: They shall deliver you up
to the synagogues to be scourged there, and stigmatized with their
anathemas." \[2.\] "They shall incense the magistrates against you: they
shall deliver you into prisons, that you may be brought before kings and
rulers for my name's sake, and be punished by them." \[2.\] "Your own
relations will betray you ([Luk
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#016)), your parents, brethren, and
kinsfolks, and friends; so that you will not know whom to put a
confidence in, or where to be safe." \[4.\] "Your religion will be made
a capital crime, and you will be called to resist unto blood. Some of
you shall they cause to be put to death; so far must you be from
expecting honour and wealth that you must expect nothing but death in
its most frightful shapes, death in all its dreadful pomp. Nay." \[5.\]
"You shall be hated of all men for my name's sake." This is worse than
death itself, and was fulfilled when the apostles were not only
appointed to death, but made a spectacle to the world, and counted as
the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things, which every
body loathes, [Co1 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#009), [Co1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#013). They were hated of all men, that
is, of all bad men, who could not bear the light of the gospel (because
it discovered their evil deeds), and therefore hated those who brought
in that light, flew in their faces, and would have pulled them to
pieces. The wicked world, which hated to be reformed, hated Christ the
great Reformer, and all that were his, for his sake. The rulers of the
Jewish church, knowing very well that if the gospel obtained among the
Jews their usurped abused power was at an end, raised all their forces
against it, put it into an ill name, filled people's minds with
prejudices against it, and so made the preachers and professors of it
odious to the mob.

(2.) He encourages them to bear up under their trials, and to go on in
their work, notwithstanding the opposition they would meet with.

\[1.\] God will bring glory both to himself and them out of their
sufferings: "It shall turn to you for a testimony, [Luk
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#013). Your being set up thus for a
mark, and publicly persecuted, will make you the more taken notice of
and your doctrine and miracles the more enquired into; your being
brought before kings and rulers will give you an opportunity of
preaching the gospel to them, who otherwise would never have come within
hearing of it; your suffering such severe things, and being so hated by
the worst of men, men of the most vicious lives, will be a testimony
that you are good, else you would not have such bad men for your
enemies; your courage, and cheerfulness, and constancy under your
sufferings will be a testimony for you, that you believe what you
preach, that you are supported by a divine power, and that the Spirit of
God and glory rests upon you."

\[2.\] "God will stand by you, and own you, and assist you, in your
trials; you are his advocates, and you shall be well furnished with
instructions, [Luk 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#014), [Luk
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#015). Instead of setting your hearts
on work to contrive an answer to informations, indictments, articles,
accusations, and interrogatories, that will be exhibited against you in
the ecclesiastical and civil courts, on the contrary, settle it in your
hearts, impress it upon them, take pains with them to persuade them not
to meditate before what you shall answer; do not depend upon your own
wit and ingenuity, your own prudence and policy, and do not distrust or
despair of the immediate and extraordinary aids of the divine grace.
Think not to bring yourselves off in the cause of Christ as you would in
a cause of your own, by your own parts and application, with the common
assistance of divine Providence, but promise yourselves, for I promise
you, the special assistance of divine grace: I will give you a mouth and
wisdom." This proves Christ to be God; for it is God's prerogative to
give wisdom, and he it is that made man's mouth. Note, First, A mouth
and wisdom together completely fit a man both for services and
sufferings; wisdom to know what to say, and a mouth wherewith to say it
as it should be said. It is a great happiness to have both matter and
words wherewith to honour God and do good; to have in the mind a
storehouse well furnished with things new and old, and a door of
utterance by which to bring them forth. Secondly, Those that plead
Christ's cause may depend upon him to give them a mouth and wisdom,
which way soever they are called to plead it, especially when they are
brought before magistrates for his name's sake. It is not said that he
will send an angel from heaven to answer for them, though he could do
this, but that he will give them a mouth and wisdom to enable them to
answer for themselves, which puts a greater honour upon them, which
requires them to use the gifts and graces Christ furnishes them with,
and redounds the more to the glory of God, who stills the enemy and the
avenger out of the mouths of babes and sucklings. Thirdly, When Christ
gives to his witnesses a mouth and wisdom, they are enabled to say that
both for him and themselves which all their adversaries are not able to
gainsay or resist, so that they are silenced, and put to confusion. This
was remarkably fulfilled presently after the pouring out of the Spirit,
by whom Christ gave his disciples this mouth and wisdom, when the
apostles were brought before the priest sand rulers, and answered them
so as to make them ashamed, Acts 4, 5, and [Act
6:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001).

\[3.\] "You shall suffer no real damage by all the hardships they shall
put upon you ([Luk 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#018)): There shall
not a hair of your head perish." Shall some of them lose their heads,
and yet not lose a hair? It is a proverbial expression, denoting the
greatest indemnity and security imaginable; it is frequently used both
in the Old Testament and New, in that sense. Some think that it refers
to the preservation of the lives of all the Christians that were among
the Jews when they were cut off by the Romans; historians tell us that
not one Christian perished in that desolation. Others reconcile it with
the deaths of multitudes in the cause of Christ, and take it
figuratively in the same sense that Christ saith, He that loseth his
life for my sake shall find it. "Not a hair of your head shall perish
but," First, "I will take cognizance of it." To this end he had said
([Mat 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#030)), The hairs of your head
are all numbered; and an account is kept of them, so that none of them
shall perish but he will miss it. Secondly, "It shall be upon a valuable
consideration." We do not reckon that lost or perishing which is laid
out for good purposes, and will turn to a good account. If we drop the
body itself for Christ's name's sake, it does not perish, but is well
bestowed. Thirdly, "It shall be abundantly recompensed; when you come to
balance profit and loss, you will find that nothing has perished, but,
on the contrary, that you have great gain in present comforts,
especially in the joys of a life eternal;" so that though we may be
losers for Christ we shall not, we cannot, be losers by him in the end.

\[4.\] "It is therefore your duty and interest, in the midst of your own
sufferings and those of the nation, to maintain a holy sincerity and
serenity of mind, which will keep you always easy ([Luk
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#019)): In your patience possess ye
your souls; get and keep possession of your souls." Some read it as a
promise, "You may or shall possess your souls." It comes all to one.
Note, First, It is our duty and interest at all times, especially in
perilous trying times, to secure the possession of our own souls; not
only that they be not destroyed and lost for ever, but that they be not
distempered now, nor our possession of them disturbed and interrupted.
"Possess your souls, be your own men, keep up the authority and dominion
of reason, and keep under the tumults of passion, that neither grief nor
fear may tyrannize over you, nor turn you out of the possession and
enjoyment of yourselves." In difficult times, when we can keep
possession of nothing else, then let us make that sure which may be made
sure, and keep possession of our souls. Secondly, It is by patience,
Christian patience, that we keep possession of our own souls. "In
suffering times, set patience upon the guard for the preserving of your
souls; by it keep your souls composed and in a good frame, and keep out
all those impressions which would ruffle you and put you out of temper."

[Luke 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 21:20</span></span>

Having given them an idea of the times for about thirty-eight years next
ensuing, he here comes to show them what all those things would issue in
at last, namely, the destruction of Jerusalem, and the utter dispersion
of the Jewish nation, which would be a little day of judgment, a type
and figure of Christ's second coming, which was not so fully spoken of
here as in the parallel place (Mt. 24), yet glanced at; for the
destruction of Jerusalem would be as it were the destruction of the
world to those whose hearts were bound up in it.

I. He tells them that they should see Jerusalem besieged, compassed with
armies ([Luk 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#020)), the Roman armies;
and, when they saw this, they might conclude that its desolation was
nigh, for in this the siege would infallibly end, though it might be a
long siege. Note, As in mercy, so in judgment, when God begins, he will
make an end.

II\. He warns them, upon this signal given, to shift for their own
safety ([Luk 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#021)): "Then let them
that are in Judea quit the country and flee to the mountains; let them
that are in the midst of it" (Of Jerusalem) "depart out, before the city
be closely shut up, and" (as we say now) "before the trenches be opened;
and let not them that are in the countries and villages about enter into
the city, thinking to be safe there. Do you abandon a city and country
which you see God has abandoned and given up to ruin. Come out of her,
my people."

III\. He foretels the terrible havoc that should be made of the Jewish
nation ([Luk 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#022)): Those are the
days of vengeance so often spoken of by the Old Testament prophets,
which would complete the ruin of that provoking people. All their
predictions must now be fulfilled, and the blood of all the Old
Testament martyrs must now be required. All things that are written must
be fulfilled at length. After days of patience long abused, there will
come days of vengeance; for reprieves are not pardons. The greatness of
that destruction is set forth, 1. By the inflicting cause of it. It is
wrath upon this people, the wrath of God, that will kindle this
devouring consuming fire. 2. By the particular terror it would be to
women with child, and poor mothers that are nurses. Woe to them, not
only because they are most subject to frights, and least able to shift
for their own safety, but because it will be a very great torment to
them to think of having borne and nursed children for the murderers. 3.
By the general confusion that should be all the nation over. There shall
be great distress in the land, for men will not know what course to
take, nor how to help themselves.

IV\. He describes the issue of the struggles between the Jews and the
Romans, and what they will come to at last; in short, 1. Multitudes of
them shall fall by the edge of the sword. It is computed that in those
wars of the Jews there fell by the sword above eleven hundred thousand.
And the siege of Jerusalem was, in effect, a military execution. 2. The
rest shall be led away captive; not into one nations, as when they were
conquered by the Chaldeans, which gave them an opportunity of keeping
together, but into all nations, which made it impossible for them to
correspond with each other, much less to incorporate. 3. Jerusalem
itself was trodden down of the Gentiles. The Romans, when they had made
themselves masters of it, laid it quite waste, as a rebellious and bad
city, hurtful to kings and provinces, and therefore hateful to them.

V. He describes the great frights that people should generally be in.
Many frightful sights shall be in the sun, moon, and stars, prodigies in
the heavens, and here in this lower world, the sea and the waves
roaring, with terrible storms and tempests, such as had not been known,
and above the ordinary working of natural causes. The effect of this
shall be universal confusion and consternation upon the earth, distress
of nations with perplexity, [Luk
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#025). Dr. Hammond understands by the
nations the several governments or tetrarchies of the Jewish nation,
Judea, Samaria, and Galilee; these shall be brought to the last
extremity. Men's hearts shall fail them for fear ([Luk
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#026)), apopsuchontōn anthrōpōn - men
being quite exanimated, dispirited, unsouled, dying away for fear. Thus
those are killed all the day long by whom Christ's apostles were so
([Rom 8:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#036)), that is, they are all the
day long in fear of being killed; sinking under that which lies upon
them, and yet still trembling for fear of worse, and looking after those
things which are coming upon the world. When judgment begins at the
house of God, it will not end there; it shall be as if all the world
were falling in pieces; and where can any be secure then? The powers of
heaven shall be shaken, and then the pillars of the earth cannot but
tremble. Thus shall the present Jewish policy, religion, laws, and
government, be all entirely dissolved by a series of unparalleled
calamities, attended with the utmost confusion. So Dr. Clarke. But our
Saviour makes use of these figurative expressions because at the end of
time they shall be literally accomplished, when the heavens shall be
rolled together as a scroll, and all their powers not only shaken, but
broken, and the earth and all the works that are therein shall be burnt
up, [Pe2 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010), [Pe2
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#012). As that day was all terror and
destruction to the unbelieving Jews, so the great day will be to all
unbelievers.

VI\. He makes this to be a kind of appearing of the Son of man: Then
shall they see the Son of man coming in a cloud, with power and great
glory, [Luk 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#027). The destruction of
Jerusalem was in a particular manner an act of Christ's judgment, the
judgment committed to the Son of man; his religion could never be
thoroughly established but by the destruction of the temple, and the
abolishing of the Levitical priesthood and economy, after which even the
converted Jews, and many of the Gentiles too, were still hankering, till
they were destroyed; so that it might justly be looked upon as a coming
of the Son of man, in power and great glory, yet not visibly, but in the
clouds; for in executing such judgments as these clouds and darkness are
round about him. Now this was, 1. An evidence of the first coming of the
Messiah; so some understand it. Then the unbelieving Jews shall be
confined, when it is too late, that Jesus was the Messiah; those that
would not see him coming in the power of his grace to save them shall be
made to see him coming in the power of his wrath to destroy them; those
that would not have him to reign over them shall have him to triumph
over them. 2. It was an earnest of his second coming. Then in the
terrors of that day they shall see the Son of man coming in a cloud, and
all the terrors of the last day. They shall see a specimen of it, a
faint resemblance of it. If this be so terrible, what will that be?

VII\. He encourages all the faithful disciples in reference to the
terrors of that day ([Luk 21:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#028)):
"When these things begin to come to pass, when Jerusalem is besieged,
and every thing is concurring to the destruction of the Jews, then do
you look up, when others are looking down, look heavenward, in faith,
hope, and prayer, and lift up your heads with cheerfulness and
confidence, for your redemption draws night." 1. When Christ came to
destroy the Jews, he came to redeem the Christians that were persecuted
and oppressed by them; then had the churches rest. 2. When he comes to
judge the world at the last day, he will redeem all that are his, from
all their grievances. And the foresight of that day is as pleasant to
all good Christians as it is terrible to the wicked and ungodly. Their
death itself is so; when they see that day approaching, they can lift up
their heads with joy, knowing that their redemption draws nigh, their
removal to their Redeemer.

VIII\. Here is one word of prediction that looks further than the
destruction of the Jewish nation, which is not easily understood; we
have it in [Luk 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#024) : Jerusalem
shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, till the times of the Gentiles be
fulfilled. 1. Some understand it of what is past; so Dr. Hammond. The
Gentiles, who have conquered Jerusalem, shall keep possession of it, and
it shall be purely Gentile, till the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled,
till a great part of the Gentile world shall have become Christian, and
then after Jerusalem shall have been rebuilt by Adrian the emperor, with
an exclusion of all the Jews from it, many of the Jews shall turn
Christians, shall join with the Gentile Christians, to set up a church
in Jerusalem, which shall flourish there for a long time. 2. Others
understand it of what is yet to come; so Dr. Whitby. Jerusalem shall be
possessed by the Gentiles, of one sort or other, for the most part, till
the time come when the nations that yet remain infidels shall embrace
the Christian faith, when the kingdoms of this world shall become
Christ's kingdoms, and then all the Jews shall be converted. Jerusalem
shall be inhabited by them, and neither they nor their city any longer
trodden down by the Gentiles.

[Luke 21:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 21:29</span></span>

Here, in the close of this discourse,

I. Christ appoints his disciples to observe the signs of the times,
which they might judge by, if they had an eye to the foregoing
directions, with as much certainty and assurance as they could judge of
the approach of summer by the budding forth of the trees, [Luk
21:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#029). As in the kingdom of nature
there is a chain of causes, so in the kingdom of providence there is a
consequence of one event upon another. When we see a nation filling up
the measure of their iniquity, we may conclude that their ruin is nigh;
when we see the ruin of persecuting powers hastening on, we may thence
infer that the kingdom of God is nigh at hand, that when the opposition
given to it is removed it shall gain ground. As we may lawfully
prognosticate the change of the seasons when second causes have begun to
work, so we may, in the disposal of events, expect something uncommon
when God is already raised up out of his holy habitation ([Zac
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#013)); then stand still and see his
salvation.

II\. He charges them to look upon those things as neither doubtful nor
distant (for then they would not make a due impression on them), but as
sure and very near. The destruction of the Jewish nation, 1. Was near
([Luk 21:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#032)): This generation shall
not pass away till all be fulfilled. There were some now alive that
should see it; some that now heard the prediction of it. 2. It was sure;
the sentence was irreversible; it was a consumption determined; the
decree was gone forth ([Luk 21:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#033)):
"Heaven and earth shall pass away sooner than any word of mine: nay,
they certainly shall pass away, but my words shall not; whether they
take hold or no, they will take effect, and not one of them fall to the
ground," [Sa1 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#019).

III\. He cautions them against security and sensuality, by which they
would unfit themselves for the trying times that were coming on, and
make them to be a great surprise and terror to them ([Luk
21:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#034), [Luk
21:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#035)): Take heed to yourselves. This
is the word of command given to all Christ's disciples: "Take heed to
yourselves, that you be not overpowered by temptations, nor betrayed by
your own corruptions." Note, We cannot be safe if we be secure. It
concerns us at all times, but especially at some times, to be very
cautious. See here, 1. What our danger is: that the day of death and
judgment should come upon us unawares, when we do not expect it, and are
not prepared for it, - lest, when we are called to meet our Lord, that
be found the furthest thing from our thoughts which ought always to be
laid nearest our hearts, lest it come upon us as a snare; for so it will
come upon the most of men, who dwell upon the earth, and mind earthly
things only, and have no converse with heaven; to them it will be as a
snare. See [Ecc 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#012). It will be a
terror and a destruction to them; it will put them into an inexpressible
fright, and hold them fast for a doom yet more frightful. 2. What our
duty is, in consideration of this danger: we must take heed lest our
hearts be overcharged, lest they be burdened and overloaded, and so
unfitted and disabled to do what must be done in preparation for death
and judgment. Two things we must watch against, lest our hearts be
overcharged with them: - (1.) The indulging of the appetites of the
body, and allowing of ourselves in the gratifications of sense to an
excess: Take heed lest you be overcharged with surfeiting and
drunkenness, the immoderate use of meat and drink, which burden the
heart, not only with the guilt thereby contracted, but by the ill
influence which such disorders of the body have upon the mind; they make
men dull and lifeless to their duty, dead and listless in their duty;
they stupify the conscience, and cause the mind to be unaffected with
those things that are most affecting. (2.) The inordinate pursuit of the
good things of this world. The heart is overcharged with the cares of
this life. The former is the snare of those that are given to their
pleasures: this is the snare of the men of business, that will be rich.
We have need to guard on both hands, not only lest at the time when
death comes, but lest at any time our hearts should be thus overcharged.
Our caution against sin, and our care of our own souls, must be
constant.

IV\. He counsels them to prepare and get ready for this great day, [Luk
21:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#036). Here see, 1. What should be our
aim: that we may be accounted worthy to escape all these things; that,
when the judgments of God are abroad, we may be preserved from the
malignity of them; that either we may not be involved in the common
calamity or it may not be that to us which it is to others; that in the
day of death we may escape the sting of it, which is the wrath of God,
and the damnation of hell. Yet we must aim not only to escape that, but
to stand before the Son of man; not only to stand acquitted before him
as our Judge ([Psa 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#005)), to have
boldness in the day of Christ (that is supposed in our escaping all
those things), but to stand before him, to attend on him as our Master,
to stand continually before his throne, and serve him day and night in
his temple ([Rev 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#015)), always to
behold his face, as the angels, [Mat
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010). The saints are here said to be
accounted worthy, as before, [Luk
20:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#035). God, by the good work of his
grace in them, makes them meet for this happiness, and, by the good will
of his grace towards them, accounts them worthy of it: but, as Grotius
here says, a great part of our worthiness lies in an acknowledgment of
our own unworthiness. 2. What should be our actings in these aims: Watch
therefore, and pray always. Watching and praying must go together, [Neh
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#009). Those that would escape the wrath
to come, and make sure of the joys to come, must watch and pray, and
must do so always, must make it the constant business of their lives,
(1.) To keep a guard upon themselves. "Watch against sin, watch to every
duty, and to the improvement of every opportunity of doing good. Be
awake, and keep awake, in expectation of your Lord's coming, that you
may be in a right frame to receive him, and bid him welcome." (2.) To
keep up their communion with God: "Pray always; be always in an habitual
disposition to that duty; keep up stated times for it; abound in it;
pray upon all occasions." Those shall be accounted worthy to live a life
of praise in the other world that live a life of prayer in this world.

V. In the last two verses we have an account how Christ disposed of
himself during those three or four days between his riding in triumph
into Jerusalem and the night in which he was betrayed. 1. He was all day
teaching in the temple. Christ preached on week-days as well as sabbath
days. He was an indefatigable preacher; he preached in the face of
opposition, and in the midst of those that he knew sought occasion
against him. 2. At night he went out to lodge at a friend's house, in
the mount of Olives, about a mile out of town. It is probable that he
had some friends in the city that would gladly have lodged him, but he
was willing to retire in the evening out of the noise of the town, that
he might have more time for secret devotion, now that his hour was at
hand. 3. Early in the morning he was in the temple again, where he had a
morning lecture for those that were willing to attend it; and the people
were forward to hear one that they saw forward to preach ([Luk
21:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#038)): They all came early in the
morning, flocking to the temple, like doves to their windows, to hear
him, though the chief priests and scribes did all they could to
prejudice them against him. Sometimes the taste and relish which
serious, honest, plain people have of good preaching are more to be
valued and judged by than the opinion of the witty and learned, and
those in authority.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 22](luk022)

</div>
