<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar013)  [Next](mar015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#001)

[Mark](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mar 14:0</span></span>

In this chapter begins the account which this evangelist gives of the
death and sufferings of our Lord Jesus, which we are all concerned to be
acquainted, not only with the history of, but with the mystery of. Here
is, I. The plot of the chief priests and scribes against Christ ([Mar
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#001), [Mar
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#002)). II. The anointing of Christ's
head at a supper in Bethany, two days before his death ([Mar
14:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#003)). III. The contract Judas made
with the chief priests, to betray him ([Mar
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#010), [Mar
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#011)). IV. Christ's eating the
passover with his disciples, his instituting the Lord's supper, and his
discourse with his disciples, at and after supper (v. 12-31). V.
Christ's agony in the garden ([Mar
14:32-42](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#032)). VI. The betraying of him by
Judas, and the apprehending of him by the chief priests' agents ([Mar
14:43-52](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#043)). VII. His arraignment before
the high priest, his conviction, and the indignities done him at that
bar ([Mar 14:53-65](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#053)). VIII. Peter's
denying him ([Mar 14:66-72](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#066)). Most of
which passages we had before, Mt. 26.

[Mark 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 14:1</span></span>

We have here instances,

I. Of the kindness of Christ's friends, and the provision made of
respect and honour for him. Some friends he had, even in and about
Jerusalem, that loved him, and never thought they could do enough for
him, among whom, though Israel be not gathered, he is, and will be,
glorious.

1\. Here was one friend, that was so kind as to invite him to sup with
him; and he was so kind as to accept the invitation, [Mar
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#003). Though he had a prospect of his
death approaching, yet he did not abandon himself to a melancholy
retirement from all company, but conversed as freely with his friends as
usual.

2\. Here was another friend, that was so kind as to anoint his head with
very precious ointment as he sat at meat. This was an extraordinary
piece of respect paid him by a good woman that thought nothing too good
to bestow upon Christ, and to do him honour. Now the scripture was
fulfilled, When the king sitteth at his table, my spikenard sendeth
forth the smell thereof, [Sol 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#012).
Let us anoint Christ as our Beloved, kiss him with a kiss of affection;
and anoint him as our Sovereign, kiss him with a kiss of allegiance. Did
he pour out his soul unto death for us, and shall we think any box of
ointment too precious to pour out upon him? It is observable that she
took care to pour it all out upon Christ's head; she broke the box (so
we read it); but because it was an alabaster box, not easily broken, nor
was it necessary that it should be broken, to get out the ointment, some
read it, she shook the box, or knocked it to the ground, to loosen what
was in it, that it might be got out the better; or, she rubbed and
scraped out all that stuck tot he sides of it. Christ must have been
honoured with all we have, and we must not think to keep back any part
of the price. Do we give him the precious ointment of our best
affections? Let him have them all; love him with all the heart.

Now, (1.) There were those that put a worse construction upon this than
it deserved. They called it a waste of the ointment, [Mar
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#004). Because they could not have
found their hearts to put themselves to such an expense for the
honouring of Christ, they thought that she was prodigal, who did. Note,
As the vile person ought to be called liberal, nor the churl said to be
bountiful ([Isa 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#005)); so the liberal
and bountiful ought not to be called wasteful. They pretend it might
have been sold, and given to the poor, [Mar
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#005). But as a common piety to the
corban will not excuse from a particular charity to a poor parent ([Mar
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#011)), so a common charity to the poor
will not excuse from a particular act of piety to the Lord Jesus. What
thy hand finds to do, that is good, do it with thy might.

(2.) Our Lord Jesus put a better construction upon it than, for aught
that appears, was designed. Probably, she intended no more, than to show
the great honour she had for him, before all the company, and to
complete his entertainment. But Christ makes it to be an act of great
faith, as well as great love ([Mar
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#008)); "She is come aforehand, to
anoint my body to the burying, as if she foresaw that my resurrection
would prevent her doing it afterward." This funeral rite was a kind of
presage of, or prelude to, his death approaching. See how Christ's heart
was filled with the thoughts of his death, how every thing was construed
with a reference to that, and how familiarly he spoke of it upon all
occasions. It is usual for those who are condemned to die, to have their
coffins prepared, and other provision made for their funerals, while
they are yet alive; and so Christ accepted this. Christ's death and
burial were the lowest steps of his humiliation, and therefore, though
he cheerfully submitted to them, yet he would have some marks of honour
to attend them, which might help to take off the offence of the cross,
and be an intimation how precious in the sight of the Lord the death of
his saints is. Christ never rode in triumph into Jerusalem, but when he
came thither to suffer; nor had ever his head anointed, but for his
burial.

(3.) He recommended this piece of heroic piety to the applause of the
church in all ages; Wherever this gospel shall be preached, it shall be
spoken of, for a memorial of her, [Mar
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#009). Note, The honour which attends
well-doing, even in this world, is sufficient to balance the reproach
and contempt that are cast upon it. The memory of the just is blessed,
and they that had trial of cruel mockings, yet obtained a good report,
[Heb 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#006), [Heb
11:39](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#039). Thus was this good woman repaid
for her box of ointment, Nec oleum perdidit nec operam - She lost
neither her oil nor her labour. She got by it that good name which is
better than precious ointment. Those that honour Christ he will honour.

II\. Of the malice of Christ's enemies, and the preparation made by them
to do him mischief.

1\. The chief priests, his open enemies, consulted how they might put
him to death, [Mar 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#001), [Mar
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#002). The feast of the passover was
now at hand, and at that feast he must be crucified, (1.) That his death
and suffering might be the more public, and that all Israel, even those
of the dispersion, who came from all parts to the feast, might be
witnesses of it, and of the wonders that attended it. (2.) That the
Anti-type might answer to the type. Christ, our Passover, was sacrificed
for us, and brought us out of the house of bondage, at the same time
that the paschal lamb was sacrificed, and Israel's deliverance out of
Egypt was commemorated.

Now see, \[1.\] How spiteful Christ's enemies were; they did not think
it enough to banish or imprison him, for they aimed not only to silence
him, and stop his progress for the future, but to be revenged on him for
all the good he had done. \[2.\] How subtle they were; Not on the
feast-day, when the people are together; they do not say, Lest they
should be disturbed in their devotions, and diverted from them, but,
Lest there should be an uproar ([Mar
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#002)); lest they should rise, and
rescue him, and fall foul upon those that attempt any thing against him.
They who desired nothing more than the praise of men, dreaded nothing
more than the rage and displeasure of men.

2\. Judas, his disguised enemy, contracted with them for the betraying
of him, [Mar 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#010), [Mar
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#011). He is said to be one of the
twelve that were Christ's family, intimate with him, trained up for the
service of the kingdom; and he went to the chief priests, to tender his
service in this affair.

(1.) That which he proposed to them, was, to betray Christ to them, and
to give them notice when and where they might find him, and seize him,
without making an uproar among the people, which they were afraid of, if
they should seize him when he appeared in public, in the midst of his
admirers. Did he know then what help it was they wanted, and where they
were run aground in their counsels? It is probable that he did not, for
the debate was held in their close cabal. Did they know that he had a
mind to serve them, and make court to him? No, they could not imagine
that any of his intimates should be so base; but Satan, who was entered
into Judas, knew what occasion they had for him, and could guide him to
be guide to them, who were contriving to take Jesus. Note, The spirit
that works in all the children of disobedience, knows how to bring them
in to the assistance one of another in a wicked project, and then to
harden them in it, with the fancy that Providence favours them.

(2.) That which he proposed to himself, was, to get money by the
bargain; he had what he aimed at, when they promised to give him money.
Covetousness was Judas's master - lust, his own iniquity, and that
betrayed him to the sin of betraying his Master; the devil suited his
temptation to that, and so conquered him. It is not said, They promised
him preferment (he was not ambitious of that), but, they promised him
money. See what need we have to double our guard against the sin that
most easily besets us. Perhaps it was Judas's covetousness that brought
him at first to follow Christ, having a promise that he should be
cash-keeper, or purser, to the society, and he loved in his heart to be
fingering money; and now that there was money to be got on the other
side, he was as ready to betray him as ever he had been to follow him.
Note, Where the principle of men's profession of religion is carnal and
worldly, and the serving of a secular interest, the very same principle,
whenever the wind turns, will be the bitter root of a vile and
scandalous apostasy.

(3.) Having secured the money, he set himself to make good his bargain;
he sought how he might conveniently betray him, how he might seasonably
deliver him up, so as to answer the intention of those who had hired
him. See what need we have to be careful that we do not ensnare
ourselves in sinful engagements. If at any time we be so ensnared in the
words of our mouths, we are concerned to deliver ourselves by a speedy
retreat, [Pro 6:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#001). It is a rule in
our law, as well as in our religion, that an obligation to do an evil
thing is null and void; it binds to repentance, not to performance. See
how the way of sin is down-hill - when men are in, they must be on; and
what wicked contrivances many have in their sinful pursuits, to compass
their designs conveniently; but such conveniences will prove mischiefs
in the end.

[Mark 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mar 14:12</span></span>

In these verses we have,

I. Christ's eating the passover with his disciples, the night before he
died, with the joys and comforts of which ordinance he prepared himself
for his approaching sorrows, the full prospect of which did not
indispose him for that solemnity. Note, No apprehension of trouble, come
or coming, should put us by, or put us out of frame for, our attendance
on holy ordinances, as we have opportunity for it.

1\. Christ ate the passover at the usual time when the other Jews did,
as Dr. Whitby had fully made out, and not, as Dr. Hammond would have it,
the night before. It was on the first day of that feast, which (taking
in all the eight days of the feast) was called, The feast of unleavened
bread, even that day when they killed the passover, [Mar
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#012).

2\. He directed his disciples how to find the place where he intended to
eat the passover; and hereby gave such another proof of his infallible
knowledge of things distant and future (which to us seem altogether
contingent), as he had given when he sent them for the ass on which he
rode in triumph ([Mar 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#006)); "Go into
the city (for the passover must be eaten in Jerusalem), and there shall
meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water (a servant sent for water to
clean the rooms in his master's house); follow him, go in where he goes,
enquire for his master, the good man of the house ([Mar
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#014)), and desire him to show you a
room." No doubt, the inhabitants of Jerusalem had rooms fitted up to be
let out, for this occasion, to those that came out of the country to
keep the passover, and one of those Christ made use of; not any friend's
house, nor any house he had formerly frequented, for then he would have
said, "Go to such a friend," or, "You know where we used to be, go
thither and prepare." Probably he went where he was not known, that he
might be undisturbed with his disciples. Perhaps he notified it by a
sign, to conceal it from Judas, that he might not know till he came to
the place; and by such a sign to intimate that he will dwell in the
clean heart, that is, washed as with pure water. Where he designs to
come, a pitcher of water must go before him; see [Isa
1:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016).

3\. He ate the passover in an upper room furnished, estrōmenon - laid
with carpets (so Dr. Hammond); it would seem to have been a very
handsome dining-room. Christ was far from affecting any thing that
looked stately in eating his common meals; on the contrary, he chose
that which was homely, sat down on the grass: but, when he was to keep a
sacred feast, in honour of that he would be at the expense of as good a
room as he could get. God looks not at outward pomp, but he looks at the
tokens and expressions of inward reverence for a divine institution,
which, it is to be feared, those want, who, to save charges, deny
themselves decencies in the worship of God.

4\. He ate it with the twelve, who were his family, to teach those who
have the charge of families, not only families of children, but families
of servants, or families of scholars, or pupils, to keep up religion
among them, and worship God with them. If Christ came with the twelve,
then Judas was with them, though he was at this time contriving to
betray his Master; and it is plain by what follows ([Mar
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#020)), that he was there: he did not
absent himself, lest he could have been suspected; had his seat been
empty at this feast, they would have said, as Saul of David, He is not
clean, surely he is not clean, [Sa1
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#026). Hypocrites, though they know it
is at their peril, yet crowd into special ordinances, to keep up their
repute, and palliate their secret wickedness. Christ did not exclude him
from the feast, though he knew his wickedness, for it was not as yet
become public and scandalous. Christ, designing to put the keys of the
kingdom of heaven into the hands of men, who can judge only according to
outward appearance, would hereby both direct and encourage them in their
admissions to his table, to be satisfied with a justifiable profession,
because they cannot discern the root of bitterness till it springs up.

II\. Christ's discourse with his disciples, as they were eating the
passover. It is probable that they had discourse, according to the
custom of the feast, of the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt, and the
preservation of the first-born, and were as pleasant as they used to be
together on this occasion, till Christ told them that which would mix
trembling with their joys.

1\. They were pleasing themselves with the society of their Master; but
he tells them that they must now presently lose him; The Son of man is
betrayed; and they knew, for he had often told them, what followed - If
he be betrayed, the next news you will hear of him, is, that he is
crucified and slain; God hath determined it concerning him, and he
agrees to it; The Son of man goes, as it is written of him, [Mar
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#021). It was written in the counsels
of God, and written in the prophecies of the Old Testament, not one jot
or tittle of either of which can fall to the ground.

2\. They were pleasing themselves with the society one of another, but
Christ casts a damp upon the joy of that, by telling them, One of you
that eateth with me shall betray me, [Mar
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#018). Christ said this, if it might
be, to startle the conscience of Judas, and to awaken him to repent of
his wickedness, and to draw back (for it was not too late) from the
brink of the pit. But for aught that appears, he who was most concerned
in the warning, was least concerned at it. All the rest were affected
with it. (1.) They began to be sorrowful. As the remembrance of our
former falls into sin, so the fear of the like again, doth often much
embitter the comfort of our spiritual feasts, and damp our joy. Here
were the bitter herbs, with which this passover-feast was taken. (2.)
They began to be suspicious of themselves; they said one by one, Is it
I? And another said, Is it I? They are to be commended for their
charity, that they were more jealous of themselves than of one another.
It is the law of charity, to hope the best ([Co1
13:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#005)), because we assuredly know,
therefore we may justly suspect, more evil by ourselves than by our
brethren. They are also to be commended for their acquiescence in what
Christ said; they trusted more to his words than to their own hearts;
and therefore do not say, "I am sure it is not I," but, "Lord, is it I?
see if there be such a way of wickedness in us, such a root of
bitterness, and discover it to us, that we may pluck up that root, and
stop up that way."

Now, in answer to their enquiry, Christ saith that, \[1.\] Which would
make them easy; "It is not you, or you; it is this that now dips with me
in the dish; the adversary and enemy is this wicked Judas." \[2.\]
Which, one would think, should make Judas very uneasy. If he go on in
his undertaking, it is upon the sword's point, for woe to that many by
whom the Son of man is betrayed; he is undone, for every undone; his sin
will soon find him out; and it were better for him that he had never
been born, and had never had a being than such a miserable one as he
must have. It is very probable that Judas encouraged himself in it with
this thought, that his Master had often said he must be betrayed; "And
if it must be done, surely God will not find fault with him that doth
it, for who hath resisted his will?" As that objector argues, [Rom
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#019). But Christ tells him that this
will be no shelter or excuse to him; The Son of man indeed goes; as it
is written of him, as a lamb to the slaughter; but woe to that man by
whom he is betrayed. God's decree to permit the sins of men, and bring
glory to himself out of them, do neither necessitate their sins, nor
determine to them, nor will they be any excuse of the sin, or mitigation
of the punishment. Christ was delivered indeed by the determinate
counsel and fore-knowledge of God; but, notwithstanding that, it is with
wicked hands that he is crucified and slain, [Act
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023).

III\. The institution of the Lord's supper.

1\. It was instituted in the close of a supper, when they were
sufficiently fed with the paschal lamb, to show that in the Lord's
supper there is no bodily repast intended; to preface it with such a
thing, is to revive Moses again. But it is food for the soul only, and
therefore a very little of that which is for the body, as much as will
serve for a sign, is enough. It was at the close of the passover-supper,
which by this was evangelized, and then superseded and set aside. Much
of the doctrine and duty of the eucharist is illustrated to us by the
law of the passover (Ex. 12); for the Old Testament institutions, though
they do not bind us, yet instruct us, by the help of a gospel-key to
them. And these two ordinances lying here so near together, it may be
good to compare them, and observe how much shorter and plainer the
institution of the Lord's supper is, than that of the passover was.
Christ's yoke is easy in comparison with that of the ceremonial law, and
his ordinances are more spiritual.

2\. It was instituted by the example of Christ himself; not with the
ceremony and solemnity of a law, as the ordinance of baptism was, after
Christ's resurrection ([Mat 28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)),
with, Be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, by a power given to
Christ in heaven and on earth ([Mat
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018)); but by the practice of our
Master himself, because intended for those who are already his
disciples, and taken into covenant with him: but it has the obligation
of the law, and was intended to remain in full force, power, and virtue,
till his second coming.

3\. It was instituted with blessing and giving of thanks; the gifts of
common providence are to be so received ([Ti1
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#004), [Ti1
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#005)), much more than the gifts of
special grace. He blessed ([Mar
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#022)), and gave thanks, [Mar
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#023). At his other meals, he was wont
to bless, and give thanks ([Mar 6:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#041);
[Mar 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#007)) so remarkably, that he was
known by it, [Luk 24:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#030), [Luk
24:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#031). And he did the same at this
meal.

4\. It was instituted to be a memorial of his death; and therefore he
broke the bread, to show how it pleased the Lord to bruise him; and he
called the wine, which is the blood of the grape, the blood of the New
Testament. The death Christ died was a bloody death, and frequent
mention is made of the blood, the precious blood, as the pride of our
redemption; for the blood is the life, and made atonement for the soul,
[Lev 17:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#011). The pouring out of the
blood was the most sensible indication of the pouring out of his soul,
[Isa 53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012). Blood has a voice ([Gen
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#010)); and therefore blood is so often
mentioned, because it was to speak, [Heb
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#024). It is called the blood of the
New Testament; for the covenant of grace became a testament, and of
force by the death of Christ, the testator, [Heb
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#016). It is said to be shed for many,
to justify many ([Isa 53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011)), to bring
many sons to glory, [Heb 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#010). It was
sufficient for many, being of infinite value; it has been of use to
many; we read of a great multitude which no man could number, that had
all washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb
([Rev 7:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009)); and still it is a
fountain opened. How comfortable is this to poor repenting sinners, that
the blood of Christ is shed for many! And if for many, why not for me?
If for sinners, sinners of the Gentiles, the chief of sinners, then why
not for me?

5\. It was instituted to be a ratification of the covenant made with us
in him, and a sign of the conveyance of those benefits to us, which were
purchased for us by his death; and therefore he broke the bread to them
([Mar 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#022)), and said, Take, eat of
it: he gave the cup to them, and ordered them to drink of it, [Mar
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#023). Apply the doctrine of Christ
crucified to yourselves, and let it be meat and drink to your souls,
strengthening, nourishing, and refreshing, to you, and the support and
comfort of your spiritual life.

6\. It was instituted with an eye to the happiness of heaven, and to be
an earnest and fore-taste of that, and thereby to put our mouths out of
taste for all the pleasures and delights of sense ([Mar
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#025)); I will drink no more of the
fruit of the vine, as it is a bodily refreshment. I have done with it.
No one, having tasted spiritual delights, straightway desires sensitive
ones, for he saith, The spiritual is better ([Luk
5:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#039)); but every one that hath tasted
spiritual delights, straightway desires eternal ones, for he saith,
Those are better still; and therefore let me drink no more of the fruit
of the vine, it is dead and flat to those that have been made to drink
of the river of God's pleasures; but, Lord, hasten the day, when I shall
drink it new and fresh in the kingdom of God, where it shall be for ever
new, and in perfection.

7\. It was closed with a hymn, [Mar
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#026). Though Christ was in the midst
of his enemies, yet he did not, for fear of them, omit this sweet duty
of singing psalms. Paul and Silas sang, when the prisoners heard them.
This was an evangelical song, and gospel times are often spoken of in
the Old Testament, as times of rejoicing, and praise is expressed by
singing. This was Christ's swan-like song, which he sung just before he
entered upon his agony; probably, that which is usually sung, [Psa
113:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#001) to 118.

IV\. Christ's discourse with his disciples, as they were returning to
Bethany by moonlight. When the had sung the hymn, presently they went
out. It was now near bedtime, but our Lord Jesus had his heart so much
upon his suffering, that he would not come into the tabernacle of his
house, norgo up into his bed, nor give sleep to his eyes, when that work
was to be done, [Psa 132:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#003), [Psa
132:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#004). The Israelites were forbidden
to go out of their houses the night that they ate the passover, for fear
of the sword of the destroying angel, [Exo
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#022), [Exo
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#023). But because Christ, the great
shepherd, was to be smitten, he went out purposely to expose himself to
the sword, as a champion; they evaded the destroyer, but Christ
conquered him, and brought destructions to a perpetual end.

1\. Christ here foretels that in his sufferings he should be deserted by
all his disciples; "You will all be offended because of me, this night.
I know you will ([Mar 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#027)), and what
I tell you now, is no other than what the scripture has told you before;
I will smite the shepherd, and then the sheep will be scattered." Christ
knew this before, and yet welcomed them at his table; he sees the falls
and miscarriages of his disciples, and yet doth not refuse them. Nor
should we be discouraged from coming to the Lord's supper, by the fear
of relapsing into sin afterward; but, the greater of our danger is, the
more need we have to fortify ourselves by the diligent conscientious use
of holy ordinances. Christ tells them that they would be offended in
him, would begin to question whether he were the Messiah or no, when
they saw him overpowered by his enemies. Hitherto, they had continued
with him in his temptations; though they had sometimes offended him, yet
they had not been offended in him, nor turned the back upon him; but now
the storm would be so great, that they would all slip their anchors, and
be in danger of shipwreck. Some trials are more particular (as [Rev
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#010), The devil shall cast some of you
into prison); but others are more general, an hour of temptation, which
shall come upon all the world, [Rev
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#010). The smiting of the shepherd is
often the scattering of the sheep: magistrates, ministers, masters of
families, if these are, as they should be, shepherds to those under
their charge, when any thing comes amiss to them, the whole flock
suffers for it, and is endangered by it.

But Christ encourages them with a promise that they shall rally again,
shall return both to their duty and to their comfort ([Mar
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#028)); "After I am risen, I will
gather you in from all the places wither you are scattered, [Eze
34:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#012). I will go before you into
Galilee, will see our friends, and enjoy one another there."

2\. He foretels that he should be denied particularly by Peter. When
they went out to go to the mount of Olives, we may suppose that they
dropped Judas (he stole away from them), whereupon the rest began to
think highly of themselves, that they stuck to their Master, when Judas
quitted him. But Christ tells them, that though they should be kept by
his grace from Judas's apostasy, yet they would have no reason to boast
of their constancy. Note, Though God keeps us from being as bad as the
worst, yet we may well be ashamed to think that we are not better than
we are.

(1.) Peter is confident that he should not do so ill as the rest of his
disciples ([Mar 14:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#029)); Though all
should be offended, all his brethren here present, yet will not I. He
supposes himself not only stronger than others, but so much stronger, as
to be able to receive the shock of a temptation, and bear up against it,
all alone; to stand, though nobody stood by him. It is bred in the bone
with us, to think well of ourselves, and trust to our own hearts.

(2.) Christ tells him that he will do worse than any of them. They will
all desert him, but he will deny him; not once, but thrice; and that
presently; "This day, even this night before the cock crow twice, thou
wilt deny that ever thou hadst any knowledge of me, or acquaintance with
me, as one ashamed and afraid to own me."

(3.) He stands to his promise; "If I should die with thee, I will not
deny thee; I will adhere to thee, though it cost me my life:" and, no
doubt, he thought as he said. Judas said nothing like this, when Christ
told him he would betray him. He sinned by contrivance, Peter by
surprise; he devised the wickedness ([Mic
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#001)), Peter was overtaken in this
fault, [Gal 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001). It was ill done of
Peter, to contradict his Master. If he had said, with fear and
trembling, "Lord, give me grace to keep me from denying thee, lead me
not into this temptation, deliver me from this evil," it might have been
prevented: but they were all thus confident; they who said, Lord, is it
I? now said, It shall never be me. Being acquitted from their fear of
betraying Christ, they were now secure. But he that thinks he stands,
must learn to take heed lest he fall; and he that girdeth on the
harness, not boast as though he had put it off.

[Mark 14:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mar 14:32</span></span>

Christ is here entering upon his sufferings, and begins with those which
were the sorest of all his sufferings, those in his soul. Here we have
him in his agony; this melancholy story we had in Matthew; this agony in
soul was the wormwood and the gall in the affliction and misery; and
thereby it appeared that no sorrow was forced upon him, but that it was
what he freely admitted.

I. He retired for prayer; Sit ye here (saith he to his disciples), while
I go a little further, and pray. He had lately prayed with them (Jn.
17); and now he appoints them to withdraw while he goes to his Father
upon an errand peculiar to himself. Note, Our praying with our families
will not excuse our neglect of secret worship. When Jacob entered into
his agony, he first sent over all that he had, and was left alone, and
then there wrestled a man with him ([Gen
32:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#023), [Gen
32:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#024)), though he had been at prayer
before ([Mar 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#009)), it is likely, with
his family.

II\. Even into that retirement he took with him Peter, and James, and
John ([Mar 14:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#033)), three competent
witnesses of this part of his humiliation; and though great spirits care
not how few know any thing of their agonies, he was not ashamed that
they should see. These three had boasted most of their ability and
willingness to suffer with him; Peter here, in this chapter, and James
and John ([Mar 10:39](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#039)); and therefore
Christ takes them to stand by, and see what a struggle he had with the
bloody baptism and the bitter cup, to convince them that they knew not
what they said. It is fit that they who are most confident, should be
first tried, that they may be made sensible of their folly and weakness.

III\. There he was in a tremendous agitation ([Mar
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#033)); He began to be sore amazed -
ekthambeisthai, a word not used in Matthew, but very significant; it
bespeaks something like that horror of great darkness, which fell upon
Abraham ([Gen 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#012)), or, rather,
something much worse, and more frightful. The terrors of God set
themselves in array against him, and he allowed himself the actual and
intense contemplation of them. Never was sorrow like unto his at that
time; never any had such experience as he had from eternity of divine
favours, and therefore never any had, or could have, such a sense as he
had of divine favours. Yet there was not the least disorder or
irregularity in this commotion of his spirits; his affections rose not
tumultuously, but under direction, and as they were called up, for he
had no corrupt nature to mix with them, as we have. If water have a
sediment at the bottom, though it may be clear while it stands still,
yet, when shaken, it grows muddy; so it is with our affections: but pure
water in a clean glass, though ever so much stirred, continues clear;
and so it was with Christ. Dr. Lightfoot thinks it very probable that
the devil did now appear to our Saviour in a visible shape, in his own
shape and proper colour, to terrify and affright him, and to drive him
from his hope in God (which he aimed at in persecuting Job, a type of
Christ, to make him curse God, and die), and to deter him from the
further prosecution of his undertaking; whatever hindered him from that,
he looked upon as coming from Satan, [Mat
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#023). When the devil had tempted him
in the wilderness, it is said, He departed from him for a season ([Luk
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#013)), intending another grapple with
him, and in another way; finding that he could not by his flatteries
allure him into sin, he would try by his terrors to affright him into
it, and so make void his design.

IV\. He made a sad complaint of this agitation. He said, My soul is
exceeding sorrowful. 1. He was made sin for us, and therefore was thus
sorrowful; he fully knew the malignity of the sins he was to suffer for;
and having the highest degree of love to God, who was offended by them,
and of love to man, who was damaged and endangered by them, now that
those were set in order before him, no marvel that his soul was
exceeding sorrowful. Now was he made to serve with our sins, and was
thus wearied with our iniquities. 2. He was made a curse for us; the
curses of the law were transferred to him as our surety and
representative, not as originally bound with us, but a bail to the
action. And when his soul was thus exceeding sorrowful, he did, as it
were, yield to them, and lie down under the load, until by his death he
had satisfied for sin, and so for ever abolished the curse. He now
tasted death (as he is said to do, [Heb
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009)), which is not an extenuating
expression, as if he did but taste it; no, he drank up even the dregs of
the cup; but it is rather aggravating; it did not go down by wholesale,
but he tasted all the bitterness of it. This was that fear which the
apostle speaks of ([Heb 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007)), a
natural fear of pain and death, which it is natural to human nature to
startle at.

Now the consideration of Christ's sufferings in his soul, and his
sorrows for us, should be of use to us,

(1.) To embitter our sins. Can we ever entertain a favourable or so much
as a slight thought of sin, when we see what impression sin (though but
imputed) made upon the Lord Jesus? Shall that sit light upon our souls,
which sat so heavy upon his? Was Christ in such an agony for our sins,
and shall we never be in an agony about them? How should we look upon
him whom we have pressed, whom we have pierced, and mourn, and be in
bitterness! It becomes us to be exceeding sorrowful for sin, because
Christ was so, and never to make a mock at it. If Christ thus suffered
for sin, let us arm ourselves with the same mind.

(2.) To sweeten our sorrows; if our souls be at any time exceeding
sorrowful, through the afflictions of this present time, let us remember
that our Master was so before us, and the disciple is not greater than
his Lord. Why should we affect to drive away sorrow, when Christ for our
sakes courted it, and submitted to it, and thereby not only took out the
sting of it, and made it tolerable, but put virtue into it, and made it
profitable (for by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made
better), nay, and put sweetness into it, and made it comfortable.
Blessed Paul was sorrowful, and yet always rejoicing. If we be exceeding
sorrowful, it is but unto death; that will be the period of all our
sorrows, if Christ be ours; when the eyes are closed, all tears are
wiped away from them.

V. He ordered his disciples to keep with him, not because he needed
their help, but because he would have them to look upon him and receive
instruction; he said to them, Tarry ye here and watch. He had said to
the other disciples nothing but, Sit ye here ([Mar
14:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#032)); but these three he bids to
tarry and watch, as expecting more from them than from the rest.

VI\. He addressed himself to God by prayer ([Mar
14:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#035)); He fell on the ground, and
prayed. It was but a little before this, that in prayer he lifted up his
eyes ([Joh 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001)); but here, being in
an agony, he fell upon his face, accommodating himself to his present
humiliation, and teaching us thus to abase ourselves before God; it
becomes us to be low, when we come into the presence of the Most High.
1. As Man, he deprecated his sufferings, that, if it were possible, the
hour might pass from him ([Mar 14:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#035));
"This short, but sharp affliction, that which I am now this hour to
enter upon, let man's salvation be, if possible, accomplished without
it." We have his very words ([Mar
14:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#036)), Abba, Father. The Syriac word
is here retained, which Christ used, and which signifies Father, to
intimate what an emphasis our Lord Jesus, in his sorrows, laid upon it,
and would have us to lay. It is with an eye to this, that St. Paul
retains this word, putting it into the mouths of all that have the
Spirit of adoption; they are taught to cry, Abba, Father, [Rom
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015); [Gal
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006). Father, all things are possible
to thee. Note, Even that which we cannot expect to be done for us, we
ought yet to believe that God is able to do: and when we submit to his
will, and refer ourselves to his wisdom and mercy, it must be with a
believing acknowledgment of his power, that all things are possible to
him. 2. As Mediator, he acquiesced in the will of God concerning them;
"Nevertheless, not what I will, but what thou wilt. I know the matter is
settled, and cannot be altered, I must suffer and die, and I bid it
welcome."

VII\. He roused his disciples, who were dropped asleep while he was at
prayer, [Mar 14:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#037), [Mar
14:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#038). He comes to look after them,
since they did not look after him; and he finds them asleep, so little
affected were they with his sorrows, his complaints, and prayers. This
carelessness of theirs was a presage of their further offence in
deserting him; and it was an aggravation of it, that he had so lately
commended them for continuing with him in his temptations, though they
had not been without their faults. Was he so willing to make the best of
them, and were they so indifferent in approving themselves to him? They
had lately promised not to be offended in him; what! and yet mind him so
little? He particularly upbraided Peter with his drowsiness; Simon,
sleepest thou? Kai su teknon; - "What thou, my son? Thou that didst so
positively promise thou wouldest not deny me, dost thou slight me thus?
From thee I expected better things. Couldest thou not watch one hour?"
He did not require him to watch all night with him, only for one hour.
It aggravates our faintness and short continuance in Christ's service,
that he doth not over-task us, nor weary us with it, [Isa
43:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#023). He puts upon us no other
burthen than to hold fast till he comes ([Rev
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#024), [Rev
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#025)); and behold, he comes quickly,
[Rev 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#011).

As those whom Christ loves he rebukes when they do amiss, so those whom
he rebukes he counsels and comforts. 1. It was a very wise and faithful
word of advice which Christ here gave to his disciples; Watch and pray,
lest ye enter into temptation, v. 38. It was bad to sleep when Christ
was in his agony, but they were entering into further temptation, and if
they did not stir up themselves, and fetch in grace and strength from
God by prayer, they would do worse; and so they did, when they all
forsook him, and fled. 2. It was a very kind and tender excuse that
Christ made for them; "The spirit truly is willing; I know it is, it is
ready, it is forward; you would willingly keep awake, but you cannot."
This may be taken as a reason for that exhortation, "Watch and pray;
because, though the spirit is willing, I grant it is (you have sincerely
resolved never to be offended in me), yet the flesh is weak, and if you
do not watch and pray, and use the means of perseverance, you may be
overcome, notwithstanding." The consideration of the weakness and
infirmity of our flesh should engage and quicken us to prayer and
watchfulness, when we are entering into temptation.

VIII\. He repeated his address to his Father ([Mar
14:39](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#039)); He went again, and prayed,
saying, ton auton logon - the same word, or matter, or business; he
spoke to the same purport, and again the third time. This teaches us,
that men ought to pray, and not to faint, [Luk
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001). Though the answers to our
prayers do not come quickly, yet we must renew our requests, and
continue instant in prayer; for the vision is for an appointed time, and
at the end it shall speak, and not lie, [Hab
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#003). Paul, when he was buffeted by a
messenger of Satan, besought the Lord thrice, as Christ did here, before
he obtained an answer of peace, [Co2
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007), [Co2
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#008). A little before this, when
Christ, in the trouble of his soul, prayed, Father, glorify thy name, he
had an immediate answer by a voice from heaven, I have both glorified
it, and I will glorify it yet again; but now he must come a second and
third time, for the visits of God's grace, in answer to prayer, come
sooner or later, according to the pleasure of his will, that we may be
kept depending.

IX\. He repeated his visits to his disciples. Thus he gave a specimen of
his continued care for his church on earth, even when it is half asleep,
and not duly concerned for itself, while he ever lives making
intercession with his Father in heaven. See how, as became a Mediator,
he passes and repasses between both. He came the second time to his
disciples, and found them asleep again, [Mar
14:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#040). See how the infirmities of
Christ's disciples return upon them, notwithstanding their resolutions,
and overpower them, notwithstanding their resistance; and what clogs
those bodies of ours are to our souls, which should make us long for
that blessed state in which they shall be no more our encumbrance. This
second time he spoke to them as before, but they wist not what to answer
him; they were ashamed of their drowsiness, and had nothing to say in
excuse for it. Or, They were so overpowered with it, that, like men
between sleeping and waking, they knew not where they were, or what they
said. But, the third time, they were bid to sleep if they would ([Mar
14:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#041)); "Sleep on now, and take your
rest. I have now no more occasion for your watching, you may sleep, if
you will, for me." It is enough; we had not that word in Matthew. "You
have had warning enough to keep awake, and would not take it; and now
you shall see what little reason you have to be secure." Apekei, I
discharge you from any further attendance; so some understand it; "Now
the hour is come, in which I knew you would all forsake me, even take
your course;" as he said to Judas, What thou doest, do quickly. The Son
of man is now betrayed into the hands of sinners, the chief priests and
elders; those worst of sinners, because they made a profession of
sanctity. "Come, rise up, do not lie dozing there. Let us go and meet
the enemy, for lo, he that betrayeth me is at hand, and I must not now
think of making an escape." When we see trouble at the door, we are
concerned to stir up ourselves to get ready for it.

[Mark 14:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">mar 14:43</span></span>

We have here the seizing of our Lord Jesus by the officers of the chief
priests. This was what his enemies had long aimed at, they had often
sent to take him; but he had escaped out of their hands, because his
hour was not come, nor could they now have taken him, had he not freely
surrendered himself. He began first to suffer in his soul, but afterward
suffered in his body, that he might satisfy for sin, which begins in the
heart, but afterwards makes the members of the body instruments of
unrighteousness.

I. Here is a band of rude miscreants employed to take our Lord Jesus and
make him a prisoner; a great multitude with swords and staves. There is
no wickedness so black, no villany so horrid, but there may be found
among the children of men fit tools to be made use of, that will not
scruple to be employed; so miserably depraved and vitiated is mankind.
At the head of this rabble is Judas, one of the twelve, one of those
that had been many years intimately conversant with our Lord Jesus, had
prophesied in his name, and in his name cast out devils, and yet
betrayed him. It is no new thing for a very fair and plausible
profession to end in a shameful and fatal apostasy. How art thou fallen,
O Lucifer!

II\. Men of no less figure than the chief priests, and the scribes, and
the elders, sent them, and set them on work, who pretended to expect the
Messiah, and to be ready to welcome him; and yet, when he is come, and
has given undeniable proofs that it is he that should come, because he
doth not make court to them, nor countenance and support their pomp and
grandeur, because he appears not as a temporal prince, but sets up a
spiritual kingdom, and preaches repentance, reformation, and a holy
life, and directs men's thoughts, and affections, and aims, to another
world, they set themselves against him, and, without giving the
credentials he produces an impartial examination, resolve to run him
down.

III\. Judas betrayed him with a kiss; abusing the freedom Christ used to
allow his disciples of kissing his cheek at their return when they had
been any time absent. He called him, Master, Master, and kissed him; he
said, Rabbi, Rabbi, as if he had been now more respectful to him than
ever. It is enough to put one for ever out of conceit with being called
of men Rabbi, Rabbi ([Mat 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#007)), since
it was with this compliment that Christ was betrayed. He bid them take
him, and lead him away safely. Some think that he spoke this ironically,
knowing that they could not secure him unless he pleased, that this
Samson could break their bonds asunder as threads of tow, and make is
escape, and then he should get the money, and Christ the honour, and no
harm done; and I should think so too, but that Satan was entered into
him, so that the worst and most malicious intention of this action is
not too black to be supposed. Nay, he had often heard his Master say,
that, being betrayed, he should be crucified, and had no reason to think
otherwise.

IV\. They arrested him, and made him their prisoner ([Mar
14:46](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#046)); They laid their hands on him,
rude and violent hands, and took him into custody; triumphing, it is
likely, that they had done that which has been often before attempted in
vain.

V. Peter laid about him in defence of his Master, and wounded one of the
assailants, being for the present mindful of his promise, to venture his
life with his Master. He was one of them that stood by, of them that
were with him (so the word signifies), of those three disciples that
were with him in the garden; he drew a sword, and aimed, it is likely,
to cut off the head, but missed his blow, and only cut off the ear, of a
servant of the high priest, [Mar
14:47](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#047). It is easier to fight for
Christ, than to die for him; but Christ's good soldiers overcome, not by
taking other people's lives, but by laying down their own, [Rev
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#011).

VI\. Christ argues with them that had seized him, and shows them the
absurdity of their proceedings against him. 1. That they came out
against him, as against a thief, whereas he was innocent of any crime;
he taught daily in the temple, and if he had any wicked design, there it
would some time or other have been discovered; nay, these officers of
the chief priests, being retainers to the temple, may be supposed to
have heard his sermons there (I was with you in the temple); and had he
not taught them excellent doctrine, even his enemies themselves being
judges? Were not all the words of his mouth in righteousness? Was there
any thing froward or perverse in them? [Pro
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#008). By his fruits he was known to be
a good tree; why then did they come out against him as a thief? 2. That
they came to take him thus privately, whereas he was neither ashamed nor
afraid to appear publicly in the temple. He was none of those evil-doers
that hate the light, neither come to the light, [Joh
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#020). If their masters had any thing
to say to him, they might meet him any day in the temple, where he was
ready to answer all challenges, all charges; and there they might do as
they pleased with him, for the priests had the custody of the temple,
and the command of the guards about it: but to come upon him thus at
midnight, and in the place of his retirement, was base and cowardly.
This was to do as David's enemy, that sat in the lurking places of the
villages, to murder the innocent, [Psa
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#008). But this was not all. 3. They
came with swords and staves, as if he had been in arms against the
government, and must have the posse comitatus raised to reduce him.
There was no occasion for those weapons; but they made this ado, (1.) To
secure themselves from the rage of some; they came armed, because they
feared the people; but thus were they in great fear, where no fear was,
[Psa 53:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#005). (2.) To expose him to the
rage of others. By coming with swords and staves to take him, they
represented him to the people (who are apt to take impressions this way)
as a dangerous turbulent man, and so endeavored to incense them against
him, and make them cry out, Crucify him, crucify him, having no other
way to gain their point.

VII\. He reconciled himself to all this injurious, ignominious
treatment, by referring himself to the Old Testament predictions of the
Messiah. I am hardly used, but I submit, for the scriptures must be
fulfilled, [Mar 14:49](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#049). 1. See here
what a regard Christ had to the scriptures; he would bear any thing
rather than that the least jot or tittle of the word of God should fall
to the ground; and as he had an eye to them in his sufferings, so he has
in his glory; for what is Christ doing in the government of the world,
but fulfilling the scriptures? 2. See what use we are to make of the Old
Testament; we must search for Christ, the true treasure hid in that
field: as the history of the New Testament expounds the prophecies of
Old, so the prophecies of the Old Testament illustrate the history of
the New.

VIII\. All Christ's disciples, hereupon, deserted him ([Mar
14:50](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#050)); They all forsook him, and
fled. They were very confident that they should adhere to him; but even
good men know not what they will do, till they are tried. If it was such
a comfort to him as he had lately intimated, that they had hitherto
continued with him in his lesser trials ([Luk
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#028)), we may well imagine what a
grief it was to him, that they deserted him now in the greatest, when
they might have done him some service - when he was abused, to protect
him, and when accused, to witness for him. Let not those that suffer for
Christ, think it strange, if they be thus deserted, and if all the herd
shun the wounded deer; they are not better than their Master, nor can
expect to be better used either by their enemies or by their friends.
When St. Paul was in peril, none stood by him, but all men forsook him,
[Ti2 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#016).

IX\. The noise disturbed the neighbourhood, and some of the neighbours
were brought into danger by the riot, [Mar
14:51](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#051), [Mar
14:52](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#052). This passage of story we have
not in any other of the evangelists. Here is an account of a certain
young man, who, as it should seem, was no disciple of Christ, nor, as
some have imagined, a servant of the house wherein Christ had eaten the
passover, who followed him to see what would become of him (as the sons
of the prophets, when they understood that Elijah was to be taken up,
went to view afar off, [Kg2 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#007)), but
some young man that lived near the garden, perhaps in the house to which
the garden belonged. Now observe concerning him,

1\. How he was frightened out of his bed, to be a spectator of Christ's
sufferings. Such a multitude, so armed, and coming with so much fury,
and in the dead of night, and in a quiet village, could not but produce
a great stir; this alarmed our young man, who perhaps thought they was
some tumult or rising in the city, some uproar among the people, and had
the curiosity to go, and see what the matter was, and was in such haste
to inform himself, that he could not stay to dress himself, but threw a
sheet about him, as if he would appear like a walking ghost, in grave
clothes, to frighten those who had frightened him, and ran among the
thickest of them with this question, What is to do here? Being told, he
had a mind to see the issue, having, no doubt, heard much of the fame of
this Jesus; and therefore, when all his disciples had quitted him, he
continued to follow him, desirous to hear what he would say, and see
what he would do. Some think that his having no other garment than this
linen cloth upon his naked body, intimates that he was one of those Jews
who made a great profession of piety that their neighbours, in token of
which, among other instances of austerity and mortification of the body,
they used no clothes but one linen garment, which, though contrived to
be modest enough, was thin and cold. But I rather think that this was
not his constant wear.

2\. See how he was frightened into his bed again, when he was in danger
of being made a sharer in Christ's sufferings. His own disciples had run
away from him; but this young man, having no concern for him, thought he
might securely attend him, especially being so far from being armed,
that he was not so much as clothed; but the young men, the Roman
soldiers, who were called to assist, laid hold of him, for all was fish
that came to their net. Perhaps they were now vexed at themselves, that
they had suffered the disciples to run away, and they being got out of
their reach they resolved to seize the first they could lay their hands
on; though this young man was perhaps one of the strictest sect of the
Jewish church, yet the Roman soldiers made no conscience of abusing him
upon this occasion. Finding himself in danger, he left the linen cloth
by which they had caught hold of him, and fled away naked. This passage
is recorded to show what a barbarous crew this was, that was sent to
seize Christ, and what a narrow escape the disciples had of falling into
their hands, out of which nothing could have kept them but their
Master's care of them; If ye seek me, let these go their way, [Joh
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#008). It also intimates that there is
no hold of those who are led by curiosity only, and not by faith and
conscience, to follow Christ.

[Mark 14:53](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">mar 14:53</span></span>

We have here Christ's arraignment, trial, conviction, and condemnation,
in the ecclesiastical court, before the great sanhedrim, of which the
high priest was president, or judge of the court; the same Caiaphas that
had lately adjudged it expedient he should be put to death, guilty or
not guilty ([Joh 11:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#050)), and who
therefore might justly be excepted against as partial.

I. Christ is hurried away to his house, his palace it is called, such
state did he live in. And there, though, in the dead of the night, all
the chief priests, and elders, and scribes, that were in the secret,
were assembled, ready to receive the prey; so sure were they of it.

II\. Peter followed at a distance, such a degree of cowardice was his
late courage dwindled into, [Mar
14:54](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#054). But when he came to the high
priest's palace, he sneakingly went, and sat with the servants, that he
might not be suspected to belong to Christ. The high priest's fire side
was no proper place, nor his servants proper company, for Peter, but it
was his entrance into a temptation.

III\. Great diligence was used to procure, for love or money, false
witnesses against Christ. They had seized him as a malefactor, and now
they had him they had no indictment to prefer against him, no crime to
lay to his charge, but they sought for witnesses against him; pumped
some with ensnaring questions, offered bribes to others, if they would
accuse him, and endeavored to frighten others, if they would not, [Mar
14:55](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#055), [Mar
14:56](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#056). The chief priests and elders
were by the law entrusted with the prosecuting and punishing of false
witnesses ([Deu 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#016), [Deu
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#017)); yet those were now ringleaders
in a crime that tends to overthrow of all justice. It is time to cry,
Help, Lord, when the physicians of a land are its troublers, and those
that should be the conservators of peace and equity, are the corrupters
of both.

IV\. He was at length charged with words spoken some years ago, which,
as they were represented, seemed to threaten the temple, which they had
made no better than an idol of ([Mar
14:57](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#057), [Mar
14:58](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#058)); but the witnesses to this
matter did not agree ([Mar 14:59](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#059)), for
one swore that he said, I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to
build it in three days (so it is in Matthew); the other swore that he
said, I will destroy this temple, that is made with hands, and within
three days, I will build not it, but another made without hands; now
these two differ much from each other; oude isē ēn hē marturia - their
testimony was not sufficient, nor equal to the charge of a capital
crime; so Dr. Hammond: they did not accuse him of that upon which a
sentence of death might be founded, no not by the utmost stretch of
their law.

V. He was urged to be his own accuser ([Mar
14:60](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#060)); The high priest stood up in a
heat, and said, Answerest thou nothing? This he said under pretence of
justice and fair dealing, but really with a design to ensnare him, that
they might accuse him, [Luk 11:53](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#053),
[Luk 11:54](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#054); [Luk
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#020). We may well imagine with what
an air of haughtiness and disdain this proud high priest brought our
Lord Jesus to this question; "Come you, the prisoner at the bar, you
hear what is sworn against you; what have you now to say for yourself?"
Pleased to think that he seemed silent, who had so often silenced those
that picked quarrels with him. Still Christ answered nothing, that he
might set us an example, 1. Of patience under calumnies and false
accusations; when we are reviled, let us not revile again, [Pe1
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#023). And, 2. Of prudence, when a man
shall be made an offender for a word ([Isa
29:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#021)), and our defence made our
offence; it is an evil time indeed when the prudent shall keep silence
(lest they make bad worse), and commit their cause to him that judgeth
righteously. But,

VI\. When he was asked whether he was the Christ, he confessed, and
denied not, that he was, [Mar 14:61](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#061),
[Mar 14:62](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#062). He asked, Art thou the Son
of the Blessed? that is the Son of God? for, as Dr. Hammond observes,
the Jews, when they named God, generally added, blessed for ever; and
thence the Blessed is the title of God, a peculiar title, and applied to
Christ, [Rom 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005). And for the proof of
his being the Son of God, he binds them over to his second coming; "Ye
shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power; that Son of
man that now appears so mean and despicable, whom ye see and trample
upon ([Isa 53:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002), [Isa
53:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003)), you shall shortly see and
tremble before." Now, one would think that such a word as this which our
Lord Jesus seems to have spoken with a grandeur and majesty not
agreeable to his present appearance (for through the thickest cloud of
his humiliation some rays of glory were still darted forth), should have
startled the court, and at least, in the opinion of some of them, should
have amounted to a demurrer, or arrest of judgment, and that they should
have stayed process till they had considered further of it; when Paul at
the bar reasoned of the judgment to come, the judge trembled, and
adjourned the trial, [Act 24:25](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#025). But
these chief priests were so miserably blinded with malice and rage,
that, like the horse rushing into the battle, they mocked at fear, and
were not affrighted, neither believed they that it was the sound of the
trumpet, [Job 39:22](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#022), [Job
39:24](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#024). And see [Job
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#025), [Job
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#026).

VII\. The high priest, upon this confession of his, convicted him as a
blasphemer ([Mar 14:63](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#063)); He rent his
clothes - chitōnas autou. Some think the word signifies his pontifical
vestments, which, for the greater state, he had put on, though in the
night, upon this occasion. As before, in his enmity to Christ, he said
he knew not what ([Joh 11:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#051), [Joh
11:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#052)), so now he did he knew not
what. If Saul's rending Samuel's mantle was made to signify the rending
of the kingdom from him ([Sa1 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#027),
[Sa1 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#028)), much more did Caiaphas's
rending his own clothes signify the rending of the priesthood from him,
as the rending of the veil, at Christ's death, signified the throwing of
all open. Christ's clothes, even when he was crucified, were kept
entire, and not rent: for when the Levitical priesthood was rent in
pieces and done away, This Man, because he continues ever, has an
unchangeable priesthood.

VIII\. They agreed that he was a blasphemer, and, as such, was guilty of
a capital crime, [Mar 14:64](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#064). The
question seemed to be put fairly, What think ye? But it was really
prejudged, for the high priest had said, Ye have heard the blasphemy; he
gave judgment first, who, as president of the court, ought to have voted
last. So they all condemned him to be guilty of death; what friends he
had in the great sanhedrim, did not appear, it is probable that they had
not notice.

IX\. They set themselves to abuse him, and, as the Philistines with
Samson, to make sport with him, [Mar
14:65](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#065). It should seem that some of the
priests themselves that had condemned him, so far forgot the dignity, as
well as duty, of their place, and the gravity which became them, that
they helped their servants in playing the fool with a condemned
prisoner. This they made their diversion, while they waited for the
morning, to complete their villany. That night of observations (as the
passover-night was called) they made a merry night of. If they did not
think it below them to abuse Christ, shall we think any thing below us,
by which we may do him honour?

[Mark 14:66](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#066)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_066">mar 14:66</span></span>

We have here the story of Peter's denying Christ.

1\. It began in keeping at a distance from him. Peter had followed afar
off ([Mar 14:54](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#054)), and now was beneath
in the palace, at the lower end of the hall. Those that are shy of
Christ, are in a fair way to deny him, that are shy of attending on holy
ordinances, shy of the communion of the faithful, and loth to be seen on
the side of despised godliness.

2\. It was occasioned by his associating with the high priest's
servants, and sitting among them. They that think it dangerous to be in
company with Christ's disciples, because thence they may be drawn in to
suffer for him, will find it much more dangerous to be in company with
his enemies, because there they may be drawn in to sin against him.

3\. The temptation was, his being charged as a disciple of Christ; Thou
also wert with Jesus of Nazareth, [Mar
14:67](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#067). This is one of them ([Mar
14:69](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#069)), for thou art a Galilean, one
may know that by thy speaking broad, [Mar
14:70](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#070). It doth not appear that he was
challenged upon it, or in danger of being prosecuted as a criminal for
it, but only bantered upon it, and in danger of being ridiculed as a
fool for it. While the chief priests were abusing the Master, the
servants were abusing the disciples. Sometimes the cause of Christ seems
to fall so much on the losing side, that every body has a stone to throw
at it, and even the abjects gather themselves together against it. When
Job was on the dunghill, he was had in derision of those that were the
children of base men, [Job 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#008). Yet,
all things considered, the temptation could not be called formidable; it
was only a maid that casually cast her eye upon him, and, for aught that
appears, without design of giving him any trouble, said, Thou art one of
them, to which he needed not to have made any reply, or might have said,
"And if I be, I hope that is no treason."

4\. The sin was very great; he denied Christ before men, at a time when
he ought to have confessed and owned him, and to have appeared in court
a witness for him. Christ had often given notice to his disciples of his
own sufferings; yet, when they came, they were to Peter as great a
surprise and terror as if he had never heard of them before. He had
often told them that they must suffer for him, must take up their cross,
and follow him; and yet Peter is so terribly afraid of suffering, upon
the very first alarm of it, that he will lie and swear, and do any
thing, to avoid it. When Christ was admired and flocked after, he could
readily own him; but now that he is deserted, and despised, and run
down, he is ashamed of him, and will own no relation to him.

5\. His repentance was very speedy. He repeated his denial thrice, and
the third was worst of all, for then he cursed and swore, to confirm his
denial; and that the third blow, which, one would think, should have
stunned him, and knocked him down, startled him, and roused him up. Then
the cock crew the second time, which put him in mind of his Master's
words, the warning he had given him, with that particular circumstance
of the cock crowing twice; by recollecting that, he was made sensible of
his sin and the aggravations of it; and when he thought thereon, he
wept. Some observe that this evangelist, who wrote, as some have
thought, by St. Peter's direction, speaks as fully of Peter's sin as any
of them, but more briefly of his sorrow, which Peter, in modesty, would
not have to be magnified, and because he thought he could never sorrow
enough for great a sin. His repentance here is thus expressed, epibalōn
eklaie, where something must be supplied. He added to weep, so some;
making it a Hebraism; he wept, and the more he thought of it, the more
he wept; he continued weeping; he flung out, and wept; burst out into
tears; threw himself down, and wept; he covered his face, and wept, so
some; cast his garment about his head, that he might not be seen to
weep; he cast his eyes upon his Master, who turned, and looked upon him;
so Dr. Hammond supplies it, and it is a probable conjecture. Or, as we
understand it, fixing his mind upon it, he wept. It is not a transient
thought of that which is humbling, that will suffice, but we must dwell
upon it. Or, what if this word should mean his laying a load upon
himself, throwing a confusion into his own face? he did as the publican
that smote his breast, in sorrow for sin; and this amounts to his
weeping bitterly.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 15](mar015)

</div>
