<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar011)  [Next](mar013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#001)

[Mark](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mar 12:0</span></span>

In this chapter, we have, I. The parable of the vineyard let out to
unthankful husbandmen, representing the sin and ruin of the Jewish
church ([Mar 12:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#001)). II. Christ's
silencing those who thought to ensnare him with a question about paying
tribute Caesar ([Mar 12:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#013)). III.
His silencing the Sadducees, who attempted to perplex the doctrine of
the resurrection ([Mar 12:18-27](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#018)). IV.
His conference with a scribe about the first and great command of the
law ([Mar 12:28-34](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#028)). V. His puzzling
the scribes with a question about Christ's being the Son of David ([Mar
12:35-37](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#035)). VI. The caution he gave the
people, to take heed of the scribes ([Mar
12:38-40](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#038)). VII. His commendation of
the poor widow that cast her two mites into the treasury ([Mar
12:41-44](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#041)).

[Mark 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 12:1</span></span>

Christ had formerly in parables showed how he designed to set up the
gospel church; now he begins in parables to show how he would lay aside
the Jewish church, which it might have been grafted into the stock of,
but was built upon the ruins of. This parable we had just as we have it
here, [Mat 21:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#033). We may observe here,

I. They that enjoy the privileges of the visible church, have a vineyard
let out to them, which is capable of great improvement, and from the
occupiers of which rent is justly expected. When God showed his word
unto Jacob, his statutes and judgments unto Israel ([Psa
147:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#019)), when he set up his temple
among them, his priesthood, and his ordinances, then he let out to them
the vineyard he had planted; which he hedged, and in which he built a
tower, [Mar 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#001). Members of the
church are God's tenants, and they have both a good Landlord and a good
bargain, and may live well upon it, if it be not their own fault.

II\. Those whom God lets out his vineyard to, he sends his servants to,
to put them in mind of his just expectations from them, [Mar
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#002). He was not hasty in his demands,
nor high, for he did not send for the rent till they could make it, at
the season; nor did he put them to the trouble of making money of it,
but was willing to take it in specie.

III\. It is sad to think what base usage God's faithful ministers have
met with, in all ages, from those that have enjoyed the privileges of
the church, and have not brought forth fruit answerable. The Old
Testament prophets were persecuted even by those that went under the
name of the Old Testament church. They beat them, and sent them empty
away ([Mar 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#003)); that was bad: they
wounded them, and sent them away shamefully entreated ([Mar
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#004)); that was worse: nay, at length,
they came to such a pitch of wickedness, that they killed them, [Mar
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#005).

IV\. It was no wonder if those who abused the prophets, abused Christ
himself. God did at length send them his Son, his well-beloved; it was
therefore so much the greater kindness in him to send him; as in Jacob
to send Joseph to visit his brethren, [Gen
37:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#014). And it might be expected that
he whom their Master loved, they also should respect and love ([Mar
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#006)); "They will reverence my son,
and, in reverence to him, will pay their rent." But, instead of
reverencing him because he was the son and heir, they therefore hated
him, [Mar 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#007). Because Christ, in
calling to repentance and reformation, made his demands with more
authority than the prophets had done, they were the more enraged against
him, and determined to put him to death, that they might engross all
church power to themselves, and that all the respect and obedience of
the people might be paid to them only; "The inheritance shall be ours,
we will be lords paramount, and bear all the sway." There is an
inheritance, which, if they had duly reverenced the Son, might have been
theirs, a heavenly inheritance; but they slighted that, and would have
their inheritance in the wealth, and pomp, and powers, of this world. So
they took him, and killed him; they had not done it yet, but they would
do it in a little time; and they cast him out of the vineyard, they
refused to admit his gospel when he was gone; it would by no means agree
with their scheme, and so they threw it out with disdain and
detestation.

V. For such sinful and shameful doings nothing can be expected but a
fearful doom ([Mar 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#009)); What shall
therefore the Lord of the vineyard do? It is easy to say what, for
nothing could be done more provoking.

1\. He will come, and destroy the husbandmen, whom he would have saved.
When they only denied the fruit, he did not distrain upon them for rent,
nor disseize them and dispossess them for non-payment; but when they
killed his servants, and his Son, he determined to destroy them; and
this was fulfilled when Jerusalem was laid waste, and the Jewish nation
extirpated and made a desolation.

2\. He will give the vineyards to others. If he have not the rent from
them, he will have it from another people, for God will be no loser by
any. This was fulfilled in the taking in of the Gentiles, and the
abundance of fruit which the gospel brought forth in all the world, [Col
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#006). If some from whom we expected
well, prove bad, it doth not follow but that others will be better.
Christ encouraged himself with this in his undertaking; Though Israel be
not gathered, not gathered to him, but gathered against him, yet shall I
be glorious ([Isa 49:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#005), [Isa
49:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006)), as a Light to lighten the
Gentiles.

3\. Their opposition to Christ's exaltation shall be no obstruction to
it ([Mar 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#010), [Mar
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#011)); The stone which the builders
rejected, notwithstanding that, is become the Head of the corner, is
highly advanced as the Head-stone, and of necessary use and influence as
the Corner-stone. God will set Christ as his King, upon his holy hill of
Zion, in spite of their project, who would break his bands asunder. And
all the world shall see and own this to be the Lord's doing, in justice
to the Jews, and in compassion to the Gentiles. The exaltation of Christ
was the Lord's doing, and it is his doing to exalt him in our hearts,
and to set up his throne there; and if it be done, it cannot but be
marvellous in our eyes.

Now what effect had this parable upon the chief priests and scribes,
whose conviction was designed by it? They knew he spoke this parable
against them, [Mar 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#012). They could
not but see their own faces in the glass of it; and one would think it
showed them their sin so very heinous, and their ruin so certain and
great, that it should have frightened them into a compliance with Christ
and his gospel, should have prevailed to bring them to repentance, at
least to make them desist from their malicious purpose against him: but,
instead of that, (1.) They sought to lay hold on him, and make him their
prisoner immediately, and so to fulfil what he had just now said they
would do to him, [Mar 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#008). (2.)
Nothing restrained them from it but the awe they stood in of the people;
they did not reverence Christ, nor had an fear of God before their eyes,
but were afraid, if they should publicly lay hold on Christ, the mob
would rise, and lay hold on them, and rescue them. (3.) They left him,
and went their way; if they could not do hurt to him, they resolved he
should not do good to them, and therefore they got out of the hearing of
his powerful preaching, lest they should be converted and healed. Note,
If men's prejudices be not conquered by the evidence of truth, they are
but confirmed; and if the corruptions of the heart be not subdued by
faithful reproofs, they are but enraged and exasperated. If the gospel
be not a savour of life unto life, it will be a savour of death unto
death.

[Mark 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mar 12:13</span></span>

When the enemies of Christ, who thirsted for his blood, could not find
occasion against him from what he said against them, they tried to
ensnare him by putting questions to him. Here we have him tempted, or
attempted rather, with a question about the lawfulness of paying tribute
to Caesar. We had this narrative, [Mat
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#015).

I. The persons they employed were the Pharisees and the Herodians, men
that in this matter were contrary to one another, and yet concurred
against Christ, [Mar 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#013). The
Pharisees were great sticklers for the liberty of the Jews, and, if he
should say, It is lawful to give tribute to Caesar, they would incense
the common people against him, and the Herodians would, underhand,
assist them in it. The Herodians were great sticklers for the Roman
power, and, if he should discountenance the paying of tribute to Caesar,
they would incense the governor against hum, yea, and the Pharisees,
against their own principles, would join with them in it. It is no new
thing for those that are at variance in other things, to join in a
confederacy against Christ.

II\. The pretence they made was, that they desired him to resolve them a
case of conscience, which was of great importance in the present
juncture; and they take on them to have a high opinion of his ability to
resolve it, [Mar 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#014). They
complimented him at a high rate, called him Master, owned him for a
Teacher of the way of God, a Teacher of it in truth, one who taught what
was good, and upon principles of truth, who would not be brought by
smiles or frowns to depart a step from the rules of equity and goodness;
"Thou carest for no man, nor regardest the person of men, thou art not
afraid of offending either the jealous prince on one hand, or the
jealous people on the other; thou art right, and always in the right,
and dost in a right manner declare good and evil, truth and falsehood."
If they spoke as they thought concerning Christ, when they said, We know
that thou art right, their persecuting him, and putting him to death, as
a deceiver, was sin against knowledge; they knew him, and yet crucified
him. However, a man's testimony shall be taken most strongly against
himself, and out of their own mouths are they judged; they knew that he
taught the way of God in truth, and yet rejected the counsel of God
against themselves. The professions and pretences of hypocrites will be
produced in evidence against them, and they will be self-condemned. But
if they did not know or believe it, they lied unto God with their mouth,
and flattered him with their tongue.

III\. The question they put was, Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar,
or not? They would be thought desirous to know their duty. As a nation
that did righteousness, they ask of God the ordinances of justice, when
really they desired nothing but to know what he would say, in hopes
that, which side soever he took of the question, they might take
occasion from it to accuse him. Nothing is more likely to ensnare
ministers, than bringing them to meddle with controversies about civil
rights, and to settle land-marks between the prince and the subject,
which it is fit should be done, while it is not at all fit that they
should have the doing of it. They seemed to refer the determining of
this matter to Christ; and he indeed was fit to determine it, for by him
kings reign, and princes decree justice; they put the question fairly,
Shall we give, or shall we not give? They seemed resolved to stand to
his award; "If thou sayest that we must pay tribute, we will do it, thou
we be made beggars by it. If thou sayest that we must not, we will not,
though we be made traitors for it." Many seemed desirous to do it; as
those proud men, [Jer 42:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#020).

IV\. Christ determined the question, and evaded the snare, by referring
them to their national concessions already made, by which they were
precluded from disputing this matter, [Mar
12:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#015). He knew their hypocrisy, the
malice that was in their hearts against him, while with their mouth they
showed all this love. Hypocrisy, though ever so artfully managed, cannot
be concealed from the Lord Jesus. He sees the potsherd that is covered
with the silver dross. He knew they intended to ensnare him, and
therefore contrived the matter so as to ensnare them, and to oblige them
by their own words to do what they were unwilling to do, which was, to
pay their taxes honestly and quietly, and yet at the same time to screen
himself against their exceptions. He made them acknowledge that the
current money of their nation was Roman money, had the emperor's image
on one side, and his superscription on the reverse; and if so, 1. Caesar
might command their money for the public benefit, because he had the
custody and conduct of the state, wherein he ought to have his charges
borne; Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's. The circulation of
the money is from him as the fountain, and therefore it must return to
him. As far as it is his, so far it must be rendered to him; and how far
it is his, and may be commanded by him, is to be judged by the
constitution of the government, according as it is, and hath settled the
prerogative of the prince and the property of the subject. 2. Caesar
might not command their consciences, nor did he pretend to it; he
offered not to make any alteration in their religion. "Pay your tribute,
therefore, without murmuring or disputing, but be sure to render to God
the things that are God's." Perhaps he referred to the parable he had
just now put forth, in which he had condemned them for not rendering the
fruits to the Lord of the vineyard, [Mar
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#002). Many that seem careful to give
to men their due, are in no care to give God the glory due to his name;
whereas our hearts and best affections are as much due to him as ever
rent was to a landlord, or tribute to a prince. All that heard Christ,
marvelled at the discretion of his answer, and how ingenuously he
avoided the snare; but I doubt none were brought by it, as they ought to
be, to render to God themselves and their devotions. Many will commend
the wit of a sermon, that will not be commanded by the divine laws of a
sermon.

[Mark 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mar 12:18</span></span>

The Sadducees, who were the deists of that age, here attack our Lord
Jesus, it should seem, not as the scribes, and Pharisees, and
chief-priests, with any malicious design upon his person; they were not
bigots and persecutors, but sceptics and infidels, and their design was
upon his doctrine, to hinder the spreading of that: they denied that
there was any resurrection, and world of spirits, any state of rewards
and punishments on the other side of death: now those great and
fundamental truths which they denied, Christ had made it his business to
establish and prove, and had carried the notion of them much further
that ever it was before carried; and therefore they set themselves to
perplex his doctrine.

I. See here the method they take to entangle it; they quote the ancient
law, by which, if a man died without issue, his brother was obliged to
marry his widow, [Mar 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#019). They
suppose a case to happen that, according to that law, seven brothers
were, successively, the husbands of one woman, [Mar
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#020). Probably, these Sadducees,
according to their wonted profaneness, intended hereby to ridicule that
law, and so to bring the whole frame of the Mosaic institution into
contempt, as absurd and inconvenient in the practice of it. Those who
deny divine truths, commonly set themselves to disparage divine laws and
ordinances. But this was only by the by; their design was to expose the
doctrine of the resurrection; for they suppose that if there be a future
state, it must be such a one as this, and then the doctrine, they think,
is clogged either with this invincible absurdity, that a woman in that
state must have seven husbands, or else with this insolvable difficulty,
whose wife must she be. See with what subtlety these heretics undermine
the truth; they do not deny it, nor say, There can be no resurrection;
nay, they do not seem to doubt of it, nor say, If there be a
resurrection, whose wife shall she be? as the devil to Christ, If thou
be the Son of God. But, as though these beasts of the field were more
subtle than the serpent himself, they pretend to own the truth, as if
they were not Sadducees, no not they; who said that they denied the
resurrection? They take it for granted that there is a resurrection, and
would be thought to desire instruction concerning it, when really they
are designing to give a fatal stab, and think that they shall do it.
Note, It is the common artifice of heretics and Sadducees to perplex and
entangle the truth, which they have not the impudence to deny.

II\. See here the method Christ takes to clear and establish this truth,
which they attempted to darken, and give a shock to. This was a matter
of moment, and therefore Christ does not pass it over lightly, but
enlarges upon it, that, if they should not be reclaimed, yet others
might be confirmed.

1\. He charges the Sadducees with error, and charges that upon their
ignorance. They who banter the doctrine of the resurrection as some do
in our age, would be thought the only knowing men, because the only free
thinkers, when really they are the fools in Israel, and the most
enslaved and, prejudiced thinkers in the world. Do ye not therefore err?
Ye cannot but be sensible of it yourselves, and that the cause of your
error is, (1.) Because ye do not know the scriptures. Not but that the
Sadducees had read the scriptures, and perhaps were ready in them; yet
they might be truly said not to know the scriptures, because they did
not know the sense and meaning of them, but put false constructions upon
them; or they did not receive the scriptures as the word of God, but set
up their own corrupt reasonings in opposition to the scripture, and
would believe nothing but what they could see. Note, A right knowledge
of the scripture, as the fountain whence all revealed religion now
flows, and the foundation on which it is built, is the best preservative
against error. Keep the truth, the scripture-truth, and it shall keep
thee. (2.) Because ye know not the power of God. They could not but know
that God is almighty, but they would not apply that doctrine to this
matter, but gave up the truth to the objections of the impossibility of
it, which would all have been answered, if they had but stuck to the
doctrine of God's omnipotence, to which nothing is impossible. This
therefore which God hath spoken once, we are concerned to hear twice, to
hear and believe, to hear and apply - that power belongs to God, [Psa
62:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#011); [Rom
4:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#019). The same power that made soul
and body and preserved them while they were together, can preserve the
body safe, and the soul active, when they are parted, and can unite them
together again; for behold, the Lord's arm is not shortened. The power
of God, seen in the return of the spring ([Psa
104:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#030)), in the reviving of the corn
([Joh 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#024)), in the restoring of an
abject people to their prosperity ([Eze
37:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#012)), in the raising of so many
to life, miraculously, both in the Old Testament and in the New, and
especially in the resurrection of Christ ([Eph
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#019), [Eph
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020)), are all earnests of our
resurrection by the same power ([Phi
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021)); according to the mighty working
whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself.

2\. He sets aside all the force of their objection, by setting the
doctrine of the future state in a true light ([Mar
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#025)); When they shall rise from the
dead, they neither marry, nor are given in marriage. It is a folly to
ask, Whose wife shall she be of the seven? For the relation between
husband and wife, though instituted in the earthly paradise, will not be
known in the heavenly one. Turks and infidels expect sensual pleasures
in their fools' paradise, but Christians know better things - that flesh
and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of God ([Co1
15:50](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#050)); and expect better things -
even a full satisfaction in God's love and likeness ([Psa
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#015)); they are as the angels of God
in heaven, and we know that they have neither wives nor children. It is
no wonder if we confound ourselves with endless absurdities, when we
measure our ideas of the world of spirits by the affairs of this world
of sense.

III\. He builds the doctrine of the future state, and of the blessedness
of the righteous in that state, upon the covenant of God with Abraham,
which God was pleased to own, being after Abraham's death, [Mar
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#026), [Mar
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#027). He appeals to the scriptures;
Have ye not read in the book of Moses? We have some advantage in dealing
with those that have read the scriptures, though many that have read
them, wrest them, as these Sadducees did, to their own destruction. Now
that which he refers them to is, what God says to Moses at the bush, I
am the God of Abraham; not only, I was so, but I am so; I am the portion
and happiness of Abraham, a God all-sufficient to him. Note, It is
absurd to think that God's relation to Abraham should be continued, and
thus solemnly recognised, if Abraham was annihilated, or that the living
God should be the portion and happiness of a man that is dead, and must
be for ever so; and therefore you must conclude, 1. That Abraham's soul
exists and acts as a state of separation from the body. 2. That
therefore, some time or other, the body must rise again; for there is
such an innate inclination in a human soul towards its body, as would
make a total and everlasting separation inconsistent with the ease and
repose, much more with the bliss and joy of those souls that have the
Lord for their God. Upon the whole matter, he concludes, Ye therefore do
greatly err. Those that deny the resurrection, greatly err, and ought to
be told so.

[Mark 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mar 12:28</span></span>

The scribes and Pharisees were (however bad otherwise) enemies to the
Sadducees; now one would have expected that, when they heard Christ
argue so well against the Sadducees, they would have countenanced him,
as they did Paul when he appeared against the Sadducees ([Act
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#009)); but it had not the effect:
because he did not fall in with them in the ceremonials of religion, he
agreeing with them in the essentials, gained him no manner of respect
with them. Only we have here an account of one of them, a scribe, who
had so much civility in him as to take notice of Christ's answer to the
Sadducees, and to own that he had answered well, and much to the purpose
([Mar 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#028)); and we have reason to
hope that he did not join with the other scribes in persecuting Christ;
for here we have his application to Christ for instruction, and it was
such as became him; not tempting Christ, but desiring to improve his
acquaintance with him.

I. He enquired, Which is the first commandment of all? [Mar
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#028). He doth not mean the first in
order, but the first in weight and dignity; "Which is that command which
we ought to have in a special manner an eye to, and our obedience to
which will lay a foundation for our obedience to all the rest?" Not that
any commandment of God is little (they are all the commands of a great
God), but some are greater than others, moral precepts than rituals, and
of some we may say, They are the greatest of all.

II\. Christ gave him a direct answer to this enquiry, [Mar
12:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#029). Those that sincerely desire
to be instructed concerning their duty, Christ will guide in judgment,
and teach his way. He tells him,

1\. That the great commandment of all, which is indeed inclusive of all,
is, that of loving God with all our hearts. (1.) Where there is a
commanding principle in the soul, there is a disposition to every other
duty. Love is the leading affection of the soul; the love of God is the
leading grace in the renewed soul. (2.) Where this is not, nothing else
that is good is done, or done aright, or accepted, or done long. Loving
God with all our heart, will effectually take us off fRom. and arm us
against, all those things that are rivals with him for the throne in our
souls, and will engage us to every thing by which he may be honoured,
and with which he will be pleased; and no commandment will be grievous
where this principle commands, and has the ascendant. Now here in, Mark,
our Saviour prefixes to this command the great doctrinal truth upon
which it is built ([Mar 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#029)); Hear,
O Israel, The Lord our God is one Lord; if we firmly believe this, it
will follow, that we shall love him with all our heart. He is Jehovah,
who has all amiable perfections in himself; he is our God, to whom we
stand related and obliged; and therefore we ought to love him, to set
our affections on him, let out own desire toward him, and take a delight
in him; and he is one Lord, therefore he must be loved with our whole
heart; he has the sole right to us, and therefore ought to have the sole
possession of us. If he be one, our hearts must be one with him, and
since there is no God besides, no rival must be admitted with him upon
the throne.

2\. That the second great commandment is, to love our neighbour as
ourselves ([Mar 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#031)), as truly and
sincerely as we love ourselves, and in the same instances, and we must
show it by doing as we would be done by. As we must therefore love God
better than ourselves, because he is Jehovah, a being infinitely better
than we are, and must love him with all our heart, because he is one
Lord, and there is no other like him; so we must love our neighbour as
ourselves, because he is of the same nature with ourselves; our hearts
are fashioned alike, and my neighbour and myself are of one body, of one
society, that of the world of mankind; and if a fellow-Christian, and of
the same sacred society, the obligation is the stronger. Hath not one
God created us? [Mal 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#010). Has not one
Christ redeemed us? Well might Christ say, There is no other commandment
greater than these; for in these all the law is fulfilled, and if we
make conscience of obedience to these, all other instances of obedience
will follow of course.

III\. The scribe consented to what Christ said, and descanted upon it,
[Mar 12:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#032), [Mar
12:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#033). 1. He commends Christ's
decision of this question; Well, Master, thou hast said the truth.
Christ's assertions needed not the scribe's attestations; but this
scribe, being a man in authority, thought it would put some reputation
upon what Christ said, to have it commended by him; and it shall be
brought in evidence against those who persecuted Christ, as a deceiver,
that one of themselves, even a scribe of their own, confessed that he
said the truth, and said it well. And thus must we subscribe to Christ's
sayings, must set to our seal that they are true. 2. He comments upon
it. Christ had quoted that great doctrine, that the Lord our God is one
Lord; and this he not only assented to, but added, "There is none other
but he; and therefore we must have no other God besides." This excludes
all rivals with him, and secures the throne in the heart entire for him.
Christ had laid down that great law, of loving God with all our hearts;
and this also he explains - that it is loving him with the
understanding, as those that know what abundant reason we have to love
him. Our love to God, as it must be an entire, so it must be an
intelligent, love; we must love him with all the understanding, ex holēs
tēs suneseōs - out of the whole understanding; our rational powers and
faculties must all be set on work to lead out the affections of our
souls toward God. Christ has said, "To love God and our neighbour is the
greatest commandment of all;" "Yea," saith the scribe, "it is better, it
is more than all whole-burnt-offerings and sacrifices, more acceptable
to God, and will turn to a better account to ourselves." There were
those who held, that the law of sacrifices was the greatest commandment
of all; but this scribe readily agreed with our Saviour in this - that
the law of love to God and our neighbour is greater than that of
sacrifice, even than that of whole-burnt-offerings, which were intended
purely for the honour of God.

IV\. Christ approved of what he said, and encouraged him to proceed in
his enquiries of him, [Mar 12:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#034). 1.
He owned that he understood well, as far as he went; so far, so good.
Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, and was the more pleased with it,
because he had of late met with so many even of the scribes, men of
letters, that answered indiscreetly, as those that had no understanding,
nor desired to have any. He answered nounechōs - as one that had a mind;
as a rational intelligent man, as one that had his wits about him; as
one whose reason was not blinded, whose judgment was not biassed, and
whose forethought was not fettered, by the prejudices which other
scribes were so much under the power of. He answered as one that allowed
himself liberty and leisure to consider, as one that had considered. 2.
He owned that he stood fair for a further advance; "Thou art not far
from the kingdom of God, the kingdom of grace and glory; thou art in a
likely way to be a Christian, a disciple of Christ. For the doctrine of
Christ insists most upon these things, and is designed, and has a
tendency direct, to bring thee to this." Note, There is hope of those
who make a good use of the light they have, and go as far as that will
carry them, that by the grace of God they will be led further, by the
clearer discoveries God has to make to them. What became of this scribe
we are not told, but would willingly hope that he took the hint Christ
hereby gave him, and that, having been told by him, so much to his
satisfaction, what was the great commandment of the law, he proceeded to
enquire of him, or his apostles, what was the great commandment of the
gospel too. Yet, if he did not, but took, up here, and went no further,
we are not to think it strange; for there are many who are not far from
the kingdom of God, and yet never come thither. Now, one would think,
this should have invited many to consult him: but it had a contrary
effect; No man, after that, durst ask him any question; every thing he
said, was spoken with such authority and majesty, that every one stood
in awe of him; those that desired to learn, were ashamed to ask, and
those that designed to cavil, were afraid to ask.

[Mark 12:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mar 12:35</span></span>

Here, I. Christ shows the people how weak and defective the scribes were
in their preaching, and how unable to solve the difficulties that
occurred in the scriptures of the Old Testament, which they undertook to
expound. Of this he gives an instance, which is not so fully related
here as it was in Matthew. Christ was teaching in the temple: many
things he said, which were not written; but notice is taken of this,
because it will stir us up to enquire concerning Christ, and to enquire
of him; for none can have the right knowledge of him but from himself;
it is not to be had from the scribes, for they will soon be run aground.

1\. They told the people that the Messiah was to be the Son of David
([Mar 12:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#035)), and they were in the
right; he was not only to descend from his loins, but to fill his throne
([Luk 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#032)); The Lord shall give him
the throne of his father David. The scripture said it often, but the
people took it as what the scribes said; whereas the truths of God
should rather be quoted from our Bibles than from our ministers, for
there is the original of them. Dulcius ex ipso fonte bibuntur aquae -
The waters are sweetest when drawn immediately from their source.

2\. Yet they could not tell them how, notwithstanding that it was very
proper for David, in spirit, the spirit of prophecy, to call him his
Lord, as he doth, [Psa 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001). They had
taught the people that concerning the Messiah, which would be for the
honour of their nation - that he should be a branch of their royal
family; but they had not taken care to teach them that which was for the
honour of the Messiah himself - that he should be the Son of God, and,
as such, and not otherwise, David's Lord. Thus they held the truth in
unrighteousness, and were partial in the gospel, as well as in the law,
of the Old Testament. They were able to say it, and prove it - that
Christ was to be David's son; but if any should object, How then doth
David himself call him Lord? they would not know how to avoid the force
of the objection. Note, Those are unworthy to sit in Moses's seat, who,
though they are able to preach the truth, are not in some measure able
to defend it when they have preached it, and to convince gainsayers.

Now this galled the scribes, to have their ignorance thus exposed, and,
no doubt, incensed them more against Christ; but the common people heard
him gladly, [Mar 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#037). What he
preached was surprising and affecting; and though it reflected upon the
scribes, it was instructive to them, and they had never heard such
preaching. Probably there was something more than ordinarily commanding
and charming in his voice and way of delivery, which recommended him to
the affections of the common people; for we do not find that any were
wrought upon to believe in him, and to follow him, but he was to them as
a lovely song of one that could play well on an instrument; as Ezekiel
was to his hearers, [Eze 33:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#032). And
perhaps some of these cried, Crucify him, as Herod heard John Baptist
gladly, and yet cut off his head.

II\. He cautions the people to take heed of suffering themselves to be
imposed upon by the scribes, and of being infected with their pride and
hypocrisy; He said unto them in his doctrine, "Beware of the scribes
([Mar 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#038)); stand upon your guard,
that you neither imbibe their peculiar opinions, nor the opinions of the
people concerning them." The charge is long as drawn up against them in
the parallel place (Mt. 23); it is here contracted.

1\. They affect to appear very great; for they go in long clothing, with
vestures down to their feet, and in those they walk about the streets,
as princes, or judges, or gentlemen of the long robe. Their going in
such clothing was not sinful, but their loving to go in it, priding
themselves in it, valuing themselves on it, commanding respect by it,
saying to their long clothes, as Saul to Samuel, Honour me now before
this people, this was a product of pride. Christ would have his
disciples go with their loins girt.

2\. They affect to appear very good; for they pray, they make long
prayers, as if they were very intimate with heaven, and had a deal of
business there. They took care it should be known that they prayed, that
they prayed long, which, some think, intimates that they prayed not for
themselves only, but for others, and therein were very particular and
very large; this they did for a pretence, that they might seem to love
prayer, not only for God's sake, whom hereby they pretended to glorify,
but for their neighbour's sake, whom hereby they pretended to be
serviceable to.

3\. They here aimed to advance themselves: they coveted applause, and
were fond of it; they loved salutations in the marketplaces, and the
chief seats in the synagogues, and the uppermost rooms at feasts; these
pleased a vain fancy; to have these given them, they thought, expressed
the value they had for them, who did know them, and gained them respect
for those who did not.

4\. They herein aimed to enrich themselves. They devoured widows'
houses, made themselves masters of their estates by some trick or other;
it was to screen themselves from the suspicion of dishonesty, that they
put on the mask of piety; and that they might not be thought as bad as
the worst, they were studious to seem as good as the best. Let fraud and
oppression be thought the worse of for their having profaned and
disgraced long prayers; but let not prayers, no nor long prayers, be
thought the worse of, if made in humility and sincerity, for their
having been by some thus abused. But as iniquity, thus disguised with a
show of piety, is double iniquity, so its doom will be doubly heavy;
These shall receive great damnation; greater than those that live
without prayer, greater than they would have received for the wrong done
to the poor widows, if it had not been thus disguised. Note, The
damnation of hypocrites will be of all others the greatest damnation.

[Mark 12:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mar 12:41</span></span>

This passage of story was not in Matthew, but is here and in Luke; it is
Christ's commendation of the poor widow, that cast two mites into the
treasury, which our Saviour, busy as he was in preaching, found leisure
to take notice of. Observe,

I. There was a public fund for charity, into which contributions were
brought, and out of which distributions were made; a poor's-box, and
this in the temple; for works of charity and works of piety very fitly
go together; where God is honoured by our worship, it is proper he
should be honoured by the relief of his poor; and we often find prayers
and alms in conjunction, as [Act 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#002),
[Act 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#004). IT is good to erect public
receptacles of charity for the inviting and directing of private hands
in giving to the poor; nay it is good for those who are of ability to
have funds of their own, to lay by as God has prospered them ([Co1
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#002)), that they might have something
ready to give when an object of charity offers itself, which is before
dedicated to such uses.

II\. Jesus Christ had an eye upon it; He sat over against the treasury,
and beheld now the people cast money into it; not grudging either that
he had none to cast in, or had not the disposal of that which was cast
in, but observing what was cast in. Note, Our Lord Jesus takes notice of
what we contribute to pious and charitable uses; whether we give
liberally or sparingly; whether cheerfully or with reluctance and
ill-will; nay, he looks at the heart; he observes what principles we act
upon, and what our views are, in giving alms; and whether we do it as
unto the Lord, or only to be seen of men.

III\. He saw many that were rich cast in much: and it was a good sight
to see rich people charitable, to see many rich people so, and to see
them not only cast in, but cast in much. Note, Those that are rich,
ought to give richly; if God give abundantly to us, he expects we should
give abundantly to the poor; and it is not enough for those that are
rich, to say, that they give as much as others do, who perhaps have much
less of the world than they have, but they must give in proportion to
their estates; and if objects of charity do not present themselves, that
require so much, they ought to enquire them out, and to devise liberal
things.

IV\. There was a poor widow that cast in two mites, which make a
farthing ([Mar 12:42](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#042)); and our Lord
Jesus highly commended her; called his disciples to him, and bid them
take notice of it ([Mar 12:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#043)); told
them that she could very ill spare that which she gave, she had scarcely
enough for herself, it was all her living, all she had to live upon for
that day, and perhaps a great part of what she had earned by her labour
the day before; and that forasmuch as he knew she did it from a truly
charitable disposition, he reckoned it more than all that put together,
which the rich people threw in; for they did cast in of their abundance,
but she of her want, [Mar 12:44](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#044). Now
many would have been ready to censure this poor widow, and to think she
did ill; why should she give to others, when she had little enough for
herself? Charity begins at home; or, if she would give it, why did she
not bestow it upon some poor body that she knew? What occasion was there
for her bringing it to the treasury to be disposed of by the chief
priests, who, we have reason to fear, were partial in the disposal of
it? It is so rare a thing to find any that would not blame this widow,
that we cannot expect to find any that will imitate her; and yet our
Saviour commends her, and therefore we are sure that she did very well
and wisely. If Christ saith, Well-done, no matter who saith otherwise;
and we must hence learn, 1. That giving alms, is an excellent good
thing, and highly pleasing to the Lord Jesus; and if we be humble and
sincere in it, he will graciously accept of it, though in some
circumstances there may not be all the discretion in the world. 2. Those
that have but a little, ought to give alms out of their little. Those
that live by their labour, from hand to mouth, must give to those that
need, [Eph 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#028). 3. It is very good
for us to straiten and deny ourselves, that we may be able to give the
more to the poor; to deny ourselves not only superfluities, but even
conveniences, for the sake of charity. We should in many cases pinch
ourselves, that we may supply the necessities of others; this is loving
our neighbours as ourselves. 4. Public charities should be encouraged,
for they bring upon a nation public blessings; and though there may be
some mismanagement of them, yet that is not a good reason why we should
not bring in our quota to them. 5. Though we can give but a little in
charity, yet if it be according to our ability, and be given with an
upright heart, it shall be accepted of Christ, who requires according to
what a man has, and not according to what he has not; two mites shall be
put upon the score, and brought to account, if given in a right manner,
as if they had been two pounds. 6. It is much to the praise of charity,
when we give not only to our power, but beyond our power, as the
Macedonian churches, whose deep poverty abounded to the riches of their
liberality, [Co2 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#002), [Co2
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#003). When we can cheerfully provide
for others, out of our own necessary provision, as the widow of Sarepta
for Elijah, and Christ for his five thousand guests, and trust God to
provide for us some other way, this is thank-worthy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 13](mar013)

</div>
