<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Micah Index](mic)  
  [Previous](mic004)  [Next](mic006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Micah Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001)

[Micah](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mic 5:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. A prediction of the troubles and distresses
of the Jewish nation ([Mic 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001)). II. A
promise of the Messiah, and of his kingdom, to support the people of God
in the day of these troubles. 1. Of the birth of the Messiah ([Mic
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002), [Mic
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#003)). 2. Of his advancement ([Mic
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#004)). 3. Of his protection of his
people, and his victory over his and their enemies ([Mic
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#005), [Mic
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#006)). 4. Of the great world by it
([Mic 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#007)). 5. Of the destruction of
the enemies of the church, both those without, that attack it, and those
within, that expose it ([Mic 5:8-15](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#008)).

[Micah 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mic 5:1</span></span>

Here, as before, we have,

I. The abasement and distress of Zion, [Mic
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001). The Jewish nation, for many years
before the captivity, dwindled, and fell into disgrace: Now gather
thyself in troops, O daughter of troops! It is either a summons to
Zion's enemies, that had troops at their service, to come and do their
worst against her (God will suffer them to do it), or a challenge to
Zion's friends, that had troops too at command, to come and do their
best for her; Let them gather in troops, yet it shall be to no purpose;
for, says the prophet, in the name of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, He
has laid siege against us; the king of Assyria has, the king of Babylon
has, and we know not which way to defend ourselves; so that the enemies
shall gain their point, and prevail so far as to smite the judge of
Israel - the king, the chief justice, and the other inferior judges -
with a rod upon the cheek, in contempt of them and their dignity; having
made them prisoners, they shall use them as shamefully as any of the
common captives. Complaint had been made of the judges of Israel ([Mic
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#011)) that they were corrupt and took
bribes, and this disgrace came justly upon them for abusing their power;
yet it was a great calamity to Israel to have their judges treated thus
ignominiously. Some make this the reason why the troops (that is, the
Roman army) shall lay siege to Jerusalem, because the Jews shall smite
the judge of Israel upon the cheek, because of the indignities they
shall do to the Messiah, the Judge of Israel, whom they smote on the
cheek, saying, Prophesy, who smote thee. But the former sense seems more
probable, and that it is meant of the besieging of Jerusalem, not by the
Romans, but the Chaldeans, and was fulfilled in the indignities done to
king Zedekiah and the princes of the house of David.

II\. The advancement of Zion's King. Having shown how low the house of
David should be brought, and how vilely the shield of that mighty family
should be cast away, as though it had not been anointed with oil, to
encourage the faith of God's people, who might be tempted now to think
that his covenant with David and his house was abrogated (according to
the psalmist's complaint, [Psa 89:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#038),
[Psa 89:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#039)), he adds an illustrious
prediction of the Messiah and his kingdom, in whom that covenant should
be established, and the honours of that house should be revived,
advanced, and perpetuated. Now let us see,

1\. How the Messiah is here described. It is he that is to be ruler in
Israel, whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting, from
the days of eternity, as the word is. Here we have, (1.) His existence
from eternity, as God: his goings forth, or emanations, as the going
forth of the beams from the sun, were, or have been, of old, from
everlasting, which (says Dr. Pocock) is so signal a description of
Christ's eternal generation, or his going forth as the Son of God,
begotten of his Father before all worlds, that this prophecy must belong
only to him, and could never be verified of any other. It certainly
speaks of a going forth that was now past, when the prophet spoke, and
cannot but be read, as we read it, his outgoings have been; and the
putting of both these words together, which severally are used to denote
eternity, plainly shows that they must here be taken in the strictest
sense (the same with [Psa 90:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002), From
everlasting to everlasting thou are God), and can be applied to no other
than to him who was able to say, Before Abraham was, I am, [Joh
8:58](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#058). Dr. Pocock observes that the
going forth is used ([Deu 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003)) for a
word which proceeds out of the mouth, and is therefore very fitly used
to signify the eternal generation of him who is called the Word of God,
that was in the beginning with God, [Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001), [Joh
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#002). (2.) His office as Mediator; he
was to be ruler in Israel, king of his church; he was to reign over the
house of Jacob for ever, [Luk 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#032),
[Luk 1:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#033). The Jews object that our
Lord Jesus could not be the Messiah, for he was so far from being ruler
in Israel that Israel ruled over him, and put him to death, and would
not have him to reign over them; but he answered that himself when he
said, My kingdom is not of this world, [Joh
18:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#036). And it is a spiritual Israel
that he reigns over, the children of promise, all the followers of
believing Abraham and praying Jacob. In the hearts of these he reigns by
his Spirit and grace, and in the society of these by his word and
ordinances. And was not he ruler in Israel whom winds and seas obeyed,
to whom legions of devils were forced to submit, and who commanded away
diseases from the sick and called the dead out of their graves? None but
he whose goings forth were from of old, from everlasting, was fit to be
ruler in Israel, to be head of the church, and head over all things to
the church.

2\. What is here foretold concerning him.

(1.) That Bethlehem should be the place of his nativity, [Mic
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002). This was the scripture which the
scribes went upon when with the greatest assurance they told Herod where
Christ should be born ([Mat 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#006)), and
hence it was universally known among the Jews that Christ should come
out of the town of Bethlehem where David was, [Joh
7:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#042). Beth-lehem signifies the house
of bread, the fittest place for him to be born in who is the bread of
life. And, because it was the city of David, by a special providence it
was ordered that he should be born there who was to be the Son of David,
and his heir and successor for ever. It is called Bethlehem-Ephratah,
both names of the same city, as appears [Gen
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#019). It was little among the
thousands of Judah, not considerable either for the number of the
inhabitants or the figure they made; it had nothing in it worthy to have
this honour put upon it; but God in that, as in other instances, chose
to exalt those of low degree, [Luk
1:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#052). Christ would give honour to the
place of his birth, and not derive honour from it: Though thou be
little, yet this shall make thee great, and, as St. Matthew reads it,
Thou art not the least among the princes of Judah, but upon this account
art really honourable above any of them. A relation to Christ will
magnify those that are little in the world.

(2.) That in the fulness of time he should be born of a woman ([Mic
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#003)): Therefore will he give them up;
he will give up his people Israel to distress and trouble, and will
defer their salvation, which has been so long promised and expected,
until the time, the set time, that she who travails has brought forth,
or (as it should be read) that she who shall bring forth shall have
brought forth, that the blessed virgin, who was to be the mother of the
Messiah, shall have brought him forth at Bethlehem, the place appointed.
This Dr. Pocock thinks to be the most genuine sense of the words. Though
the out-goings of the Messiah were from everlasting, yet the redemption
in Jerusalem, the consolation of Israel, must be waited for ([Luk
2:25-38](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#025)) until the time that she who
should bring forth (so the virgin Mary is called, as Christ is himself
called, He that shall come) shall bring forth; and in the mean time he
will give them up. Divine salvations must be waited for until the time
fixed for the bringing of them forth.

(3.) That the remnant of his brethren shall then return to the children
of Israel. The remnant of the Jewish nation shall return to the spirit
of the true genuine children of Israel, a people in covenant with God;
the hearts of the children shall be turned to the fathers, [Mal
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#006). Some understand it of all
believers, Gentiles as well as Jews; they shall all be incorporated into
the commonwealth of Israel; and, as they are all brethren to one
another, so he is not ashamed to call them brethren, [Heb
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#011).

(4.) That he shall be a glorious prince, and his subjects shall be happy
under his government ([Mic 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#004)): He
shall stand and feed, that is, he shall both teach and rule, and
continue to do so, as a good shepherd, with wisdom, and care, and love.
So it was foretold. He shall feed his flock like a shepherd, shall
provide green pastures for them, and under-shepherds to lead them into
these pastures. He is the good shepherd that goes before the sheep, and
presides among them. He shall do this, not as an ordinary man, but in
the strength of the Lord, as one clothed with a divine power to go
through his work, and break through the difficulties in his way, so as
not to fail, or be discouraged; he shall do it in the majesty of the
name of the Lord his God, so as plainly to evidence that God's name was
in him ([Exo 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#021)) the majesty of his
name, for he taught as one having authority and not as the scribes. The
prophets prefaced their messages with, Thus saith the Lord; but Christ
spoke, not as a servant, but as a Son - Verily, verily, I say unto you.
This was feeding in the majesty of the name of the Lord his God. All
power was given him in heaven and in earth, a power over all flesh, by
virtue of which he still rules in the majesty of the name of the Lord
his God, a name above every name. Christ's government shall be, \[1.\]
Very happy for his subjects, for they shall abide; they shall be safe
and easy, and continue so for ever. Because he lives, they shall live
also. They shall lie down in the green pastures to which he shall lead
them, shall abide in God's tabernacle for ever, [Psa
61:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#004). His church shall abide, and he
in it, and with it, always, even to the end of the world. \[2.\] It
shall be very glorious to himself: Now shall he be great to the ends of
the earth. Now that he stands and feeds his flock, now shall he be
great. For Christ reckons it his greatness to do good. Now he shall be
great to the ends of the earth, for the uttermost parts of the earth
shall be given him for his possession, and the ends of the world shall
see his salvation.

\(5\) That he shall secure the peace and welfare of his church and
people against all the attempts of his and their enemies ([Mic
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#005), [Mic
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#006)): This man, as king and ruler,
shall be the peace when the Assyrians shall come into our land. This
refers to the deliverance of Hezekiah and his kingdom from the power of
Sennacherib, who invaded them, in the type; but, under the shadow of
that, it is a promise of the safety of the gospel-church and of all
believers from the designs and attempts of the powers of darkness, Satan
and all his instruments, the dragon and his angels, that seek to devour
the church of the first-born and all that belong to it. Observe, \[1.\]
The peril and danger which Christ's subjects are supposed to be in. The
Assyrian, a potent enemy, comes into their land ([Mic
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#005), [Mic
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#006)), treads within their borders,
nay, prevails so far as to tread in their palaces; it was a time of
treading down and of perplexity when Sennacherib made a descent upon
Judah, took all the defenced cities, and laid siege to Jerusalem, [Isa
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#001); [Isa
37:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#003). This represented the gates of
hell fighting against the kingdom of Christ, encompassing the camp of
the saints and of the holy city, and threatening to bear down all before
them. When the terrors of the law set themselves in array against a
convinced soul, when the temptations of Satan assault the people of God,
and the troubles of the world threaten to rob them of all their
comforts, then the Assyrian comes into their land and treads in their
palaces. Without are fightings, within are fears. \[2.\] The protection
and defence which his subjects are then sure to be under. First, Christ
will himself be their peace. When the Assyrian comes with such a force
into a land, can there be any other peace than a tame submission and an
unresisted desolation? Yes, even then the church's King will be the
conservator of the church's peace, will be for a hiding-place, [Isa
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#001), [Isa
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#002). Christ is our peace as a priest,
making atonement for sin, and reconciling us to God; and he is our peace
as a king, conquering our enemies and commanding down disquieting fears
and passions; he creates the fruit of the lips, peace. Even when the
Assyrian comes into the land, when we are in the greatest distress and
danger and have received a sentence of death within ourselves, yet this
man may be the peace. In me, says Christ, you shall have peace, when in
the world you have tribulation; at such a time our souls may dwell at
ease in him. Secondly, He will find out proper instruments to be
employed for their protection and deliverance, and the defeat of their
enemies: Then shall we raise against him seven shepherds and eight
principal men, that is, a competent number of persons, proper to oppose
the enemy, and make head against him, and protect the church of God in
peace, men that shall have the care and tenderness of shepherds and the
courage and authority of principal men, or princes of men. Seven and
eight are a certain number for an uncertain. Note, When God has work to
do he will not want fitting instruments to do it with; and when he
pleases he can do it by a few; he needs not raise thousands, but seven
or eight principal men may serve the turn if God be with them.
Magistrates and ministers are shepherds and principal men, raised in
defence of religion's righteous cause against the powers of sin and
Satan in the world. Thirdly, The opposition given to the church shall be
got over, and the opposers brought down. This is represented by the
laying of Assyria and Chaldea waste, which two nations were the most
formidable enemies to the Israel of God of any, and the destruction of
them signified the making of Christ's enemies his footstool: They shall
waste the land of Assyria with the sword, and the land of Nimrod in the
entrances thereof; they shall make inroads upon the land, and put to the
sword all that they find in arms. Note, Those that threaten ruin to the
church of God hasten ruin to themselves; and their destruction is the
church's salvation: Thus shall he deliver us from the Assyrian. When
Satan fell as lightning from heaven before the preaching of the gospel,
and Christ's enemies, that would not have him to reign over them, were
slain before him, then this was fulfilled.

[Micah 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mic 5:7</span></span>

Glorious things are here spoken of the remnant of Jacob, that remnant
which was raised of her that halted ([Mic
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#007)), and it seems to be that remnant
which the Lord our God shall call ([Joe
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032)), on whom the Spirit shall be
poured out, the remnant that shall be saved, [Rom
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#027). Note, God's people are but a
remnant, a small number in comparison with the many that are left to
perish, a little flock; but they are the remnant of Jacob, a people in
covenant with God, and in his favour. Now concerning this remnant it is
here promised,

I. That they shall be as a dew in the midst of the nations, [Mic
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#007). God's church is dispersed all the
world over; it is in the midst of many people, as gold in the ore, wheat
in the heap. Israel according to the flesh dwelt alone, and was not
numbered among the nations; but the spiritual Israel lies scattered in
the midst of many people, as the salt of the earth, or as seed sown in
the ground, here a grain and there a grain, [Hos
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023). Now this remnant shall be as dew
from the Lord. 1. They shall be of a heavenly extraction; as dew from
the Lord, who is the Father of the rain, and has begotten the drops of
the dew, [Job 38:28](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#028). They are born
from above, and are not of the earth, savouring the things of the earth.
2. They shall be numerous as the drops of dew in a summer's morning.
[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003), Thou hast the dew of thy
youth. 3. They shall be pure and clear, not muddy and corrupt, but
crystal drops, as the water of life. 4. They shall be produced silently
and without noise, as the dew that distils insensibly, we know not how;
such is the way of the Spirit. 5. They shall live in a continual
dependence upon God, and be still deriving from him, as the dew, which
tarries not for man, not waits for the sons of men; they shall not rely
upon human aids and powers, but on divine grace, for they are, and own
that they are, no more than what the free grace of God makes them every
day. 6. They shall be great blessings to those among whom they live, as
the dew and the showers are to the grass, to make it grow without the
help of man, or the sons of men. Their doctrine, example, and prayers,
shall make them as dew, to soften and moisten others, and make them
fruitful. Their speech shall distil as the dew ([Deu
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#002)), and all about them shall wait
for them as for the rain, [Job 29:23](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#023).
The people among whom they live shall be as the grass, which flourishes
only by the blessing of God, and not by the art and care of man; they
shall be beneficial to those about them by drawing down God's blessings
on them, as Jacob on Laban's house, and by cooling and mitigating God's
wrath, which otherwise would burn them up, as the dew preserves the
grass from being scorched by the sun; so Dr. Pocock; they shall be mild
and gentle in their behaviour, like their Master, who comes down like
rain upon the new-mown grass, [Psa
72:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#006).

II\. That they shall be as a lion among the beasts of the forest, that
treads down and tears in pieces, [Mic
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#008). As they shall be silent, and
gentle, and communicative of all good, to those that receive the truth
in the love of it, so they shall be bold as a lion in witnessing against
the corruptions of the times and places they live in, and strong as a
lion, in the strength of God, to resist and overcome their spiritual
enemies. The weapons of their warfare are mighty, through God, to the
pulling down of strongholds, [Co2
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004), [Co2
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005). They shall have courage which
all their adversaries shall not be able to resist ([Luk
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#015)), as when the lion tears none
can deliver. When infidelity is silenced, and all iniquity made to stop
her mouth, when sinners are convinced and converted by the power of the
gospel, in the doctrine of its ministers and the conversation of its
professors, then the remnant of Jacob is like a lion. This is explained,
[Mic 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#009), Thy hand shall be lifted up
upon thy adversaries; the church shall have the upper hand at last of
all that oppose her. Her enemies shall be cut off; they shall cease to
be enemies; their enmity shall be cut off. Christ's arrows of conviction
shall be sharp in their hearts, so that they shall fall under him; they
shall yield themselves subjects to him ([Psa
45:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#005)) and be happily conquered and
subdued, [Psa 110:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#002).

III\. That they shall be brought off from all carnal confidences, which
they have relied on, that by the providence of God they shall enjoy such
a security that they shall not need them, and by the grace of God they
shall be brought to see the folly of them and come off from them. It was
the sin of Israel that they furnished themselves extravagantly with
horses and chariots, and were soothsayers and idolaters; see [Isa
2:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#006). But here it is promised that
they shall not regard them any more. The tranquillity of the kingdom of
Christ is intended in that promise, which explains this, [Zac
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#010), I will cut off the chariot from
Ephraim and the horse from Jerusalem. Note, It is a great mercy to be
deprived of those things in which we have reposed a confidence in
competition with God, which we have made our arm, and after which we
have gone a whoring from God. Let us observe the particulars: - 1. They
had trusted in chariots and horses, and multiplied them ([Psa
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007)); but now God will cut off their
horses, and destroy their chariots ([Mic
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#010)), as David houghed the
chariot-horses, [Sa2 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#004). They shall
not have them, lest they should be tempted to trust in them. 2. They
depended upon their strongholds, and fortified cities, for their
security; but God will take care that they be demolished ([Mic
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#011)): I will cut off the cities of
thy land; I will throw down thy strongholds. They shall have them for
habitations, but not for garrisons, for God will be their only place of
defence, their high tower, and their deliverer. 3. Many of them depended
much upon the conduct and advice of their conjurors, diviners, and
fortune-tellers; and those God will cut off, not only as weak things,
and insufficient to relieve them, but as wicked things, and sufficient
to ruin them ([Mic 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#012)): "I will cut
off witchcrafts out of thy hand, that thou shalt no more take hold of
them, and stay thyself upon them, and thou shalt have no more
soothsayers, for thou shalt be convinced that all their pretensions are
a cheat." The justice of the nation shall cut them off according to law,
[Lev 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#027). the preaching of the
gospel brought men off from using curious arts, [Act
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#019). 4. Many of them had said to the
work of their hands, You are our gods; but now idolatry shall be
abolished and abandoned ([Mic 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#013)):
"Thy graven images will I cut off, and thy standing images, both those
that were movable and those that were fixed; they shall be destroyed by
the power of the law of Moses and deserted by the power of the gospel of
Christ, so that thou shalt no more worship the work of thy hands, but be
ashamed that ever thou hast been so deluded. Among other monuments of
idolatry, I will pluck up thy groves out of the midst of thee," [Mic
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#014). These were planted and preserved
in honour of their idols, and used in the worship of them; these they
were ordered to burn ([Deu 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#002), [Deu
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#003)), and, if they do not, God will,
so that they shall not have them to trust to. And so will I destroy
their cities, meaning the cities that were dedicated to the idols, to
some dunghill-deity or other, which they confided in for their
protection.

IV\. That those who stand it out against the gospel of Christ, and
continue in league with their idolatries and witchcrafts, shall fall
under the wrath of God, and be consumed by it ([Mic
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#015)): I will execute vengeance in
anger and fury upon the heathen (that is, upon heathenism), such as they
have not heard; idolatries shall be done away, and idolaters put to
shame. I will execute vengeance upon the heathen who have not heard (so
some read it), or who would not hear and receive the doctrine of Christ.
God will give his Son either the hearts or the necks of his enemies, and
make them either his friends or his footstool.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah Chapter 6](mic006)

</div>
