<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh007)  [Next](neh009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001)

[Nehemiah](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">neh 8:0</span></span>

Ezra came up out of Babylon thirteen years before Nehemiah came, yet we
have here a piece of good work which he did, that might have been done
before, but was not done till Nehemiah came, who, though he was not such
a scholar nor such a divine as Ezra, nor such a scribe in the law of his
God, yet was a man of a more lively active spirit. His zeal set Ezra's
learning on work, and then great things were done, as we find here,
where we have, I. The public and solemn reading and expounding of the
law ([Neh 8:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001)). II. The joy which
the people were ordered to express upon that occasion ([Neh
8:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#009)). III. The solemn keeping of
the feast of tabernacles according to the law ([Neh
8:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#013)).

[Nehemiah 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 8:1</span></span>

We have here an account of a solemn religious assembly, and the good
work that was done in that assembly, to the honour of God and the
edification of the church.

I. The time of it was the first day of the seventh month, [Neh
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#002). That was the day of the feast of
trumpets, which is called a sabbath, and on which they were to have a
holy convocation, [Lev 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#024); [Num
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#001). But that was not all: it was one
that day that the altar was set up, and they began to offer their
burnt-offerings after their return out of captivity, a recent mercy in
the memory of many then living; in a thankful remembrance of that, it is
likely, they had kept this feast ever since with more than ordinary
solemnity. Divine favours which are fresh in mind, and which we
ourselves have been witnesses of, should be, and usually are, most
affecting.

II\. The place was in the street that was before the water-gate ([Neh
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001)), a spacious broad street, able to
contain so great a multitude, which the court of the temple was not; for
probably it was not now built nearly so large as it had been in
Solomon's time. Sacrifices were to be offered only at the door of the
temple, but praying, and praising, and preaching, were, and are,
services of religion as acceptably performed in one place as in another.
When this congregation thus met in the street of the city no doubt God
was with them.

III\. The persons that met were all the people, who were not compelled
to come, but voluntarily gathered themselves together by common
agreement, as one man: not only men came, but women and children, even
as many as were capable of understanding what they heard. Masters of
families should bring their families with them to the public worship of
God. Women and children have souls to save, and are therefore concerned
to acquaint themselves with the word of God and attend on the means of
knowledge and grace. Little ones, as they come to the exercise of
reason, must be trained up in the exercises of religion.

IV\. The master of this assembly was Ezra the priest; he presided in
this service. None so fit to expound and preach as he who was such a
ready scribe in the law of his God. 1. His call to the service was very
clear; for being in office as a priest, and qualified as a scribe, the
people spoke to him to bring the book of the law and read it to them,
[Neh 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001). God gave him ability and
authority, and then the people gave him opportunity and invitation.
Knowledge is spiritual alms, which those that are able should give to
every one that needs, to every one that asks. 2. His post was very
convenient. He stood in a pulpit or tower of wood, which they made for
the word (so it is in the original), for the preaching of the word, that
what he said might be the more gracefully delivered and the better
heard, and that the eyes of the hearers might be upon him, which would
engage their attention, as [Luk 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#020).
3. He had several assistants. Some of these stood with him ([Neh
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#004)), six on his right hand and seven
on his left: either his pulpit was so contrived as to hold them all in a
row, as in a gallery (but then it would scarcely have been called a
tower), or they had desks a degree lower. Some think, that he appointed
them to read when he was weary; at least his taking them as assessors
with him put an honour upon them before the people, in order to their
being employed in the same service another time. Others who are
mentioned ([Neh 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#007)) seem to have been
employed at the same time in other places near at hand, to read and
expound to those who could not come within hearing of Ezra. Of these
also there were thirteen priests, whose lips were to keep knowledge,
[Mal 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007). It is a great mercy to a
people thus to be furnished with ministers that are apt to teach. Happy
was Ezra in having such assistants as these, and happy were they in
having such a guide as Ezra.

V. The religious exercises performed in this assembly were not
ceremonial, but moral, praying and preaching. Ezra, as president of the
assembly, was, 1. The people's mouth to God, and they affectionately
joined with him, [Neh 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#006). He blessed
the Lord as the great God, gave honour to him by praising his
perfections and praying for his favour; and the people, in token of
their concurrence with him both in prayers and praises, said, Amen,
Amen, lifted up their hands in token of their desire being towards God
and all their expectations from him, and bowed their heads in token of
their reverence of him and subjection to him. Thus must we adore God,
and address ourselves to him, when we are going to read and hear the
word of God, as those that see God in his word very great and very good.
2. God's mouth to the people, and they attentively hearkened to him.
This was the chief business of the solemnity, and observe, (1.) Ezra
brought the law before the congregation, [Neh
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#002). He had taken care to provide
himself with the best and most correct copies of the law; and what he
had laid up for his own use and satisfaction he here brought forth, as a
good householder out of his treasury, for the benefit of the church.
Observe, \[1.\] The book of the law is not to be confined to the
scribes' studies, but to be brought before the congregation and read to
them in their own language. \[2.\] Ministers, when they go to the
pulpit, should take their Bibles with them; Ezra did so; thence they
must fetch their knowledge, and according to that rule they must speak
and must show that they do so. See [Ch2
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#009). (2.) He opened the book with
great reverence and solemnity, in the sight of all the people, [Neh
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#005). He brought it forth with a sense
of the great mercy of God to them in giving them that book; he opened it
with a sense of his mercy to them in giving them leave to read it, that
it was not a spring shut up and a fountain sealed. The taking of the
books, and the opening of the seals, we find celebrated with joy and
praise, [Rev 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009). Let us learn to
address ourselves to the services of religion with solemn stops and
pauses, and not to go about them rashly; let us consider what we are
doing when we take God's book into our hands, and open it, and so also
when we bow our knees in prayer; and what we do let us do deliberately,
[Ecc 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#001). (3.) He and others read in
the book of the law, from morning till noon ([Neh
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#003)), and they read distinctly, [Neh
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#008). Reading the scriptures in
religious assemblies is an ordinance of God, whereby he is honoured and
his church edified. And, upon special occasions, we must be willing to
attend for many hours together on the reading and expounding of the word
of God: those mentioned here were thus employed for six hours. Let those
that read and preach the word learn also to deliver themselves
distinctly, as those who understand what they say and are affected with
it themselves, and who desire that those they speak to may understand
it, retain it, and be affected with it likewise. It is a snare for a man
to devour that which is holy. (4.) What they read they expounded, showed
the intent and meaning of it, and what use was to be made of it; they
gave the sense in other words, that they might cause the people to
understand the reading, [Neh 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#007), [Neh
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#008). Note, \[1.\] It is requisite that
those who hear the word should understand it, else it is to them but an
empty sound of words, [Mat 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#015).
\[2.\] It is therefore required of those who are teachers by office that
they explain the word and give the sense of it. Understandest thou what
thou readest? and, Have you understood all these things? are good
questions to be put to the hearers; but, How should we except someone
guide us? is as proper a question for them to put to their teachers,
[Act 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#030), [Act
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#031). Reading is good, and preaching
good, but expounding brings the reading and the preaching together, and
thus makes the reading the more intelligible and the preaching the more
convincing. (5.) The people conducted themselves very properly when the
word was read and opened to them. \[1.\] With great reverence. When Ezra
opened the book all the people stood up ([Neh
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#005)), thereby showing respect both to
Ezra and to the word he was about to read. It becomes servants to stand
when their master speaks to them, in honour to their master and to show
a readiness to do as they are bidden. \[2.\] With great fixedness and
composedness. They stood in their place ([Neh
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#007)); several ministers were reading
and expounding at some distance from each other, and every one of the
people kept his post, did not go to hear first one and then another, to
make remarks upon them, but stood in his place, that he might neither
give disturbance to another nor receive any disturbance himself. \[3.\]
With great attention and a close application of mind: The ears of all
the people were unto the book of the law ([Neh
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#003)), were even chained to it; they
heard readily, and minded every word. The word of God commands attention
and deserves it. If through carelessness we let much slip in hearing,
there is danger that through forgetfulness we shall let all slip after
hearing.

[Nehemiah 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">neh 8:9</span></span>

We may here observe,

I. How the people were wounded with the words of the law that were read
to them. The law works death, and speaks terror, shows men their sins,
and their misery and danger because of sin, and thunders a curse against
every one that continues not in every part of his duty. Therefore when
they heard it they all wept ([Neh
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#009)): it was a good sign that their
hearts were tender, like Josiah's when he heard the words of the law.
They wept to think how they had offended God, and exposed themselves, by
their many violations of the law; when some wept all wept, for they all
saw themselves guilty before God.

II\. How they were healed and comforted with the words of peace that
were spoken to them. It was well that they were so much affected with
the word of God, and received the impressions of it; but they must not
yield unduly to their mourning, especially at this time, because the day
was holy to the Lord; it was one of the solemn feasts, on which it was
their duty to rejoice; and even sorrow for sin must not hinder our joy
in God, but rather lead us to it and prepare us for it.

1\. The masters of the assembly endeavoured to pacify them and encourage
them. Now Nehemiah is brought in, and not before, in this chapter; he
took notice of the people's weeping. Ezra was pleased to see them so
affected with the word, but Nehemiah observed to him, and Ezra concurred
in the thought, that it was now unseasonable. This day was holy (it is
called a sabbath, [Lev 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#024)), and
therefore was to be celebrated with joy and praise, not as if it were a
day to afflict their souls. (1.) They forbade the people to mourn and
weep ([Neh 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#009)): Be not sorry ([Neh
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#010)); hold your peace, neither be you
grieved, [Neh 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#011). Every thing is
beautiful in its season; as we must not be merry when God calls to
mourning, so we must not frighten and afflict ourselves when God gives
us occasion to rejoice. Even sorrow for sin must not grow so excessive
as to hinder our joy in God and our cheerfulness in his service. (2.)
They commanded them to testify their joy, to put on the garments of
praise instead of the spirit of heaviness. They allowed them, in token
of their joy, to feast themselves, to eat and drink better than on other
days, to eat the fat and drink the sweet; but then it must be, \[1.\]
With charity to the poor: "Send portions to those for whom nothing is
prepared that your abundance may supply their want, that they may
rejoice with you and their loins may bless you." Christ directs those
that make feasts to invite their poor neighbours, [Luk
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#013). But it is especially the duty
of a religious feast, as well as of a religious fast, to draw out the
soul to the hungry, [Isa 58:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007), [Isa
58:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#010). God's bounty should make us
bountiful. Many will eat the fat and drink the sweet themselves, even to
excess, that will never allow portions, nor scarcely crumbs, to the
poor, who may read their own doom in the parable of the rich man, [Luk
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019), etc. But such know not, or
consider not, what God gave them their estates for. Observe, We must not
only give to those that offer themselves, but send to those that are out
of sight. The liberal devises liberal things, and seeks objects of
charity. \[2.\] It must be with piety and devotion: The joy of the Lord
is your strength. Let it not be a carnal sensual joy, but holy and
spiritual, the joy of the Lord, joy in the goodness of God, under the
direction and government of the grace of God, joy arising from our
interest in the love and favour of God and the tokens of his favour.
"This joy will be your strength, therefore encourage it; it will be your
strength, First, For the performance of the other duties of the feast."
The more cheerful we are in our religious exercises the more we shall
abound in them. Secondly, "For all that which you have to do in
conformity to the law of God which has been read to you." Holy joy will
be oil to the wheels of our obedience. Thirdly, "For the resisting of
your enemies that are plotting against you." The joy of the Lord will
arm us against the assaults of our spiritual enemies, and put our mouths
out of taste for those pleasures with which the tempter baits his hooks.

2\. The assembly complied with the directions that were given them.
Their weeping was stilled ([Neh 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#011))
and they made great mirth, [Neh 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#012).
Note, We ought always to have such a command of every passion as that,
however it may break out, it may soon be restrained and called in again
when we are convinced that it is either unreasonable or unseasonable. He
that has such a rule as this over his own spirit is better than the
mighty. Observe, (1.) After they had wept they rejoiced. Holy mourning
makes way for holy mirth; those that sow in tears shall reap in joy;
those that tremble at the convictions of the word may triumph in the
consolations of it. (2.) The ground of their joy was very good. They
made mirth, not because they had the fat to eat and the sweet to drink,
and a great deal of good company, but because they had understood the
words that were declared to them. note, \[1.\] To have the holy
scriptures with us, and helps to understand them, is a very great mercy,
which we have abundant reason to rejoice in. Bibles and ministers are
the joy of God's Israel. \[2.\] The better we understand the word of God
the more comfort we shall find in it; for the darkness of trouble arises
from the darkness of ignorance and mistake. When the words were first
declared to them they wept; but, when they understood them, they
rejoiced, finding at length precious promises made to those who repented
and reformed and that therefore there was hope in Israel.

[Nehemiah 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">neh 8:13</span></span>

We have here,

I. The people's renewed attendance upon the word. They had spent the
greatest part of one day in praying and hearing, and yet were so far
from being weary of that new moon and sabbath that the next day after,
though it was no festival, the chief of them came together again to hear
Ezra expound ([Neh 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#013)), which they
found more delightful and gainful than any worldly pleasure or profit
whatsoever. Note, The more we converse with the word of God, if we
rightly understand it and be affected with it, the more we shall covet
to converse with it, and to increase in our acquaintance with it,
saying, How sweet are thy words unto my mouth! Those that understand the
scriptures well will still be desirous to understand them better. Now
the priests and the Levites themselves came with the chief of the people
to Ezra, that prince of expositors, to understand the words of the law,
or, as it is in the margin, that they might instruct in the words of the
law; they came to be taught themselves, that they might be qualified to
teach others. Observe, 1. Though, on the first day, Ezra's humility had
set them on his right hand and on his left, as teachers with him ([Neh
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#004), [Neh
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#007)), yet now, they being by trial
made more sensible than ever of their own deficiencies and his
excellencies, on the second day their humility set them at Ezra's feet,
as learners of him. 2. Those that would teach others must themselves
receive instructions. Priests and Levites must be taught first and then
teach.

II\. The people's ready obedience to the word, in one particular
instance, as soon as they were made sensible of their duty therein. It
is probable that Ezra, after the wisdom of his God that was in his hand
([Ezr 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#025)), when they applied to him
for instruction out of the law on the second day of the seventh month,
read to them those laws which concerned the feasts of that month, and,
among the rest, that of the feast of tabernacles, [Lev
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#034); [Deu
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#013). Ministers should preach not
only that which is true and good, but that which is seasonable,
directing to the work of the day in its day. Here is, 1. The divine
appointment of the feast of tabernacles reviewed, [Neh
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#014), [Neh
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#015). They found written in the law a
commandment concerning it. Those that diligently search the scriptures
will find those things written there which they had forgotten or not
duly considered. This feast of tabernacles was a memorial of their
dwelling in tents in the wilderness, a representation of our tabernacle
state in this world, and a type of the holy joy of the gospel church.
The conversion of the nations to the faith of Christ is foretold under
the figure of this feast ([Zac 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#016));
they shall come to keep the feast of tabernacles, as having here no
continuing city. This feast was to be proclaimed in all their cities.
The people were themselves to fetch boughs of trees (they of Jerusalem
fetched them from the mount of Olives) and to make booths, or arbours,
of them, in which they were to lodge (as much as the weather would
permit) and to make merry during the feast. 2. This appointment
religiously observed, [Neh 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#016), [Neh
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#017). Then we read and hear the word
acceptably and profitably when we do according to what is written
therein, when what appears to be our duty is revived after it has been
neglected. (1.) They observed the ceremony: They sat in booths, which
the priests and Levites set up in the courts of the temple; those that
had houses of their own set up booths on the roofs of them, or in their
courts; and those that had not such conveniences set them up in the
streets. This feast had usually been observed ([Ch2
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#003); [Ezr
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#004)), but never with such solemnity as
now since Joshua's time, when they were newly settled, as they were now
newly re-settled in Canaan. That man loves his house too well that
cannot find in his heart to quit it, awhile, in compliance either with
an ordinance or with a providence of God. (2.) They minded the
substance, else the ceremony, how significant soever, would have been
insignificant. \[1.\] They did it with gladness, with very great
gladness, rejoicing in God and his goodness to them. All their holy
feasts, but this especially, were to be celebrated with joy, which would
be much for the honour of God, and their own encouragement in his
service. \[2.\] They attended the reading and expounding of the word of
God during all the days of the feast, v. 18. They improved their leisure
for this good work. Spare hours cannot be better spent than in studying
the scriptures and conversing with them. At this feast of tabernacles
God appointed the law to be read once in seven years. Whether this was
that year of release in which that service was to be performed ([Deu
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#010), [Deu
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#011)) does not appear; however they
spent all the days of the feast in that good work, and on the eighth day
was a solemn assembly, as God had appointed, in which they finished the
solemnity the twenty-second day of the month, yet did not separate, for
the twenty-fourth day was appointed to be spent in fasting and prayer.
Holy joy just not indispose us for godly sorrow any more than godly
sorrow for holy joy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 9](neh009)

</div>
