<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh002)  [Next](neh004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001)

[Nehemiah](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">neh 3:0</span></span>

Saying and doing are often two things: many are ready to say, "Let us
rise up and build," who sit still and do nothing, like that fair-spoken
son who said,"I go, Sir, but went not." The undertakers here were none
of those. As soon as they had resolved to build the wall about Jerusalem
they lost no time, but set about it presently, as we find in this
chapter. Let it never be said that we left that good work to be done
tomorrow which we might as well have done today. This chapter gives an
account of two things: - I. The names of the builders, which are
recorded here to their honour, for they were such as herein discovered a
great zeal for God and their country, both a pious and a public spirit,
a great degree both of industry and courage; and what they did was fit
to be thus largely registered, both for their praise and for the
encouragement of others to follow their example. II. The order of the
building; they took it before them, and ended where they began. They
repaired, 1. From the sheep-gate to the fish-gate ([Neh
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001), [Neh
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#002)). 2. Thence to the old-gate ([Neh
3:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#003)). 3. Thence to the valley-gate
([Neh 3:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#006)). 4. Thence to the
dung-gate ([Neh 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#013), [Neh
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#014)). 5. Thence to the gate of the
fountain ([Neh 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#015)). 6. Thence to the
water-gate ([Neh 3:16-26](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#016)). 7. Thence
by the horse-gate to the sheep-gate again, where they began ([Neh
3:27-32](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#027)), and so they brought their
work quite round the city.

[Nehemiah 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 3:1</span></span>

The best way to know how to divide this chapter is to observe how the
work was divided among the undertakers, that every one might know what
he had to do, and mind it accordingly with a holy emulation, and desire
to excel, yet without any contention, animosity, or separate interest.
No strife appears among them but which should do most for the public
good. Several things are observable in the account here given of the
building of the wall about Jerusalem: -

I. That Eliashib the high priest, with his brethren the priests, led the
van in this troop of builders, [Neh
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001). Ministers should be foremost in
every good work; for their office obliges them to teach and quicken by
their example, as well as by their doctrine. If there be labour in it,
who so fit as they to work? if danger, who so fit as they to venture?
The dignity of the high priest was very great, and obliged him to
signalize himself in this service. The priests repaired the sheep-gate,
so called because through it were brought the sheep that were to be
sacrificed in the temple; and therefore the priests undertook the repair
of it because the offerings of the Lord made by fire were their
inheritance. And of this gate only it is said that they sanctified it
with the word and prayer, and perhaps with sacrifices perhaps, 1.
Because it led to the temple; or, 2. Because with this the building of
the wall began, and it is probable (though they were at work in all
parts of the wall at the same time) that this was first finished, and
therefore at this gate they solemnly committed their city and the walls
of it to the divine protection; or, 3. Because the priests were the
builders of it; and it becomes ministers above others, being themselves
in a peculiar manner sanctified to God, to sanctify to him all their
performances, and to do even their common actions after a godly sort.

II\. That the undertakers were very many, who each took his share, some
more and some less, in this work, according as their ability was. Note,
What is to be done for the public good every one should assist in, and
further, to the utmost of his place and power. United force will conquer
that which no individual dares venture on. Many hands will make light
work.

III\. That many were active in this work who were not themselves
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and therefore consulted purely the public
welfare and not any private interest or advantage of their own. Here are
the men of Jericho with the first ([Neh
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#002)), the men of Gibeon and Mizpah
([Neh 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#007)), and Zanoah, [Neh
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#013). Every Israelite should lend a
hand towards the building up of Jerusalem.

IV\. That several rulers, both of Jerusalem and of other cities, were
active in this work, thinking themselves bound in honour to do the
utmost that their wealth and power enabled them to do for the
furtherance of this good work. But it is observable that they are called
rulers of part, or the half part, of their respective cities. One was
ruler of the half part of Jerusalem ([Neh
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#012)), another of part of
Beth-haccerem ([Neh 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#014)), another of
part of Mizpah ([Neh 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#015)), another of
the half part of Beth-zur ([Neh 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#016)),
one was ruler of one half part, and another of the other half part, of
Keilah, [Neh 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#017), [Neh
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#018). Perhaps the Persian government
would not entrust any one with a strong city, but appointed two to be a
watch upon each other. Rome had two consuls.

V. Here is a just reproach fastened upon the nobles of Tekoa, that they
put not their necks to the work of their Lord ([Neh
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#005)), that is, they would not come
under the yoke of an obligation to this service; as if the dignity and
liberty of their peerage were their discharge from serving God and doing
good, which are indeed the highest honour and the truest freedom. Let
not nobles think any thing below them by which they may advance the
interests of their country; for what else is their nobility good for but
that it puts them in a higher and larger sphere of usefulness than that
in which inferior persons move?

VI\. Two persons joined in repairing the old gate ([Neh
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#006)), and so were co-founders, and
shared the honour of it between them. The good work which we cannot
compass ourselves we must be thankful to those that will go partners
with us in. Some think that this is called the old gate because it
belonged to the ancient Salem, which was said to be first built by
Melchizedek.

VII\. Several good honest tradesmen, as well as priests and rulers, were
active in this work - goldsmiths, apothecaries, merchants, [Neh
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#008), [Neh
3:32](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#032). They did not think their
callings excused them, nor plead that they could not leave their shops
to attend the public business, knowing that what they lost would
certainly be made up to them by the blessing of God upon their callings.

VIII\. Some ladies are spoken of as helping forward this work - Shallum
and his daughters ([Neh 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#012)), who,
though not capable of personal service, yet having their portions in
their own hands, or being rich widows, contributed money for buying
materials and paying workmen. St. Paul speaks of some good women that
laboured with him in the gospel, [Phi
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003).

IX\. Of some it is said that they repaired over against their houses
([Neh 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#010), [Neh
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#023), [Neh
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#028), [Neh
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#029)), and of one (who, it is likely,
was only a lodger) that he repaired over against his chamber, [Neh
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#030). When a general good work is to
be done each should apply himself to that part of it that falls nearest
to him and is within his reach. If every one will sweep before his own
door, the street will be clean; if every one will mend one, we shall be
all mended. If he that has but a chamber will repair before that, he
does his part.

X. Of one it is said that he earnestly repaired that which fell to his
share ([Neh 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#020)) - he did it with an
inflamed zeal; not that others were cold or indifferent, but he was the
most vigorous of any of them and consequently made himself remarkable.
It is good to be thus zealously affected in a good thin; and it is
probable that this good man's zeal provoked very many to take the more
pains and make the more haste.

XI\. Of one of these builders it is observed that he was the sixth son
of his father, [Neh 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#030). His five
elder brethren, it seems, laid not their hand to this work, but he did.
In doing that which is good we need not stay to see our elders go before
us; if they decline it, it does not therefore follow that we must. Thus
the younger brother, if he be the better man, and does God and his
generation better service, is indeed the better gentleman; those are
most honourable that are most useful.

XII\. Some of those that had first done helped their fellows, and
undertook another share where they saw there was most need. Meremoth
repaired, [Neh 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#004). and again, [Neh
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#021). And the Tekoites, besides the
piece they repaired ([Neh 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#005)),
undertook another piece ([Neh 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#027)),
which is the more remarkable because their nobles set them a bad example
by withdrawing from the service, which, instead of serving them for an
excuse to sit still, perhaps made them the more forward to do double
work, that by their zeal they might either shame or atone for the
covetousness and carelessness of their nobles.

Lastly, Here is no mention of any particular share that Nehemiah himself
had in this work. A name-sake of his is mentioned, [Neh
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#016). But did he do nothing? Yes,
though he undertook not any particular piece of the wall, yet he did
more than any of them, for he had the oversight of them all; half of his
servants worked where there was most need, and the other half stood
sentinel, as we find afterwards ([Neh
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#016)), while he himself in his own
person walked the rounds, directed and encouraged the builders, set his
hand to the work where he saw occasion, and kept a watchful eye upon the
motions of the enemy, as we shall find in the next chapter. The pilot
needs not haul at a rope: it is enough for him to steer.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 4](neh004)

</div>
