<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num005)  [Next](num007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 6:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. The law concerning Nazarites, 1. What it was
to which the vow of a Nazarite obliged him ([Num
6:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#001)). 2. A remedial law in case a
Nazarite happened to be polluted by the touch of a dead body ([Num
6:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#009)). 3. The solemnity of his
discharge when his time was up ([Num
6:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#013)). II. Instructions given to
the priests how they should bless the people ([Num
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#022), etc.).

[Numbers 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 6:1</span></span>

After the law for the discovery and shame of those that by sin had made
themselves vile, fitly follows this for the direction and encouragement
of those who by their eminent piety and devotion had made themselves
honourable, and distinguished themselves from their neighbours. It is
very probable that there were those before the making of this law who
went under the character of Nazarites, and were celebrated by that title
as persons professing greater strictness and zeal in religion than other
people; for the vow of a Nazarite is spoken of here as a thing already
well known, but the obligation of it is reduced to a greater certainty
than hitherto it had been. Joseph is called a Nazarite among his
brethren ([Gen 49:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#026)), not only
because separate from them, but because eminent among them. Observe,

I. The general character of a Nazarite: it is a person separated unto
the Lord, [Num 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#002). Some were
Nazarites for life, either by divine designation, as Samson ([Jdg
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#005)), and John Baptist ([Luk
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#015)), or by their parents' vow
concerning them, as Samuel, [Sa1 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#011).
Of these this law speaks not. Others were so for a certain time, and by
their own voluntary engagement, and concerning them rules are given by
this law. A woman might bind herself with the vow of a Nazarite, under
the limitations we find, [Num 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#003),
where the vow which the woman is supposed to vow unto the Lord seems to
be meant especially of this vow. The Nazarites were, 1. Devoted to the
Lord during the time of their Nazariteship, and, it is probable, spent
much of their time in the study of the law, in acts of devotion, and
instructing others. An air of piety was thereby put upon them, and upon
their whole conversation. 2. They were separated from common persons and
common things. Those that are consecrated to God must not be conformed
to this world. They distinguished themselves, not only from others, but
from what they themselves were before and after. 3. They separated
themselves by vowing a vow. Every Israelite was bound by the divine law
to love God with all his heart, but the Nazarites by their own act and
deed bound themselves to some religious observances, as fruits and
expressions of that love, which other Israelites were not bound to. Some
such there were, whose spirits God stirred up to be in their day the
ornaments of the church, the standard-bearers of religion, and patterns
of piety. It is spoken of as a great favour to their nation that God
raised up of their young men for Nazarites, [Amo
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#011). The Nazarites were known in the
streets and respected as purer than snow, whiter than milk, [Lam
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#007). Christ was called in reproach a
Nazarene, so were his followers: but he was no Nazarite according to
this law; he drank wine, and touched dead bodies, yet in his this type
had its accomplishment, for in him all purity and perfection met; and
every true Christian is a spiritual Nazarite, separated by vow unto the
Lord. We find St. Paul, by the persuasion of his friends, in
complaisance to the Jews, submitting to this law of the Nazarites; but
at the same time it is declared that the Gentiles should observe no such
thing, [Act 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#024), [Act
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#025). It was looked upon as a great
honour to a man to be a Nazarite, and therefore if a man speak of it as
a punishment, saying for instance, "I will be a Nazarite rather than do
so or so," he is (say the Jews) a wicked man; but he that vows unto the
Lord in the way of holiness to be a Nazarite, lo, the crown of his God
is upon his head.

II\. The particular obligations that the Nazarites lay under. That the
fancies of superstitious men might not multiply their restraints
endlessly, God himself lays down the law for them, and gives them the
rule of their profession.

1\. They must have nothing to do with the fruit of the vine, [Num
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#003), [Num
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#004). They must drink no wine nor
string drink, nor eat grapes, no, not the kernel nor the husk; they
might not so much as eat a raisin. The learned Dr. Lightfoot has a
conjecture (Hor. Heb. in Luc. 1.15), that, as the ceremonial pollutions
by leprosy and otherwise represented the sinful state of fallen man, so
the institution of the order of Nazarites was designed to represent the
pure and perfect state of man in innocency, and that the tree of
knowledge, forbidden to Adam, was the vine, and for that reason it was
forbidden to the Nazarites, and all the produce of it. Those who gave
the Nazarites wine to drink did the tempter's work ([Amo
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#012)), persuading them to that
forbidden fruit. That it was reckoned a perfection and praise not to
drink wine appears from the instance of the Rechabites, [Jer
35:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#006). They were to drink no wine, (1.)
That they might be examples of temperance and mortification. Those that
separate themselves to God and to his honour must not gratify the
desires of the body, but keep it under and bring it into subjection.
Drinking a little wine for the stomach's sake is allowed, to help that,
[Ti1 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#023). But drinking much wine for
the palate's sake, to please that, does by no means become those who
profess to walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. (2.) That
they might be qualified to employ themselves in the service of God. They
must not drink, lest they should forget the law ([Pro
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#005)), lest they should err through
wine, [Isa 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#007). Let all Christians
oblige themselves to be very moderate in the use of wine and strong
drink; for, if the love of these once gets the mastery of a man, he
becomes a very easy prey to Satan. It is observable that because they
were to drink no wine (which was the thing mainly intended) they were to
eat nothing that came of the vine, to teach us with the utmost care and
caution to avoid sin and every thing that borders upon it and leads to
it, or may be a temptation to us. Abstain from all appearance of evil,
[Th1 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#022).

2\. They must not cut their hair, [Num
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#005). They must neither poll their
heads nor shave their beards; this was that mark of Samson's
Nazariteship which we often read of in his story. Now, (1.) This
signified a noble neglect of the body and the ease and ornament of it,
which became those who, being separated to God, ought to be wholly taken
up with their souls, to secure their peace and beauty. It signified that
they had, for the present, renounced all sorts of sensual pleasures and
delights, and resolved to live a life of self-denial and mortification.
Mephibosheth in sorrow trimmed not his beard, [Sa2
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#024). (2.) Some observe that long
hair is spoken of as a badge of subjection ([Co1
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#005), etc.); so that the long hair of
the Nazarites denoted their subjection to God, and their putting
themselves under his dominion. (3.) By this they were known to all that
met them to be Nazarites, and so it commanded respect. It made them look
great without art; it was nature's crown to the head, and a testimony
for them that they had preserved their purity. For, if they had been
defiled, their hair must have been cut, [Num
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#009). See [Jer
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#029).

3\. They must not come near any dead body, [Num
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#006), [Num
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#007). Others might touch dead bodies,
and contracted only a ceremonial pollution by it for some time; some
must do it, else the dead must be unburied; but the Nazarites must not
do it, upon pain of forfeiting all the honour of their Nazariteship.
They must not attend the funeral of any relation, no, not father nor
mother, any more than the high priest himself, because the consecration
of his God is upon his head. Those that separate themselves to God must
learn, (1.) To distinguish themselves, and do more than others. (2.) To
keep their consciences pure from dead works, and not to touch the
unclean thing. The greater profession of religion we make, and the more
eminent we appear, the greater care we must take to avoid all sin, for
we have so much the more honour to lose by it. (3.) To moderate their
affections even to their near relations, so as not to let their sorrow
for the loss of them break in upon their joy in God and submission to
his will. See [Mat 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#021), [Mat
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#022).

4\. All the days of their separation they must be holy to the Lord, [Num
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#008). This was the meaning of those
external observances, and without this they were of no account. The
Nazarites must be devoted to God, employed for him, and their minds
intent upon him; they must keep themselves pure in heart and life, and
be in every thing conformable to the divine image and will; this is to
be holy, this is to be a Nazarite indeed.

III\. The provision that was made for the cleansing of a Nazarite, if he
happened unavoidably to contract a ceremonial pollution by the touch of
a dead body. No penalty is ordered by this law for the wilful breach of
the foregoing laws; for it was not supposed that a man who had so much
religion as to make that vow could have so little as to break it
presumptuously: nor could it be supposed that he should drink wine, or
have his hair cut, but by his own fault; but purely by the providence of
God, without any fault of his own, he might be near a dead body, and
that is the case put ([Num 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#009)): If a
man die very suddenly by him, he has defiled the head of his
consecration. Note, Death sometimes takes men away very suddenly, and
without any previous warning. A man might be well and dead in so little
a time that the most careful Nazarite could not avoid being polluted by
the dead body; so short a step is it sometimes, and so soon taken, from
time to eternity. God prepare us for sudden death! In this case, 1. He
must be purified from the ceremonial pollution he had contracted, as
others must, upon the seventh day, [Num
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#009). Nay, more was required for the
purifying of the Nazarite than of any other person that had touched a
dead body; he must bring a sin-offering and a burnt-offering, and an
atonement must be made for him, [Num
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#010), [Num
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#011). This teaches us that sins of
infirmity, and the faults we are overtaken in by surprise, must be
seriously repented of, and that an application must be made of the
virtue of Christ's sacrifice to our souls for the forgiveness of them
every day, [Jo1 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001), [Jo1
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002). It teaches us also that, if those
who make an eminent profession of religion do any thing to sully the
reputation of their profession, more is expected from them than others,
for the retrieving both of their peace and of their credit. 2. He must
begin the days of his separation again; for all that were past before
his pollution, though coming ever so near the period of his time set,
were lost, and not reckoned to him, [Num
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#012). This obliged them to be very
careful not to defile themselves by the dead, for that was the only
thing that made them lose their time, and it teaches us that if a
righteous man turn away from his righteousness, and defile himself with
dead works, all his righteousness that he has done shall be lost to him,
[Eze 33:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#013). It is all lost, all in
vain, if he do not persevere, [Gal
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#004). He must begin again, and do his
first works.

IV\. The law for the solemn discharge of a Nazarite from his vow, when
he had completed the time he fixed to himself. Before the expiration of
that term he could not be discharged; before he vowed, it was in his own
power, but it was too late after the vow to make enquiry. The Jews say
that the time of a Nazarite's vow could not be less than thirty days;
and if a man said, "I will be a Nazarite but for two days," yet he was
bound for thirty; but it should seem Paul's vow was for only seven days
([Act 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#027)), or, rather, then he
observed the ceremony of finishing that vow of Nazariteship from which,
being at a distance from the temple, he had discharged himself some
years before at Cenchrea only by the ceremony of cutting his hair, [Act
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#018). When the time of the vowed
separation was out, he was to be made free, 1. Publicly, at the door of
the tabernacle ([Num 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#013)), that all
might take notice of the finishing of his vow, and none might be
offended if they saw him now drink wine, who had so lately refused. 2.
It was to be done with sacrifices, [Num
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#014). Lest he should think that by
this eminent piece of devotion he had made God a debtor to him, he is
appointed, even when he had finished his vow, to bring an offering to
God; for, when we have done our utmost in duty to God, still we must own
ourselves behind-hand with him. He must bring one of each sort of the
instituted offerings. (1.) A burnt-offering, as an acknowledgment of
God's sovereign dominion over him and all he had still, notwithstanding
his discharge from this particular vow. (2.) A sin-offering. This,
though mentioned second ([Num 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#014)),
yet seems to have been offered first ([Num
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#016)), for atonement must be made for
our sins before any of our sacrifices can be accepted. And it is very
observable that even the Nazarite, who in the eye of men was purer than
snow and whiter than milk, yet durst not appear before the holy God
without a sin-offering. Though he had fulfilled the vow of his
separation without any pollution, yet he must bring a sacrifice for sin;
for there is guilt insensibly contracted by the best of men, even in
their best works - some good omitted, some ill admitted, which, if we
were dealt with in strict justice, would be our ruin, and in consequence
of which it is necessary for us to receive the atonement, and plead it
as our righteousness before God. (3.) A peace-offering, in thankfulness
to God who had enabled him to fulfil his vow, and in supplication to God
for grace to preserve him from ever doing any thing unbecoming one that
had been once a Nazarite, remembering that, though he was now freed from
the bonds of his own vow, he still remained under the bonds of the
divine law. (4.) To these were added the meat-offerings and
drink-offerings, according to the manner ([Num
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#015), [Num
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#017)), for these always accompanied
the burnt-offerings and peace-offerings: and, besides these, a basket of
unleavened cakes, and wafers. (5.) Part of the peace-offering, with a
cake and wafer, was to be waved for a wave-offering ([Num
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#019), [Num
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#020)); and this was a gratuity to the
priest, who had it for his pains, after it had been first presented to
God. (6.) Besides all this, he might bring his free-will offerings, such
as his hand shall get, [Num 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#021). More
than this he might bring, but not less. And, to grace the solemnity, it
was common upon this occasion to have their friends to be at charges
with them, [Act 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#024). Lastly, One
ceremony more was appointed, which was like the cancelling of the bond
when the condition is performed, and that was the cutting off of his
hair, which had been suffered to grow all the time of his being a
Nazarite, and burning it in the fire over which the peace-offerings were
boiling, [Num 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#018). This intimated
that his full performance of his vow was acceptable to God in Christ the
great sacrifice, and not otherwise. Learn hence to vow and pay to the
Lord our God, for he has no pleasure in fools.

[Numbers 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 6:22</span></span>

Here, I. The priests, among other good offices which they were to do,
are appointed solemnly to bless the people in the name of the Lord, [Num
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#023). It was part of their work, [Deu
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#005). Hereby God put an honour upon
the priests, for the less is blessed of the better; and hereby he gave
great comfort and satisfaction to the people, who looked upon the priest
as God's mouth to them. Though the priests of himself could do no more
than beg a blessing, yet being an intercessor by office, and doing that
in his name who commands the blessing, the prayer carried with it a
promise, and he pronounced it as one having authority with his hands
lifted up and his face towards the people. Now, 1. This was a type of
Christ's errand into the world, which was to bless us ([Act
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#026)), as the high priest of our
profession. The last thing he did on earth was with uplifted hands to
bless his disciples, [Luk 24:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#050), [Luk
24:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#051). The learned bishop Pearson
observes it as a tradition of the Jews that the priests blessed the
people only at the close of the morning sacrifice, not of the evening
sacrifice, to show (says he) that in the last days, the days of the
Messiah, which are (as it were) the evening of the world, the
benediction of the law should cease, and the blessing of Christ should
take place. 2. It was a pattern to gospel ministers, the masters of
assemblies, who are in like manner to dismiss their solemn assemblies
with a blessing. The same that are God's mouth to his people, to teach
and command them, are his mouth likewise to bless them; and those that
receive the law shall receive the blessing. The Hebrew doctors warn the
people that they say not, "What availeth the blessing of this poor
simple priest? "For," say they, "the receiving of the blessing depends,
not on the priest, but on the holy blessed God."

II\. A form of blessing is here prescribed them. In their other
devotions no form was prescribed, but this being God's command
concerning benediction, that it might not look like any thing of their
own, he puts the very words in their mouths, [Num
6:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#024). Here observe, 1. That the
blessing is commanded upon each particular person: The Lord bless thee.
They must each of them prepare themselves to receive the blessing, and
then they should find enough in it to make them every man happy. Blessed
shalt thou be, [Deu 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#003). If we take
the law to ourselves, we may take the blessing to ourselves, as if our
names were inserted. 2. That the name Jehovah is three times repeated in
it, and (as the critics observe) each with a different accent in the
original; the Jews themselves think there is some mystery in this, and
we know what it is, the New Testament having explained it, which directs
us to expect the blessing from the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
love of the Father, and the communion of the Holy Ghost, each of which
persons is Jehovah, and yet they are "not three Lords, but one Lord,"
[Co2 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#014). 3. That the favour of God
is all in all in this blessing, for that is the fountain of all good.
(1.) The Lord bless thee! Our blessing God is only our speaking well of
him; his blessing us is doing well for us; those whom he blesses are
blessed indeed. (2.) The Lord make his face shine upon thee, alluding to
the shining of the sun upon the earth, to enlighten and comfort it, and
to renew the face of it. "The Lord love thee and cause thee to know that
he loves thee." We cannot but be happy if we have God's love; and we
cannot but be easy if we know that we have it. (3.) The Lord lift up his
countenance upon thee. This is to the same purport with the former, and
it seems to allude to the smiles of a father upon his child, or of a man
upon his friend whom he takes pleasure in. If God give us the assurances
of his special favour and his acceptance of us, this will put gladness
into the heart, [Psa 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#007), [Psa
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#008). 4. That the fruits of this favour
conveyed by this blessing are protection, pardon, and peace. (1.)
Protection from evil, [Num 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#024). The
Lord keep thee, for it is he that keeps Israel, and neither slumbers nor
sleeps ([Psa 121:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#004)), and all believers
are kept by the power of God. (2.) Pardon of sin, [Num
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#025). The Lord be gracious, or
merciful, unto thee. (3.) Peace ([Num
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#026)), including all that good which
goes to make up a complete happiness.

III\. God here promises to ratify and confirm the blessing: They shall
put my name upon the children of Israel, [Num
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#027). God gives them leave to make use
of his name in blessing the people, and to bless them as his people,
called by his name. This included all the blessings they could pronounce
upon them, to mark them for God's peculiar, the people of his choice and
love. God's name upon them was their honour, their comfort, their
safety, their plea. We are called by thy name, leave us not. It is
added, and I will bless them. Note, A divine blessing goes along with
divine institutions, and puts virtue and efficacy into them. What Christ
says of the peace is true of the blessing, "Peace to this congregation,"
if the sons of peace and heirs of blessing be there, the peace, the
blessing, shall rest upon them, [Luk
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#005), [Luk
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#006). For in every place where God
records his name he will meet his people and bless them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 7](num007)

</div>
