<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num009)  [Next](num011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 10:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. Orders given about the making and using of
silver trumpets, which seems to have been the last of all the
commandments God gave upon mount Sinai, and one of the least, yet not
without its significancy ([Num
10:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#001)). II. The history of the
removal of Israel's camp from mount Sinai, and their orderly march into
the wilderness of Paran (v. 11-28). III. Moses's treaty with Hobab, his
brother-in-law ([Num 10:29-32](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#029)). IV.
Moses's prayer at the removing and resting of the ark ([Num
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#033), etc.).

[Numbers 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 10:1</span></span>

We have here directions concerning the public notices that were to be
given to the people upon several occasions by sound of trumpet. In a
thing of this nature, one would think, Moses needed not to have been
taught of God: his own reason might teach him the conveniency of
trumpets; but the constitution of Israel was to be in every thing
divine, and therefore even in this matter, small as it seems. Moses is
here directed, 1. About the making of them. They must be made of silver;
not cast but of beaten work (as some read it), the matter and shape, no
doubt, very fit for the purpose. He was now ordered to make but two,
because there were but two priests to use them. But in Solomon's time we
read of 120 priests sounding with trumpets, [Ch2
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#012). The form of these trumpets is
supposed to have been much like ours at this day. 2. Who were to make
use of them; not any inferior person, but the priests themselves, the
sons of Aaron, [Num 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#008). As great as
they were, they must not think it a disparagement to them to be
trumpeters in the house of God; the meanest office there was honourable.
This signified that the Lord's ministers should lift up their voice like
a trumpet, to show people their sins ([Isa
58:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#001)), to call them to Christ, [Isa
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#013). 3. Upon what occasions the
trumpets were to be sounded. (1.) For the calling of assemblies, [Num
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#002). Thus they are told to blow the
trumpet in Zion for the calling of a solemn assembly together, to
sanctify a fast, [Joe 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#015). Public
notice ought to be given of the time and place of religious assemblies;
for the invitation to the benefit or ordinances is general: whoever
will, let him come. wisdom cries in the chief places of concourse. But,
that the trumpet might not give an uncertain sound, they are directed,
if only the princes and elders were to meet, to blow but one of the
trumpets; less should serve to call them together, who ought to be
examples of forwardness in any thing that is good: but, if the body of
the people were to be called together, both the trumpets must be
sounded, that they might be heard at the greater distance. In allusion
to this, they are said to be blessed that hear the joyful sound ([Psa
89:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#015)), that is, that are invited and
called upon to wait upon God in public ordinances, [Psa
122:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#001). And the general assembly at the
great day will be summoned by the sound of the archangel's trumpet, [Mat
24:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#031). (2.) For the journeying of the
camps, to give notice when each squadron must move; for no man's voice
could reach to give the word of command: soldiers with us that are well
disciplined may be exercised by beat of drums. When the trumpets were
blown for this purpose, they mustsound an alarm ([Num
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#005)), a broken, quavering,
interrupted sound, which was proper to excite and encourage the minds of
people in their marches against their enemies; whereas a continued equal
sound was more proper for the calling of the assembly together ([Num
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#007)): yet when the people were called
together to deprecate God's judgments we find an alarm sounded, [Joe
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001). At the first sounding, Judah's
squadron marched, at the second Reuben's, at the third Ephraim's, at the
fourth Dan's, [Num 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#005), [Num
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#006). And some think that this was
intended to sanctify their marches, for thus were proclaimed by the
priests, who were God's mouth to the people, not only the divine orders
given them to move, but the divine blessing upon them in all their
motions. He that hath ears, let him hear that God is with them of a
truth. King Abijah valued himself and his army very much upon this ([Ch2
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#012)), God himself is with us for our
captain and his priests with sounding trumpets. (3.) For the animating
and encouraging of their armies, when they went out in battle ([Num
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#009)): "If you go to war, blow with
the trumpets, signifying thereby your appeal to heaven for the decision
of the controversy, and your prayer to God to give you victory; and God
will own this his own institution, and you shall be remembered before
the Lord your God." God will take notice of this sound of the trumpet,
and be engaged to fight their battles, and let all the people take
notice of it, and be encouraged to fight his, as David, when he heard a
sound of a going upon the tops of the mulberry trees. Not that God
needed to be awaked by sound of trumpet any more than Christ needed to
be awaked by his disciples in the storm, [Mat
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#025). But where he intends mercy it is
his will that we should solicit it; ministers must stir up the good
soldiers of Jesus Christ to fight manfully against sin, the world, and
the devil, by assuring them that Christ is the captain of their
salvation, and will tread Satan under their feet. (4.) For the
solemnizing of their sacred feasts, [Mat
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#010). One of their feasts was called a
memorial of the blowing of trumpets, [Lev
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#023), etc. And it should seem they
were thus to grace the solemnity of all their feasts ([Psa
81:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#003)), and their sacrifices ([Ch2
29:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#027)), to intimate with what joy and
delight they performed their duty to God, and to raise the minds of
those that attended the services to a holy triumph in the God they
worshipped. And then their performances were for a memorial before God;
for he takes pleasure in our religious exercises when we take pleasure
in them. Holy work should be done with holy joy.

[Numbers 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 10:11</span></span>

Here is, I. A general account of the removal of the camp of Israel from
mount Sinai, before which mountain it had lain now about a year, in
which time and place a great deal of memorable business was done. Of
this removal, it should seem, God gave them notice some time before
([Deu 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#006), [Deu
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#007)): You have dwelt long enough in
this mountain, turn you and take your journey towards the land of
promise. The apostle tells us that mount Sinai genders to bondage ([Gal
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#024)), and signifies the law there
given, which is of use indeed as a schoolmaster to bring us to Christ,
yet we must not rest in it, but advance towards the joys and liberties
of the children of God, for our happiness is conferred not by the law,
but by promise. Observe, 1. The signal given ([Num
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#011)): The cloud was taken up, and we
may suppose it stood for some time, till they were ready to march; and a
great deal of work it was to take down all those tents, and pack up all
those goods that they had there; but every family being employed about
its own, and all at the same time, many hands made quick work of it. 2.
The march began: They took their journey according to the commandment of
the Lord, and just as the cloud led them, [Num
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#013). Some think that mention is thus
frequently made in this and the foregoing chapter of the commandment of
the Lord, guiding and governing them in all their travels, to obviate
the calumny and reproach which were afterwards thrown upon Israel, that
they tarried so long in the wilderness, because they had lost themselves
there, and could not find the way out. No, the matter was not so; in
every stage, in every step, they were under divine direction; and, if
they knew not where they were, yet he that led them knew. Note, Those
that have given up themselves to the direction of God's word and Spirit
steer a steady course, even when they seem to be bewildered. While they
are sure they cannot lose their God and guide, they need not fear losing
their way. 3. The place they rested in, after three days' march: They
went out of the wilderness of Sinai, and rested in the wilderness of
Paran. Note, All our removals in this world are but from one wilderness
to another. The changes which we think will be for the better do not
always prove so; while we carry about with us, wherever we go, the
common infirmities of human nature, we must expect, wherever we go, to
meet with its common calamities; we shall never be at rest, never at
home, till we come to heaven, and all will be well there.

II\. A particular draught of the order of their march, according to the
late model. 1. Judah's squadron marched first, [Num
10:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#014). The leading standard, now
lodged with that tribe, was an earnest of the sceptre which in David's
time should be committed to it, and looked further to the captain of our
salvation, of whom it was likewise foretold that unto him should the
gathering of the people be. 2. Then came those two families of the
Levites which were entrusted to carry the tabernacle. As soon as ever
the cloud was taken up, the tabernacle was taken down, and packed up for
removing, [Num 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#017). And here the six
wagons came laden with the more bulky part of the tabernacle. This
frequent removing of the tabernacle in all their journeys signified the
movableness of that ceremonial dispensation. That which was so often
shifted would at length vanish away, [Heb
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#013). 3. Reuben's squadron marched
forward next, taking place after Judah, according to the commandment of
the Lord, [Num 10:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#018). 4. Then the
Kohathites followed with their charge, the sacred furniture of the
tabernacle, in the midst of the camp, the safest and most honourable
place, [Num 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#021). And they (that is,
says the margin, the Gershonites and Merarites) did set up the
tabernacle against they came; and perhaps it is expressed thus generally
because, if there was occasion, not those Levites only, but the other
Israelites that were in the first squadron, lent a hand to the
tabernacle to hasten the rearing of it up, even before they set up their
own tents. 5. Ephraim's squadron followed next after the ark ([Num
10:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#022)), to which some think the
psalmist alludes when he prays ([Psa
80:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#002)), Before Ephraim, Benjamin, and
Manasseh, the three tribes that composed this squadron, stir up thy
strength (and the ark is called his strength, [Psa
78:61](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#061)), and come and save us. 6. Dan's
squadron followed last, [Num 10:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#025).
It is called the rearward, or gathering host, of all the camps, because
it gathered up all that were left behind; not the women and children
(these we may suppose were taken care of by the heads of their families
in their respective tribes), but all the unclean, the mixed multitude,
and all that were weak and feeble, and cast behind in their march. Note,
He that leadeth Joseph like a flock has a tender regard to the hindmost
([Eze 34:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#016)), that cannot keep pace
with the rest, and of all that are given him he will lose none, [Joh
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#011).

[Numbers 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">num 10:29</span></span>

Here is, I. An account of what passed between Moses and Hobab, now upon
this advance which the camp of Israel made towards Canaan. Some think
that Hobab was the same with Jethro, Moses's father-in-law, and that the
story, Ex. 18, should come in here; it seems more probable that Hobab
was the son of Jethro, alias Reuel, or Raguel ([Exo
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#018)), and that when the father, being
aged, went to his own land ([Exo
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#027)), he left his son Hobab with
Moses, as Barzillai left Chimham with David; and the same word signifies
both a father-in-law and a brother-in-law. Now this Hobab staid
contentedly with Israel while they encamped at mount Sinai, near his own
country; but, now that they were removing, he was for going back to his
own country and kindred, and his father's house. Here is, 1. The kind
invitation Moses gives him to go forward with them to Canaan, [Num
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#029). He tempts him with a promise
that they would certainly be kind to him, and puts God's word in for
security: The Lord hath spoken good concerning Israel. As if he had
said, "Come, cast in thy lot among us, and thou shalt fare as we fare;
and we have the promise of God that we shall fare well." Note, Those
that are bound for the heavenly Canaan should invite and encourage all
their friends to go along with them, for we shall have never the less of
the treasures of the covenant, and the joys of heaven, for others coming
in to share with us. And what argument can be more powerful with us to
take God's people for our people than this, that God hath spoken good
concerning them? It is good having fellowship with those that have
fellowship with God ([Jo1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003)), and
going with those with whom God is, [Zac
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#023). 2. Hobab's inclination, and
present resolution, to go back to his own country, [Num
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#030). One would have thought that he
who had seen so much of the special presence of God with Israel, and
such surprising tokens of his favour to them, would not have needed much
invitation to embark with them. But his refusal must be imputed to the
affection he had for his native air and soil, which was not overpowered,
as it ought to have been, by a believing regard to the promise of God
and a value for covenant blessings. He was indeed a son of Abraham's
loins (for the Midianites descended from Abraham by Keturah), but not an
heir of Abraham's faith ([Heb 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#008)),
else he would not have given Moses this answer. Note, The things of this
world, which are seen, draw strongly from the pursuit of the things of
the other world, which are not seen. The magnetic virtue of this earth
prevails with most people above the attractives of heaven itself. 3. The
great importunity Moses used with him to alter his resolution, [Num
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#031), [Num
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#032). He urges, (1.) That he might be
serviceable to them: "We are to encamp in the wilderness" (a country
well known to Hobab), "and thou mayest be to us instead of eyes, not to
show us where we must encamp, nor what way we must march" (which the
cloud was to direct), "but to show us the conveniences and
inconveniences of the place we march through and encamp in, that we may
make the best use we can of the conveniences, and the best fence we can
against the inconveniences." Note, It will very well consist with our
trust in God's providence to make use of the help of our friends in
those things wherein they are capable of being serviceable to us. Even
those that were led by miracle must not slight the ordinary means of
direction. Some think that Moses suggests this to Hobab, not because he
expected much benefit from his information, but to please him with the
thought of being some way useful to so great a body, and so to draw him
on with them, by inspiring him with an ambition to obtain that honour.
Calvin gives quite another sense of this place, very agreeably with the
original, which yet I do not find taken notice of by any since. "Leave
us not, I pray thee, but come along, to share with us in the promised
land, for therefore hast thou known our encampment in the wilderness,
and hast been to us instead of eyes; and we cannot make thee amends for
sharing with us in our hardships, and doing us so many good offices,
unless thou go with us to Canaan. Surely for this reason thou didst set
out with us that thou mightest go on with us." Note, Those that have
begun well should use that as a reason for their persevering, because
otherwise they lose the benefit and recompence of all they have done and
suffered. (2.) That they would be kind to him: What goodness the Lord
shall do to us, the same we will do to thee, [Num
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#032). Note, \[1.\] We can give only
what we receive. We can do no more service and kindness to our friends
than God is pleased to put it into the power of our hand to do. This is
all we dare promise, to do good as God shall enable us. \[2.\] Those
that share with God's Israel in their labours and hardships shall share
with them in their comforts and honours. Those that are wiling to take
their lot with them in the wilderness shall have their lot with them in
Canaan; if we suffer with them we shall reign with them, [Ti2
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#012); [Luk
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#028), [Luk
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#029).

We do not find any reply that Hobab here made to Moses, and therefore we
hope that his silence gave consent, and he did not leave them, but that,
when he perceived he might be useful, he preferred that before the
gratifying of his own inclination; in this case he left us a good
example. And we find ([Jdg 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#016); [Sa1
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#006)) that his family was no loser by
it.

II\. An account of the communion between God and Israel in this removal.
They left the mount of the Lord ([Num
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#033)), that Mount Sinai where they
had seen his glory and heard his voice, and had been taken into covenant
with him (they must not expect that such appearances of God to them as
they had there been blessed with should be constant); they departed from
that celebrated mountain, which we never read of in scripture any more,
unless with reference to these past stories; now farewell, Sinai; Zion
is the mountain of which God has said. This is my rest for ever ([Psa
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)), and of which we must say so.
But when they left the mount of the Lord they took with them the ark of
the covenant of the Lord, by which their stated communion with God was
to be kept up. For,

1\. By it God did direct their paths. The ark of the covenant went
before them, some think in place, at least in this removal; others think
only in influence; though it was carried in the midst of the camp, yet
the cloud that hovered over it directed all their motions. The ark (that
is, the God of the ark) is said to search out a resting place for them;
not that God's infinite wisdom and knowledge need to make searches, but
every place they were directed to was as convenient for them as if the
wisest man they had among them had been employed to go before them, and
mark out their camp to the best advantage. thus Canaan is said to be a
land which God spied out, [Eze 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#006).

2\. By it they did in all their ways acknowledge God, looking upon it as
a token of God's presence; when that moved, or rested, they had their
eye up unto God. Moses, as the mouth of the congregation, lifted up a
prayer, both at the removing and at the resting of the ark; thus their
going out and coming in were sanctified by prayer, and it is an example
to us to begin and end every day's journey, and every day's work, with
prayer.

(1.) Here is his prayer when the ark set forward: Rise up, Lord, and let
thy enemies be scattered, [Num 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#035).
They were now in a desolate country, but they were marching towards an
enemy's country, and their dependence was upon God for success and
victory in their wars, as well as for direction and supply in the
wilderness. David used this prayer long after ([Psa
68:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#001)), for he also fought the Lords'
battles. Note, \[1.\] There are those in the world that are enemies to
God, and haters of him: secret and open enemies; enemies to his truths,
his laws, his ordinances, his people. \[2.\] The scattering and
defeating of God's enemies is a thing to be earnestly desired, and
believingly expected, by all the Lord's people. This prayer is a
prophecy. Those that persist in rebellion against God are hasting
towards their own ruin. \[3.\] For the scattering and defeating of God's
enemies, there needs no more but God's arising. When God arose to
judgment, the work was soon done, [Psa
76:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#008), [Psa
76:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#009). "Rise, Lord, as the sun riseth
to scatter the shadows of the night." Christ's rising from the dead
scattered his enemies, [Psa 68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018).

(2.) His prayer when the ark rested, [Num
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#036). \[1.\] That God would cause his
people to rest. So some read it, "Return, O Lord, the many thousands of
Israel, return them to their rest again after this fatigue." Thus it is
said ([Isa 63:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#014)), The Spirit of the
Lord caused him to rest. Thus he prays that God would give Israel
success and victory abroad, and peace and tranquillity at home. \[2.\]
That God himself would take up his rest among them. So we read it:
Return to the thousands of Israel, the ten thousand thousand, so the
word is. Note, First, The church of God is a great body; there are many
thousands belonging to God's Israel. Secondly, We ought in our prayers
to concern ourselves for this body. Thirdly, The welfare and happiness
of the Israel of God consist in the continual presence of God among
them. Their safety consists not in their numbers, though they are
thousands, many thousands, but in the favour of God, and his gracious
return to them and residence with them. These thousands are cyphers; he
is the figure: and upon this account, Happy art thou, O Israel! who is
like unto thee, O people!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 11](num011)

</div>
