<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num014)  [Next](num016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 15:0</span></span>

This chapter, which is mostly concerning sacrifice and offering, comes
in between the story of two rebellions (one ch. 14, the other ch. 16),
to signify that these legal institutions were typical of the gifts which
Christ was to receive even for the rebellious, [Psa
68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018). In the foregoing chapter, upon
Israel's provocation, God had determined to destroy them, and in token
of his wrath had sentenced them to perish in the wilderness. But, upon
Moses' intercession, he said, "I have pardoned;" and, in token of that
mercy, in this chapter he repeats and explains some of the laws
concerning offerings, to show that he was reconciled to them,
notwithstanding the severe dispensation they wee under, and would not
unchurch them. Here is, I. The law concerning the meat-offerings and
drink-offerings ([Num 15:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#001)) both
for Israelites and for strangers ([Num
15:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#013)), and a law concerning the
heave-offerings of the first of their dough ([Num
15:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#017)). II. The law concerning
sacrifices for sins of ignorance ([Num
15:22-29](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#022)). III. The punishment of
presumptuous sins ([Num 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#030), [Num
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#031)), and an instance given in the
sabbath-breaker ([Num 15:32-36](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#032)). IV. A
law concerning fringes, for memorandums, upon the borders of their
garments ([Num 15:37](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#037), etc.).

[Numbers 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 15:1</span></span>

Here we have,

I. Full instructions given concerning the meat-offerings and
drink-offerings, which were appendages to all the sacrifices of animals.
The beginning of this law is very encouraging: When you come into the
land of your habitation which I give unto you, they you shall do so and
so, [Num 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#002). This was a plain
intimation, not only that God was reconciled to them notwithstanding the
sentence he had passed upon them, but that he would secure the promised
land to their seed notwithstanding their proneness to rebel against him.
They might think some time or other they should be guilty of a
misdemeanour that would be fatal to them, and would exclude them for
ever, as the last had done for one generation; but this intimates an
assurance that they should be kept from provoking God to such a degree
as would amount to a forfeiture; for this statute takes it for granted
that there were some of them that should in due time come into Canaan.
The meat-offerings were of two sorts; some were offered alone, and we
have the law concerning those, [Lev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001), etc. Others were added to the
burnt-offerings and peace-offerings, and constantly attended them, and
about these direction is here given. It was requisite, since the
sacrifices of acknowledgment (specified in [Lev
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#003)) were intended as the food of
God's table, that there should be a constant provision of bread, oil,
and wine, whatever the flesh-meat was. The caterers or purveyors for
Solomon's temple provided fine flour, [Kg1
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#022). And it was fit that God should
keep a good house, that his table should be furnished with bread as well
as flesh, and that his cup should run over. In my Father's house there
is bread enough. Now the intent of this law is to direct what proportion
the meat-offering and drink-offering should bear to several sacrifices
to which they were annexed. If the sacrifice was a lamb or a kid, then
the meat-offering must be a tenth-deal of flour, that is, an omer, which
contained about five pints; this must be mingled with oil, the fourth
part of a hin (a hin contained about five quarts), and the
drink-offering must be the same quantity of wine, about a quart and half
a pint, [Num 15:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#003). If it was a ram,
the meat-offering was doubled, two tenth-deals of flour, about five
quarts, and a third part of a hin of oil (which was to them as butter is
to us) mingled with it; and the same quantity of wine for a
drink-offering, [Num 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#006), [Num
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#007). If the sacrifice was a bullock,
the meat-offering was to be trebled, three omers, with five pints of
oil, and the same quantity of wine for a drink-offering, [Num
15:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#008). And thus for each sacrifice,
whether offered by a particular person or at the common charge. Note,
Our religious services should be governed, as by other rules, so by the
rule of proportion.

II\. Natives and strangers are here set upon a level, in this as in
other matters ([Num 15:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#013)): "One
law shall be for you and for the stranger that is proselyted to the
Jewish religion." Now, 1. This was an invitation to the Gentiles to
become proselytes, and to embrace the faith and worship of the true God.
In civil things there was a difference between strangers and true-born
Israelites, but not in the things of God; as you are, so shall the
stranger be before the Lord, for with him there is no respect of
persons. See [Isa 56:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#003). 2. This was an
obligation upon the Jews to be kind to strangers, and not to oppress
them, because they saw them owned and accepted of God. Communion in
religion is a great engagement to mutual affection, and should slay all
enmities. 3. It was a mortification to the pride of the Jews, who are
apt to be puffed up with their birthright privileges. "We are Abraham's
seed." God let them know that the sons of the stranger were as welcome
to him as the sons of Jacob; no man's birth or parentage shall turn
either to his advantage or his prejudice in his acceptance with God.
This likewise intimated that, as believing strangers should be accounted
Israelites, so unbelieving Israelites should be accounted strangers. 4.
It was a happy presage of the calling of the Gentiles, and of their
admission into the church. If the law made so little difference between
Jew and Gentile, much less would the gospel make, which broke down the
partition-wall, and reconciled both to God in one sacrifice, without the
observance of the legal ceremonies.

III\. A law for the offering of the first of their dough unto the Lord.
This, as the former, goes upon the comfortable supposition of their
having come into the promised land, [Num
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#018). Now that they lived upon manna
they needed not such an express acknowledgment of God's title to their
daily bread, and their dependence upon him for it, the thing spoke for
itself; but in Canaan, where they should eat the fruit of their own
industry, God required that he should be owned as their landlord and
their great benefactor. They must not only offer him the first-fruits
and tenths of the corn in their fields (these had already been
reserved); but when they had it in their houses, in their kneading
trough, when it was almost ready to be set upon their tables, God must
have a further tribute of acknowledgment, part of their dough (the Jews
say a fortieth part, at least, of the whole lump) must be heaved or
offered up to God ([Num 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#020), [Num
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#021)), and the priest must have it
for the use of his family. Thus they must own their dependence upon God
for their daily bread, even when they had it in the house with them;
they must then wait on God for the comfortable use of it; for we read of
that which was brought home, and yet God did blow upon it, and it came
to little, [Hag 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#009). Christ has taught
us to pray not, Give us this year our yearly harvest, but Give us this
day our daily bread. God by this law said to the people, as the prophet
long afterwards said to the widow of Sarepta ([Kg1
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#013)), Only make me thereof a little
cake first. This offering was expressly kept up by the laws of Ezekiel's
visionary temple, and it is a commandment with promise of family-mercies
([Eze 44:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#030)): You shall give unto the
priest the first of your dough, that he may cause the blessing to rest
in thy house; for, when God has had his dues out of our estates, we may
expect the comfort of what falls to our share.

[Numbers 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 15:22</span></span>

We have here the laws concerning sacrifices for sins of ignorance; the
Jews understand it of idolatry, or false worship, through the error of
their teachers. The case here supposed is that they had not observed all
these commandments, [Num 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#022), [Num
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#023). If they had failed in the
offerings of their acknowledgment, and had not brought them according to
the law, then they must bring an offering of atonement, yea, though the
omission had been through forgetfulness or mistake. If they failed in
one part of the ceremony, they must make it up by the observance of
another part, which was in the nature of a remedial law. 1. The case is
put of a national sin, committed through ignorance, and become customary
through a vulgar error ([Num 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#024)) -
the congregation, that is, the body of the people, for so it is
explained ([Num 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#025)): All the
congregation of the children of Israel. The ceremonial observances were
so numerous, and so various, that, it might easily be supposed, some of
them by degrees would be forgotten and disused, as particularly that
immediately before concerning the heave-offering of their dough: now if,
in process of time, upon consulting the law, there should appear to have
been a general neglect of that or any other appointment, then a
sacrifice must be offered for the whole congregation, and the oversight
shall be forgiven ([Num 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#025), [Num
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#026)) and not punished, as it
deserved, with some national judgment. The offering of the sacrifice
according to the manner, or ordinance, plainly refers to a former
statute, of which this is the repetition; and the same bullock which is
there called a sin-offering ([Lev
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#013), [Lev
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#021)) is here called a burnt-offering
([Num 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#024)), because it was wholly
burnt, though not upon the altar, yet without the camp. And here is the
addition of a kid of the goats for a sin-offering. According to this
law, we find that Hezekiah made atonement for the errors of his father's
reign, by seven bullocks, seven rams, seven lambs, and seven he-goats,
which he offered as a sin-offering for the kingdom, and for the
sanctuary, and for Judah ([Ch2 29:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#021)),
and for all Israel, [Num 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#024). And we
find the like done after the return out of captivity, [Ezr
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#035). 2. It is likewise supposed to be
the case of a particular person: If any soul sin through ignorance ([Num
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#027)), neglecting any part of his
duty, he must bring his offering, as was appointed, [Lev
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#027), etc. Thus atonement shall be
made for the soul that sins, when he sins through ignorance, [Num
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#028). Observe, (1.) Sins committed
ignorantly need to have atonement made for them; for, though ignorance
will in a degree excuse, it will not justify those that might have known
their Lord's will and did it not. David prayed to be cleansed from his
secret faults, that is, those sins which he himself was not aware of,
the errors he did not understand, [Psa
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#012). (2.) Sins committed ignorantly
shall be forgiven, through Christ the great sacrifice, who, when he
offered up himself once for all upon the cross, seemed to explain the
intention of his offering in that prayer, Father, forgive them, for they
know not what they do. And Paul seems to allude to this law concerning
sins of ignorance ([Ti1 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013)), I
obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly and in unbelief. And it
looked favourable upon the Gentiles that this law of atoning for sins of
ignorance is expressly made to extend to those who were strangers to the
commonwealth of Israel ([Num 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#029)),
but supposed to be proselytes of righteousness. Thus the blessing of
Abraham comes upon the Gentiles.

[Numbers 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">num 15:30</span></span>

Here is, I. The general doom passed upon presumptuous sinners. 1. Those
are to be reckoned presumptuous sinners that sin with a high hand, as
the original phrase is ([Num 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#030)),
that is, that avowedly confront God's authority, and set up their own
lust in competition with it, that sin for sinning-sake, in contradiction
to the precept of the law, and in defiance of the penalty, that fight
against God, and dare him to do his worst; see [Job
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#025). It is not only to sin against
knowledge, but to sin designedly against God's will and glory. 2. Sins
thus committed are exceedingly sinful. He that thus breaks the
commandment, (1.) Reproaches the Lord ([Num
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#030)); he says the worst he can of
him, and most unjustly. The language of presumptuous sin is, "Eternal
truth is not fit to be believed, the Lord of all not fit to be obeyed,
and almighty power not fit to be either feared or trusted." It imputes
folly to Infinite Wisdom, and iniquity to the righteous Judge of heaven
and earth; such is the malignity of wilful sin. (2.) He despises the
word of the Lord, [Num 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#031). There
are those who, in many instances, come short of fulfilling the word, and
yet have a great value for it, and count the law honourable; but
presumptuous sinners despise it, thinking themselves too great, too
good, and too wise, to be ruled by it. What is the Almighty that we
should serve him? Whatever the sin itself is, it is contumacy that
incurs the anathema. It is rebellion added to the sin that is as
witch-craft, and stubbornness as idolatry. 3. The sentence passed on
such is dreadful. There remains no sacrifice for those sins; the law
provided none: That soul shall be cut off from among his people ([Num
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#030)), utterly cut off ([Num
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#031)); and that God may be for ever
justified, and the sinner for ever confounded, his iniquity shall be
upon him, and there needs no more to sink him to the lowest hell. Thus
the Jewish doctors understand it, that the iniquity shall cleave to the
soul, after it is cut off, and that man shall give an account of his sin
at the great day of judgment. Perhaps the kind of offence might be such
as did not expose the offender to the censure of the civil magistrate,
but, if it was done presumptuously, God himself would take the
punishment of it into his own hands, and into them it is a fearful thing
to fall. In the New Testament we find the like sentence of exclusion
from all benefit by the great sacrifice passed upon the blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost, and a total apostasy from Christianity.

II\. A particular instance of presumption in the sin of
sabbath-breaking. 1. The offence was the gathering of sticks on the
sabbath day ([Num 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#032)), which, it is
probable, were designed to make a fire of, whereas they were commanded
to bake and seeth what they had occasion for the day before, [Exo
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#023). This seemed but a small
offence, but it was a violation of the law of the sabbath, and so was a
tacit contempt of the Creator, to whose honour the sabbath was
dedicated, and an incursion upon the whole law, which the sabbath was
intended as a hedge about. And it appears by the context to have been
done presumptuously, and in affront both of the law and to the
Law-maker. 2. The offender was secured, [Num
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#033), [Num
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#034). Those that found him gathering
sticks, in their zeal for the honour of the sabbath, brought him to
Moses and Aaron, and all the congregation, which intimates that being
the sabbath day the congregation was at that time gathered to Moses and
Aaron, to receive instruction from them, and to join with them in
religious worship. It seems, even common Israelites, though there was
much amiss among them, yet would not contentedly see the sabbath
profaned, which was a good sign that they had not quite forsaken God,
nor were utterly forsaken of him. 3. God was consulted, because it was
not declared what should be done to him. The law had already made the
profanation of the sabbath a capital crime ([Exo
31:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#014), [Exo
35:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#002)); but they were in doubt, either
concerning the offence (whether this that he had done should be deemed a
profanation or no) or concerning the punishment, which death he should
die. God was the Judge, and before him they brought this cause. 4.
Sentence was passed; the prisoner was adjudged a sabbath-breaker,
according to the intent of that law, and as such he must be put to
death; and to show how great the crime was, and how displeasing to God,
and that others might hear and fear and not do in like manner
presumptuously, that death is appointed him which was looked upon as
most terrible: He must be stoned with stones, [Num
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#035). Note, God is jealous for the
honour of his sabbaths, and will not hold those guiltless, whatever men
do, that profane them. 5. Execution was done pursuant to the sentence,
[Num 15:36](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#036). He was stoned to death by
the congregation. As many as could were employed in the execution, that
those, at least, might be afraid of breaking the sabbath, who had thrown
a stone at this sabbath-breaker. This intimates that the open
profanation of the sabbath is a sin which ought to be punished and
restrained by the civil magistrate, who, as far as overt acts go, is
keeper of both tables. See [Neh 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#017).
One would think there could be no great harm in gathering a few sticks,
on what day soever it was, but God intended the exemplary punishment of
him that did so for a standing warning to us all, to make conscience of
keeping holy the sabbath.

[Numbers 15:37](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">num 15:37</span></span>

Provision had been just now made by the law for the pardon of sins of
ignorance and infirmity; now here is an expedient provided for the
preventing of such sins. They are ordered to make fringes upon the
borders of their garments, which were to be memorandums to them of their
duty, that they might not sin through forgetfulness. 1. The sign
appointed is a fringe of silk, or thread, or worsted, or the garment
itself ravelled at the bottom, and a blue riband bound on the top of it
to keep it tight, [Num 15:38](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#038). The Jews
being a peculiar people, they were thus distinguished from their
neighbours in their dress, as well as in their diet, and taught by such
little instances of singularity not to be conformed to the way of the
heathen in greater things. Thus likewise they proclaimed themselves Jews
wherever they were, as those that were not ashamed of God and his law.
Our Saviour, being made under the law, wore these fringes; hence we read
of the hem or border, of his garment, [Mat
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#020). These borders the Pharisees
enlarged, that they might be thought more holy and devout than other
people. The phylacteries were different things; these were their own
invention, the fringes were a divine institution. The Jews at this day
wear them, saying, when they put them on, Blessed be he who has
sanctified us unto himself, and commanded us to wear fringes. 2. The
intention of it was to remind them that they were a peculiar people.
They were not appointed for the trimming and adorning of their clothes,
but to stir up their pure minds by way of remembrance ([Pe2
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001)), that they might look upon the
fringe and remember the commandments. Many look upon their ornaments to
feed their pride, but they must look upon these ornaments to awaken
their consciences to a sense of their duty, that their religion might
constantly beset them, and that they might carry it about with them, as
they did their clothes, wherever they went. If they were tempted to sin,
the fringe would be a monitor to them not to break God's commandments:
If a duty was forgotten to be done in its season, the fringe would
remind them of it. This institution, though it is not an imposition upon
us, is an instruction to us, always to remember the commandments of the
Lord our God, that we may do them, to treasure them up in our memories,
and to apply them to particular cases as there is occasion to use them.
It was intended particularly to be a preservative from idolatry: that
you seek not after your own heart, and your own eyes, in your religious
worship. Yet it may extend also to the whole conversation, for nothing
is more contrary to God's honour, and our own true interest, than to
walk in the way of our heart and in the sight of our eyes; for the
imagination of the heart is evil, and so is the lust of the eyes.

After the repetition of some ceremonial appointments, the chapter closes
with that great and fundamental law of religion, Be holy unto your God,
purged from sin, and sincerely devoted to his service; and that great
reason for all the commandments is again and again inculcated, I am the
Lord your God. Did we more firmly believe, and more frequently and
seriously consider, that God is the Lord, and our God and Redeemer, we
should see ourselves bound in duty, interest, and gratitude, to keep all
his commandments.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 16](num016)

</div>
