<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num024)  [Next](num026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 25:0</span></span>

Israel, having escaped the curse of Balaam, here sustains a great deal
of damage and reproach by the counsel of Balaam, who, it seems, before
he left Balak, put him into a more effectual way than that which Balak
thought of to separate between the Israelites and their God. "The Lord
will not be prevailed with by Balaam's charms to ruin them; try if they
will not be prevailed with by the charms of the daughters of Moab to
ruin themselves." None are more fatally bewitched than those that are
bewitched by their own lusts. Here is, I. The sin of Israel; they were
enticed by the daughters of Moab both to whoredom and to idolatry ([Num
25:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001)). II. The punishment of this
sin by the hand of the magistrate ([Num
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#004), [Num
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#005)) and by the immediate hand of God
([Num 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#009)). III. The pious zeal of
Phinehas in slaying Zimri and Cozbi, two impudent sinners ([Num
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#006), [Num
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#008), [Num
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#014), [Num
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#015)). IV. God's commendation of the
zeal of Phinehas ([Num 25:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#010)). V.
Enmity put between the Israelites and the Midianites, their tempters, as
at first between the woman and the serpent ([Num
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#016), etc.).

[Numbers 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 25:1</span></span>

Here is, I. The sin of Israel, to which they were enticed by the
daughters of Moab and Midian; they were guilty both of corporal and
spiritual whoredoms, for Israel joined himself unto Baal-peor, [Num
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#003). Not all, nor the most, but very
many, were taken in this snare. Now concerning this observe, 1. That
Balak, by the advice of Balaam, cast this stumbling-block before the
children of Israel, [Rev 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#014). Note,
Those are our worst enemies that draw us to sin, for that is the
greatest mischief any man can do us. If Balak had drawn out his armed
men against them to fight them, Israel had bravely resisted, and no
doubt had been more than conquerors; but now that he sends his beautiful
women among them, and invites them to his idolatrous feasts, the
Israelites basely yield, and are shamefully overcome: those are smitten
with this harlots that could not be smitten with his sword. Note, We are
more endangered by the charms of a smiling world than by the terrors of
a frowning world. 2. That the daughters of Moab were their tempters and
conquerors. Ever since Eve was first in the transgression the fairer
sex, though the weaker, has been a snare to many; yea strong men have
been wounded and slain by the lips of the strange woman ([Pro
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#026)), witness Solomon, whose wives
were shares and nets to him [Ecc 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#026).
3. That whoredom and idolatry went together. They first defiled and
debauched their consciences, by committing lewdness with the women, and
then were easily drawn, in complaisance to them, and in contempt of the
God of Israel, to bow down to their idols. And they were more likely to
do so if, as it is commonly supposed, and seems probable by the joining
of them together, the uncleanness committed was a part of the worship
and service performed to Baal-peor. Those that have broken the fences of
modesty will never be held by the bonds of piety, and those that have
dishonoured themselves by fleshly lusts will not scruple to dishonour
God by idolatrous worships, and for this they are justly given up yet
further to vile affections. 4. That by eating of the idolatrous
sacrifices they joined themselves to Baal-peor to whom they were
offered, which the apostle urges as a reason why Christians should not
eat things offered to idols, because thereby they had fellowship with
the devils to whom they were offered, [Co1
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020). It is called eating the
sacrifices of the dead ([Psa 106:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#028)),
not only because the idol itself was a dead thing, but because the
person represented by it was some great hero, who since his death was
deified, as saints in the Roman church are canonized. 5. It was great
aggravation of the sin that Israel abode in Shittim, where they had the
land of Canaan in view, and were just ready to enter and take possession
of it. It was the highest degree of treachery and ingratitude to be
false to their God, whom they had found so faithful to them, and to eat
of idol-sacrifices when they were ready to be feasted so richly on God's
favours.

II\. God's just displeasure against them for this sin. Israel's
whoredoms did that which all Balaam's enchantments could not do, they
set God against them; now he was turned to be their enemy, and fought
against them. So many of the people, nay, so many of the princes, were
guilty, that the sin became national, and for it God was wroth with the
whole congregation. 1. A plague immediately broke out, for we read of
the staying of it ([Num 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#008)), and of
the number that died of it ([Num
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#009)), but no mention of the beginning
of it, which therefore must be implied in those words ([Num
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#003)), The anger of the Lord was
kindled against Israel. It is said expressly ([Psa
106:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#029)), The plague broke in. Note,
Epidemical diseases are the fruits of God's anger, and the just
punishments of epidemical sins; one infection follows the other. The
plague, no doubt, fastened on those that were most guilty, who were soon
made to pay dearly for their forbidden pleasures; and though now God
does not always plague such sinners, as he did here, yet that word of
God will be fulfilled, If any man defile the temple of God, him shall
God destroy, [Co1 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017). 2. The
ringleaders are ordered to be put to death by the hand of public
justice, which will be the only way to stay the plague ([Num
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#004)): Take the heads of the people
(that is, of that part of the people that went out of the camp of Israel
into the country of Moab, to join in their idolatries) - take them and
hang them up before the sun, as sacrifices to God's justice, and for a
terror to the rest of the people. The judges must first order them to be
slain with the sword ([Num 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#005)), and
their dead bodies must be hanged up, that the stupid Israelites, seeing
their leaders and princes so severely punished for their whoredom and
idolatry, without any regard to their quality, might be possessed with a
sense of the evil of the sin and the terror of God's wrath against them.
Ringleaders in sin ought to be made examples of justice.

[Numbers 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 25:6</span></span>

Here is a remarkable contest between wickedness and righteousness, which
shall be most bold and resolute; and righteousness carries the day, as
no doubt it will at last.

I. Never was vice more daring than it was in Zimri, a prince of a chief
house in the tribe of Simeon. Such a degree of impudence in wickedness
had he arrived at that he publicly appeared leading a Midianitish harlot
(and a harlot of quality too like himself, a daughter of a chief house
in Midian) in the sight of Moses, and all the good people of Israel. He
did not think it enough to go out with his harlot to worship the gods of
Moab, but, when he had done that, he brought her with him to dishonour
the God of Israel. He not only owned her publicly as his friend, and
higher in his favour then any of the daughters of Israel, but openly
went with her into the tent, [Num
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#008). The word signifies such a booth
or place of retirement as was designed and fitted up for lewdness. Thus
he declared his sin as Sodom, as was so far from blushing for it that he
rather prided himself in it, and gloried in his shame. All the
circumstances concurred to make it exceedingly sinful, exceedingly
shameful. 1. It was an affront to the justice of the nation, and bade
defiance to that. The judges were ordered to put the criminals to death,
but he thought himself too great for them to meddle with, and, in
effect, bade them touch him if they durst. He had certainly cast off all
fear of God who stood in no awe of the powers which he had ordained to
be a terror to evil-doers. 2. It was an affront to the religion of the
nation, and put a contempt upon that. Moses, and the main body of the
congregation, who kept their integrity, were weeping at the door of the
tabernacle, lamenting the sin committed and deprecating the plague
begun; they were sanctifying a fast in a solemn assembly, weeping
between the porch and the altar, to turn away the wrath of God from the
congregation. Then comes Zimri among them, with his harlot in his hand,
to banter them, and, in effect, to tell them that he was resolved to
fill the measure of sin as fast as they emptied it.

II\. Never was virtue more daring than it was in Phinehas. Being aware
of the insolence of Zimri, which it is probable, all the congregation
took notice of, in a holy indignation at the offenders he rises up from
his prayers, takes his sword or half-pike, follows those impudent
sinners into their tent, and stabs them both, [Num
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#007), [Num
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#008). It is not at all difficult to
justify Phinehas in what he did; for, being now heir-apparent to the
high-priesthood, no doubt he was one of those judges of Israel whom
Moses had ordered, by the divine appointment, to slay all those whom
they knew to have joined themselves to Baal-peor, so that this gives no
countenance at all to private persons, under pretence of zeal against
sin, to put offenders to death, who ought to be prosecuted by due course
of law. The civil magistrate is the avenger, to execute wrath upon him
that doeth evil, and no private person may take his work out of his
hand. Two ways God testified his acceptance of the pious zeal of
Phinehas: - 1. He immediately put a stop to the plague, [Num
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#008). Their weeping and praying
prevailed not till this piece of necessary justice was done. If
magistrates do not take care to punish sin, God will; but their justice
will be the best prevention of his judgment, as in the case of Achan,
[Jos 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#013). 2. He put an honour upon
Phinehas. Though he did no more than it was his duty to do as a judge,
yet because he did it with extraordinary zeal against sin, and for the
honour of God and Israel, and did it when the other judges, out of
respect to Zimri's character as a prince, were afraid, and declined
doing it, therefore God showed himself particularly well pleased with
him, and it was counted to him for righteousness, [Psa
106:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#031). There is nothing lost by
venturing for God. If Zimri's relations bore him a grudge for it, and
his friends might censure him as indiscreet in this violent and hasty
execution, what needed he care, while God accepted him? In a good thing
we should be zealously affected. (1.) Phinehas, upon this occasion,
though a young man, is pronounced his country's patriot and best friend,
[Num 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#011). He has turned away my
wrath from the children of Israel. So much does God delight in showing
mercy that he is well pleased with those that are instrumental in
turning away his wrath. This is the best service we can do to our
people; and we may contribute something towards it by our prayers, and
by our endeavours in our places to bring the wickedness of the wicked to
an end. (2.) The priesthood is entailed by covenant upon his family. It
was designed him before, but now it was confirmed to him, and, which
added much to the comfort and honour of it, it was made the recompence
of his pious zeal, [Num 25:12](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#012), [Num
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#013). It is here called an
everlasting priesthood, because it should continue to the period of the
Old Testament dispensation, and should then have its perfection and
perpetuity in the unchangeable priesthood of Christ, who is consecrated
for evermore. By the covenant of peace given him, some understand in
general a promise of long life and prosperity, and all good; it seems
rather to be meant particularly of the covenant of priesthood, for that
is called the covenant of life and peace ([Mal
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#005)), and was made for the
preservation of peace between God and his people. Observe how the reward
answered the service. By executing justice he had made an atonement for
the children of Israel ([Num 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#013)),
and therefore he and his shall henceforward be employed in making
atonement by sacrifice. He was zealous for his God, and therefore he
shall have the covenant of an everlasting priesthood. Note, It is
requisite that ministers should be not only for God, but zealous for
God. It is required of them that they do more than others for the
support and advancement of the interests of God's kingdom among men.

[Numbers 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 25:16</span></span>

God had punished the Israelites for their sin with a plague; as a Father
he corrected his own children with a rod. But we read not that any of
the Midianites died of the plague; God took another course with them,
and punished them with the sword of an enemy, not with the rod of a
father. 1. Moses, though the meekest man, and far from a spirit of
revenge, is ordered to vex the Midianites and smite them, [Num
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#017). Note, We must set ourselves
against that, whatever it is, which is an occasion of sin to us, though
it be a right eye or a right hand that thus offends us, [Mat
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029), [Mat
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#030). This is that holy indignation
and revenge which godly sorrow worketh, [Co2
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#011). 2. The reason given for the
meditating of this revenge is because they vex you with their wiles,
[Num 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#018). Note, Whatever draws us to
sin should be a vexation to us, as a thorn in the flesh. The mischief
which the Midianites did to Israel by enticing them to whoredom must be
remembered and punished with as much severity as that which the
Amalekites did in fighting with them when they came out of Egypt, [Exo
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#014). God will certainly reckon with
those that do the devil's work in tempting men to sin. See further
orders given in this matter, [Num
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#002).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 26](num026)

</div>
