<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num026)  [Next](num028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 27:0</span></span>

Here is, I. The case of Zelophehad's daughters determined ([Num
27:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#001)). II. Notice given to Moses of
his death approaching ([Num 27:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#012)).
III. Provision made of a successor in the government, 1. By the prayer
of Moses ([Num 27:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#015)). 2. By the
appointment of God ([Num 27:18](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#018), etc.).

[Numbers 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 27:1</span></span>

Mention is made of the case of these daughters of Zelophehad in the
chapter before, v. 33. It should seem, by the particular notice taken of
it, that it was a singular case, and that the like did not at this time
occur in all Israel, that the head of a family had no sons, but
daughters only. Their case is again debated ([Num
36:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#001)) upon another article of it;
and, according to the judgments given in their case, we find them put in
possession, [Jos 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#003), [Jos
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#004). One would suppose that their
personal character was such as added weight to their case, and caused it
to be so often taken notice of.

Here is, I. Their case stated by themselves, and their petition upon it
presented to the highest court of judicature, which consisted of Moses
as king, the princes as lords, and the congregation, or elders of the
people who were chose their representatives, as the commons, [Num
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#002). This august assembly sat near
the door of the tabernacle, that in difficult cases they might consult
the oracle. To them these young ladies made their application; for it is
the duty of magistrates to defend the fatherless, [Psa
82:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#003). We find not that the had any
advocate to speak for them, but they managed their own cause ingeniously
enough, which they could do the better because it was plain and honest,
and spoke for itself. Now observe,

1\. What it is they petition for: That they might have a possession in
the land of Canaan, among the brethren of their father, [Num
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#004). What God had said to Moses ([Num
26:53](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#053)) he had faithfully made known to
the people, that the land of Canaan was to be divided among those that
were now numbered; these daughters knew that they were not numbered, and
therefore by this rule must expect no inheritance, and the family of
their father must be looked upon as extinct, and written childless,
though he had all these daughters: this they thought hard, and therefore
prayed to be admitted heirs to their father, and to have an inheritance
in his right. If they had had a brother, they would not have applied to
Moses (as one did to Christ, [Luk
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#013)) for an order to inherit with
him. But, having no brother, they beg for a possession. Herein they
discovered, (1.) A strong faith in the power and promise of God
concerning the giving of the land of Canaan to Israel. Though it was yet
unconquered, untouched, and in the full possession of the natives, yet
they petition for their share in it as if it were all their own already.
See [Psa 60:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006), [Psa
60:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#007), God has spoken in his holiness,
and the Gilead is mine, Manasseh is mane. (2.) An earnest desire of a
place and name in the land of promise, which was a type of heaven; and
if they had, as some think, an eye to that, and by this claim laid hold
on eternal life, they were five wise virgins indeed; and their example
should quicken us with all possible diligence to make sure our title to
the heavenly inheritance, in the disposal of which, by the covenant of
grace, no difference is made between male and female, [Gal
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028). (3.) A true respect and honour
for their father, whose name was dear and precious to them now that he
was gone, and they were therefore solicitous that it should not be done
away from among his family. There is a debt which children owe to the
memory of their parents, required by the fifth commandment: Honour thy
father and mother.

2\. What their plea is: That their father did not die under any
attainder which might be thought to have corrupted his blood and
forfeited his estate, but he died in his own sin ([Num
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#003)), not engaged in any mutiny or
rebellion against Moses, particularly not in that of Korah and his
company, nor in any way concerned in the sins of others, but chargeable
only with the common iniquities of mankind, for which to his own Master
he was to stand or fall, but laid not himself open to any judicial
process before Moses and the princes. He was never convicted of any
thing that might be a bar to his children's claim. It is a comfort to
parents, when they come to die, if, though they smart themselves for
their own sin, yet they are not conscious to themselves of any of those
iniquities which God visits upon the children.

II\. Their case determined by the divine oracle. Moses did not presume
to give judgment himself, because, though their pretensions seemed just
and reasonable, yet his express orders were to divide the land among
those that were numbered, who were the males only; he therefore brings
their cause before the Lord, and waits for his decision ([Num
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#005)), and God himself gives the
judgment upon it. He takes cognizance of the affairs, not only of
nations, but of private families, and orders them in judgment, according
to the counsel of his own will. 1. The petition is granted ([Num
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#007)): They speak right, give them a
possession. Those that seek an inheritance in the land of promise shall
have what they seek, and other things shall be added to them. These are
claims which God will countenance and crown. 2. The point is settled for
all future occasions. These daughters of Zelophehad consulted, not only
their own comfort and the credit of their family, but the honour and
happiness of their sex likewise; for on this particular occasion a
general law was made that, in case a man had no son, his estate should
go to his daughters ([Num 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#008)); not
to the eldest, as the eldest son, but to them all in copartnership,
share and share alike. Those that in such a case deprive their daughters
of their right, purely to keep up the name of their family, unless a
valuable consideration be allowed them, may make the entail of their
lands surer than the entail of a blessing with them. Further directions
are given for the disposal of inheritances, [Num
27:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#009). "If a man have no issue at
all, his estate shall go to his brethren; if no brethren, then to his
father's brethren; and, if there be no such, then to his next kinsman."
With this the rules of our law exactly agree: and though the Jewish
doctors here will have it understood that if a man have no children his
estate shall go to his father, if living, before his brethren, yet there
is nothing of that in the law, and our common law has an express rule
against it, That an estate cannot ascend lineally; so that if a person
purchase lands in fee-simple, and die without issue in the life-time of
his father, his father cannot be his heir. See how God makes heirs, and
in his disposal we must acquiesce.

[Numbers 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 27:12</span></span>

Here, 1. God tells Moses of his fault, his speaking unadvisedly with his
lips at the waters of strife, where he did not express, so carefully as
he ought to have done, a regard to the honour both of God and Israel,
[Num 27:14](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#014). Though Moses was a servant
of the Lord, a faithful servant, yet once he rebelled against God's
commandment, and failed in his duty; and though a very honourable
servant, and highly favoured, yet he shall hear of his miscarriage, and
all the world shall hear of it too, again and again; for God will show
his displeasure against sin, even in those that are nearest and dearest
to him. Those that are in reputation for wisdom and honour have need to
be constantly careful of their words and ways, lest at any time they say
or do that which may be a diminution to their comfort, or to their
credit, or both, a great while after. 2. He tells Moses of his death.
His death was the punishment of his sin, and yet notice is given him of
it in such a manner as might best serve to sweeten and mollify the
sentence, and reconcile him to it. (1.) Moses must die, but he shall
first have the satisfaction of seeing the land of promise, [Num
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#012). God did not intend with this
sight of Canaan to tantalize him, or upbraid him with his folly in doing
that which cut him short of it, nor had it any impression of that kind
upon him, but God appointed it and Moses accepted it as a favour, his
sight (we have reason to think) being wonderfully strengthened and
enlarged to take such a full and distinct view of it as did abundantly
gratify his innocent curiosity. This sight of Canaan signified his
believing prospect of the better country, that is, the heavenly, which
is very comfortable to dying saints. (2.) Moses must die, but death does
not cut him off; it only gathers him to his people, brings him to rest
with the holy patriarchs that had gone before him. Abraham, and Isaac,
and Jacob, were his people, the people of his choice and love, and to
them death gathered him. (3.) Moses must die, but only as Aaron died
before him, [Num 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#013). And Moses had
seen how easily and cheerfully Aaron had put off the priesthood first
and then the body; let not Moses therefore be afraid of dying; it was
but to be gathered to his people, as Aaron was gathered. Thus the death
of our near and dear relations should be improved by us, \[1.\] As an
engagement to us to think often of dying. We are not better than our
fathers or brethren; if they are gone, we are going; if they are
gathered already, we must be gathered very shortly. \[2.\] As an
encouragement to us to think of death without terror, and even to please
ourselves with the thoughts of it. It is but to die as such and such
died, if we live as they lived; and their end was peace, they finished
their course with joy; why then should we fear any evil in that
melancholy valley?

[Numbers 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 27:15</span></span>

Here, I. Moses prays for a successor. When God had told him that he must
die, though it appears elsewhere that he solicited for a reprieve for
himself ([Deu 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#024), [Deu
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#025)), yet, when this could not be
obtained, he begged earnestly that the work of God might be carried on,
though he might not have the honour of finishing it. Envious spirits do
not love their successors, but Moses was not one of these. We should
concern ourselves, both in our prayers and in our endeavours, for the
rising generation, that religion may flourish, and the interests of
God's kingdom among men may be maintained and advanced, when we are in
our graves. In this prayer Moses expresses, 1. A tender concern for the
people of Israel: That the congregation of the Lord be not as sheep
which have no shepherd. Our Saviour uses this comparison in his
compassions for the people when they wanted good ministers, [Mat
9:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#036). Magistrates and ministers are
the shepherds of a people; if these be wanting, or be not as they should
be, people are apt to wander and be scattered abroad, are exposed to
enemies, and in danger of wanting food and of hurting one another, as
sheep having no shepherd. 2. A believing dependence upon God, as the God
of the spirits of all flesh. He is both the former and the searcher of
spirits, and therefore can either find men fit or make them fit to serve
his purposes, for the good of his church. Moses prays to God, not to
send an angel, but to set a man over the congregation, that is, to
nominate and appoint one whom he would qualify and own as ruler of his
people Israel. Before God gave this blessing to Israel, he stirred up
Moses to pray for it: thus Christ, before he sent forth his apostles,
called to those about him to pray the Lord of the harvest that he would
send forth labourers into his harvest, [Mat
9:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#038).

II\. God, in answer to his prayer, appoints him a successor, even
Joshua, who had long since signalized himself by his courage in fighting
Amalek, his humility in ministering to Moses, and his faith and
sincerity in witnessing against the report of the evil spies; this is
the man whom God pitches upon to succeed Moses: A man in whom is the
Spirit, the Spirit of grace (he is a good man, fearing God and hating
covetousness, and acting from principle), the spirit of government (he
is fit to do the work and discharge the trusts of his place), a spirit
of conduct and courage; and he had also the spirit of prophecy, for the
Lord often spoke unto him, [Jos 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#001);
[Jos 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#002); [Jos
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#010). Now here,

1\. God directs Moses how to secure the succession to Joshua. (1.) He
must ordain him: Lay thy hand upon him, [Num
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#018). This was done in token of
Moses' transferring the government to him, as the laying of hands on the
sacrifice put the offering in the place and stead of the offerer; also
in token of God's conferring the blessing of the Spirit upon him, which
Moses obtained by prayer. It is said ([Deu
34:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#009)), Joshua was full of the spirit
of wisdom, for Moses had laid his hands on him. This rite of imposing
hands we find used in the New Testament in the setting apart of gospel
ministers, denoting a solemn designation of them to the office and an
earnest desire that God would qualify them for it and own them in it. It
is the offering of them to Christ and his church for living sacrifices.
(2.) He must present him to Eleazar and the people, set him before them,
that they might know him to be designed of God for this great trust and
consent to that designation. (3.) He must give him a charge, v. 19. He
must be charged with the people of Israel, who were delivered into his
hand as sheep into the hand of a shepherd, and for whom he must be
accountable. He must be strictly charged to do his duty to them; though
they were under his command, he was under God's command, and from him
must receive charge. The highest must know that there is a higher than
they. This charge must be given him in their sight, that it might be the
more affecting to Joshua, and that the people, seeing the work and care
of their prince, might be the more engaged to assist and encourage him.
(4.) He must put some of his honour upon him, [Num
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#020). Joshua at the most had but some
of the honour of Moses, and in many instances came short of him; but
this seems to be meant of his taking him now, while he lived, into
partnership with him in the government and admitting him to act with
authority as his assistant. It is an honour to be employed for God and
his church; some of this honour must be put upon Joshua, that the
people, being used to obey him while Moses lived, might the more
cheerfully do it afterwards. (5.) He must appoint Eleazar the high
priest, with this breast-plate of judgment, to be his privy-council
([Num 27:21](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#021)): He shall stand before
Eleazar, by him to consult the oracle, ready to receive and observe all
the instructions that should be given him by it. This was a direction to
Joshua. Though he was full of the Spirit, and had all this honour put
upon him, yet he must do nothing without asking counsel of God, not
leaning to his own understanding. It was also a great encouragement to
him. To govern Israel, and to conquer Canaan, were two hard tasks, but
God assures him that in both he should be under a divine conduct; and in
every difficult case God would advise him to that which should be for
the best. Moses had recourse to the oracle of God himself, but Joshua
and the succeeding judges must use the ministry of the high priest, and
consult the judgment of urim, which, the Jews say, might not be enquired
of but by the king or the head of the sanhedrim, or by the agent or
representative of the people, for them, and in their name. Thus the
government of Israel was now purely divine, for both the designation and
direction of their princes were entirely so. At the word of the priest,
according to the judgment of urim, Joshua and all Israel must go out and
come in; and no doubt God, who thus guided, would preserve both their
going out and their coming in. Those are safe, and may be easy, that
follow God, and in all their ways acknowledge him.

2\. Moses does according to these directions, [Num
27:22](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#022), [Num
27:23](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#023). He cheerfully ordained Joshua,
(1.) Though it was a present lessening to himself, and amounted almost
to a resignation of the government. He was very willing that the people
should look off from him, and gaze on the rising sun. (2.) Though it
might appear a perpetual slur upon his family. It would not have been so
much his praise if he had thus resigned his honour to a son of his own;
but with his own hands first to ordain Eleazar high priest, and then
Joshua, one of another tribe, chief ruler, while his own children had no
preferment at all, but were left in the rank of common Levites, this was
such an instance of self-denial and submission to the will of God as was
more his glory than the highest advancement of his family could have
been; for it confirms his character as the meekest man upon earth, and
faithful to him that appointed him in all his house. This (says the
excellent bishop Patrick) shows him to have had a principle which raised
him above all other lawgivers, who always took care to establish their
families in some share of that greatness which they themselves
possessed; but hereby it appeared that Moses acted not from himself,
because he acted not for himself.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 28](num028)

</div>
