<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num035)  [Next](deu000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 36](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 36:0</span></span>

We have in this chapter the determination of another question that arose
upon the case of the daughters of Zelophehad. God had appointed that
they should inherit, [Num 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#007). Now
here, I. An inconvenience is suggested, in case they should marry into
any other tribe ([Num 36:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#001)). II. It
is prevented by a divine appointment that they should marry in their own
tribe and family ([Num 36:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#005)), and
this is settled for a rule in like cases ([Num
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#008), [Num
36:9](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#009)); and they did marry accordingly
to some of their own relations ([Num
36:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#010)), and with this the book
concludes ([Num 36:13](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#013)).

[Numbers 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 36:1</span></span>

We have here the humble address which the heads of the tribe of Manasseh
made to Moses and the princes, on occasion of the order lately made
concerning the daughters of Zelophehad. The family they belonged to was
part of that half of the tribe of Manasseh which we yet to have their
lot within Jordan, not that half that was already settled; and yet they
speak of the land of their possession, and the inheritance of their
fathers, with as great assurance as if they had it already in their
hands, knowing whom they had trusted. In their appeal observe, 1. They
fairly recite the former order made in this case, and do not move to
have that set aside, but are very willing to acquiesce in it ([Num
36:2](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#002)): The Lord commanded to give the
inheritance of Zelophehad to his daughters; and they are very well
pleased that it should be so, none of them knowing but that hereafter it
might be the case of their own families, and then their daughters would
have the benefit of this law. 2. They represent the inconvenience which
might, possibly, follow hereupon, if the daughters of Zelophehad should
see cause to marry into any other tribes, [Num
36:3](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#003). And it is probable that this was
not a bare surmise, or supposition, but that they knew, at this time,
great court was made to them by some young gentlemen of other tribes,
because they were heiresses, that they might get footing in this tribe,
and so enlarge their own inheritance. This truly is often aimed at more
than it should be in making marriages, not the meetness of the person,
but the convenience of the estate, to lay house to house, and field to
field. Wisdom indeed is good with an inheritance; but what is an
inheritance good for in that relation without wisdom? But here, we may
presume, the personal merit of these daughters recommended them as well
as their fortunes; however, the heads of their tribe foresaw the
mischief that would follow, and brought the case to Moses, that he might
consult the oracle of God concerning it. The difficulty they start God
could have obviated and provided against in the former order given in
this case; but to teach us that we must, in our affairs, not only attend
God's providence, but make use of our own prudence, God did not direct
in it till the themselves that were concerned wisely foresaw the
inconvenience, and piously applied to Moses for a rule in it. For though
they were chief fathers in their families, and might have assumed a
power to overrule these daughters of Zelophehad in disposing of
themselves, especially their father being dead and the common interest
of their tribe being concerned in it, yet they chose rather to refer the
matter to Moses, and it issued well. We should not covet to be judges in
our own case, for it is difficult to be so without being partial. It is
easier in many cases to take good advice than to give it, and it is a
satisfaction to be under direction. Two things they aimed at in their
representation: - (1.) To preserve the divine appointment of
inheritances. They urged the command ([Num
36:2](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#002)), that the land should be given
by lot to the respective tribes, and urged that it would break in upon
the divine appointment if such a considerable part of the lot of
Manasseh should, by their marriage, be transferred to any other tribe;
for the issue would be denominated from the father's tribe, not the
mother's. This indeed would not lessen the lot of the particular persons
of that tribe (they would have their own still), but it would lessen the
lot of the tribe in general, and render it less strong and considerable;
they therefore thought themselves concerned for the reputation of their
tribe, and perhaps were the more jealous for it because it was already
very much weakened by the sitting down of the one half of it on this
side Jordan. (2.) To prevent contests and quarrels among posterity. If
those of other tribes should come among them perhaps it might occasion
some contests. They would be apt to give and receive disturbance, and
their title might, in process of time, come to be questioned; and how
great a matter would this fire kindle! It is the wisdom and duty of
those that have estates in the world to settle them, and dispose of
them, so as that no strife and contention may arise about them among
posterity.

[Numbers 36:5](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 36:5</span></span>

Here is, I. The matter settled by express order from God between the
daughters of Zelophehad and the rest of the tribe of Manasseh. The
petition is assented to, and care taken to prevent the inconvenience
feared: The tribe of the sons of Joseph hath said well, [Num
36:5](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#005). Thus those that consult the
oracles of God concerning the making of their heavenly inheritance sure
shall not only be directed what to do, but their enquiries shall be
graciously accepted, and they shall have not only their well done, but
their well said, good and faithful servant. Now the matter is thus
accommodated: these heiresses must be obliged to marry, not only within
their own tribe of Manasseh, but within the particular family of the
Hepherites, to which they did belong. 1. They are not determined to any
particular persons; there was choice enough in the family of their
father: Let them marry to whom they think best. As children must
preserve the authority of their parents, and not marry against their
minds, so parents must consult the affections of their children in
disposing of them, and not compel them to marry such as they cannot
love. Forced marriages are not likely to prove blessings. 2. Yet they
are confined to their own relations, that their inheritance may not go
to another family. God would have them know that the land being to be
divided by lot, the disposal whereof was of the Lord, they could not
mend, and therefore should not alter, his appointment. The inheritances
must not remove from tribe to tribe ([Num
36:7](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#007)), lest there should be confusion
among them, their estates entangled, and their genealogies perplexed.
God would not have one tribe to be enriched by the straitening and
impoverishing of another, since they were all alike the seed of Abraham
his friend.

II\. The law, in this particular case, was made perpetual, and to be
observed whenever hereafter the like case should happen, [Num
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#008). Those that were not heiresses
might marry into what tribe they pleased (though we may suppose that,
ordinarily, they kept within their own tribe), but those that were must
either quit their claim to the inheritance or marry one of their own
family, that each of the tribes might keep to its own inheritance, and
one tribe might not encroach upon another, but throughout their
generations there might remain immovable the ancient landmarks, set, not
by their fathers, but by the God of their fathers.

III\. The submission of the daughters of Zelophehad to this appointment.
How could they but marry well, and to their satisfaction, when God
himself directed them? They married their father's brothers' sons, [Num
36:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#010). By this it appears, 1. That
the marriage of cousin-germans is not in itself unlawful, nor within the
degrees prohibited, for then God would not have countenanced these
marriages. But, 2. That ordinarily it is not advisable; for, if there
had not been a particular reason for it (which cannot hold in any case
now, inheritances being not disposed of as then by the special
designation of Heaven), they would not have married such near relations.
The world is wide, and he that walks uprightly will endeavour to walk
surely.

IV\. The conclusion of this whole book, referring to the latter part of
it: These are the judgments which the Lord commanded in the plains of
Moab ([Num 36:13](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#013)), these foregoing,
ever since ch. 26, most of which related to their settlement in Canaan,
into which they were now entering. Whatever new condition God is by his
providence bringing us into, we must beg of him to teach us the duty of
it, and to enable us to do it, that we may do the work of the day in its
day, of the place in its place.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Introduction](deu000)

</div>
