<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Peter Index](pe2)  
  [Previous](pe2000)  [Next](pe2002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Peter Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001)

In this chapter we have, I. An introduction, or preface, making way for,
and leading to, what is principally designed by the apostle ([Pe2
1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001)). II. An exhortation to advance
and improve in all Christian graces ([Pe2
1:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#005)). III. To enforce this
exhortation, and engage them seriously and heartily to comply with it,
he adds, 1. A representation of the very great advantage which will
thereby accrue to them ([Pe2 1:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#008)).
2. A promise of the best assistance the apostle was able to give to
facilitate and forward this good work ([Pe2
1:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#012)). 3. A declaration of the
certain truth and divine origin of the gospel of Christ, in the grace
whereof they were exhorted to increase and persevere.

[2 Peter 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe2 1:1</span></span>

The apostle Peter, being moved by the Holy Ghost to write once more to
those who from among the Jews were turned to faith in Christ, begins
this second epistle with an introduction, wherein the same persons are
described and the same blessings are desired that are in the preface to
his former letter; but there are some additions or alterations which
ought to be taken notice of, in all the three parts of the introduction.

I. We have here a description of the person who wrote the epistle, by
the name of Simon, as well as Peter, and by the title of servant, as
well as that of apostle. Peter, being in both epistles, seems to be the
name most frequently used, and with which he may be thought to be best
pleased, it being given him by our Lord, upon his confessing Jesus to be
Christ the Son of the living God, and the very name signifying and
sealing that truth to be the fundamental article, the rock on which all
must build; but the name Simon, though omitted in the former epistle, is
mentioned in this, lest the total omission of that name, which was given
him when he was circumcised, should make the Jewish believers, who were
all zealous of the law, to become jealous of the apostle, as if he
disclaimed and despised circumcision. He here styles himself a servant
(as well as an apostle) of Jesus Christ; in this he may be allowed to
glory, as David does, [Psa 116:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#016). The
service of Christ is the way to the highest honour, [Joh
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#026). Christ himself is King of
kings, and Lord of lords; and he makes all his servants kings and
priests unto God, [Rev 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006). How great
an honour is it to be the servants of this Master! This is what we
cannot, without sin, be ashamed of. To triumph in being Christ's servant
is very proper for those who are engaging others to enter into or abide
in the service of Christ.

II\. We have an account of the people to whom the epistle is written.
They are described in the former epistle as elect according to the
foreknowledge of God the Father, and here as having obtained precious
faith in our Lord Jesus Christ; for the faith here mentioned is vastly
different from the false faith of the heretic, and the feigned faith of
the hypocrite, and the fruitless faith of the formal professor, how
orthodox soever he is. It is the faith of God's elect ([Tit
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001)), wrought by the Spirit of God in
effectual calling. Observe, 1. True saving faith is a precious grace,
and that not only as it is very uncommon, very scarce, even in the
visible church, a very small number of true believers among a great
multitude of visible professors ([Mat
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#014)), but true faith is very
excellent and of very great use and advantage to those who have it. The
just lives by faith, a truly divine spiritual life; faith procures all
the necessary supports and comforts of this excellent life; faith goes
to Christ, and buys the wine and milk ([Isa
55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001)) which are the proper nourishment
of the new creature; faith buys and brings home the tried gold, the
heavenly treasure that enriches; faith takes and puts on the white
raiment, the royal robes that clothe and adorn, [Rev
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#018). Observe, 2. Faith is alike
precious in the private Christian and in the apostle; it produces the
same precious effects in the one and in the other. Faith unites the weak
believer to Christ as really as it does the strong one, and purifies the
heart of one as truly as of another; and every sincere believer is by
his faith justified in the sight of God, and that from all sins, [Act
13:39](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#039). Faith, in whomsoever it exists,
takes hold of the same precious Saviour, and applies the same precious
promises. 3. This precious faith is obtained of God. Faith is the gift
of God, wrought by the Spirit, who raised up Jesus Christ from the dead.
4. The preciousness of faith, as well as our obtaining it, is through
the righteousness of Christ. The satisfactory meritorious righteousness
and obedience of Christ gives faith all its value and preciousness: and
the righteousness of such a person cannot but be of infinite value to
those who by faith receive it. For, (1.) This Jesus Christ is God, yea,
our God, as it is in the original. He is truly God, an infinite Being,
who has wrought out this righteousness, and therefore it must be of
infinite value. (2.) He is the Saviour of those that believe, and as
such he yielded this meritorious obedience; and therefore it is of such
great benefit and advantage to them, because, as surety and Saviour, he
wrought out this righteousness in their stead.

III\. We have the apostolical benediction, wherein he wishes for the
multiplication and increase of the divine favour to them, and the
advancement and growth of the work of grace in them, and that peace with
God and in their own consciences (which cannot be without grace) may
abound in them. This is the very same benediction that is in the former
epistle; but here he adds,

1\. An account of the way and means whereby grace and peace are
multiplied - it is through the knowledge of God and Jesus Christ; this
acknowledging or believing in the only living and true God, and Jesus
Christ whom he has sent, is the great improvement of spiritual life, or
it could not be the way to life eternal, [Joh
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003).

2\. The ground of the apostle's faith in asking, and of the Christian's
hope in expecting, the increase of grace. What we have already received
should encourage us to ask for more; he who has begun the work of grace
will perfect it. Observe, (1.) The fountain of all spiritual blessings
is the divine power of Jesus Christ, who could not discharge all the
office of Mediator, unless he was God as well as man. (2.) All things
that have any relation to, and influence upon, the true spiritual life,
the life and power of godliness, are from Jesus Christ; in him all
fulness dwells, and it is from him that we receive, and grace for grace
([Joh 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016)), even all that is
necessary for the preserving, improving, and perfecting of grace and
peace, which, according to some expositors, are called here in this
verse godliness and life. (3.) Knowledge of God, and faith in him, are
the channel whereby all spiritual supports and comforts are conveyed to
us; but then we must own and acknowledge God as the author of our
effectual calling, for so he is here described: Him that hath called us
to glory and virtue. Observe here, The design of God in calling or
converting men is to bring them to glory and virtue, that is, peace and
grace, as some understand it; but many prefer the marginal rendering, by
glory and virtue; and so we have effectual calling set forth as the work
of the glory and virtue, or the glorious power, of God, which is
described [Eph 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#019). It is the glory
of God's power to convert sinners; this is the power and glory of God
which are seen and experienced in his sanctuary ([Psa
63:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#002)); this power or virtue is to be
extolled by all that are called out of darkness into marvellous light,
[Pe1 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009). (4.) In the fourth verse the
apostle goes on to encourage their faith and hope in looking for an
increase of grace and peace, because the same glory and virtue are
employed and evidenced in giving the promises of the gospel that are
exercised in our effectual calling. Observe, \[1.\] The good things
which the promises make over are exceedingly great. Pardon of sin is one
of the blessings here intended; how great this is all who know any thing
of the power of God's anger will readily confess, and this is one of
those promised favours in bestowing whereof the power of the Lord is
great, [Num 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#017). To pardon sins that
are numerous and heinous (every one of which deserves God's wrath and
curse, and that for ever) is a wonderful thing, and is so called, [Psa
119:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#018). \[2.\] The promised blessings
of the gospel are very precious; as the great promise of the Old
Testament was the Seed of the woman, the Messiah ([Heb
11:39](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#039)), so the great promise of the
New Testament is the Holy Ghost ([Luk
24:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#049)), and how precious must the
enlivening, enlightening, sanctifying Spirit be! \[3.\] Those who
receive the promises of the gospel partake of the divine nature. They
are renewed in the spirit of their mind, after the image of God, in
knowledge, righteousness, and holiness; their hearts are set for God and
his service; they have a divine temper and disposition of soul; though
the law is the ministration of death, and the letter killeth, yet the
gospel is the ministration of life, and the Spirit quickeneth those who
are naturally dead in trespasses and sins. \[4.\] Those in whom the
Spirit works the divine nature are freed from the bondage of corruption.
Those who are, by the Spirit of grace, renewed in the spirit of their
mind, are translated into the liberty of the children of God; for it is
the world in which corruption reigns. Those who are not of the Father,
but of the world, are under the power of sin; the world lies in
wickedness, [Jo1 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#019). And the
dominion that sin has in the men of the world is through lust; their
desires are to it, and therefore it rules over them. The dominion that
sin has over us is according to the delight we have in it.

[2 Peter 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pe2 1:5</span></span>

In these words the apostle comes to the chief thing intended in this
epistle - to excite and engage them to advance in grace and holiness,
they having already obtained precious faith, and been made partakers of
the divine nature. This is a very good beginning, but it is not to be
rested in, as if we were already perfect. The apostle had prayed that
grace and peace might be multiplied to them, and now he exhorts them to
press forward for the obtaining of more grace. We should, as we have
opportunity, exhort those we pray for, and excite them to the use of all
proper means to obtain what we desire God to bestow upon them; and those
who will make any progress in religion must be very diligent and
industrious in their endeavours. Without giving all diligence, there is
no gaining any ground in the work of holiness; those who are slothful in
the business of religion will make nothing of it; we must strive if we
will enter in at the strait gate, [Luk
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#024).

I. Here we cannot but observe how the believer's way is marked out step
by step. 1. He must get virtue, by which some understand justice; and
then the knowledge, temperance, and patience that follow, being joined
with it, the apostle may be supposed to put them upon pressing after the
four cardinal virtues, or the four elements that go to the making up of
every virtue or virtuous action. But seeing it is a faithful saying, and
constantly to be asserted, that those who have faith be careful to
maintain good works ([Tit 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#008)), by
virtue here we may understand strength and courage, without which the
believer cannot stand up for good works, by abounding and excelling in
them. The righteous must be bold as a lion ([Pro
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#001)); a cowardly Christian, who is
afraid to profess the doctrines or practise the duties of the gospel,
must expect that Christ will be ashamed of him another day. "Let not
your hearts fail you in the evil day, but show yourselves valiant in
standing against all opposition, and resisting every enemy, world,
flesh, devil, yea, and death too." We have need of virtue while we live,
and it will be of excellent use when we come to die. 2. The believer
must add knowledge to his virtue, prudence to his courage; there is a
knowledge of God's name which must go before our faith ([Psa
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#010)), and we cannot approve of the
good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God, till we know it; but
there are proper circumstances for duty, which must be known and
observed; we must use the appointed means, and observe the accepted
time. Christian prudence regards the persons we have to do with and the
place and company we are in. Every believer must labour after the
knowledge and wisdom that are profitable to direct, both as to the
proper method and order wherein all Christian duties are to be performed
and as to the way and manner of performing them. 3. We must add
temperance to our knowledge. We must be sober and moderate in our love
to, and use of, the good things of this life; and, if we have a right
understanding and knowledge of outward comforts, we shall see that their
worth and usefulness are vastly inferior to those of spiritual mercies.
Bodily exercises and bodily privileges profit but little, and therefore
are to be esteemed and used accordingly; the gospel teaches sobriety as
well as honesty, [Tit 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#012). We must be
moderate in desiring and using the good things of natural life, such as
meat, drink, clothes, sleep, recreations, and credit; an inordinate
desire after these is inconsistent with an earnest desire after God and
Christ; and those who take more of these than is due can render to
neither God nor man what is due to them. 4. Add to temperance patience,
which must have its perfect work, or we cannot be perfect and entire,
wanting nothing ([Jam 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#004)), for we are
born to trouble, and must through many tribulations enter into the
kingdom of heaven; and it is this tribulation ([Rom
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003)) which worketh patience, that is,
requires the exercise and occasions the increase of this grace, whereby
we bear all calamities and crosses with silence and submission, without
murmuring against God or complaining of him, but justifying him who lays
all affliction upon us, owning that our sufferings are less than our
sins deserve, and believing they are no more than we ourselves need. 5.
To patience we must add godliness, and this is the very thing which is
produced by patience, for that works experience, [Rom
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#004). When Christians bear afflictions
patiently, they get an experimental knowledge of the loving-kindness of
their heavenly Father, which he will not take from his children, even
when he visits their iniquity with the rod and their transgression with
stripes ([Psa 89:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#032), [Psa
89:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#033)), and hereby they are brought to
the child-like fear and reverential love wherein true godliness
consists: to this, 6. We must add brotherly-kindness, a tender affection
to all our fellow-christians, who are children of the same Father,
servants of the same Master, members of the same family, travellers to
the same country, and heirs of the same inheritance, and therefore are
to be loved with a pure heart fervently, with a love of complacency, as
those who are peculiarly near and dear to us, in whom we take particular
delight, [Psa 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#003). 7. Charity, or a
love of good-will to all mankind, must be added to the love of delight
which we have for those who are the children of God. God has made of one
blood all nations, and all the children of men are partakers of the same
human nature, are all capable of the same mercies, and liable to the
same afflictions, and therefore, though upon a spiritual account
Christians are distinguished and dignified above those who are without
Christ, yet are they to sympathize with others in their calamities, and
relieve their necessities, and promote their welfare both in body and
soul, as they have opportunity: thus must all believers in Christ
evidence that they are the children of God, who is good to all, but is
especially good to Israel.

II\. All the forementioned graces must be had, or we shall not be
thoroughly furnished for all good works - for the duties of the first
and second table, for active and passive obedience, and for those
services wherein we are to imitate God as well as for those wherein we
only obey him - and therefore to engage us to an industrious and
unwearied pursuit of them, the apostle sets forth the advantages that
redound to all who successfully labour so as to get these things to be
and abound in them, [Pe2 1:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#008). These
are proposed,

1\. More generally, [Pe2 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#008). The
having these things make not barren (or slothful) nor unfruitful, where,
according to the style of the Holy Ghost, we must understand a great
deal more than is expressed; for when it is said concerning Ahaz, the
vilest and most provoking of all the kings of Judah, that he did not
right in the sight of the Lord ([Kg2
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#002)), we are to understand as much as
if it had been said, He did what was most offensive and abominable, as
the following account of his life shows; so, when it is here said that
the being and abounding of all Christian graces in us will make us
neither inactive nor unfruitful, we are thereby to understand that it
will make us very zealous and lively, vigorous and active, in all
practical Christianity, and eminently fruitful in the works of
righteousness. these will bring much glory to God, by bringing forth
much fruit among men, being fruitful in knowledge, or the acknowledging
of our Lord Jesus Christ, owning him to be their Lord, and evidencing
themselves to be his servants by their abounding in the work that he has
given them to do. This is the necessary consequence of adding one grace
to another; for, where all Christian graces are in the heart, they
improve and strengthen, encourage and cherish, one another; so they all
thrive and grow (as the apostle intimates in the beginning of [Pe2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#008)), and wherever grace abounds there
will be an abounding in good works. How desirable it is to be in such a
case the apostle evidences, [Pe2 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#009).
There he sets forth how miserable it is to be without those quickening
fructifying graces; for he who has not the forementioned graces, or,
though he pretends or seems to have them, does not exercise and improve
them, is blind, that is, as to spiritual and heavenly things, as the
next words explain it: He cannot see far off. This present evil world he
can see, and dotes upon, but has no discerning at all of the world to
come, so as to be affected with the spiritual privileges and heavenly
blessings thereof. He who sees the excellences of Christianity must
needs be diligent in endeavours after all those graces that are
absolutely necessary for obtaining glory, honour, and immortality; but,
where these graces are not obtained nor endeavoured after, men are not
able to look forward to the things that are but a very little way off in
reality, though in appearance, or in their apprehension, they are at a
great distance, because they put them far away from them; and how
wretched is their condition who are thus blind as to the awfully great
things of the other world, who cannot see any thing of the reality and
certainty, the greatness and nearness, of the glorious rewards God will
bestow on the righteous, and the dreadful punishment he will inflict on
the ungodly! But this is not all the misery of those who do not add to
their faith virtue, knowledge, etc. They are as unable to look backward
as forward, their memories are slippery and unable to retain what is
past, as their sight is short and unable to discern what is future; they
forget that they have been baptized, and had the means, and been laid
under the obligations to holiness of heart and life. By baptism we are
engaged in a holy war against sin, and are solemnly bound to fight
against the flesh, the world, and the devil. Often call to mind, and
seriously meditate on, your solemn engagement to be the Lord's, and your
peculiar advantages and encouragements to lay aside all filthiness of
flesh and spirit.

2\. The apostle proposes two particular advantages that will attend or
follow upon diligence in the work of a Christian: stability in grace,
and a triumphant entrance into glory. These he brings in by resuming his
former exhortation, and laying it down in other words; for what in [Pe2
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#005) is expressed by giving diligence
to add to faith virtue, etc., is expressed in [Pe2
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#010) by giving diligence to make our
calling and election sure. Here we may observe, (1.) It is the duty of
believers to make their election sure, to clear it up to themselves that
they are the chosen of God. (2.) The way to make sure their eternal
election is to make out their effectual calling: none can look into the
book of God's eternal counsels and decrees; but, inasmuch as whom God
did predestinate those he also called, if we can find we are effectually
called, we may conclude we are chosen to salvation. (3.) It requires a
great deal of diligence and labour to make sure our calling and
election; there must be a very close examination of ourselves, a very
narrow search and strict enquiry, whether we are thoroughly converted,
our minds enlightened, our wills renewed, and our whole souls changed as
to the bent and inclination thereof; and to come to a fixed certainty in
this requires the utmost diligence, and cannot be attained and kept
without divine assistance, as we may learn from [Psa
139:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#023); [Rom
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#016). "But, how great soever the
labour is, do not think much of it, for great is the advantage you gain
by it; for," \[1.\] "By this you will be kept from falling, and that at
all times and seasons, even in those hours of temptation that shall be
on the earth." When others shall fall into heinous and scandalous sin,
those who are thus diligent shall be enabled to walk circumspectly and
keep on in the way of their duty; and, when many fall into errors, they
shall be preserved sound in the faith, and stand perfect and complete in
all the will of God. \[2.\] Those who are diligent in the work of
religion shall have a triumphant entrance into glory; while of those few
who get to heaven some are scarcely saved ([Pe1
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#018)), with a great deal of
difficulty, even as by fire ([Co1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#015)), those who are growing in grace,
and abounding in the work of the Lord, shall have an abundant entrance
into the joy of their Lord, even that everlasting kingdom where Christ
reigns, and they shall reign with him for ever and ever.

[2 Peter 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pe2 1:12</span></span>

I. The importance and advantage of progress and perseverance in grace
and holiness made the apostle to be very diligent in doing the work of a
minister of Christ, that he might thereby excite and assist them to be
diligent in the duty of Christians. If ministers be negligent in their
work, it can hardly be expected that the people will be diligent in
theirs; therefore Peter will not be negligent (that is, at no time or
place, in no part of his work, to no part of his charge), but will be
exemplarily and universally diligent, and that in the work of a
remembrancer. This is the office of the best ministers, even the
apostles themselves; they are the Lord's remembrancers ([Isa
62:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#006)); they are especially bound to
make mention of the promises, and put God in mind of his engagements to
do good to his people; and they are the people's remembrancers, making
mention of God's precepts, and putting them in mind of the doctrines and
duties of Christianity, that they may remember God's commandments, to do
them. And this the apostle does, though some persons might think it
needless, inasmuch as they already knew those thing that he writes
about, and were established in the very truth that he insists upon.
Observe, 1. We need to be put in mind of what we already know to prevent
our forgetting it, and to improve our knowledge, and reduce all to
practice. 2. We must be established in the belief of the truth, that we
may not be shaken by every wind of doctrine, and especially in that
which is the present truth, the truth more peculiarly necessary for us
to know in our day, that which belongs to our peace, and which is more
especially opposed in our time. The great doctrines of the gospel, that
Jesus is the Christ, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners, that those who believe in the Lord Jesus Christ shall be saved,
and all that believe in God must be careful to maintain good works -
these are truths the apostles insisted on in their day; these are
faithful sayings, and worthy of all acceptation in every age of the
Christian church. And, as these must be constantly affirmed by ministers
([Tit 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#008)), so the people are to be
well instructed and established therein, and yet must, after all their
attainments in knowledge, be put in mind of such things as cannot be too
clearly known nor too firmly believed. The most advanced Christians
cannot, while in this world, be above ordinances, nor beyond the need of
those means which God has appointed and does afford. And, if the people
need teaching and exhortation while they are in the body, it is very
meet and just that ministers should, as long as they are in this
tabernacle, instruct and exhort them, and bring those truths to their
remembrance that they have formerly heard, this being a proper means to
stir them up to be diligent and lively in a course of gospel-obedience.

II\. The apostle, being set upon the work, tells us ([Pe2
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#014)) what makes him earnest in this
matter, even the knowledge he had, not only that he must certainly, but
also that he must shortly, put off this tabernacle. Observe, 1. The body
is but the tabernacle of the soul. It is a mean and movable structure,
whose stakes can be easily removed, and its cords presently broken. 2.
This tabernacle must be put off. We are not to continue long in this
earthly house. AS at night we put off our clothes, and lay them by, so
at death we must put off our bodies, and they musts be laid up in the
grave till the morning of the resurrection. 3. The nearness of death
makes the apostle diligent in the business of life. Our Lord Jesus had
shown him that the time of his departure was at hand, and therefore he
bestirs himself with greater zeal and diligence, because the time is
short. He must soon be removed from those to whom he wrote; and his
ambition being that they should remember the doctrine he had delivered
to them, after he himself was taken away from them, he commits his
exhortation to writing. The apostle had not any great opinion of oral
tradition. This was not so proper a means to reach the end he was in
pursuit of. He would have them always to remember these things, and not
only to keep them in mind, but also to make mention of them, as the
original words import. Those who fear the Lord make mention of his name,
and talk of his loving-kindness. This is the way to spread the knowledge
of the Lord and this the apostle had at heart: and those who have the
written word of God are thereby put into a capacity to do this.

[2 Peter 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pe2 1:16</span></span>

Here we have the reason of giving the foregoing exhortation, and that
with so much diligence and seriousness. These things are not idle tales,
or a vain thing, but of undoubted truth and vast concern. The gospel is
not a cunningly devised fable. These are not the words of one who hath a
devil, nor the contrivance of any number of men who by cunning
craftiness endeavour to deceive. The way of salvation by Jesus Christ is
eminently the counsel of God, the most excellent contrivance of the
infinitely wise Jehovah; it was he that invented this way of saving
sinners by Jesus Christ, whose power and coming are set forth in the
gospel, and the apostle's preaching was a making of these things known.
1. The preaching of the gospel is a making known the power of Christ,
that he is able to save to the uttermost all who come to God by him. He
is the mighty God, and therefore can save from both the guilt and the
filth of sin. 2. The coming of Christ also is make known by the
preaching of the gospel. He who was promised immediately after the fall
of man, as in the fulness of time to be born of a woman, has now come in
the flesh; and whosoever denies this is an antichrist ([Jo1
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#003)), he is actuated and influenced by
the spirit of anti-christ; but those who are the true apostles and
ministers of Christ, and are directed and guided by the Spirit of
Christ, evidence that Christ has come according to the promise which all
the Old Testament believers died in the faith of, [Heb
11:39](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#039). Christ has come in the flesh.
Inasmuch as those whom he undertakes to save are partakers of flesh and
blood, he himself also took part of the same, that he might suffer in
their nature and stead, and thereby make an atonement. This coming of
Christ the gospel is very plain and circumstantial in setting forth; but
there is a second coming, which it likewise mentions, which the
ministers of the gospel ought also to make known, when he shall come in
the glory of his Father with all his holy angels, for he is appointed to
be Judge both of quick and dead. He will come to judge the world in
righteousness by the everlasting gospel, and call us all to give account
of all things done in the body, whether good or evil. 3. And though this
gospel of Christ has been blasphemously called a fable by one of those
wretches who call themselves the successors of St. Peter, yet our
apostle proves that it is of the greatest certainty and reality,
inasmuch as during our blessed Saviour's abode here on earth, when he
took on him the form of a servant and was found in fashion as a man, he
sometimes manifested himself to be God, and particularly to our apostle
and the two sons of Zebedee, who were eye-witnesses of his divine
majesty, when he was transfigured before them, and his face did shine as
the sun, and his raiment was white as the light, exceedingly white, as
snow, so as no fuller on earth can whiten them. This Peter, James, and
John, were eye-witnesses of, and therefore might and ought to attest;
and surely their testimony is true, when they witness what they have
seen with their eyes, yea, and heard with their ears: for, besides the
visible glory that Christ was invested with here on earth, there was an
audible voice from heaven. Here observe, (1.) What a gracious
declaration was made: This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased
- the best voice that ever came from heaven to earth; God is well
pleased with Christ, and with us in him. This is the Messiah who was
promised, through whom all who believe in him shall be accepted and
saved. (2.) This declaration is made by God the Father, who thus
publicly owns his Son (even in his state of humiliation, when he was in
the form of a servant), yea, proclaims him to be his beloved Son, when
he is in that low condition; yea, so far are Christ's mean and low
circumstances from abating the love of the Father to him that his laying
down his life is said to be one special reason of the Father's love,
[Joh 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#017). (3.) The design of this
voice was to do our Saviour a singular humour while he was here below:
He received honour and glory from God the Father. This is the person
whom God delights to honour. As he requires us to give honour and glory
to his Son by confessing him to be our Saviour, so does he give glory
and honour to our Saviour by declaring him to be his Son. (4.) This
voice is from heaven, called here the excellent glory, which still
reflects a greater glory upon our blessed Saviour. This declaration is
from God the fountain of honour, and from heaven the seat of glory,
where God is most gloriously present. (5.) This voice was heard, and
that so as to be understood, by Peter, James, and John. They not only
heard a sound (as the people did, [Joh
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#028), [Joh
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#029)), but they understood the sense.
God opens the ears and understandings of his people to receive what they
are concerned to know, when others are like Paul's companions, who only
heard a sound of words ([Act 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#007)), but
understood not the meaning thereof, and therefore are said not to hear
the voice of him that spoke, [Act
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#009). Blessed are those who not only
hear, but understand, who believe the truth, and feel the power of the
voice from heaven, as he did who testifieth these things: and we have
all the reason in the world to receive his testimony; for who would
refuse to give credit to what is so circumstantially laid down as this
account of the voice from heaven, of which the apostle tells us, (6.) It
was heard by them in the holy mount, when they were with Jesus? The
place wherein God affords any peculiarly gracious manifestation of
himself is thereby made holy, not with an inherent holiness, but as the
ground was holy where God appeared to Moses ([Exo
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#005)), and the mountain holy on which
the temple was built, [Psa 87:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#001). Such
places are relatively holy, and to be regarded as such during the time
that men in themselves experience, or may, by warrant from the word,
believingly expect, the special presence and gracious influence of the
holy and glorious God.

[2 Peter 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pe2 1:19</span></span>

In these words the apostle lays down another argument to prove the truth
and reality of the gospel, and intimates that this second proof is more
strong and convincing than the former, and more unanswerably makes out
that the doctrine of the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ is
not a mere fable or cunning contrivance of men, but the wise and
wonderful counsel of the holy and gracious God. For this is foretold by
the prophets and penmen of the Old Testament, who spoke and wrote under
the influence and according to the direction of the Spirit of God. Here
note,

I. The description that is given of the scriptures of the Old Testament:
they are called a more sure word of prophecy. 1. It is a prophetical
declaration of the power and coming, the Godhead and incarnation, of our
Saviour, which we have in the Old Testament. It is there foretold that
the seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head. His power to
destroy the devil and his works, and his being made of a woman, are
there foretold; and the great and awful Old Testament name of God,
Jehovah (as read by some), signifies only He will be; and that name of
God ([Exo 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014)) is rendered by many, I
will be that I will be; and, thus understood, they point at God's being
incarnate in order to the redemption and salvation of his people as what
was to come. But the New Testament is a history of that whereof the Old
Testament is a prophecy. All the prophets and the law prophesied until
John, [Mat 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#013). And the evangelists
and the apostles have written the history of what was before delivered
as prophecy. Now the accomplishment of the Old Testament by the New, and
the agreeableness of the New Testament to the Old, are a full
demonstration of the truth of both. Read the Old Testament as a prophecy
of Christ, and with diligence and thankfulness use the New as the best
exposition of the Old. 2. The Old Testament is a more sure word of
prophecy. It is so to the Jews who received it as the oracles of God.
Following prophets confirmed what had been delivered by those who went
before, and these prophecies had been written by the express command,
and preserved by the special care, and many of them fulfilled by the
wonderful providence of God, and therefore were more certain to those
who had all along received and read the scriptures than the apostle's
account of this voice from heaven. Moses and the prophets more
powerfully persuade than even miracles themselves, [Luk
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#031). How firm and sure should our
faith be, who have such a firm and sure word to rest upon! All the
prophecies of the Old Testament are more sure and certain to us who have
the history of the most exact and minute accomplishment of them.

II\. The encouragement the apostle gives us to search the scriptures. He
tells us, We do well if we take heed to them; that is, apply our minds
to understand the sense, and our hearts to believe the truth, of this
sure word, yea, bend ourselves to it, that we may be moulded and
fashioned by it. The word is that form of doctrine into which we must be
cast ([Rom 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#017)), that formulary of
knowledge ([Rom 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#020)) by which we are
to regulate our thoughts and sentiments, our words and confessions, our
whole life and conversation. If we thus apply ourselves to the word of
God, we certainly do well in all respects, what is pleasing to God and
profitable to ourselves; and this indeed is but paying that regard which
is due to the oracles of God. But, in order to this giving heed to the
word, the apostle suggests some things that are of singular use to those
who would attend to the scriptures to any good purpose. 1. They must
account and use the scripture as a light which God hath sent into and
set up in the world, to dispel that darkness which is upon the face of
the whole earth. The word is a lamp to the feet of those who use it
aright; this discovers the way wherein men ought to walk; this is the
means whereby we come to know the way of life. 2. They must acknowledge
their own darkness. This world is a place of error and ignorance, and
every man in the world is naturally without that knowledge which is
necessary in order to attain eternal life. 3. If ever men are made wise
to salvation, it is by the shining of the word of God into their hearts.
Natural notions of God are not sufficient for fallen man, who does at
best actually know a great deal less, and yet does absolutely need to
know a great deal more, of God than Adam did while he continued
innocent. 4. When the light of the scripture is darted into the blind
mind and dark understanding by the Holy Spirit of God, then the
spiritual day dawns and the day-star arises in that soul. This
enlightening of a dark benighted mind is like the day-break that
improves and advances, spreads and diffuses itself through the whole
soul, till it makes perfect day, [Pro
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#018). It is a growing knowledge; those
who are this way enlightened never think they know enough, till they
come to know as they are known. To give heed to this light must needs be
the interest and duty of all; and all who do truth come to this light,
while evil-doers keep at a distance from it.

III\. The apostle lays down one thing as previously necessary in order
to our giving heed to, and getting good by, the scriptures, and that is
the knowing that all prophecy is of divine origin. Now this important
truth he not only asserts, but proves. 1. Observe, No scripture prophecy
is of private interpretation (or a man's own proper opinion, an
explication of his own mind), but the revelation of the mind of God.
This was the difference between the prophets of the Lord and the false
prophets who have been in the world. The prophets of the Lord did not
speak nor do any thing of their own mind, as Moses, the chief of them,
says expressly ([Num 16:28](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#028)), I have
not done any of the works (nor delivered any of the statutes and
ordinances) of my own mind. But false prophets speak a vision of their
own heart, not out of the mouth of the Lord, [Jer
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#016). The prophets and penmen of the
scripture spoke and wrote what was the mind of God; and though, when
under the influence and guidance of the Spirit, it may well be supposed
that they were willing to reveal and record such thing, yet it is
because God would have them spoken and written. But though the scripture
be not the effusion of man's own private opinion or inclination, but the
revelation of the mind and will of God, yet every private man ought to
search it, and come to understand the sense and meaning thereof. 2. This
important truth of the divine origin of the scriptures (that what is
contained in them is the mind of God and not of man) is to be known and
owned by all who will give heed to the sure word of prophecy. That the
scriptures are the word of God is not only an article of the true
Christian's faith, but also a matter of science or knowledge. As a man
not barely believes, but knows assuredly that that very person is his
particular friend in whom he sees all the proper, peculiar,
distinguishing marks and characters of his friend, so the Christian
knows that book to be the word of God in and upon which he sees all the
proper marks and characters of a divinely inspired book. He tastes a
sweetness, and feels a power, and sees a glory, in it truly divine. 3.
The divinity of the scriptures must be known and acknowledged in the
first place, before men can profitably use them, before they can give
good heed to them. To call off our minds from all other writings, and
apply them in a peculiar manner to these as the only certain and
infallible rule, necessarily requires our being fully persuaded that
these are divinely inspired, and contain what is truly the mind and will
of God.

IV\. Seeing it is so absolutely necessary that persons be fully
persuaded of the scripture's divine origin, the apostle ([Pe2
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#021)) tells us how the Old Testament
came to be compiled, and that, 1. Negatively: It came not by the will of
man. Neither the things themselves that are recorded, and make up the
several parts of the Old Testament, are the opinions of men, nor was the
will of any of the prophets or penmen of the scriptures the rule or
reason why any of those things were written which make up the canon of
the scripture. 2. Affirmatively: Holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost. Observe, (1.) They were holy men of God who
were employed about that book which we receive as the word of God. If
Balaam and Caiaphas, and others who were destitute of holiness, had any
thing of the spirit of prophecy, upon occasion, yet such persons were
not employed to write any part of the scriptures for the use of the
church of God. All the penmen of the scriptures were holy men of God.
(2.) These holy men were moved by the Holy Ghost in what they delivered
as the mind and will of God. The Holy Ghost is the supreme agent, the
holy men are but instruments. \[1.\] The Holy Ghost inspired and
dictated to them what they were to deliver of the mind of God. \[2.\] He
powerfully excited and effectually engaged them to speak (and write)
what he had put into their mouths. \[3.\] He so wisely and carefully
assisted and directed them in the delivery of what they had received
from him that they were effectually secured from any the least mistake
in expressing what they revealed; so that the very words of scripture
are to be accounted the words of the Holy Ghost, and all the plainness
and simplicity, all the power and virtue, all the elegance and
propriety, of the very words and expressions are to be regarded by us as
proceeding from God. Mix faith therefore with what you find in the
scriptures; esteem and reverence your Bible as a book written by holy
men, inspired, influenced, and assisted by the Holy Ghost.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Peter Chapter 2](pe2002)

</div>
