<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro003)  [Next](pro005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#001)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 4:0</span></span>

When the things of God are to be taught precept must be upon precept,
and line upon line, not only because the things themselves are of great
worth and weight, but because men's minds, at the best, are unapt to
admit them and commonly prejudiced against them; and therefore Solomon,
in this chapter, with a great variety of expression and a pleasant
powerful flood of divine eloquence, inculcates the same things that he
had pressed upon us in the foregoing chapters. Here is, I. An earnest
exhortation to the study of wisdom, that is, of true religion and
godliness, borrowed from the good instructions which his father gave
him, and enforced with many considerable arguments ([Pro
4:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#001)). II. A necessary caution
against bad company and all fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness ([Pro 4:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#014)). III.
Particular directions for the attaining and preserving of wisdom, and
bringing forth the fruits of it ([Pro
4:20-27](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#020)). So plainly, so pressingly,
is the case laid before us, that we shall be for ever inexcusable if we
perish in our folly.

[Proverbs 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 4:1</span></span>

Here we have,

I. The invitation which Solomon gives to his children to come and
receive instruction from him ([Pro
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#001), [Pro
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#002)): Hear, you children, the
instruction of a father. That is, 1. "Let my own children, in the first
place, receive and give good heed to those instructions which I set down
for the use of others also." Note, Magistrates and ministers, who are
entrusted with the direction of larger societies, are concerned to take
a more than ordinary care for the good instruction of their own
families; from this duty their public work will by no means excuse them.
This charity must begin at home, though it must not end there; for he
that has not his children in subjection with all gravity, and does not
take pains in their good education, how shall he do his duty as he ought
to the church of God? [Ti1 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#004), [Ti1
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#005). The children of those that are
eminent for wisdom and public usefulness ought to improve in knowledge
and grace in proportion to the advantages they derive from their
relation to such parents. Yet it may be observed, to save both the
credit and the comfort of those parents whose children do not answer the
hopes that arose from their education, that Rehoboam, the son of
Solomon, was far from being either one of the wisest or one of the best.
We have reason to think that thousands have got more good by Solomon's
proverbs than his own son did, to whom they seem to have been dedicated.
2. Let all young people, in the days of their childhood and youth, take
pains to get knowledge and grace, for that is their learning age, and
then their minds are formed and seasoned. He does not say, My children,
but You children. We read but of one son that Solomon had of his own;
but (would you think it?) he is willing to set up for a schoolmaster,
and to teach other people's children! for at that age there is most hope
of success; the branch is easily bent when it is young and tender. 3.
Let all that would receive instruction come with the disposition of
children, though they be grown persons. Let all prejudices be laid
aside, and the mind be as white paper. let them be dutiful, tractable,
and self-diffident, and take the word as the word of a father, which
comes both with authority and with affection. We must see it coming from
God as our Father in heaven, to whom we pray, from whom we expect
blessings, the Father of our spirits, to whom we ought to be in
subjection, that we may live. We must look upon our teachers as our
fathers, who love us and seek our welfare; and therefore though the
instruction carry in it reproof and correction, for so the word
signifies, yet we must bid it welcome. Now, (1.) To recommend it to us,
we are told, not only that it is the instruction of a father, but that
it is understanding, and therefore should be welcome to intelligent
creatures. Religion has reason on its side, and we are taught it by fair
reasoning. It is a law indeed ([Pro
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#002)), but that law is founded upon
doctrine, upon unquestionable principles of truth, upon good doctrine,
which is not only faithful, but worthy of all acceptation. If we admit
the doctrine, we cannot but submit to the law. (2.) To rivet it in us,
we are directed to receive it as a gift, to attend to it with all
diligence, to attend so as to know it, for otherwise we cannot do it,
and not to forsake it by disowning the doctrine or disobeying the law.

II\. The instructions he gives them. Observe,

1\. How he came by these instructions; he had them from his parents, and
teaches his children the same that they taught him, [Pro
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#003), [Pro
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#004). Observe, (1.) His parents loved
him, and therefore taught him: I was my father's son. David had many
sons, but Solomon was his son indeed, as Isaac is called ([Gen
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#019)) and for the same reason,
because on him the covenant was entailed. He was his father's darling,
above any of his children. God had a special kindness for Solomon (the
prophet called him Jedidiah, because the Lord loved him, [Sa2
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#025)), and for that reason David had
a special kindness for him, for he was a man after God's own heart. If
parents may ever love one child better than another, it must not be till
it plainly appears that God does so. He was tender, and only beloved, in
the sight of his mother. Surely there was a manifest reason for making
such a distinction when both the parents made it. Now we see how they
showed their love; they catechised him, kept him to his book, and held
him to a strict discipline. Though he was a prince, and heir-apparent to
the crown, yet they did not let him live at large; nay, therefore they
tutored him thus. And perhaps David was the more strict with Solomon in
his education because he had seen the ill effects of an undue indulgence
in Adonijah, whom he had not crossed in any thing ([Kg1
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#006)), as also in Absalom. (2.) What
his parents taught him he teaches others. Observe, \[1.\] When Solomon
was grown up he not only remembered, but took a pleasure in repeating,
the good lessons his parents taught him when he was a child. He did not
forget them, so deep were the impressions they made upon him. He was not
ashamed of them, such a high value had he for them, nor did he look upon
them as the childish things, the mean things, which, when he became a
man, a king, he should put away, as a disparagement to him; much less
did he repeat them: as some wicked children have done, to ridicule them,
and make his companions merry with them, priding himself that he had got
clear from grave lessons and restraints. \[2.\] Though Solomon was a
wise man himself, and divinely inspired, yet, when he was to teach
wisdom, he did not think it below him to quote his father and to make
use of his words. Those that would learn well, and teach well, in
religion, must not affect new-found notions and new-coined phrases, so
as to look with contempt upon the knowledge and language of their
predecessors; if we must keep to the good old way, why should we scorn
the good old words? [Jer 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#016). \[3.\]
Solomon, having been well educated by his parents, thought himself
thereby obliged to give his children a good education, the same that his
parents had given him; and this is one way in which we must requite our
parents for the pains they took with us, even by showing piety at home,
[Ti1 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#004). They taught us, not only
that we might learn ourselves, but that we might teach our children, the
good knowledge of God, [Psa 78:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#006). And
we are false to a trust if we do not; for the sacred deposit of
religious doctrine and law was lodged in our hands with a charge to
transmit it pure and entire to those that shall come after us, [Ti2
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#002). \[4.\] Solomon enforces his
exhortations with the authority of his father David, a man famous in his
generation upon all accounts. Be it taken notice of, to the honour of
religion, that the wisest and best men in every age have been most
zealous, not only for the practice of it themselves, but for the
propagating of it to others; and we should therefore continue in the
things which we have learned, knowing of whom we have learned them, [Ti2
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#014).

2\. What these instructions were, [Pro
4:4-13](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#004).

(1.) By way of precept and exhortation. David, in teaching his son,
though he was a child of great capacity and quick apprehension, yet to
show that he was in good earnest, and to affect his child the more with
what he said, expressed himself with great warmth and importunity, and
inculcated the same thing again and again. So children must be taught.
[Deu 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#007), Thou shalt whet them
diligently upon thy children. David, though he was a man of public
business, and had tutors for his son, took all this pains with him
himself.

\[1.\] He recommends to him his Bible and his catechism, as the means,
his father's words ([Pro 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#004)), the
words of his mouth ([Pro 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#005)), his
sayings ([Pro 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#010)), all the good
lessons he had taught him; and perhaps he means particularly the book of
Psalms, many of which were Maschils - psalms of instruction, and two of
them are expressly said to be for Solomon. These, and all his other
words, Solomon must have an eye to. First, He must hear and receive them
([Pro 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#010)), diligently attend to
them, and imbibe them, as the earth drinks in the rain that comes often
upon it, [Heb 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#007). God thus bespeaks
our attention to his word: Hear, O my son! and receive my sayings.
Secondly, He must hold fast the form of sound words which his father
gave him ([Pro 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#004)): Let thy heart
retain my words; and except the word be hid in the heart, lodged in the
will and affections, it will not be retained. Thirdly, He must govern
himself by them: Keep my commandments, obey them, and that is the way to
increase in the knowledge of them, [Joh
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#017). Fourthly, He must stick to them
and abide by them: "Decline not from the words of my mouth ([Pro
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#005)), as fearing they will be too
great a check upon thee, but take fast hold of instruction ([Pro
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#013)), as being resolved to keep thy
hold and never let it go." Those that have a good education, though they
strive to shake it off, will find it hang about them a great while, and,
if it do not, their case is very sad.

\[2.\] He recommends to him wisdom and understanding as the end to be
aimed at in the use of these means; that wisdom which is the principal
wisdom, get that. Quod caput est sapientia eam acquire sapientiam - Be
sure to mind that branch of wisdom which is the top branch of it, and
that is the fear of God, [Pro 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007).
Junius and Tremellius. A principle of religion in the heart is the one
thing needful; therefore, First, Get this wisdom, get this
understanding, [Pro 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#005). And again,
"Get wisdom, and with all thy getting, get understanding, [Pro
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#007). Pray for it, take pains for it,
give diligence in the use of all appointed means to attain it. Wait at
wisdom's gate, [Pro 8:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#034). Get dominion
over thy corruptions, which are thy follies: get possession of wise
principles and the habits of wisdom. Get wisdom by experience, get it
above all thy getting; be more in care and take more pains to get this
than to get the wealth of this world; whatever thou forgettest, get
this, reckon it a great achievement, and pursue it accordingly." True
wisdom is God's gift, and yet we are here commanded to get it, because
God gives it to those that labour for it; yet, after all, we must not
say, Our might and the power of our hand have gotten us this wealth.
Secondly, Forget her not ([Pro 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#005)),
forsake her not ([Pro 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#006)), let her
not go ([Pro 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#013)), but keep her.
Those that have got this wisdom must take heed of losing it again by
returning to folly: it is indeed a good part, that shall not be taken
from us; but then we must take heed lest we throw it from us, as those
do that forget it first, and let it slip out of their minds, and then
forsake it and turn out of its good ways. That good thing which is
committed to us we must keep, and not let it drop, through carelessness,
nor suffer it to be forced from us, nor suffer ourselves to be wheedled
out of it; never let go such a jewel. Thirdly, Love her ([Pro
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#006)), and embrace her ([Pro
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#008)), as worldly men love their wealth
and set their hearts upon it. Religion should be very dear to us, dearer
than any thing in this world; and, if we cannot reach to be great
masters of wisdom, yet let us be true lovers of it; and what grace we
have let us embrace it with a sincere affection, as those that admire
its beauty. Fourthly, "Exalt her, [Pro
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#008). Always keep up high thoughts of
religion, and do all thou canst to bring it into reputation, and
maintain the credit of it among men. Concur with God in his purpose,
which is to magnify the law and make it honourable, and do what thou
canst to serve that purpose." Let Wisdom's children not only justify
her, but magnify her, and prefer her before that which is dearest to
them in this world. In honouring those that fear the Lord, though they
are low in the world, and in regarding a poor wise man, we exalt wisdom.

(2.) By way of motive and inducement thus to labour for wisdom, and
submit to the guidance of it, consider, \[1.\] It is the main matter,
and that which ought to be the chief and continual care of every man in
this life ([Pro 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#007)): Wisdom is the
principal thing; other things which we are solicitous to get and keep
are nothing to it. It is the whole of man, [Ecc
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#013). It is that which recommends us
to God, which beautifies the soul, which enables us to answer the end of
our creation, to live to some good purpose in the world, and to get to
heaven at last; and therefore it is the principal thing. \[2.\] It has
reason and equity on its side ([Pro
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#011)): "I have taught thee in the way
of wisdom, and so it will be found to be at last. I have led thee, not
in the crooked ways of carnal policy, which does wrong under colour of
wisdom, but in right paths, agreeable to the eternal rules and reasons
of good and evil." The rectitude of the divine nature appears in the
rectitude of all the divine laws. Observe, David not only taught his son
by good instructions, but led him both by a good example and by applying
general instructions to particular cases; so that nothing was wanting on
his part to make him wise. \[3.\] It would be much for his own
advantage: "If thou be wise and good, thou shalt be so for thyself."
First, "It will be thy life, thy comfort, thy happiness; it is what thou
canst not live without:" Keep my commandments and live, [Pro
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#004). That of our Saviour agrees with
this, If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments, [Mat
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#017). It is upon pain of death,
eternal death, and in prospect of life, eternal life, that we are
required to be religious. "Receive wisdom's sayings, and the years of
thy life shall be many ([Pro 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#010)), as
many in this world as Infinite Wisdom sees fit, and in the other world
thou shalt live that life the years of which shall never be numbered.
Keep her therefore, whatever it cost thee, for she is thy life, [Pro
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#013). All thy satisfaction will be
found in this;" and a soul without true wisdom and grace is really a
dead soul. Secondly, "It will be thy guard and guide, thy convoy and
conductor, through all the dangers and difficulties of thy journey
through this wilderness. Love wisdom, and cleave to her, and she shall
preserve thee, she shall keep thee ([Pro
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#006)) from sin, the worst of evils, the
worst of enemies; she shall keep thee from hurting thyself, and then
none else can hurt thee." As we say, "Keep thy shop, and thy shop will
keep thee;" so, "Keep thy wisdom, and thy wisdom will keep thee." It
will keep us from straits and stumbling-blocks in the management of
ourselves and our affairs, [Pro 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#012).
1. That our steps be not straitened when we go, that we bring not
ourselves into such straits as David was in, [Sa2
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#014). Those that make God's word
their rule shall walk at liberty, and be at ease in themselves. 2. That
our feet do not stumble when we run. If wise and good men be put upon
sudden resolves, the certain rule of God's word which they go by will
keep them even then from stumbling upon any thing that may be
pernicious. Integrity and uprightness will preserve us. Thirdly, "It
will be thy honour and reputation ([Pro
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#008)): Exalt wisdom (do thou but show
thy good-will to her advancement) and though she needs not thy service
she will abundantly recompense it, she shall promote thee, she shall
bring thee to honour." Solomon was to be a king, but his wisdom and
virtue would be more his honour than his crown or purple; it was that
for which all his neighbours had him so much in veneration; and no
doubt, in his reign and David's, wise and good men stood fairest for
preferment. However, religion will, first or last, bring all those to
honour that cordially embrace her; they shall be accepted of God,
respected by all wise men, owned in the great day, and shall inherit
everlasting glory. This he insists on ([Pro
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#009)): "She shall give to thy head an
ornament of grace in this world, shall recommend thee both to God and
man, and in the other world a crown of glory shall she deliver to thee,
a crown that shall never totter, a crown of glory that shall never
wither." That is the true honour which attends religion. Nobilitas sola
est atique unica virtus - Virtue is the only nobility! David having thus
recommended wisdom to his son, no marvel that when God bade him ask what
he would he prayed, Lord, give me a wise and an understanding heart. We
should make it appear by our prayers how well we are taught.

[Proverbs 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 4:14</span></span>

Some make David's instructions to Solomon, which began [Pro
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#004), to continue to the end of the
chapter; nay, some continue them to the end of the ninth chapter; but it
is more probable that Solomon begins here again, if not sooner. In these
verses, having exhorted us to walk in the paths of wisdom, he cautions
us against the path of the wicked. 1. We must take heed of the ways of
sin and avoid them, every thing that looks like sin and leads to it. 2.
In order to this we must keep out of the ways of sinners, and have no
fellowship with them. For fear of falling into wicked courses, we must
shun wicked company. Here is,

I. The caution itself, [Pro 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#014), [Pro
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#015). 1. We must take heed of falling
in with sin and sinners: Enter not into the paths of the wicked. Our
teacher, having like a faithful guide shown us the right paths ([Pro
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#011)), here warns us of the by-paths
into which we are in danger of being drawn aside. Those that have been
well educated, and trained up in the way they should go, let them never
turn aside into the way they should not go; let them not so much as
enter into it, no, not to make trial of it, lest it prove a dangerous
experiment and difficult to retreat with safety. "Venture not into the
company of those that are infected with the plague, no, not though thou
think thyself guarded with an antidote." 2. If at any time we are
inveigled into an evil way, we must hasten out of it. "If, ere thou wast
aware, thou didst enter in at the gate, because it was wide, go not on
in the way of evil men. As soon as thou art made sensible of thy
mistake, retire immediately, take not a step more, stay not a minute
longer, in the way that certainly leads to destruction." 3. We must
dread and detest the ways of sin and sinners, and decline them with the
utmost care imaginable. "The way of evil men may seem a pleasant way and
sociable, and the nearest way to the compassing of some secular end we
may have in view; but it is an evil way, and will end ill, and therefore
if thou love thy God and thy soul avoid it, pass not by it, that thou
mayest not be tempted to enter into it; and, if thou find thyself near
it, turn from it and pass away, and get as far off it as thou canst."
The manner of expression intimates the imminent danger we are in, the
need we have of this caution, and the great importance of it, and that
our watchmen are, or should be, in good earnest, in giving us warning.
It intimates likewise at what a distance we should keep from sin and
sinners; he does not say, Keep at a due distance, but at a great
distance, the further the better; never think you can get far enough
from it. Escape for thy life: look not behind thee.

II\. The reasons to enforce this caution.

1\. "Consider the character of the men whose way thou art warned to
shun." They are mischievous men ([Pro
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#016), [Pro
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#017)); they not only care not what
hurt they do to those that stand in their way, but it is their business
to do mischief, and their delight, purely for mischief-sake. They are
continually designing and endeavouring to cause some to fall, to ruin
them body and soul. Wickedness and malice are in their nature, and
violence is in all their actions. They are spiteful in the highest
degree; for, (1.) Mischief is rest and sleep to them. As much
satisfaction as a covetous man has when he has got money, an ambitious
man when he has got preferment, and a good man when he has done good, so
much have they when they have said or done that which is injurious and
ill-natured; and they are extremely uneasy if they cannot get their envy
and revenge gratified, as Haman, to whom every thing was unpleasant as
long as Mordecai was unhanged. It intimates likewise how restless and
unwearied they are in their mischievous pursuits; they will rather be
deprived of sleep than of the pleasure of being vexatious. (2.) Mischief
is meat and drink to them; they feed and feast upon it. They eat the
bread of the wickedness (they eat up my people as they eat bread, [Psa
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#004)) and drink the wine of violence
([Pro 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#017)), drink iniquity like
water, [Job 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#016). All they eat and
drink is got by rapine and oppression. Do wicked men think the time lost
in which they are not doing hurt? Let good men make it as much their
business and delight to do good. Amici, diem perdidi - Friends, I have
lost a day. And let all that are wise, and wish well to themselves,
avoid the society of the wicked; for, \[1.\] It is very scandalous; for
there is no disposition of mind that is a greater reproach to human
nature, a greater enemy to human society, a bolder defiance to God and
conscience, that has more of the devil's image in it, or is more
serviceable to his interests, than a delight to do mischief and to vex,
and hurt, and ruin every body. \[2.\] It is very dangerous. "Shun those
that delight to do mischief as thou tenderest thy own safety; for,
whatever friendship they may pretend, one time or other they will do
thee mischief; thou wilt ruin thyself if thou dost concur with them
([Pro 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#018)) and they will ruin thee if
thou dost not."

2\. "Consider the character of the way itself which thou art warned to
shun, compared with the right way which thou art invited to walk in."

(1.) The way of righteousness is light ([Pro
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#018)): The path of the just, which
they have chosen, and in which they walk, is as light; the light shines
on their ways ([Job 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#028)) and makes
them both safe and pleasant. Christ is their way and he is the light.
They are guided by the word of God and that is a light to their feet;
they themselves are light in the Lord and they walk in the light as he
is in the light. \[1.\] It is a shining light. Their way shines to
themselves in the joy and comfort of it; it shines before others in the
lustre and honour of it; it shines before men, who see their good works,
[Mat 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016). They go on in their way
with a holy security and serenity of mind, as those that walk in the
light. It is as the morning-light, which shines out of obscurity ([Isa
58:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#008), [Isa
58:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#010)) and puts an end to the works of
darkness. \[2.\] It is a growing light; it shines more and more, not
like the light of a meteor, which soon disappears, or that of a candle,
which burns dim and burns down, but like that of the rising sun, which
goes forward shining, mounts upward shining. Grace, the guide of this
way, is growing; he that has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger.
That joy which is the pleasure of this way, that honour which is the
brightness of it, and all that happiness which is indeed its light,
shall be still increasing. \[3.\] It will arrive, in the end, at the
perfect day. The light of the dayspring will at length be noon-day
light, and it is this that the enlightened soul is pressing towards. The
saints will not be perfect till they come to heaven, but there they
shall themselves shine as the sun when he goes forth in his strength,
[Mat 13:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#043). Their graces and joys
shall be all consummate. Therefore it is our wisdom to keep close to the
path of the just.

(2.) The way of sin is as darkness, [Pro
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#019). The works he had cautioned us
not to have fellowship with are works of darkness. What true pleasure
and satisfaction can those have who know no pleasure and satisfaction
but what they have in doing mischief? What sure guide have those that
cast God's word behind them? The way of the wicked is dark, and
therefore dangerous; for they stumble and yet know not at what they
stumble. They fall into sin, but are not aware which way the temptation
came by which they were overthrown, and therefore know not how to avoid
it the next time. They fall into trouble, but never enquire wherefore
God contends with them; they consider not that they do evil, nor what
will be in the end of it, [Psa 82:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#005);
[Job 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#005), [Job
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#006). This is the way we are directed
to shun.

[Proverbs 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 4:20</span></span>

Solomon, having warned us not to do evil, here teaches us how to do
well. It is not enough for us to shun the occasions of sin, but we must
study the methods of duty.

I. We must have a continual regard to the word of God and endeavour that
it may be always ready to us.

1\. The sayings of wisdom must be our principles by which we must govern
ourselves, our monitors to warn us of duty and danger; and therefore,
(1.) We must receive them readily: "Incline thy ear to them ([Pro
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#020)); humbly bow to them; diligently
listen to them." The attentive hearing of the word of God is a good sign
of a work of grace begun in the heart and a good means of carrying it
on. It is to be hoped that those are resolved to do their duty who are
inclined to know it. (2.) We must retain them carefully ([Pro
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#021)); we must lay them before us as
our rule: "Let them not depart from thy eyes; view them, review them,
and in every thing aim to conform to them." We must lodge them within
us, as a commanding principle, the influences of which are diffused
throughout the whole man: "Keep them in the midst of thy heart, as
things dear to thee, and which thou art afraid of losing." Let the word
of God be written in the heart, and that which is written there will
remain.

2\. The reason why we must thus make much of the words of wisdom is
because they will be both food and physic to us, like the tree of life,
[Rev 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#002); [Eze
47:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#012). Those that seek and find them,
find and keep them, shall find in them, (1.) Food: For they are life
unto those that find them, [Pro 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#022).
As the spiritual life was begun by the word as the instrument of it, so
by the same word it is still nourished and maintained. We could not live
without it; we may by faith live upon it. (2.) Physic. They are health
to all their flesh, to the whole man, both body and soul; they help to
keep both in good plight. They are health to all flesh, so the
Septuagint. There is enough to cure all the diseases of this distempered
world. They are a medicine to all their flesh (so the word is), to all
their corruptions, for they are called flesh, to all their grievances,
which are as thorns in the flesh. There is in the word of God a proper
remedy for all our spiritual maladies.

II\. We must keep a watchful eye and a strict hand upon all the motions
of our inward man, [Pro 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#023). Here is,
1. A great duty required by the laws of wisdom, and in order to our
getting and preserving wisdom: Keep thy heart with all diligence. God,
who gave us these souls, gave us a strict charge with them: Man, woman,
keep thy heart; take heed to thy spirit, [Deu
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#009). We must maintain a holy jealousy
of ourselves, and set a strict guard, accordingly, upon all the avenues
of the soul; keep our hearts from doing hurt and getting hurt, from
being defiled by sin and disturbed by trouble; keep them as our jewel,
as our vineyard; keep a conscience void of offence; keep out bad
thoughts; keep up good thoughts; keep the affections upon right objects
and in due bounds. Keep them with all keepings (so the word is); there
are many ways of keeping things - by care, by strength, by calling in
help, and we must use them all in keeping our hearts; and all little
enough, so deceitful are they, [Jer
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#009). Or above all keepings; we must
keep our hearts with more care and diligence than we keep any thing
else. We must keep our eyes ([Job
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#001)), keep our tongues ([Psa
34:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#013)), keep our feet ([Ecc
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#001)), but, above all, keep our hearts.
2. A good reason given for this care, because out of it are the issues
of life. Out of a heart well kept will flow living issues, good
products, to the glory of God and the edification of others. Or, in
general, all the actions of the life flow from the heart, and therefore
keeping that is making the tree good and healing the springs. Our lives
will be regular or irregular, comfortable or uncomfortable, according as
our hearts are kept or neglected.

III\. We must set a watch before the door of our lips, that we offend
not with out tongue ([Pro 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#024)): Put
away from thee a froward mouth and perverse lips. Our hearts being
naturally corrupt, out of them a great deal of corrupt communication is
apt to come, and therefore we must conceive a great dread and
detestation of all manner of evil words, cursing, swearing, lying,
slandering, brawling, filthiness, and foolish talking, all which come
from a froward mouth and perverse lips, that will not be governed either
by reason or religion, but contradict both, and which are as unsightly
and ill-favoured before God as a crooked distorted mouth drawn awry is
before men. All manner of tongue sins, we must, by constant watchfulness
and stedfast resolution, put from us, put far from us, abstaining from
all words that have an appearance of evil and fearing to learn any such
words.

IV\. We must make a covenant with our eyes: "Let them look right on and
straight before thee, [Pro 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#025). Let
the eye be fixed and not wandering; let it not rove after every thing
that presents itself, for then it will be diverted form good and
ensnared in evil. Turn it from beholding vanity; let thy eye be single
and not divided; let thy intentions be sincere and uniform, and look not
asquint at any by-end." We must keep our eye upon our Master, and be
careful to approve ourselves to him; keep our eye upon our rule, and
conform to that; keep our eye upon our mark, the prize of the high
calling, and direct all towards that. Oculum in metam - The eye upon the
goal.

V. We must act considerately in all we do ([Pro
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#026)): Ponder the path of thy feet,
weigh it (so the word is); "put the word of God in one scale, and what
thou hast done, or art about to do, in the other, and see how they
agree; be nice and critical in examining whether thy way be good before
the Lord and whether it will end well." We must consider our past ways
and examine what we have done, and our present ways, what we are doing,
whither we are going, and see that we walk circumspectly. It concerns us
to consider what are the duties and what the difficulties, what are the
advantages and what the dangers, of our way, that we may act
accordingly. "Do nothing rashly."

VI\. We must act with steadiness, caution, and consistency: "Let all thy
ways be established ([Pro 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#026)) and be
not unstable in them, as the double-minded man is; halt not between two,
but go on in an even uniform course of obedience; turn not to the right
hand not to the left, for there are errors on both hands, and Satan
gains his point if he prevails to draw us aside either way. Be very
careful to remove thy foot from evil; take heed of extremes, for in them
there is evil, and let thy eyes look right on, that thou mayest keep the
golden mean." Those that would approve themselves wise must always be
watchful.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 5](pro005)

</div>
