<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro023)  [Next](pro025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#001)

[Proverbs 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 24:1</span></span>

Here, 1. The caution given is much the same with that which we had
before ([Pro 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#017)), not to envy
sinners, not to think them happy, nor to whish ourselves in their
condition, though they prosper ever so much in this world, and are ever
so marry and ever so secure. "Let not such a thought ever come into thy
mind, O that I could shake off the restraints of religion and
conscience, and take as great a liberty to indulge the sensual appetite,
as I see such and such do! No; desire not to be with them, to do as they
do and fare as they fare, and to cast in thy lot among them." 2. Here is
another reason given for this caution: "Be not envious against them, not
only because their end will be had, but because their way is so, [Pro
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#002). Do not think with them, for
their heart studies destruction to others, but it will prove destruction
to themselves. Do not speak like them, for their lips talk of their
mischief. All they say has an ill tendency, to dishonour God, reproach
religion, or wrong their neighbour; but it will be mischief to
themselves at last. It is therefore thy wisdom to have nothing to do
with them. Nor hast thou any reason to look upon them with envy, but
with pity rather, or a just indignation at their wicked practices."

[Proverbs 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 24:3</span></span>

We are tempted to envy those that grow rich, and raise their estates and
families, by such unjust courses as our consciences will by no means
suffer us to use. But, to set aside that temptation, Solomon here shows
that a man, with prudent management, may raise his estate and family by
lawful and honest means, with a good conscience, and a good name, and
the blessing of God upon his industry; and, if the other be raised a
little sooner, yet these will last a great deal longer. 1. That which is
here recommended to us as having the best influence upon our outward
prosperity is wisdom, and understanding, and knowledge; that is, both
piety towards God (for that is true wisdom) and prudence in the
management of our outward affairs. We must govern ourselves in every
thing by the rules of religion first and then of discretion. Some that
are truly pious do not thrive in the world, for want of prudence; and
some that are prudent enough, yet do not prosper, because they lean to
their own understanding and do not acknowledge God in their ways;
therefore both must go together to complete a wise man. 2. That which is
here set before us as the advantage of true wisdom is that it will make
men's outward affairs prosperous and successful. (1.) it will build a
house and establish it, [Pro 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#003). Men
may by unrighteous practices build their houses, but they cannot
establish them, for the foundation is rotten ([Hab
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#009), [Hab
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#010)); whereas what is honestly got
will wear like steel and be an inheritance to children's children. (2.)
It will enrich a house and furnish it, [Pro
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#004). Those that manage their affairs
with wisdom and equity, that are diligent in the use of lawful means for
increasing what they have that spare from luxury and spend in charity,
are in a fair way to have their shops, their warehouses, their chambers,
filled with all precious and pleasant riches - precious because got by
honest labour, and the substance of a diligent man is precious -
pleasant because enjoyed with holy cheerfulness. Some think this is to
be understood chiefly of spiritual riches. By knowledge the chambers of
the soul are filled with the graces and comforts of the Spirit, those
precious and pleasant riches; for the Spirit, by enlightening the
understanding, performs all his other operations on the soul. (3.) It
will fortify a house and turn it into a castle: Wisdom is better than
weapons of war, offensive or defensive. A wise man is in strength, is in
a strong-hold, yea, a man of knowledge strengthens might, that is,
increases it, [Pro 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#005). As we grow in
knowledge we grow in all grace, [Pe2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#018). Those that increase in wisdom
are strengthened with all might, [Col
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#009), [Col
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#011). A wise man will compass that by
his wisdom which a strong man cannot effect by force of arms. The spirit
is strengthened both for the spiritual work and the spiritual warfare by
true wisdom. (4.) It will govern a house and a kingdom too, and the
affairs of both, [Pro 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#006). Wisdom
will erect a college, or council of state. Wisdom will be of use, \[1.\]
For the managing of the public quarrels, so as not to engage in them but
for an honest cause and with some probability of success, and, when they
are engaged in, to manage them well, and so as to make either an
advantageous peace or an honourable retreat: By wise counsel thou shalt
make war, which is a thing that may prove of ill consequence if not done
by wise counsel. \[2.\] For the securing of the public peace: In the
multitude of counsellors there is safety, for one may foresee the
danger, and discern the advantages, which another cannot. In our
spiritual conflicts we need wisdom, for our enemy is subtle.

[Proverbs 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 24:7</span></span>

Here is the description, 1. Of a weak man: Wisdom is too high for him;
he thinks it so, and therefore, despairing to attain it, he will take no
pains in the pursuit of it, but sit down content without it. And really
it is so; he has not capacity for it, and therefore the advantages he
has for getting it are all in vain to him. It is no easy thing to get
wisdom; those that have natural parts good enough, yet if they be
foolish, that is, if they be slothful and will not take pains, if they
be playful and trifling, and given to their pleasures, if they be
viciously inclined and keep bad company, it is too high for them; they
are not likely to reach it. And, for want of it, they are unfit for the
service of their country: They open not their mouth in the gate; they
are not admitted into the council or magistracy, or, if they are, they
are dumb statues, and stand for cyphers; they say nothing, because they
have nothing to say, and they know that if they should offer any thing
it would not be heeded, nay, it would be hissed at. Let young men take
pains to get wisdom, that they may be qualified for public business, and
do it with reputation. 2. Of a wicked man, who is not only despised as a
fool is, but detested. Two sorts of wicked men are so: - (1.) Such as
are secretly malicious. Though they speak courteously and conduct
themselves plausibly, they devise to do evil, are contriving to do an
ill turn to those they bear a grudge to, or have an envious eye at. He
that does so shall be called a mischievous person, or a master of
mischief, which perhaps was then a common name of reproach; he shall be
branded as an inventor of evil things ([Rom
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#030)), or if any mischief be done, he
shall be suspected as the author of it, or at least accessory to it.
This devising evil is the thought of foolishness, [Pro
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#009). It is made light of, and turned
off with a jest, as only a foolish thing, but really it is sin, it is
exceedingly sinful; you cannot call it by a worse name than to call it
sin. It is bad to do evil, but it is worse to devise it; for that has in
it the subtlety and poison of the old serpent. But it may be taken more
generally. We contract guilt, not only by the act of foolishness, but by
the thought of it, though it go no further; the first risings of sin in
the heart are sin, offensive to God, and must be repented of or we are
undone. Not only malicious, unclean, proud thoughts, but even foolish
thoughts, are sinful thoughts. If vain thoughts lodge in the heart, they
defile it ([Jer 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#014)), which is a
reason why we should keep our hearts with all diligence, and harbour no
thoughts there which cannot give a good account of themselves, [Gen
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#005). (2.) Such as are openly abusive:
The scorner, who gives ill-language to every body, takes a pleasure in
affronting people and reflecting upon them, is an abomination to men;
none that have any sense of honour and virtue will care to keep company
with him. The seat of the scornful is the pestilential chair (as the
Septuagint calls it, [Psa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)), which
no wise man will come near, for fear of taking the infection. Those that
strive to make others odious do but make themselves so.

[Proverbs 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 24:10</span></span>

Note, 1. In the day of adversity we are apt to faint, to droop and be
discouraged, to desist from our work, and to despair of relief. Our
spirits sink, and then our hands hang down and our knees grow feeble,
and we become unfit for anything. And often those that are most cheerful
when they are well droop most, and are most dejected, when any thing
ails them. 2. This is an evidence that our strength is small, and is a
means of weakening it more. "It is a sign that thou art not a man of any
resolution, any firmness of thought, any consideration, any faith (for
that is the strength of a soul), if thou canst not bear up under an
afflictive change of thy condition." Some are so feeble that they can
bear nothing; if a trouble does but touch them ([Job
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#005)), nay, if it does but threaten
them, they faint immediately and are ready to give up all for gone; and
by this means they render themselves unfit to grapple with their trouble
and unable to help themselves. Be of good courage therefore, and God
shall strengthen thy heart.

[Proverbs 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 24:11</span></span>

Here is, 1. A great duty required of us, and that is to appear for the
relief of oppressed innocency. If we see the lives or livelihoods of any
in danger of being taken away unjustly, we ought to bestir ourselves all
we can to save them, by disproving the false accusations on which they
are condemned and seeking out proofs of their innocency. Though the
persons be not such as we are under any particular obligation to, we
must help them, out of a general zeal for justice. If any be set upon by
force and violence, and it be in our power to rescue them, we ought to
do it. Nay, if we see any through ignorance exposing themselves to
danger, or fallen in distress, as travellers upon the road, ships at
sea, or any the like, it is our duty, though it be with peril to
ourselves, to hasten with help to them and not forbear to deliver them,
not to be slack, or remiss, or indifferent, in such a case. 2. An answer
to the excuse that is commonly make for the omission of this duty. Thou
wilt say, "Behold, we knew it not; we were not aware of the imminency of
the danger the person was in; we could not be sure that he was innocent,
nor did we know how to prove his innocence, nor which way to do any
thing in favour of him, else we would have helped him." Now, (1.) It is
easy to make such an excuse as this, sufficient to avoid the censures of
men, for perhaps they cannot disprove us when we say, We knew it not,
or, We forgot; and the temptation to tell a lie for the excusing of a
fault is very strong when we know that it is impossible to be disproved,
the truth lying wholly in our own breast, as when we say, We thought so
and so, and really designed it, which no one is conscious of but
ourselves. (2.) It is not so easy with such excuses to evade the
judgment of God; and to the discovery of that we lie open and by the
determination of that we must abide. Now, \[1.\] God ponders the heart
and keeps the soul; he keeps an eye upon it, observes all the motions of
it; its most secret thoughts and intents are all naked and open before
him. It is his prerogative to do so, and that in which he glories. [Jer
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#010), I the Lord search the heart. He
keeps the soul, holds it in life. This is a good reason why we should be
tender of the lives of others, and do all we can to preserve them,
because our lives have been precious in the sight of God and he has
graciously kept them. \[2.\] He knows and considers whether the excuse
we make be true or no, whether it was because we did not know it or
whether the true reason was not because we did not love our neighbour as
we ought, but were selfish, and regardless both of God and man. Let this
serve to silence all our frivolous pleas, by which we think to stop the
mouth of conscience when it charges us with the omission of plain duty:
Does not he that ponders the heart consider it? \[3.\] He will judge us
accordingly. As his knowledge cannot be imposed upon, so his justice
cannot be biassed, but he will render to every man according to his
works, not only the commission of evil works, but the omission of good
works.

[Proverbs 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 24:13</span></span>

We are here quickened to the study of wisdom by the consideration both
of the pleasure and the profit of it. 1. It will be very pleasant. We
eat honey because it is sweet to the taste, and upon that account we
call it good, especially that which runs first from the honey-comb.
Canaan was said to flow with milk and honey, and honey was the common
food of the country ([Luk 24:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#041), [Luk
24:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#042)), even for children, [Isa
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#015). Thus should we feed upon wisdom,
and relish the good instructions of it. Those that have tasted honey
need no further proof that it is sweet, nor can they by any argument be
convinced of the contrary; so those that have experienced the power of
truth and godliness are abundantly satisfied of the pleasure of both;
they have tasted the sweetness of them, and all the atheists in the
world with their sophistry, and the profane with their banter, cannot
alter their sentiments. 2. It will be very profitable. Honey may be
sweet to the taste and yet not wholesome, but wisdom has a future
recompence attending it, as well as a present sweetness in it. "Thou art
permitted to eat honey, and the agreeableness of it to thy taste invites
thee to it; but thou hast much more reason to relish and digest the
precepts of wisdom, for when thou hast found that, there shall be a
reward; thou shalt be paid for thy pleasure, while the servants of sin
pay dearly for their pains. Wisdom does indeed set thee to work, but
there shall be a reward; it does indeed raise great expectations in
thee, but as thy labour, so thy hope, shall not be in vain; thy
expectation shall not be cut off ([Pro
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#018)), nay, it shall be infinitely
outdone."

[Proverbs 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 24:15</span></span>

This is spoken, not so much by way of counsel to wicked men (they will
not receive instruction, [Pro 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#009)),
but rather in defiance of them, for the encouragement of good people
that are threatened by them. See here, 1. The designs of the wicked
against the righteous, and the success they promise themselves in those
designs. The plot is laid deeply: They lay wait against the dwelling of
the righteous, thinking to charge some iniquity upon it, or compass dome
design against it; they lie in wait at the door, to catch him when he
stirs out, as David's persecutors, Ps. 59 title. The hope is raised
high; they doubt not but to spoil his dwelling-place because he is weak
and cannot support it, because his condition is low and distressed, and
he is almost down already. All this is a fruit of the old enmity in the
seed of the serpent against the seed of the woman. The blood-thirsty
hate the upright. 2. The folly and frustration of these designs (1.) The
righteous man, whose ruin was expected, recovers himself. He falls seven
times into trouble, but, by the blessing of God upon his wisdom and
integrity, he rises again, sees through his troubles and sees better
times after them. The just man falls, sometimes falls seven times
perhaps, into sin, sins of infirmity, through the surprise of
temptation; but he rises again by repentance, finds mercy with God, and
regains his peace. (2.) The wicked man, who expected to see his ruin and
to help it forward, is undone. He falls into mischief; his sins and his
troubles are his utter destruction.

[Proverbs 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 24:17</span></span>

Here, 1. The pleasure we are apt to take in the troubles of an enemy is
forbidden us. If any have done us an ill turn, or if we bear them
ill-will only because they stand in our light or in our way, when any
damage comes to them (suppose they fall), or any danger (suppose they
stumble), our corrupt hearts are too apt to conceive a secret delight
and satisfaction in it - Aha! so would we have it; they are entangled;
the wilderness has shut them in - or, as Tyrus said concerning Jerusalem
([Eze 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#002)) I shall be replenished,
now she is laid waste. "Men hope in the ruin of their enemies or rivals
to wreak their revenge or to find their account; but be not thou so
inhuman; rejoice not when the worst enemy thou hast falls." There may be
a holy joy in the destruction of God's enemies, as it tends to the glory
of God and the welfare of the church ([Psa
58:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010)); but in the ruin of our
enemies, as such, we must by no means rejoice; on the contrary, we must
weep even with them when they weep (as David, [Psa
35:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#013), [Psa
35:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#014)), and that in sincerity, not so
much as letting our hearts be secretly glad at their calamities. 2. The
provocation which that pleasure gives to God is assigned as the reason
of that prohibition: The Lord will see it, though it be hidden in the
heart only, and it will displease him, as it will displease a prudent
father to see one child triumph in the correction of another, which he
ought to tremble at, and take warning by, not knowing how soon it may be
his own case, he having so often deserved it. Solomon adds an argument
ad hominem - addressed to the individual: "Thou canst not do a greater
kindness to thy enemy, when he has fallen, than to rejoice in it; for
them, to cross thee and vex thee, God will turn his wrath from him; for,
as the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God, so the
righteousness of God was never intended to gratify the wrath of man, and
humour his foolish passions; rather than seem to do that he will adjourn
the execution of his wrath: nay, it is implied that when he turns his
wrath from him he will turn it against thee and the cup of trembling
shall be put into thy hand."

[Proverbs 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 24:19</span></span>

Here, 1. He repeats the caution he had before given against envying the
pleasures and successes of wicked man in their wicked ways. This he
quotes from his father David, [Psa
37:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#001). We must not in any case fret
ourselves, or make ourselves uneasy, whatever God does in his providence
how disagreeable soever it is to our sentiments, interests, and
expectations, we must acquiesce in it. Even that which grieves us must
not fret us; nor must our eye be evil against any because God is good.
Are we more wise or just than he? If wicked people prosper, we must not
therefore incline to do as they do. 2. He gives a reason for this
caution, taken from the end of that way which wicked man walk in. Envy
not their prosperity; for, (1.) There is no true happiness in it: Thee
shall be no reward to the evil man; his prosperity only serves for his
present subsistence; these are all the good things he must ever expect:
there is none intended him in the world of retribution. He has his
reward, [Mat 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#002). He shall have none.
Those are not to be envied that have their portion in this life and must
out-live it, [Psa 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#014). (2.) There is
no continuance in it; their candle shines brightly, but it shall
presently be put out, and a final period put to all their comforts, [Job
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#014); [Psa
37:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#001), [Psa
37:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#002).

[Proverbs 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 24:21</span></span>

Note, 1. Religion and loyalty must go together. As men, it is our duty
to honour our Creator, to worship and reverence him, and to be always in
his fear; as members of a community, incorporated for mutual benefit, it
is our duty to be faithful and dutiful to the government God has set
over us, [Rom 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001), [Rom
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#002). Those that are truly religious
will be loyal, in conscience towards God; the godly in the land will be
the quite in the land; and those are not truly loyal, or will be so no
longer than is for their interest, that are not religious. How should he
be true to his prince that is false to his God? And, if they come in
competition, it is an adjudged case, we must obey God rather than men.
2. Innovations in both are to be dreaded. Have nothing to do, he does
not say, with those that change, for there may be cause to change for
the better, but those that are given to change, that affect change for
change-sake, out of a peevish discontent with that which is and a
fondness for novelty, or a desire to fish in troubled waters: Meddle not
with those that are given to change either in religion or in a civil
government; come not into their secret; join not with them in their
cabals, nor enter into the mystery of their iniquity. 3. Those that are
of restless, factious, turbulent spirits, commonly pull mischief upon
their own heads ere they are aware: Their calamity shall rise suddenly.
Though they carry on their designs with the utmost secresy, they will be
discovered, and brought to condign punishment, when they little think of
it. Who knows the time and manner of the ruin which both God and the
king will bring on their contemners, both on them and those that meddle
with them?

[Proverbs 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 24:23</span></span>

Here are lessons for wise men, that is, judges and princes. As subjects
must do their duty, and be obedient to magistrates, so magistrates must
do their duty in administering justice to their subjects, both in pleas
of the crown and causes between party and party. These are lessons for
them. 1. They must always weigh the merits of a cause, and not be swayed
by any regard, one way or other, to the parties concerned: It is not
good in itself, nor can it ever do well, to have respect of persons in
judgment; the consequences of it cannot but be the perverting of justice
and doing wrong under colour of law and equity. A good judge will know
the truth, not know faces, so as to countenance a friend and help him
out in a bad cause, or so much as omit any thing that can be said or
done in favour of a righteous cause, when it is the cause of an enemy.
2. They must never connive at or encourage wicked people in their wicked
practices. Magistrates in their places, and ministers in theirs, are to
deal faithfully and the wicked man, though he be a great man or a
particular friend, to convict him of his wickedness, to show him what
will be in the end thereof, to discover him to others, that they may
avoid him. But if those whose office it is thus to show people their
transgressions palliate them and connive at them, if they excuse the
wicked man, much more if they prefer him and associate with him (which
is, in effect, to say, Thou art righteous), they shall justly be looked
upon as enemies to the public peace and welfare, which they ought to
advance, and the people shall curse them and cry out shame on them; and
even those of other nations shall abhor them, as base betrayers of their
trust. 3. They must discountenance and give check to all fraud,
violence, injustice, and immorality; and, though thereby they may
disoblige a particular person, yet they will recommend themselves to the
favour of God and man. Let magistrates and ministers, and private
persons too that are capable of doing it, rebuke the wicked, that they
may bring them to repentance or put them to shame, and they shall have
the comfort of it in their own bosoms: To them shall be delight, when
their consciences witness for them that they have been witnesses for
God; and a good blessing shall come upon them, the blessing of God and
good men; they shall be deemed religion's patrons and their country's
patriots. See [Pro 28:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#023). 4. They must
always give judgment according to equity ([Pro
24:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#026)); they must give a right answer,
that is, give their opinion and pass sentence according to law and them
true merits of the cause; and every one shall kiss his lips that does
so, that is, shall love and honour him, and be subject to his orders,
for there is a kiss of allegiance as well as of affection. He that in
common conversation likewise speaks pertinently and with sincerity
recommends himself to his company and is beloved and respected by all.

[Proverbs 24:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 24:27</span></span>

This is a rule of prudence in the management of household affairs; for
all good men should be good husbands, and manage with discretion, which
would prevent a great deal of sin, and trouble, and disgrace to their
profession. 1. We must prefer necessaries before conveniences, and not
lay that out for show which should be expended for the support of the
family. We must be contented with a mean cottage for a habitation,
rather than want, or go in debt for, food convenient. 2. We must not
think of building till we can afford it: "First apply thyself to thy
work without in the field; let thy ground be put into good order; look
after thy husbandry, for it is that by which thou must get; and, when
thou hast got well by that, then, and not till then, thou mayest think
of rebuilding and beautifying thy house, for that is it upon which, and
in which, thou wilt have occasion to spend." Many have ruined their
estates and families by laying out money on that which brings nothing
in, beginning to build when they were not able to finish. Some
understand it as advice to young men not to marry (for by that the house
is built) till they have set up in the world, and not wherewith to
maintain a wife and children comfortably. 3. When we have any great
design on foot it is wisdom to take it before us, and make the necessary
preparations, before we fall to work, that, when it is begun, it may not
stand still for want of materials. Solomon observed this rule himself in
building the house of God; all was made ready before it was brought to
the ground, [Kg1 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#007).

[Proverbs 24:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">pro 24:28</span></span>

We are here forbidden to be in any thing injurious to our neighbour,
particularly in and by the forms of law, either, 1. As a witness: "Never
bear a testimony against any man without cause, unless what thou sayest
thou knowest to be punctually true and thou hast a clear call to testify
it. Never bear a false testimony against any one;" for it follows,
"Deceive not with thy lips; deceive not the judge and jury, deceive not
those whom thou conversest with, into an ill opinion of thy neighbour.
When thou speakest of thy neighbour do not only speak that which is
true, but take heed lest, in the manner of thy speaking, thou insinuate
any thing that is otherwise and so shouldst deceive by innuendos or
hyperboles." Or, 2. As a plaintiff or prosecutor. If there be occasion
to bring an action or information against thy neighbour, let it not be
from a spirit of revenge. "Say not, I am resolved I will be even with
him: I will do so to him as he had done to me." Even a righteous cause
becomes unrighteous when it is thus prosecuted with malice. Say not, I
will render to the man according to his work, and make him pay dearly
for it; for it is God's prerogative to do so, and we must leave it to
him, and not step into his throne, or take his work out of his hands. If
we will needs be our own carvers, and judges in our own cause, we
forfeit the benefit of an appeal to God's tribunal; therefore we must
not avenge ourselves, because he has said, Vengeance is mine.

[Proverbs 24:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">pro 24:30</span></span>

Here is, 1. The view which Solomon took of the field and vineyard of the
slothful man. He did not go on purpose to see it, but, as he passed by,
observing the fruitfulness of the ground, as it is very proper for
travellers to do, and his subjects' management of their land, as it is
very proper for magistrates to do, he cast his eye upon a field and a
vineyard unlike all the rest; for, though the soil was good, yet there
was nothing growing in them but thorns and nettles, not here and there
one, but they were all overrun with weeds; and, if there had been any
fruit, it would have been eaten up by the beasts, for there was no
fence: The stone-wall was broken down See the effects of that curse upon
the ground ([Gen 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#018)), "Thorns and
thistles shall it bring forth unto thee, and nothing else unless thou
take pains with it." See what a blessing to the world the husbandman's
calling is, and what a wilderness this earth, even Canaan itself, would
be without it. The king himself is served of the field, but he would be
ill served if God did not teach the husbandman discretion and diligence
to clear the ground, plant it, sow it, and fence it. See what a great
difference there is between some and others in the management even of
their worldly affairs, and how little some consult their reputation, not
caring though they proclaim their slothfulness, in the manifest effects
of it, to all that pass by, shamed by their neighbour's diligence. 2.
The reflections which he made upon it. He paused a little and considered
it, looked again upon it, and received instruction. He did not break out
into any passionate censures of the owner, did not call him any ill
names, but he endeavoured himself to get good by the observation and to
be quickened by it to diligence. Note, Those that are to give
instruction to others must receive instruction themselves, and
instruction may be received, not only from what we read and hear, but
from what we see, not only from what we see of the works of God, but
from what we see of the manners of man, not only from men's good
manners, but from their evil manners. Plutarch relates a saying of Cato
Major, "That wise men profit more by fools than fools by wise men; for
wise men will avoid the faults of fools, but fools will not imitate the
virtues of wise men." Solomon reckoned that he received instruction by
this sight, though it did not suggest to him any new notion or lesson,
but only put him in mind of an observation he himself had formerly made,
both of the ridiculous folly of the sluggard (who, when he has needful
work to do, lies dozing in bed and cries, Yet a little sleep, a little
slumber, and still it will be a little more, till he has slept his eyes
out, and, instead of being fitted by sleep for business, as wise men
are, he is dulled, and stupefied, and made good for nothing) and of
certain misery that attends him: his poverty comes as one that travels;
it is constantly coming nearer and nearer to him, and will be upon him
speedily, and want seizes him as irresistibly as an armed man, a
highwayman that will strip him of all he has. Now this is applicable,
not only to our worldly business, to show what a scandalous thing
slothfulness in that is, and how injurious to the family, but to the
affairs of our souls. Note, (1.) Our souls are our fields and vineyards,
which we are every one of us to take care of, to dress, and to keep.
They are capable of being improved with good husbandry; that may be got
out of them which will be fruit abounding to our account. We are charged
with them, to occupy them till our Lord come; and a great deal of care
and pains it is requisite that we should take about them. (2.) These
fields and vineyards are often in a very bad state, not only no fruit
brought forth, but all overgrown with thorns and nettles (scratching,
stinging, inordinate lusts and passions, pride, covetousness,
sensuality, malice, those are the thorns and nettles, the wild grapes,
which the unsanctified heart produces), no guard kept against the enemy,
but the stone-wall broken down, and all lies in common, all exposed.
(3.) Where it is thus it is owing to the sinner's own slothfulness and
folly. He is a sluggard, loves sleep, hates labour; and he is void of
understanding, understands neither his business nor his interest; he is
perfectly besotted. (4.) The issue of it will certainly be the ruin of
the soul and all its welfare. It is everlasting want that thus comes
upon it as an armed man. We know the place assigned to the wicked and
slothful servant.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 25](pro025)

</div>
