<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa016)  [Next](psa018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 17:0</span></span>

David being in great distress and danger by the malice of his enemies,
does, in this psalm, by prayer address himself to God, his tried refuge,
and seeks shelter in him. I. He appeals to God concerning his integrity
([Psa 17:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#001)). II. He prays to God
still to be upheld in his integrity and preserved from the malice of his
enemies ([Psa 17:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#005), [Psa
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#013)). III. He gives a character of
his enemies, using that as a plea with God for his preservation ([Psa
17:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#009), [Psa
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#014)). IV. He comforts himself with
the hopes of his future happiness ([Psa
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#015)). Some make him, in this, a type
of Christ, who was perfectly innocent, and yet was hated and persecuted,
but, like David, committed himself and his cause to him that judgeth
righteously.

A prayer of David.

[Psalms 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 17:1</span></span>

This psalm is a prayer. As there is a time to weep and a time to
rejoice, so there is a time for praise and a time for prayer. David was
now persecuted, probably by Saul, who hunted him like a partridge on the
mountains; without were fightings, within were fears, and both urged him
as a suppliant to the throne of mercy. He addresses himself to God in
these verses both by way of appeal (Hear the right, O Lord! let my
righteous cause have a hearing before thy tribunal, and give judgment
upon it) and by way of petition (Give ear unto my prayer [Psa
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#001), and again [Psa
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#006), Incline thy ear unto me and hear
my speech); not that God needs to be thus pressed with our importunity,
but he gives us leave thus to express our earnest desire of his gracious
answers to our prayers. These things he pleads with God for audience, 1.
That he was sincere, and did not dissemble with God in his prayer: It
goeth not out of feigned lips. He meant as he spoke, and the feelings of
his mind agreed with the expressions of his mouth. Feigned prayers are
fruitless; but, if our hearts lead our prayers, God will meet them with
his favour. 2. That he had been used to pray at other times, and it was
not his distress and danger that now first brought him to his duty: "I
have called upon thee formerly ([Psa
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#006)); therefore, Lord, hear me now."
It will be a great comfort to us if trouble, when it comes, find the
wheels of prayer a-going, for then we may come with the more boldness to
the throne of grace. Tradesmen are willing to oblige those that have
been long their customers. 3. That he was encouraged by his faith to
expect God would take notice of his prayers: "I know thou wilt hear me,
and therefore, O God, incline thy ear to me." Our believing dependence
upon God is a good plea to enforce our desires towards him. Let us now
see,

I. What his appeal is; and here observe,

1\. What the court is to the cognizance and determination of which he
makes his appeal; it is the court of heaven. "Lord, do thou hear the
right, for Saul is so passionate, so prejudiced, that he will not hear
it. Lord, let my sentence come forth from thy presence, [Psa
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#002). Men sentence me to be pursued
and cut off as an evil-doer. Lord, I appeal from them to thee." This he
did in a public remonstrance before Saul's face ([Sa1
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#012), The Lord judge between me and
thee), and he repeats it here in his private devotions. Note, (1.) The
equity and extent of God's government and judgment are a very great
support to injured innocency. If we are blackened, and abused, and
misrepresented, by unrighteous men, it is a comfort that we have a
righteous God to go to, who will take our part, who is the patron of the
oppressed, whose judgment is according to truth, by the discoveries of
which every person and every cause will appear in a true light, stripped
of all false colours, and by the decisions of which all unrighteous
dooms will be reversed, and to every man will be rendered according to
his work. (2.) Sincerity dreads no scrutiny, no, not that of God
himself, according to the tenour of the covenant of grace: Let thy eyes
behold the things that are equal. God's omniscience is as much the joy
of the upright as it is the terror of hypocrites, and is particularly
comfortable to those who are falsely accused and in any wise have wrong
done them.

2\. What the evidence is by which he hopes to make good his appeal; it
is the trial God had made of him ([Psa
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#003)): Thou hast proved my heart.
God's sentence is therefore right, because he always proceeds upon his
knowledge, which is more certain and infallible than that which men
attain to by the closest views and the strictest investigations.

(1.) He knew God had tried him, \[1.\] By his own conscience, which is
God's deputy in the soul. The spirit of a man is the candle of the Lord,
with this God had searched him, and visited him in the night, when he
communed with his own heart upon his bed. He had submitted to the
search, and had seriously reviewed the actions of his life, to discover
what was amiss, but could find nothing of that which his enemies charged
him with. \[2.\] By providence. God had tried him by the fair
opportunity he had, once and again, to kill Saul; he had tried him by
the malice of Saul, the treachery of his friends, and the many
provocations that were given him; so that, if he had been the man he was
represented to be, it would have appeared; but, upon all these trials,
there was nothing found against him, no proof at all of the things
whereof they accused him.

(2.) God tried his heart, and could witness to the integrity of that;
but, for the further proof of his integrity, he himself takes notice of
two things concerning which his conscience bore him record: - \[1.\]
That he had a fixed resolution against all sins of the tongue: "I have
purposed and fully determined, in the strength of God's grace, that my
mouth shall not transgress." He does not say, "I hope that it will not,"
or, "I wish that it may not," but, "I have fully purposed that it shall
not:" with this bridle he kept his mouth, [Psa
39:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001). Note, Constant resolution and
watchfulness against sins of the tongue will be a good evidence of our
integrity. If any offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, [Jam
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#002). He does not say, "My mouth never
shall transgress" (for in many things we all offend), but, "I have
purposed that it shall not;" and he that searches the heart knows
whether the purpose be sincere. \[2.\] That he had been as careful to
refrain from sinful actions as from sinful words ([Psa
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#004)): "Concerning the common works of
men, the actions and affairs of human life, I have, by the direction of
thy word, kept myself from the paths of the destroyer." Some understand
it particularly, that he had not been himself a destroyer of Saul, when
it lay in his power, nor had he permitted others to be so, but said to
Abishai, Destroy him not, [Sa1 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#009).
But it may be taken more generally; he kept himself from all evil works,
and endeavoured, according to the duty of his place, to keep others from
them too. Note, First, The ways of sin are paths of the destroyer, of
the devil, whose name is Abaddon and Apollyon, a destroyer, who ruins
souls by decoying them into the paths of sin. Secondly, It concerns us
all to keep out of the paths of the destroyer; for, if we walk in those
ways that lead to destruction, we must thank ourselves if destruction
and misery be our portion at last. Thirdly, It is by the word of God, as
our guide and rule, that we must keep out of the paths of the destroyer,
by observing its directions and admonitions, [Psa
119:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#009). Fourthly, If we carefully avoid
all the paths of sin, it will be very comfortable in the reflection,
when we are in trouble. If we keep ourselves, that the wicked one touch
us not with his temptations ([Jo1
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#018)), we may hope he will not be able
to touch us with his terrors.

II\. What his petition is; it is, in short, this, That he might
experience the good work of God in him, as an evidence of and
qualification for the good will of God towards him: this is grace and
peace from God the Father. 1. He prays for the work of God's grace in
him ([Psa 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#005)): "Hold up my going in
thy paths. Lord, I have, by thy grace, kept myself from the paths of the
destroyer; by the same grace let me be kept in thy paths; let me not
only be restrained from doing that which is evil, but quickened to
abound always in that which is good. Let my goings be held in thy paths,
that I may not turn back from them nor turn aside out of them; let them
be held up in thy paths, that I may not stumble and fall into sin, that
I may not trifle and neglect my duty. Lord, as thou hast kept me
hitherto, so keep me still." Those that are, through grace, going in
God's paths, have need to pray, and do pray, that their goings may be
held up in those paths; for we stand no longer than he is pleased to
hold us, we go no further than he is pleased to lead us, bear us up, and
carry us. David had been kept in the way of his duty hitherto, and yet
he does not think that this would be his security for the future, and
therefore prays, "Lord, still hold me up." Those that would proceed and
persevere in the way of God must, by faith and prayer, fetch in daily
fresh supplies of grace and strength from him. David was sensible that
his way was slippery, that he himself was weak, and not so well fixed
and furnished as he should be, that there were those who watched for his
halting and would improve the least slip against him, and therefore he
prays, "Lord, hold me up, that my foot slip not, that I may never say
nor do any thing that looks either dishonest or distrustful of thee and
thy providence and promise." 2. He prays for the tokens of God's favour
to him, [Psa 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#007). Observe here, (1.)
How he eyes God as the protector and Saviour of his people, so he calls
him, and thence he takes his encouragement in prayer: O thou that savest
by thy right hand (by thy own power, and needest not the agency of any
other) those who put their trust in thee from those that rise up against
them. It is the character of God's people that they trust in him; he is
pleased to make them confidants, for his secret is with the righteous;
and they make him their trust, for to him they commit themselves. Those
that trust in God have many enemies, many that rise up against them and
seek their ruin; but they have one friend that is able to deal with them
all, and, if he be for them, no matter who is against them. He reckons
it his honour to be their Saviour. His almighty power is engaged for
them, and they have all found him ready to save them. The margin reads
it, O thou that savest those who trust in thee from those that rise up
against thy right hand. Those that are enemies to the saints are rebels
against God and his right hand, and therefore, no doubt, he will, in due
time, appear against them. (2.) What he expects and desires from God:
Show thy marvellous loving-kindness. The word signifies, \[1.\]
Distinguishing favours. "Set apart thy loving-kindnesses for me; put me
not off with common mercies, but be gracious to me, as thou usest to do
to those who love thy name." \[2.\] Wonderful favours. "O make thy
loving-kindness admirable! Lord, testify thy favour to me in such a way
that I and others may wonder at it." God's loving-kindness is marvellous
for the freeness and the fulness of it; in some instances it appears, in
a special manner, marvellous ([Psa
118:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#023)), and it will certainly appear
so in the salvation of the saints, when Christ shall come to be
glorified in the saints and to be admired in all those that believe.

[Psalms 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 17:8</span></span>

We may observe, in these verses,

I. What David prays for. Being compassed about with enemies that sought
his life, he prays to God to preserve him safely through all their
attempts against him, to the crown to which he was anointed. This prayer
is both a prediction of the preservation of Christ through all the
hardships and difficulties of his humiliation, to the glories and joys
of his exalted state, and a pattern to Christians to commit the keeping
of their souls to God, trusting him to preserve them to his heavenly
kingdom. He prays,

1\. That he himself might be protected ([Psa
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#008)): "Keep me safe, hide me close,
where I may not be found, where I may not be come at. Deliver my soul,
not only my mortal life from death, but my immortal spirit from sin."
Those who put themselves under God's protection may in faith implore the
benefit of it.

(1.) He prays that God would keep him, \[1.\] With as much care as a man
keeps the apple of his eye with, which nature has wonderfully fenced and
teaches us to guard. If we keep God's law as the apple of our eye ([Pro
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#002)), we may expect that God will so
keep us; for it is said concerning his people that whoso touches them
touches the apple of his eye, [Zac
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008). \[2.\] With as much tenderness as
the hen gathers her young ones under her wings with; Christ uses the
similitude, [Mat 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037). "Hide me under
the shadow of thy wings, where I may be both safe and warm." Or,
perhaps, it rather alludes to the wings of the cherubim shadowing the
mercy-seat: "Let me be taken under the protection of that glorious grace
which is peculiar to God's Israel." What David here prays for was
performed to the Son of David, our Lord Jesus, of whom it is said ([Isa
49:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#002)) that God hid him in the shadow
of his hand, hid him as a polished shaft in his quiver.

(2.) David further prays, "Lord, keep me from the wicked, from men of
the world," \[1.\] "From being, and doing, like them, from walking in
their counsel, and standing in their way, and eating of their dainties."
\[2.\] "From being destroyed and run down by them. Let them not have
their will against me; let them not triumph over me."

2\. That all the designs of his enemies to bring his either into sin or
into trouble might be defeated ([Psa
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#013)): "Arise, O Lord! appear for me,
disappoint him, and cast him down in his own eyes by the
disappointment." While Saul persecuted David, how often did he miss his
prey, when he thought he had him sure! And how were Christ's enemies
disappointed by his resurrection, who thought they had gained their
point when they had put him to death!

II\. What he pleads for the encouraging of his own faith in these
petitions, and his hope of speeding. He pleads,

1\. The malice and wickedness of his enemies: "They are such as are not
fit to be countenanced, such as, if I be not delivered from them by the
special care of God himself, will be my ruin. Lord, see what wicked men
those are that oppress me, and waste me, and run me down." (1.) "They
are very spiteful and malicious; they are my deadly enemies, that thirst
after my blood, my heart's blood - enemies against the soul," so the
word is. David's enemies did what they could to drive him to sin and
drive him away from God; they bade him go serve other gods ([Sa1
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#019)), and therefore he had reason to
pray against them. Note, Those are our worst enemies, and we ought so to
account them, that are enemies to our souls. (2.) "They are very secure
and sensual, insolent and haughty ([Psa
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#010)): They are enclosed in their own
fat, wrap themselves, hug themselves, in their own honour, and power,
and plenty, and then make light of God, and set his judgments at
defiance, [Psa 73:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#007); [Job
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#027). They wallow in pleasure, and
promise themselves that tomorrow shall be as this day. And therefore
with their mouth they speak proudly, glorying in themselves, blaspheming
God, trampling upon his people, and insulting them." See [Rev
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005), [Rev
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#006). "Lord, are not such men as these
fit to be mortified and humbled, and made to know themselves? Will it
not be for thy glory to look upon these proud men and abase them?" (3.)
"They are restless and unwearied in their attempts against me: They
compass me about, [Psa 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#009). They have
now in a manner gained their point; they have surrounded us, they have
compassed us in our steps, they track us wherever we go, follow us as
close as the hound does the hare, and take all advantages against us,
being both too many and too quick for us. And yet they pretend to look
another way, and set their eyes bowing down to the earth, as if they
were meditating, retired into themselves, and thinking of something
else;" or (as some think), "They are watchful and intent upon it, to do
us a mischief; they are down-looked, and never let slip any opportunity
of compassing their design." (4.) "The ringleader of them (that was
Saul) is in a special manner bloody and barbarous, politic and
projecting ([Psa 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#012)), like a lion
that lives by prey and is therefore greedy of it." It is as much the
meat and drink of a wicked man to do mischief as it is of a good man to
do good. He is like a young lion lurking in secret places, disguising
his cruel designs. This is fitly applied to Saul, who sought David on
the rocks of the wild goats ([Sa1
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#002)) and in the wilderness of Ziph
([Psa 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#002)), where lions used to lurk
for their prey.

2\. The power God had over them, to control and restrain them. He
pleads, (1.) "Lord, they are thy sword; and will any father suffer his
sword to be drawn against his own children?" As this is a reason why we
should patiently bear the injuries of men, that they are but the
instruments of the trouble (it comes originally from God, to whose will
we are bound to submit), so it is an encouragement to us to hope both
that their wrath shall praise him and that the remainder thereof he will
restrain, that they are God's sword, which he can manage as he pleases,
which cannot move without him, and which he will sheathe when he has
done his work with it. (2.) "They are thy hand, by which thou dost
chastise thy people and make them feel thy displeasure." He therefore
expects deliverance from God's hand because from God's hand the trouble
came. Una eademque manus vulnus opemque tulit - The same hand wounds and
heals. There is no flying from God's hand but by flying to it. It is
very comfortable, when we are in fear of the power of man, to see it
dependent upon and in subjection to the power of God; see [Isa
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#006), [Isa
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#007), [Isa
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#015).

3\. Their outward prosperity ([Psa
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#014)): "Lord, appear against them,
for," (1.) "They are entirely devoted to the world, and care not for
thee and thy favour. They are men of the world, actuated by the spirit
of the world, walking according to the course of this world, in love
with the wealth and pleasure of this world, eager in the pursuits of it
(making them their business) and at ease in the enjoyments of it -
making them their bliss. They have their portion in this life; they look
upon the good things of this world as the best things, and sufficient to
make them happy, and they choose them accordingly, place their felicity
in them, and aim at them as their chief good; they rest satisfied with
them, their souls take their ease in them, and they look no further, nor
are in any care to provide for another life. These things are their
consolation ([Luk 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#024)), their good
things ([Luk 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#025)), their reward
([Mat 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#005)), the penny they agreed for,
[Mat 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#013). Now, Lord, shall men of
this character be supported and countenanced against those who honour
thee by preferring thy favour before all the wealth in this world, and
taking thee for their portion?" [Psa
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005). (2.) They have abundance of the
world. \[1.\] They have enlarged appetites, and a great deal wherewith
to satisfy them: Their bellies thou fillest with thy hidden treasures.
The things of this world are called treasures, because they are so
accounted; otherwise, to a soul, and in comparison with eternal
blessings, they are but trash. They are hidden in the several parts of
the creation, and hidden in the sovereign disposals of Providence. They
are God's hidden treasures, for the earth is his and the fulness
thereof, though the men of the world think it is their own and forget
God's property in it. Those that fare deliciously every day have their
bellies filled with these hidden treasures; and they will but fill the
belly ([Co1 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#013)); they will not fill
the soul; they are not bread for that, nor can they satisfy, [Isa
55:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#002). They are husks, and ashes, and
wind; and yet most men, having no care for their souls, but all for
their bellies, take up with them. \[2.\] They have numerous families,
and a great deal to leave to them: They are full of children, and yet
their pasture is not overstocked; they have enough for them all, and
leave the rest of their substance to their babes, to their
grand-children; and this is their heaven, it is their bliss, it is their
all. "Lord," said David, "deliver me from them; let me not have my
portion with them. Deliver me from their designs against me; for, they
having so much wealth and power, I am not able to deal with them unless
the Lord be on my side."

4\. He pleads his own dependence upon God as his portion and happiness.
"They have their portion in this life, but as for me ([Psa
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#015)) I am none of them, I have but
little of the world. Nec habeo, nec careo, nec curo - I neither have,
nor need, nor care for it. It is the vision and fruition of God that I
place my happiness in; that is it I hope for, and comfort myself with
the hopes of, and thereby distinguish myself from those who have their
portion in this life." Beholding God's face with satisfaction may be
considered, (1.) As our duty and comfort in this world. We must in
righteousness (clothed with Christ's righteousness, having a good heart
and a good life) by faith behold God's face and set him always before
us, must entertain ourselves from day to day with the contemplation of
the beauty of the Lord; and, when we awake every morning, we must be
satisfied with his likeness set before us in his word, and with his
likeness stamped upon us by his renewing grace. Our experience of God's
favour to us, and our conformity to him, should yield us more
satisfaction than those have whose belly is filled with the delights of
sense. 2. As our recompence and happiness in the other world. With the
prospect of that he concluded the foregoing psalm, and so this. That
happiness is prepared and designed only for the righteous that are
justified and sanctified. They shall be put in possession of it when
they awake, when the soul awakes, at death, out of its slumber in the
body, and when the body awakes, at the resurrection, out of its slumber
in the grave. That blessedness will consist in three things: - \[1.\]
The immediate vision of God and his glory: I shall behold thy face, not,
as in this world, through a glass darkly. The knowledge of God will
there be perfected and the enlarged intellect filled with it. \[2.\] The
participation of his likeness. Our holiness will there be perfect. This
results from the former ([Jo1 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)):
When he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he
is. \[3.\] A complete and full satisfaction resulting from all this: I
shall be satisfied, abundantly satisfied with it. There is no
satisfaction for a soul but in God, and in his face and likeness, his
good-will towards us and his good work in us; and even that satisfaction
will not be perfect till we come to heaven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 18](psa018)

</div>
