<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa083)  [Next](psa085) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 84](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 84:0</span></span>

Though David's name be not in the title of this psalm, yet we have
reason to think he was the penman of it, because it breathes so much of
his excellent spirit and is so much like the sixty-third psalm which was
penned by him; it is supposed that David penned this psalm when he was
forced by Absalom's rebellion to quit his city, which he lamented his
absence from, not so much because it was the royal city as because it
was the holy city, witness this psalm, which contains the pious
breathings of a gracious soul after God and communion with him. Though
it be not entitled, yet it may fitly be looked upon as a psalm or song
for the sabbath day, the day of our solemn assemblies. The psalmist here
with great devotion expresses his affection, I. To the ordinances of
God; his value for them ([Psa 84:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#001)),
his desire towards them ([Psa 84:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#002),
[Psa 84:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#003)), his conviction of the
happiness of those that did enjoy them ([Psa
84:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#004)), and his placing his own
happiness so very much in the enjoyment of them ([Psa
84:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#010)). II. To the God of the
ordinances; his desire towards him ([Psa
84:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#008), [Psa
84:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#009)), his faith in him ([Psa
84:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#011)), and his conviction of the
happiness of those that put their confidence in him ([Psa
84:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#012)). In singing this psalm we
should have the same devout affections working towards God that David
had, and then the singing of it will be very pleasant.

To the chief musician upon Gittith. A psalm for the sons of Korah.

[Psalms 84:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 84:1</span></span>

The psalmist here, being by force restrained from waiting upon God in
public ordinances, by the want of them is brought under a more sensible
conviction than ever of the worth of them. Observe,

I. The wonderful beauty he saw in holy institutions ([Psa
84:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#001)): How amiable are thy
tabernacles, O Lord of hosts! Some think that he here calls God the Lord
of hosts (that is, in a special manner of the angels, the heavenly
hosts) because of the presence of the angels in God's sanctuary; they
attended the Shechinah, and were (as some think) signified by the
cherubim. God is the Lord of these hosts, and his the tabernacle is: it
is spoken of as more than one (thy tabernacles) because there were
several courts in which the people attended, and because the tabernacle
itself consisted of a holy place and a most holy. How amiable are these!
How lovely is the sanctuary in the eyes of all that are truly
sanctified! Gracious souls see a wonderful, an inexpressible, beauty in
holiness, and in holy work. A tabernacle was a mean habitation, but the
disadvantage of external circumstances makes holy ordinances not at all
the less amiable; for the beauty of holiness is spiritual, and their
glory is within.

II\. The longing desire he had to return to the enjoyment of public
ordinances, or rather of God in them, [Psa
84:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#002). It was an entire desire; body,
soul, and spirit concurred in it. He was not conscious to himself of any
rising thought to the contrary. It was an intense desire; it was like
the desire of the ambitious, or covetous, or voluptuous. He longed, he
fainted, he cried out, importunate to be restored to his place in God's
courts, and almost impatient of delay. Yet it was not so much the courts
of the Lord that he coveted, but he cried out, in prayer, for the living
God himself. O that I might know him, and be again taken into communion
with him! [Jo1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003). Ordinances are
empty things if we meet not with God in the ordinances.

III\. His grudging the happiness of the little birds that made their
nests in the buildings that were adjoining to God's altars, [Psa
84:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#003). This is an elegant and
surprising expression of his affection to God's altars: The sparrow has
found a house and the swallow a nest for herself. These little birds, by
the instinct and direction of nature, provide habitations for themselves
in houses, as other birds do in the woods, both for their own repose and
in which to lay their young; some such David supposes there were in the
buildings about the courts of God's house, and wishes himself with them.
He would rather live in a bird's nest nigh God's altars than in a palace
at a distance from them. He sometimes wished for the wings of a dove, on
which to fly into the wilderness ([Psa
55:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#006)); here for the wings of a
sparrow, that he might fly undiscovered into God's courts; and, though
to watch as a sparrow alone upon the house-top is the description of a
very melancholy state and spirit ([Psa
102:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#007)), yet David would be glad to
take it for his lot, provided he might be near God's altars. It is
better to be serving God in solitude than serving sin with a multitude.
The word for a sparrow signifies any little bird, and (if I may offer a
conjecture) perhaps when, in David's time, music was introduced so much
into the sacred service, both vocal and instrumental, to complete the
harmony they had singing-birds in cages hung about the courts of the
tabernacle (for we find the singing of birds taken notice of to the
glory of God, [Psa 104:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#012)), and David
envies the happiness of these, and would gladly change places with them.
Observe, David envies the happiness not of those birds that flew over
the altars, and had only a transient view of God's courts, but of those
that had nests for themselves there. David will not think it enough to
sojourn in God's house as a way-faring man that turns aside to tarry for
a night; but let this be his rest, his home; here he will dwell. And he
takes notice that these birds not only have nests for themselves there,
but that there they lay their young; for those who have a place in God's
courts themselves cannot but desire that their children also may have in
God's house, and within his walls, a place and a name, that they may
feed their kids beside the shepherds' tents. Some give another sense of
this verse: "Lord, by thy providence thou hast furnished the birds with
nests and resting-places, agreeable to their nature, and to them they
have free recourse; but thy altar, which is my nest, my resting-place,
which I am as desirous of as ever the wandering bird was of her nest, I
cannot have access to. Lord, wilt thou provide better for thy birds than
for thy babes? As a bird that wanders from her nest so am I, now that I
wander from the place of God's altars, for that is my place ([Pro
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#008)); I shall never be easy till I
return to my place again." Note, Those whose souls are at home, at rest,
in God, cannot but desire a settlement near his ordinances. There were
two altars, one for sacrifice, the other for incense, and David, in his
desire of a place in God's courts, has an eye to both, as we also must,
in all our attendance on God, have an eye both to the satisfaction and
to the intercession of Christ. And, lastly, Observe how he eyes God in
this address: Thou art the Lord of hosts, my King and my God. Where
should a poor distressed subject seek for protection but with his king?
And should not a people seek unto their God? My King, my God, is Lord of
hosts; by him and his altars let me live and die.

IV\. His acknowledgment of the happiness both of the ministers and of
the people that had liberty of attendance on God's altars: "Blessed are
they. O when shall I return to the enjoyment of that blessedness?" 1.
Blessed are the ministers, the priests and Levites, who have their
residence about the tabernacle and are in their courses employed in the
service of it ([Psa 84:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#004)): Blessed are
those that dwell in thy house, that are at home there, and whose
business lies there. He is so far from pitying them, as confined to a
constant attendance and obliged to perpetual seriousness, that he would
sooner envy them than the greatest princes in the world. There are those
that bless the covetous, but he blesses the religious. Blessed are those
that dwell in thy house (not because they have good wages, a part of
every sacrifice for themselves, which would enable them to keep a good
table, but because they have good work): They will be still praising
thee; and, if there be a heaven upon earth, it is in praising God, in
continually praising him. Apply this to his house above; blessed are
those that dwell there, angels and glorified saints, for they rest not
day nor night from praising God. Let us therefore spend as much of our
time as may be in that blessed work in which we hope to spend a joyful
eternity. 2. Blessed are the people, the inhabitants of the country,
who, though they do not constantly dwell in God's house as the priests
do, yet have liberty of access to it at the times appointed for their
solemn feasts, the three great feasts, at which all the males were
obliged to give their attendance, [Deu
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#016). David was so far from reckoning
this an imposition, and a hardship put upon them, that he envies the
happiness of those who might thus attend, [Psa
84:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#005). Those whom he pronounces
blessed are here described. (1.) They are such as act in religion from a
rooted principle of dependence upon God and devotedness to him: Blessed
is the man whose strength is in thee, who makes thee his strength and
strongly stays himself upon thee, who makes thy name his strong tower
into which he runs for safety, [Pro
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#010). Happy is the man whose hope is
in the Lord his God, [Psa 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#004); [Psa
146:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#005). Those are truly happy who go
forth, and go on, in the exercises of religion, not in their own
strength (for then the work is sure to miscarry), but in the strength of
the grace of Jesus Christ, from whom all our sufficiency is. David
wished to return to God's tabernacles again, that there he might
strengthen himself in the Lord his God for service and suffering. (2.)
They are such as have a love for holy ordinances: In whose heart are the
ways of them, that is, who, having placed their happiness in God as
their end, rejoice in all the ways that lead to him, all those means by
which their graces are strengthened and their communion with him kept
up. They not only walk in these ways, but they have them in their
hearts, they lay them near their hearts; no care or concern, no pleasure
or delight, lies nearer than this. Note, Those who have the new
Jerusalem in their eye must have the ways that lead to it in their
heart, must mind them, their eyes must look straight forward in them,
must ponder the paths of them, must keep close to them, and be afraid of
turning aside to the right hand or to the left. If we make God's promise
our strength, we must make God's word our rule, and walk by it. (3.)
They are such as will break through difficulties and discouragements in
waiting upon God in holy ordinances, [Psa
84:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#006). When they come up out of the
country to worship at the feasts their way lies through many a dry and
sandy valley (so some), in which they are ready to perish for thirst;
but, to guard against that inconvenience, they dig little pits to
receive and keep the rain-water, which is ready to them and others for
their refreshment. When they make the pools the ram of heaven fills
them. If we be ready to receive the grace of God, that grace shall not
be wanting to us, but shall be sufficient for us at all times. Their way
lay through many a weeping valley, so Baca signifies, that is (as others
understand it), many watery valleys, which in wet weather, when the rain
filled the pools, either through the rising of the waters or through the
dirtiness of the way were impassable; but, by draining and trenching
them, they made a road through them for the benefit of those who went up
to Jerusalem. Care should be taken to keep those roads in repair that
lead to church, as well as those that lead to market. But all this is
intended to show, \[1.\] That they had a good will to the journey. When
they were to attend the solemn feasts at Jerusalem, they would not be
kept back by bad weather, or bad ways, nor make those an excuse for
staying at home. Difficulties in the way of duty are designed to try our
resolution; and he that observes the wind shall not sow. \[2.\] That
they made the best of the way to Zion, contrived and took pains to mend
it where it was bad, and bore, as well as they could, the inconveniences
that could not be removed. Our way to heaven lies through a valley of
Baca, but even that may be made a well if we make a due improvement of
the comforts God has provided for the pilgrims to the heavenly city.
(4.) They are such as are still pressing forward till they come to their
journey's end at length, and do not take up short of it ([Psa
84:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#007)): They go from strength to
strength; their company increases by the accession of more out of every
town they pass through, till they become very numerous. Those that were
near staid till those that were further off called on them, saying,
Come, and let us go to the house of the Lord ([Psa
122:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#001), [Psa
122:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#002)), that they might go together in
a body, in token of their mutual love. Or the particular persons,
instead of being fatigued with the tediousness of their journey and the
difficulties they met with, the nearer they came to Jerusalem the more
lively and cheerful they were, and so went on stronger and stronger,
[Job 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#009). Thus it is promised that
those that wait on the Lord shall renew their strength, [Isa
40:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#031). Even where they are weak, there
they are strong. They go from virtue to virtue (so some); it is the same
word that is used for the virtuous woman. Those that press forward in
their Christian course shall find God adding grace to their graces, [Joh
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016). They shall be changed from glory
to glory ([Co2 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018)), from one degree
of glorious grace to another, till, at length, every one of them appears
before God in Zion, to give glory to him and receive blessings from him.
Note, Those who grow in grace shall, at last, be perfect in glory. The
Chaldee reads it, They go from the house of the sanctuary to the house
of doctrine; and the pains which they have taken about the law shall
appear before God, whose majesty dwells in Zion. We must go from one
duty to another, from prayer to the word, from practising what we have
learned to learn more; and, if we do this, the benefit of it will
appear, to God's glory and our own everlasting comfort.

[Psalms 84:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 84:8</span></span>

Here, I. The psalmist prays for audience and acceptance with God, not
mentioning particularly what he desired God would do for him. He needed
to say no more when he had professed such an affectionate esteem for the
ordinances of God, which now he was restrained and banished from. All
his desire was, in that profession, plainly before God, and his longing,
his groaning, was not hidden from him; therefore he prays ([Psa
84:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#008), [Psa
84:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#009)) only that God would hear his
prayer and give ear, that he would behold his condition, behold his good
affection, and look upon his face, which way it was set, and how his
countenance discovered the longing desire he had towards God's courts.
He calls himself (as many think) God's anointed, for David was anointed
by him and anointed for him. In this petition, 1. He has an eye to God
under several of his glorious titles - as the Lord God of hosts, who has
all the creatures at his command, and therefore has all power both in
heaven and in earth, - as the God of Jacob, a God in covenant with his
own people, a God who never said to the praying seed of Jacob, Seek you
me in vain, - and as God our shield, who takes his people under his
special protection, pursuant to his covenant with Abraham their father.
[Gen 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001), Fear not, Abraham, I am thy
shield. When David could not be hidden in the secret of God's tabernacle
([Psa 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#005)), being at a distance from
it, yet he hoped to find God his shield ready to him wherever he was. 2.
He has an eye to the Mediator; for of him I rather understand those
words, Look upon the face of thy Messiah, thy anointed one, for of his
anointing David spoke, [Psa 45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007). In
all our addresses to God we must desire that he would look upon the face
of Christ, accept us for his sake, and be well-pleased with us in him.
We must look with an eye of faith, and then God will with an eye of
favour look upon the face of the anointed, who does show his face when
we without him dare not show ours.

II\. He pleads his love to God's ordinances and his dependence upon God
himself.

1\. God's courts were his choice, [Psa
84:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#010). A very great regard he had for
holy ordinances: he valued them above any thing else, and he expresses
his value for them, (1.) By preferring the time of God's worship before
all other time: A day spent in thy courts, in attending on the services
of religion, wholly abstracted from all secular affairs, is better than
a thousand, not than a thousand in thy courts, but any where else in
this world, though in the midst of all the delights of the children of
men. Better than a thousand, he does not say days, you may supply it
with years, with ages, if you will, and yet David will set his hand to
it. "A day in thy courts, a sabbath day, a holy day, a feast-day, though
but one day, would be very welcome to me; nay" (as some of the rabbin
paraphrase it), "though I were to die for it the next day, yet that
would be more sweet than years spent in the business and pleasure of
this world. One of these days shall with its pleasure chase a thousand,
and two put ten thousand to flight, to shame, as not worthy to be
compared." (2.) By preferring the place of worship before any other
place: I would rather be a door-keeper, rather be in the meanest place
and office, in the house of my God, than dwell in state, as master, in
the tents of wickedness. Observe, He calls even the tabernacle a house,
for the presence of God in it made even those curtains more stately than
a palace and more strong than a castle. It is the house of my God; the
covenant-interest he had in God as his God was the sweet string on which
he loved dearly to be harping; those, and those only, who can, upon good
ground, call God theirs, delight in the courts of his house. I would
rather be a porter in God's house than a prince in those tents where
wickedness reigns, rather lie at the threshold (so the word is); that
was the beggar's place ([Act 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#002)): "no
matter" (says David), "let that be my place rather than none." The
Pharisees loved synagogues well enough, provided they might have the
uppermost seats there ([Mat 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#006)),
that they might make a figure. Holy David is not solicitous about that;
if he may but be admitted to the threshold, he will say, Master, it is
good to be here. Some read it, I would rather be fixed to a post in the
house of my God than live at liberty in the tents of wickedness,
alluding to the law concerning servants, who, if they would not go out
free, were to have their ear bored to the door-post, [Exo
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#005), [Exo
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006). David loved his master and loved
his work so well that he desired to be tied to this service for ever, to
be more free to it, but never to go out free from it, preferring bonds
to duty far before the greatest liberty to sin. Such a superlative
delight have holy hearts in holy duties; no satisfaction in their
account comparable to that in communion with God.

2\. God himself was his hope, and joy, and all. Therefore he loved the
house of his God, because his expectation was from his God, and there he
used to communicate himself, [Psa
84:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#011). See, (1.) What God is, and will
be, to his people: The Lord God is a sun and shield. We are here in
darkness, but, if God be our God, he will be to us a sun, to enlighten
and enliven us, to guide and direct us. We are here in danger, but he
will be to us a shield to secure us from the fiery darts that fly
thickly about us. With his favour he will compass us as with a shield.
Let us therefore always walk in the light of the Lord, and never throw
ourselves out of his protection, and we shall find him a sun to supply
us with all good and a shield to shelter us from all evil. (2.) What he
does, and will, bestow upon them: The Lord will give grace and glory.
Grace signifies both the good-will of God towards us and the good work
of God in us; glory signifies both the honour which he now puts upon us,
in giving us the adoption of sons, and that which he has prepared for us
in the inheritance of sons. God will give them grace in this world as a
preparation for glory, and glory in the other world as the perfection of
grace; both are God's gift, his free gift. And as, on the one hand,
wherever God gives grace he will give glory (for grace is glory begun,
and is an earnest of it), so, on the other hand, he will give glory
hereafter to none to whom he does not give grace now, or who receive his
grace in vain. And if God will give grace and glory, which are the two
great things that concur to make us happy in both worlds, we may be sure
that no good thing will be withheld from those that walk uprightly. It
is the character of all good people that they walk uprightly, that they
worship God in spirit and in truth, and have their conversation in the
world in simplicity and godly sincerity; and such may be sure that God
will withhold no good thing from them, that is requisite to their
comfortable passage through this world. Make sure grace and glory, and
other things shall be added. This is a comprehensive promise, and is
such an assurance of the present comfort of the saints that, whatever
they desire, and think they need, they may be sure that either Infinite
Wisdom sees it is not good for them or Infinite Goodness will give it to
them in due time. Let it be our care to walk uprightly, and then let us
trust God to give us every thing that is good for us.

Lastly, He pronounces those blessed who put their confidence in God, as
he did, [Psa 84:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#012). Those are blessed
who have the liberty of ordinances and the privileges of God's house.
But, though we should be debarred from them, yet we are not therefore
debarred from blessedness if we trust in God. If we cannot go to the
house of the Lord, we may go by faith to the Lord of the house, and in
him we shall be happy and may be easy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 85](psa085)

</div>
