<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa010)  [Next](psa012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 11:0</span></span>

In this psalm we have David's struggle with and triumph over a strong
temptation to distrust God and betake himself to indirect means for his
own safety in a time of danger. It is supposed to have been penned when
he began to feel the resentments of Saul's envy, and had had the javelin
thrown at him once and again. He was then advised to run his country.
"No," says he, "I trust in God, and therefore will keep my ground."
Observe, I. How he represents the temptation, and perhaps parleys with
it, ([Psa 11:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001)). II. How he answers
it, and puts it to silence with the consideration of God's dominion and
providence ([Psa 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004)), his favour to
the righteous, and the wrath which the wicked are reserved for ([Psa
11:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#005)). In times of public fear, when
the insults of the church's enemies are daring and threatening, it will
be profitable to meditate on this psalm.

To the chief musician. A psalm of David.

[Psalms 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 11:1</span></span>

Here is, I. David's fixed resolution to make God his confidence: In the
Lord put I my trust, [Psa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001). Those
that truly fear God and serve him are welcome to put their trust in him,
and shall not be made ashamed of their doing so. And it is the character
of the saints, who have taken God for their God, that they make him
their hope. Even when they have other things to stay themselves upon,
yet they do not, they dare not, stay upon them, but on God only. Gold is
not their hope, nor are horses and chariots their confidence, but God
only; and therefore, when second causes frown, yet their hopes do not
fail them, because the first cause is still the same, is ever so. The
psalmist, before he gives an account of the temptation he was in to
distrust God, records his resolution to trust in him, as that which he
was resolved to live and die by.

II\. His resentment of a temptation to the contrary: "How say you to my
soul, which has thus returned to God as its rest and reposes in him,
Flee as a bird to your mountain, to be safe there out of the reach of
the fowler?" This may be taken either,

1\. As the serious advice of his timorous friends; so many understand
it, and with great probability. Some that were hearty well-wishers to
David, when they saw how much Saul was exasperated against him and how
maliciously he sought his life, pressed him by all means to flee for the
same to some place of shelter, and not to depend too much upon the
anointing he had received, which, they thought, was more likely to
occasion the loss of his head than to save it. That which grieved him in
this motion was not that to flee now would savour of cowardice, and ill
become a soldier, but that it would savour of unbelief and would ill
become a saint who had so often said, In the Lord put I my trust. Taking
it thus, the two following verses contain the reason with which these
faint-hearted friends of David backed this advice. They would have him
flee, (1.) Because he could not be safe where he was, [Psa
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#002). "Observe," say they, "how the
wicked bend their bow; Saul and his instruments aim at thy life, and the
uprightness of thy heart will not be thy security." See what an enmity
there is in the wicked against the upright, in the seed of the serpent
against the seed of the woman; what pains they take, what preparations
they make, to do them a mischief: They privily shoot at them, or, in
darkness, that they may not see the evil designed, to avoid it, nor
others, to prevent it, no, nor God himself, to punish it. (2.) Because
he could be no longer useful where he was. "For," say they, "if the
foundations be destroyed" (as they were by Saul's mal-administration),
"if the civil state and government be unhinged and all out of course"
([Psa 75:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#003), [Psa
82:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#005)), "what canst thou do with thy
righteousness to redress the grievances? Alas! it is to no purpose to
attempt the saving of a kingdom so wretchedly shattered; whatever the
righteous can do signifies nothing." Abi in cellam, et dic, Miserere
mei, Domine - Away to thy cell, and there cry, Pity me, O Lord! Many are
hindered from doing the service they might do to the public, in
difficult times, by a despair of success.

2\. It may be taken as a taunt wherewith his enemies bantered him,
upbraiding him with the professions he used to make of confidence in
God, and scornfully bidding him try what stead that would stand him in
now. "You say, God is your mountain; flee to him now, and see what the
better you will be." Thus they endeavoured to shame the counsel of the
poor, saying, There is no help for them in God, [Psa
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#006); [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002). The confidence and comfort which
the saints have in God, when all the hopes and joys in the creature fail
them, are a riddle to a carnal world and are ridiculed accordingly.
Taking it thus, the two following verses are David's answer to this
sarcasm, in which, (1.) He complains of the malice of those who did thus
abuse him ([Psa 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#002)): They bend their
bow and make ready their arrows; and we are told ([Psa
64:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#003)) what their arrows are, even
bitter words, such words as these, by which they endeavour to discourage
hope in God, which David felt as a sword in his bones. (2.) He resists
the temptation with a gracious abhorrence, [Psa
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#003). He looks upon this suggestion as
striking at the foundations which every Israelite builds upon: "If you
destroy the foundations, if you take good people off from their hope in
God, if you can persuade them that their religion is a cheat and a jest
and can banter them out of that, you ruin them, and break their hearts
indeed, and make them of all men the most miserable." The principles of
religion are the foundations on which the faith and hope of the
righteous are built. These we are concerned, in interest as well as
duty, to hold fast against all temptations to infidelity; for, if these
be destroyed, if we let these go, What can the righteous do? Good people
would be undone if they had not a God to go to, a God to trust to, and a
future bliss to hope for.

[Psalms 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 11:4</span></span>

The shaking of a tree (they say) makes it take the deeper and faster
root. The attempt of David's enemies to discourage his confidence in God
engages him to cleave so much the more closely to his first principles,
and to review them, which he here does, abundantly to his own
satisfaction and the silencing of all temptations to infidelity. That
which was shocking to his faith, and has been so to the faith of many,
was the prosperity of wicked people in their wicked ways, and the
straits and distresses which the best men are sometimes reduced to:
hence such an evil thought as this was apt to arise, Surely it is vain
to serve God, and we may call the proud happy. But, in order to stifle
and shame all such thoughts, we are here called to consider,

I. That there is a God in heaven: The Lord is in his holy temple above,
where, though he is out of our sight, we are not out of his. Let not the
enemies of the saints insult over them, as if they were at a loss and at
their wits' end: no, they have a God, and they know where to find him
and how to direct their prayer unto him, as their Father in heaven. Or,
He is in his holy temple, that is, in his church; he is a God in
covenant and communion with his people, through a Mediator, of whom the
temple was a type. We need not say, "Who shall go up to heaven, to fetch
us thence a God to trust to?" No, the word is nigh us, and God in the
word; his Spirit is in his saints, those living temples, and the Lord is
that Spirit.

II\. That this God governs the world. The Lord has not only his
residence, but his throne, in heaven, and he has set the dominion
thereof in the earth ([Job 38:33](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#033));
for, having prepared his throne in the heavens, his kingdom ruleth over
all, [Psa 103:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#019). Hence the heavens
are said to rule, [Dan 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#026). Let us by
faith see God on this throne, on his throne of glory, infinitely
transcending the splendour and majesty of earthly princes - on his
throne of government, giving law, giving motion, and giving aim, to all
the creatures - on his throne of judgment, rendering to every man
according to his works - and on his throne of grace, to which his people
may come boldly for mercy and grace; we shall then see no reason to be
discouraged by the pride and power of oppressors, or any of the
afflictions that attend the righteous.

III\. That this God perfectly knows every man's true character: His eyes
behold, his eye-lids try, the children of men; he not only sees them,
but he sees through them, not only knows all they say and do, but knows
what they think, what they design, and how they really stand affected,
whatever they pretend. We may know what men seem to be, but he knows
what they are, as the refiner knows what the value of the gold is when
he has tried it. God is said to try with his eyes, and his eye-lids,
because he knows men, not as earthly princes know men, by report and
representation, but by his own strict inspection, which cannot err nor
be imposed upon. This may comfort us when we are deceived in men, even
in men that we think we have tried, that God's judgment of men, we are
sure, is according to truth.

IV\. That, if he afflict good people, it is for their trial and
therefore for their good, [Psa 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#005).
The Lord tries all the children of men that he may do them good in their
latter end, [Deu 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#016). Let not that
therefore shake our foundations nor discourage our hope and trust in
God.

V. That, however persecutors and oppressors may prosper and prevail
awhile, they now lie under, and will for ever perish under, the wrath of
God. 1. He is a holy God, and therefore hates them, and cannot endure to
look upon them: The wicked, and him that loveth violence, his soul
hateth; for nothing is more contrary to the rectitude and goodness of
his nature. Their prosperity is so far from being an evidence of God's
love that their abuse of it does certainly make them the objects of his
hatred. He that hates nothing that he has made, yet hates those who have
thus ill-made themselves. Dr. Hammond offers another reading of this
verse: The Lord trieth the righteous and the wicked (distinguishes
infallibly between them, which is more than we can do), and he that
loveth violence hateth his own soul, that is, persecutors bring certain
ruin upon themselves ([Pro 8:36](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#036)), as
follows here. 2. He is a righteous Judge, and therefore he will punish
them, [Psa 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006). Their punishment will
be, (1.) Inevitable: Upon the wicked he shall rain snares. Here is a
double metaphor, to denote the unavoidableness of the punishment of
wicked men. It shall be rained upon them from heaven ([Job
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#023)), against which there is no
fence and from which there is no escape; see [Jos
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#011); [Sa1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#010). It shall surprise them as a
sudden shower sometimes surprises the traveller in a summer's day. It
shall be as snares upon them, to hold them fast, and keep them
prisoners, till the day of reckoning comes. (2.) Very terrible. It is
fire, and brimstone, and a horrible tempest, which plainly alludes to
the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, and very fitly, for that
destruction was intended for a figure of the vengeance of eternal fire,
[Jde 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#007). The fire of God's wrath,
fastening upon the brimstone of their own guilt, will burn certainly and
furiously, will burn to the lowest hell and the utmost line of eternity.
What a horrible tempest are the wicked hurried away in at death! What a
lake of fire and brimstone must they make their bed in for ever, in the
congregation of the dead and damned! It is this that is here meant; it
is this that shall be the portion of their cup, the heritage appointed
them by the Almighty and allotted to them, [Job
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#029). This is the cup of trembling
which shall be put into their hands, which they must drink the dregs of,
[Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008). Every man has the portion
of his cup assigned him. Those who choose the Lord for the portion of
their cup shall have what they choose, and be for ever happy in their
choice ([Psa 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005)); but those who
reject his grace shall be made to drink the cup of his fury, [Jer
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#015); [Isa
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017); [Hab
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#016).

VI\. That, though honest good people may be run down and trampled upon,
yet God does and will own them, and favour them, and smile upon them,
and that is the reason why God will severely reckon with persecutors and
oppressors, because those whom they oppress and persecute are dear to
him; so that whosoever toucheth them toucheth the apple of his eye, [Psa
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#007). 1. He loves them and the work of
his own grace in them. He is himself a righteous God, and therefore
loves righteousness wherever he finds it and pleads the cause of the
righteous that are injured and oppressed; he delights to execute
judgment for them, [Psa 103:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#006). We must
herein be followers of God, must love righteousness as he does, that we
may keep ourselves always in his love. He looks graciously upon them:
His countenance doth behold the upright; he is not only at peace with
them, and puts gladness into their hearts, by letting them know that he
is so. He, like a tender father, looks upon them with pleasure, and
they, like dutiful children, are pleased and abundantly satisfied with
his smiles. They walk in the light of the Lord.

In singing this psalm we must encourage and engage ourselves to trust in
God at all times, must depend upon him to protect our innocence and make
us happy, must dread his frowns as worse than death and desire his
favour as better than life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 12](psa012)

</div>
