<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa008)  [Next](psa010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 9:0</span></span>

In this psalm, I. David praises God for pleading his cause, and giving
him victory over his enemies and the enemies of his country ([Psa
9:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001)), and calls upon others to join
with him in his songs of praise ([Psa
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#011), [Psa
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#012)). II. He prays to God that he
might have still further occasion to praise him, for his own
deliverances and the confusion of his enemies ([Psa
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#013), [Psa
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#014), [Psa
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#019), [Psa
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#020)). III. He triumphs in the
assurance he had of God's judging the world ([Psa
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#007), [Psa
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#008)), protecting his oppressed people
([Psa 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#009), [Psa
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#010), [Psa
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#018)), and bringing his and their
implacable enemies to ruin ([Psa
9:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015)). This is very applicable to
the kingdom of the Messiah, the enemies of which have been in part
destroyed already, and shall be yet more and more till they all be made
his footstool, which we are to assure ourselves of, that God may have
the glory and we may take the comfort.

To the chief musician upon Muth-labben. A psalm of David.

[Psalms 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 9:1</span></span>

The title of this psalm gives a very uncertain sound concerning the
occasion of penning it. It is upon Muth-labben, which some make to refer
to the death of Goliath, others of Nabal, others of Absalom; but I
incline to think it signifies only some tone, or some musical
instrument, to which this psalm was intended to be sung; and that the
enemies David is here triumphing in the defeat of are the Philistines,
and the other neighbouring nations that opposed his settlement in the
throne, whom he contested with and subdued in the beginning of his
reign, [Sa2 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#008). In these verses,

I. David excites and engages himself to praise God for his mercies and
the great things he had of late done for him and his government, [Psa
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001), [Psa
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#002). Note, 1. God expects suitable
returns of praise from those for whom he has done marvellous works. 2.
If we would praise God acceptably, we must praise him in sincerity, with
our hearts, and not only with our lips, and be lively and fervent in the
duty, with our whole heart. 3. When we give thanks for some one
particular mercy we should take occasion thence to remember former
mercies and so to show forth all his marvellous works. 4. Holy joy is
the life of thankful praise, as thankful praise is the language of holy
joy: I will be glad and rejoice in thee. 5. Whatever occurs to make us
glad, our joy must pass through it, and terminate in God only: I will be
glad and rejoice in thee, not in the gift so much as in the giver. 6.
Joy and praise are properly expressed by singing psalms. 7. When God has
shown himself to be above the proud enemies of the church we must take
occasion thence to give glory to him as the Most High. 8. The triumphs
of the Redeemer ought to be the triumphs of the redeemed; see [Rev
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010); [Rev
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#005); [Rev
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#003), [Rev
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#004).

II\. He acknowledges the almighty power of God as that which the
strongest and stoutest of his enemies were no way able to contest with
or stand before, [Psa 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#003). But, 1.
They are forced to turn back. Their policy and their courage fail them,
so that they cannot, they dare not, push forward in their enterprises,
but retire with precipitation. 2. When once they turn back, they fall
and perish; even their retreat will be their ruin, and they will save
themselves no more by flying than by fighting. If Haman begin to fall
before Mordecai, he is a lost man, and shall prevail no more; see [Est
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#013). 3. The presence of the Lord, and
the glory of his power, are sufficient for the destruction of his and
his people's enemies. That is easily done which a man does with his very
presence; with that God confounds his enemies, such a presence has he.
This was fulfilled when our Lord Jesus, with one word, I am he, made his
enemies to fall back at his presence ([Joh
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#006)) and he could, at the same time,
have made them perish. 4. When the enemies of God's church are put to
confusion we must ascribe their discomfiture to the power, not of
instruments, but of his presence, and give him all the glory.

III\. He gives to God the glory of his righteousness, in his appearing
on his behalf ([Psa 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#004)): "Thou hast
maintained my right and my cause, that is, my righteous cause; when that
came on, thou satest in the throne, judging right." Observe, 1. God sits
in the throne of judgment. To him it belongs to decide controversies, to
determine appeals, to avenge the injured, and to punish the injurious;
for he has said, Vengeance is mine. 2. We are sure that the judgment of
God is according to truth and that with him there is no unrighteousness.
Far be it from God that he should pervert justice. If there seem to us
to be some irregularity in the present decisions of Providence, yet
these, instead of shaking our belief of God's justice, may serve to
strengthen our belief of the judgment to come, which will set all
to-rights. 3. Whoever disown and desert a just and injured cause, we may
be sure that the righteous God will maintain it and plead it with
jealousy, and will never suffer it to be run down.

IV\. He records, with joy, the triumphs of the God of heaven over all
the powers of hell and attends those triumphs with his praises, [Psa
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#005). By three steps the power and
justice of God had proceeded against the heathen, and wicked people, who
were enemies to the king God had lately set up upon his holy hill of
Zion. 1. He had checked them: "Thou hast rebuked the heathen, hast given
them real proofs of thy displeasure against them." This he did before he
destroyed them, that they might take warning by the rebukes of
Providence and so prevent their own destruction. 2. He had cut them off:
Thou hast destroyed the wicked. The wicked are marked for destruction,
and some are made monuments of God's vindictive justice and destructive
power in this world. 3. He had buried them in oblivion and perpetual
infamy, had put out their name for ever, that they should never be
remembered with any respect.

V. He exults over the enemy whom God thus appears against ([Psa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#006)): Thou hast destroyed cities.
Either, "Thou, O enemy! hast destroyed our cities, at least in intention
and imagination," or "Thou, O God! hast destroyed their cities by the
desolation brought upon their country." It may be taken either way; for
the psalmist will have the enemy to know, 1. That their destruction is
just and that God was but reckoning with them for all the mischief which
they had done and designed against his people. The malicious and
vexatious neighbours of Israel, as the Philistines, Moabites, Ammonites,
Edomites, and Syrians, had made incursions upon them (when there was no
king in Israel to fight their battles), had destroyed their cities and
done what they could to make their memorial perish with them. But now
the wheel was turned upon them; their destructions of Israel had come to
a perpetual end; they shall now cease to spoil and must themselves be
spoiled, [Isa 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#001). 2. That it is
total and final, such a destruction as should make a perpetual end of
them, so that the very memorial of their cities should perish with them,
So devouring a thing is time, and much more such desolations do the
righteous judgments of God make upon sinners, that great and populous
cities have been reduced to such ruins that their very memorial has
perished, and those who have sought them could not find where they
stood; but we look for a city that has stronger foundations.

VI\. He comforts himself and others in God, and pleases himself with the
thoughts of him. 1. With the thoughts of his eternity. On this earth we
see nothing durable, even strong cities are buried in rubbish and
forgotten; but the Lord shall endure for ever, [Psa
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#007). There is no change of his being;
his felicity, power, and perfection, are out of the reach of all the
combined forces of hell and earth; they may put an end to our liberties,
our privileges, our lives, but our God is still the same, and sits even
upon the floods, unshaken, undisturbed, [Psa
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#010); [Psa
93:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#002). 2. With the thoughts of his
sovereignty both in government and judgment: He has prepared his throne,
has fixed it by his infinite wisdom, has fixed it by his immutable
counsel. It is the great support and comfort of good people, when the
power of the church's enemies is threatening and the posture of its
affairs melancholy and perplexed, that God now rules the world and will
shortly judge the world. 3. With the thoughts of his justice and
righteousness in all the administrations of his government. He does all
every day, he will do all at the last day, according to the eternal
unalterable rules of equity ([Psa
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#008)): He shall judge the world, all
persons and all controversies, shall minister judgment to the people
(shall determine their lot both in this and in the future state) in
righteousness and in uprightness, so that there shall not be the least
colour of exception against it. 4. With the thoughts of that peculiar
favour which God bears to his own people and the special protection
which he takes them under. The Lord, who endures for ever, is their
everlasting strength and protection; he that judges the world will be
sure to judge for them, when at any time they are injured or distressed
([Psa 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#009)): He will be a refuge for
the oppressed, a high place, a strong place, for the oppressed, in times
of trouble. It is the lot of God's people to be oppressed in this world
and to have troublous times appointed to them. Perhaps God may not
immediately appear for them as their deliverer and avenger; but, in the
midst of their distresses, they may by faith flee to him as their refuge
and may depend upon his power and promise for their safety, so that no
real hurt shall be done them. 5. With the thoughts of that sweet
satisfaction and repose of mind which those have that make God their
refuge ([Psa 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#010)): "Those that know
thy name will put their trust in thee, as I have done" (for the grace of
God is the same in all the saints), "and then they will find, as I have
found, that thou dost not forsake those that seek thee;" for the favour
of God is the same towards all the saints. Note, (1.) The better God is
known the more he is trusted. Those who know him to be a God of infinite
wisdom will trust him further than they can see him ([Job
35:14](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#014)); those who know him to be a God
of almighty power will trust him when creature-confidences fail and they
have nothing else to trust to ([Ch2
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#012)); and those who know him to be a
God of infinite grace and goodness will trust him though he slay them,
[Job 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015). Those who know him to be a
God of inviolable truth and faithfulness will rejoice in his word of
promise, and rest upon that, though the performance be deferred and
intermediate providences seem to contradict it. Those who know him to be
the Father of spirits, and an everlasting Father, will trust him with
their souls as their main care and trust in him at all times, even to
the end. (2.) The more God is trusted the more he is sought unto. If we
trust God we shall seek him by faithful and fervent prayer, and by a
constant care to approve ourselves to him in the whole course of our
conversations. (3.) God never did, nor ever will, disown or desert any
that duly seek to him and trust in him. Though he afflict them, he will
not leave them comfortless; though he seem to forsake them for a while,
yet he will gather them with everlasting mercies.

[Psalms 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 9:11</span></span>

In these verses,

I. David, having praised God himself, calls upon and invites others to
praise him likewise, [Psa 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#011). Those
who believe God is greatly to be praised not only desire to do that work
better themselves, but desire that others also may join with them in it
and would gladly be instrumental to bring them to it: Sing praises to
the Lord who dwelleth in Zion. As the special residence of his glory is
in heaven, so the special residence of his grace is in his church, of
which Zion was a type. There he meets his people with his promises and
graces, and there he expects they should meet him with their praises and
services. In all our praises we should have an eye to God as dwelling in
Zion, in a special manner present in the assemblies of his people, as
their protector and patron. He resolved himself to show forth God's
marvellous works ([Psa 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001)), and here
he calls upon others to declare among the people his doings. He commands
his own subjects to do it, for the honour of God, of their country, and
of their holy religion; he courts his neighbours to do it, to sing
praises, not, as hitherto, to their false gods, but to Jehovah who
dwelleth in Zion, to the God of Israel, and to own among the heathen
that the Lord has done great things for his people Israel, [Psa
126:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#003), [Psa
126:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#004). Let them particularly take
notice of the justice of God in avenging the blood of his people Israel
on the Philistines and their other wicked neighbours, who had, in making
war upon them, used them barbarously and given them no quarter, [Psa
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#012). When God comes to make
inquisition for blood by his judgments on earth, before he comes to do
it by the judgment of the great day, he remembers them, remembers every
drop of the innocent blood which they have shed, and will return it
sevenfold upon the head of the blood-thirsty; he will give them blood to
drink, for they are worthy. This assurance he might well build upon that
word ([Deu 32:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#043)), He will avenge the
blood of his servants. Note, There is a day coming when God will make
inquisition for blood, when he will discover what has been shed
secretly, and avenge what has been shed unjustly; see [Isa
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#021); [Jer
51:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#035). In that day it will appear how
precious the blood of God's people is to him ([Psa
72:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#014)), when it must all be accounted
for. It will then appear that he has not forgotten the cry of the
humble, neither the cry of their blood nor the cry of their prayers, but
that both are sealed up among his treasures.

II\. David, having praised God for former mercies and deliverances,
earnestly prays that God would still appear for him; for he sees not all
things put under him.

1\. He prays, (1.) That God would be compassionate to him ([Psa
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#013)): "Have mercy upon me, who,
having misery only, and no merit, to speak for me, must depend upon
mercy for relief." (2.) That he would be concerned for him. He is not
particular in his request, lest he should seem to prescribe to God; but
submits himself to the wisdom and will of God in this modest request,
"Lord, consider my trouble, and do for me as thou thinkest fit."

2\. He pleads, (1.) The malice of his enemies, the trouble which he
suffered from those that hated him, and hatred is a cruel passion. (2.)
The experience he had had of divine succours and the expectation he now
had of the continuance of them, as the necessity of his case required:
"O thou that liftest me up, that canst do it, that hast done it, that
wilt do it, whose prerogative it is to lift up thy people from the gates
of death!" We are never brought so low, so near to death, but God can
raise us up. If he has saved us from spiritual and eternal death, we may
thence take encouragement to hope that in all our distresses he will be
a very present help to us. (3.) His sincere purpose to praise God when
his victories should be completed ([Psa
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#014)): "Lord, save me, not that I may
have the comfort and credit of the deliverance, but that thou mayest
have the glory, that I may show forth all thy praise, and that publicly,
in the gates of the daughter of Zion;" there God was said to dwell ([Psa
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#011)) and there David would attend
him, with joy in God's salvation, typical of the great salvation which
was to be wrought out by the Son of David.

III\. David by faith foresees and foretels the certain ruin of all
wicked people, both in this world and in that to come.

1\. In this world, [Psa 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015), [Psa
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#016). God executes judgment upon them
when the measure of their iniquities is full, and does it, (1.) So as to
put shame upon them and make their fall inglorious; for they sink into
the pit which they themselves digged ([Psa
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015)), they are taken in the net which
they themselves laid for the ensnaring of God's people, and they are
snared in the work of their own hands. In all the struggles David had
with the Philistines they were the aggressors, [Sa2
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#017), [Sa2
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#022). And other nations were subdued
by those ward in which they embroiled themselves. The overruling
providence of God frequently so orders it that persecutors and
oppressors are brought to ruin by those very projects which they
intended to be destructive to the people of God. Drunkards kill
themselves; prodigals beggar themselves; the contentious bring mischief
upon themselves. Thus men's sins may be read in their punishment, and it
becomes visible to all that the destruction of sinners is not only
meritoriously, but efficiently, of themselves, which will fill them with
the utmost confusion. (2.) So as to get honour to himself: The Lord is
known, that is, he makes himself known, by these judgments which he
executes. It is known that there is a God who judges in the earth, that
he is a righteous God, and one that hates sin and will punish it. In
these judgments the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. The psalmist therefore adds here
a note extraordinary, commanding special regard, Higgaion; it is a thing
to be carefully observed and meditated upon. What we see of present
judgments, and what we believe of the judgment to come, ought to be the
subject of our frequent and serious meditations.

2\. In the other world ([Psa 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#017)):
The wicked shall be turned into hell, as captives into the prison-house,
even all the nations that forget God. Note, (1.) Forgetfulness of God is
the cause of all the wickedness of the wicked. (2.) There are nations of
those that forget God, multitudes that live without God in the world,
many great and many mighty nations, that never regard him nor desire the
knowledge of his ways. (3.) Hell will, at last, be the portion of such,
a state of everlasting misery and torment - Sheol, a pit of destruction,
in which they and all their comforts will be for ever lost and buried.
Though there be nations of them, yet they shall be turned into hell,
like sheep into the slaughter-house ([Psa
49:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#014)), and their being so numerous
will not be any security or ease to them, nor any loss to God or the
least impeachment of his goodness.

IV\. David encourages the people of God to wait for his salvation,
though it should be long deferred, [Psa
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#018). The needy may think themselves,
and others may think them, forgotten for a while, and their expectation
of help from God may seem to have perished and to have been for ever
frustrated. But he that believes does not make haste; the vision is for
an appointed time, and at the end it shall speak. We may build upon it
as undoubtedly true that God's people, God's elect, shall not always be
forgotten, nor shall they be disappointed of their hopes from the
promise. God will not only remember them, at last, but will make it to
appear that he never did forget them; it is impossible he should, though
a woman may forget her sucking child.

V. He concludes with prayer that God would humble the pride, break the
power, and blast the projects, of all the wicked enemies of his church:
"Arise, O Lord! ([Psa 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#019)), stir up
thy self, exert thy power, take thy seat, and deal with all these proud
and daring enemies of thy name, and cause, and people." 1. "Lord,
restrain them, and set bounds to their malice: Let not man prevail;
consult thy own honour, and let not weak and mortal men prevail against
the kingdom and interest of the almighty and immortal God. Shall mortal
man be too hard for God, too strong for his Maker?" 2. "Lord, reckon
with them: Let the heathen be judges in thy sight, that is, let them be
plainly called to an account for all the dishonour done to thee and the
mischief done to thy people." Impenitent sinners will be punished in
God's sight; and, when their day of grace is over, the bowels even of
infinite mercy will not relent towards them, [Rev
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#010). 3. "Lord, frighten them: Put
them in fear, O Lord! ([Psa 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#020)),
strike a terror upon them, make them afraid with thy judgments." God
knows how to make the strongest and stoutest of men to tremble and to
flee when none pursues, and thereby he makes them know and own that they
are but men; they are but weak men, unable to stand before the holy God
- sinful men, the guilt of whose consciences make them subject to
alarms. Note, It is a very desirable thing, much for the glory of God
and the peace and welfare of the universe, that men should know and
consider themselves to be but men, depending creatures, mutable, mortal,
and accountable.

In singing this psalm we must give to God the glory of his justice in
pleading his people's cause against his and their enemies, and encourage
ourselves to wait for the year of the redeemed and the year of
recompences for the controversy of Zion, even the final destruction of
all anti-christian powers and factions, to which many of the ancients
apply this psalm.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 10](psa010)

</div>
