<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa086)  [Next](psa088) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 87](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 87:0</span></span>

The foregoing psalm was very plain and easy, but in this are things dark
and hard to be understood. It is an encomium of Zion, as a type and
figure of the gospel-church, to which what is here spoken is very
applicable. Zion, for the temple's sake, is here preferred, I. Before
the rest of the land of Canaan, as being crowned with special tokens of
God's favour ([Psa 87:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#001)). II. Before
any other place or country whatsoever, as being replenished with more
eminent men and with a greater plenty of divine blessings ([Psa
87:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#004)). Some think it was penned to
express the joy of God's people when Zion was in a flourishing state;
others think it was penned to encourage their faith and hope when Zion
was in ruins and was to be rebuilt after the captivity. Though no man
cared for her ([Jer 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#017), "This is
Zion whom no man seeketh after"), yet God had done great things for her,
and spoken glorious things of her, which should all have their
perfection and accomplishment in the gospel-church; to that therefore we
must have an eye in singing this psalm.

A psalm or song for the sons of Korah.

[Psalms 87:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 87:1</span></span>

Some make the first words of the psalm to be part of the title; it is a
psalm or song whose subject is the holy mountains - the temple built in
Zion upon Mount Moriah. This is the foundation of the argument, or
beginning of the psalm. Or we may suppose the psalmist had now the
tabernacle or temple in view and was contemplating the glories of it,
and at length he breaks out into this expression, which has reference,
though not to what he had written before, yet to what he had thought of;
every one knew what he meant when he said thus abruptly, Its foundation
is in the holy mountains. Three things are here observed, in praise of
the temple: - 1. That it was founded on the holy mountains, [Psa
87:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#001). The church has a foundation, so
that it cannot sink or totter; Christ himself is the foundation of it,
which God has laid. The Jerusalem above is a city that has foundations.
The foundation is upon the mountains. It is built high; the mountain of
the Lord's house is established upon the top of the mountains, [Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002). It is built firmly; the mountains
are rocky, and on a rock the church is built. The world is founded upon
the seas ([Psa 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#002)), which are
continually ebbing and flowing, and are a very weak foundation; Babel
was built in a plain, where the ground was rotten. But the church is
built upon the everlasting mountains and the perpetual hills; for sooner
shall the mountains depart, and the hills be removed, than the covenant
of God's peace shall be disannulled, and on that the church is built,
[Isa 54:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#010). The foundation is upon the
holy mountains. Holiness is the strength and stability of the church: it
is this that will support it and keep it from sinking; not so much that
it is built upon mountains as that it is built upon holy mountains -
upon the promise of God, for the confirming of which he has sworn by his
holiness, upon the sanctification of the Spirit, which will secure the
happiness of all the saints. 2. That God had expressed a particular
affection for it ([Psa 87:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#002)): The Lord
loveth the gates of Zion, of the temple, of the houses of doctrine (so
the Chaldee), more than all the dwellings of Jacob, whether in Jerusalem
or any where else in the country. God had said concerning Zion, This is
my rest for ever; here will I dwell. There he met his people, and
conversed with them, received their homage, and showed them the tokens
of his favour, and therefore we may conclude how well he loves those
gates. Note, (1.) God has a love for the dwellings of Jacob, has a
gracious regard to religious families and accepts their family-worship.
(2.) Yet he loves the gates of Zion better, not only better than any,
but better than all, of the dwellings of Jacob. God was worshipped in
the dwellings of Jacob, and family-worship is family-duty, which must by
no means be neglected; yet, when they come in competition, public
worship (caeteris paribus - other things being equal) is to be preferred
before private. 3. That there was much said concerning it in the word of
God ([Psa 87:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#003)): Glorious things are
spoken of thee, O city of God! We are to judge of things and persons by
the figure they make and the estimate put upon them in and by the
scripture. Many base things were spoken of the city of God by the
enemies of it, to render it mean and odious; but by him whose judgment
we are sure is according to truth glorious things are spoken of it. God
said of the temple, My eyes and my heart shall be there perpetually; I
have sanctified this house, that my name may be there for ever, [Ch2
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#016). Beautiful for situation is Mount
Zion, [Psa 48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002). These are glorious
things. Yet more glorious things are spoken of the gospel-church. It is
the spouse of Christ, the purchase of his blood; it is a peculiar
people, a holy nation, a royal priesthood, and the gates of hell shall
not prevail against it. Let us not be ashamed of the church of Christ in
its meanest condition, nor of any that belong to it, nor disown our
relation to it, though it be turned ever so much to our reproach, since
such glorious things are spoken of it, and not on iota or tittle of what
is said shall fall to the ground.

[Psalms 87:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 87:4</span></span>

Zion is here compared with other places, and preferred before them; the
church of Christ is more glorious and excellent than the nations of the
earth. 1. It is owned that other places have their glories ([Psa
87:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#004)): "I will make mention of Rahab"
(that is, Egypt) "and Babylon, to those that know me and are about me,
and with whom I discourse about public affairs; behold Philistia and
Tyre, with Ethiopia" (or rather Arabia), "we will observe that this man
was born there; here and there one famous man, eminent for knowledge and
virtue, may be produced, that was a native of these countries; here and
there one that becomes a proselyte and worshipper of the true God." But
some give another sense of it, supposing that it is a prophecy or
promise of bringing the Gentiles into the church and of uniting them in
one body with the Jews. God says, "I will reckon Egypt and Babylon with
those that know me. I will reckon them my people as much as Israel when
they shall receive the gospel of Christ, and own them as born in Zion,
born again there, and admitted to the privileges of Zion as freely as a
true-born Israelite." Those that were strangers and foreigners became
fellow-citizens with the saints, [Eph
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#019). A Gentile convert shall stand
upon a level with a native Jew; compare [Isa
19:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#023). The Lord shall say, Blessed
be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel my
inheritance. 2. It is proved that the glory of Zion outshines them all,
upon many accounts; for, (1.) Zion shall produce many great and good men
that shall be famous in their generation, [Psa
87:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#005). Of Zion it shall be said by all
her neighbours that this and that man were born in her, many men of
renown for wisdom and piety, and especially for acquaintance with the
words of God and the visions of the Almighty - many prophets and kings,
who should be greater favourites of heaven, and greater blessings to the
earth, than ever were bred in Egypt or Babylon. The worthies of the
church far exceed those of heathen nations, and their names will shine
brighter than in perpetual records. A man, a man was born in her, by
which some understand Christ, that man, that son of man, who is fairer
than the children of men; he was born at Bethlehem near Zion, and was
the glory of his people Israel. The greatest honour that ever was put
upon the Jewish nation was, that of them, as concerning the flesh,
Christ came, [Rom 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005). Or this also
may be applied to the conversion of the Gentiles. Of Zion it shall be
said that the law which went forth out of Zion, the gospel of Christ,
shall be an instrument to beget many souls to God, and the Jerusalem
that is from above shall be acknowledged the mother of them all. (2.)
Zion's interest shall be strengthened and settled by an almighty power.
The Highest himself shall undertake to establish her, who can do it
effectually; the accession of proselytes out of various nations shall be
so far from occasioning discord and division that it shall contribute
greatly to Zion's strength; for, God himself having founded her upon an
everlasting foundation, whatever convulsions and revolutions there are
of states and kingdoms, and however heaven and earth may be shaken,
these are things which cannot be shaken, but must remain. (3.) Zion's
sons shall be registered with honour ([Psa
87:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#006)): "The Lord shall count, when he
writes up the people, and takes a catalogue of his subjects, that this
man was born there, and so is a subject by birth, by the first birth,
being born in his house - by the second birth, being born again of his
Spirit." When God comes to reckon with the children of men, that he may
render to every man according to his works, he will observe who was born
in Zion, and consequently enjoyed the privileges of God's sanctuary, to
whom pertained the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the
service of God, [Rom 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004); [Rom
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001), [Rom
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#002). For to them much was given, and
therefore of them much will be required, and the account will be
accordingly; five talents must be improved by those that were entrusted
with five. I know thy works, and where thou dwellest, and where thou was
born. Selah. Let those that dwell in Zion mark this, and live up to
their profession. (4.) Zion's songs shall be sung with joy and triumph:
As well the singers as the players on instruments shall be there to
praise God, [Psa 87:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#007). It was much to
the honour of Zion, and is to the honour of the gospel-church, that
there God is served and worshipped with rejoicing: his work is done, and
done cheerfully; see [Psa 68:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#025). All
my springs are in thee, O Zion! So God says; he has deposited treasures
of grace in his holy ordinances; there are the springs from which those
streams take rise which make glad the city of our God, [Psa
46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004). So the psalmist says, reckoning
the springs from which his dry soul must be watered to lie in the
sanctuary, in the word and ordinances, and in the communion of saints.
The springs of the joy of a carnal worldling lie in wealth and pleasure;
but the springs of the joy of a gracious soul lie in the word of God and
prayer. Christ is the true temple; all our springs are in him, and from
him all our streams flow. It pleased the Father, and all believers are
well pleased with it too, that in him should all fulness dwell.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 88](psa088)

</div>
