<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa055)  [Next](psa057) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 56](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 56:0</span></span>

It seems by this, and many other psalms, that even in times of the
greatest trouble and distress David never hung his harp upon the
willow-trees, never unstrung it or laid it by; but that when his dangers
and fears were greatest he was still in tune for singing God's praises.
He was in imminent peril when he penned this psalm, at least when he
meditated it; yet even then his meditation of God was sweet. I. He
complains of the malice of his enemies, and begs mercy for himself and
justice against them ([Psa 56:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001), [Psa
56:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#002), [Psa
56:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#005)). II. He confides in God, being
assured that he took his part, comforting himself with this, that
therefore he was safe and should be victorious, and that while he lived
he should praise God ([Psa 56:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#003), [Psa
56:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#004), [Psa
56:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#008)). How pleasantly may a good
Christian, in singing this psalm, rejoice in God, and praise him for
what he will do, as well as for what he has done.

To the chief musician upon Jonath-elem-rechokim, Michtam of David, when
the Philistines took him in Gath.

[Psalms 56:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 56:1</span></span>

David, in this psalm, by his faith throws himself into the hands of God,
even when he had by his fear and folly thrown himself into the hands of
the Philistines; it was when they took him in Gath, whither he fled for
fear of Saul, forgetting the quarrel they had with him for killing
Goliath; but they soon put him in mid of it, [Sa1
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#010), [Sa1
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#011). Upon that occasion he changed
his behaviour, but with so little ruffle to his temper that then he
penned both this psalm and the 34th. This is called Michtam - a golden
psalm. So some other psalms are entitled, but this has something
peculiar in the title; it is upon Jonath-elem-rechokim, which signifies
the silent dove afar off. Some apply this to David himself, who wished
for the wings of a dove on which to fly away. He was innocent and
inoffensive, mild and patient, as a dove, was at this time driven from
his nest, from the sanctuary ([Psa
84:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#003)), was forced to wander afar off,
to seek for shelter in distant countries; there he was like the doves of
the valleys, mourning and melancholy; but silent, neither murmuring
against God nor railing at the instruments of his trouble; herein a type
of Christ, who was as a sheep, dumb before the shearers, and a pattern
to Christians, who, wherever they are and whatever injuries are done
them, ought to be as silent doves. In this former part of the psalm,

I. He complains to God of the malice and wickedness of his enemies, to
show what reason he had to fear them, and what cause, what need, there
was that God should appear against them ([Psa
56:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001)): Be merciful unto me, O God!
That petition includes all the good we come to the throne of grace for;
if we obtain mercy there, we obtain all we can desire, and need no more
to make us happy. It implies likewise our best plea, not our merit, but
God's mercy, his free rich mercy. He prays that he might find mercy with
God, for with men he could find no mercy. When he fled from the cruel
hands of Saul he fell into the cruel hands of the Philistines. "Lord"
(says he), "be thou merciful to me now, or I am undone." The mercy of
God is what we may flee to and trust to, and in faith pray for, when we
are surrounded on all sides with difficulties and dangers. He complains,
1. That his enemies were very numerous ([Psa
56:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#002)): "They are many that fight
against me, and think to overpower me with numbers; take notice of this,
O thou Most High! and make it to appear that wherein they deal proudly
thou art above them." It is a point of honour to come in to the help of
one against many. And, if God be on our side, how many soever they are
that fight against us, we may, upon good grounds, boast that there are
more with us; for (as that great general said) "How many do we reckon
him for?" 2. That they were very barbarous: they would swallow him up,
[Psa 56:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001) and again [Psa
56:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#002). They sought to devour him; no
less would serve; they came upon him with the utmost fury, like beasts
of prey, to eat up his flesh, [Psa
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#002). Man would swallow him up, those
of his own kind, from whom he might have expected humanity. The ravenous
beasts prey not upon those of their own species; yet a bad man would
devour a good man if he could. "They are men, weak and frail; make them
to know that they are so," [Psa 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#020).
3. That they were very unanimous ([Psa
56:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#006)): They gather themselves
together; though they were many, and of different interests among
themselves, yet they united and combined against David, as Herod and
Pilate against the Son of David. 4. That they were very powerful, quite
too hard for him if God did not help him: "They fight against me ([Psa
56:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#002)); they oppress me, [Psa
56:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001). I am almost overcome and borne
down by them, and reduced to the last extremity." 5. That they were very
subtle and crafty ([Psa 56:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#006)): "They
hide themselves; they industriously cover their designs, that they may
the more effectually prosecute and pursue them. They hide themselves as
a lion in his den, that they may mark my steps;" that is, "they observe
every thing I say and do with a critical eye, that they may have
something to accuse me of" (thus Christ's enemies watched him, [Luk
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#020)), or "they have an eye upon all
my motions, that they may gain an opportunity to do me a mischief, and
may lay their snares for me." 6. That they were very spiteful and
malicious. They put invidious constructions upon every thing he said,
though ever so honestly meant and prudently expressed ([Psa
56:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#005)): "They wrest my words, put them
upon the rack, to extort that out of them which was never in them;" and
so they made him an offender for a word ([Isa
29:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#021)), misrepresenting it to Saul,
and aggravating it, to incense him yet more against him. They made it
their whole business to ruin David; all their thoughts were against him
for evil, which put evil interpretations upon all his words. 7. That
they were very restless and unwearied. They continually waited for his
soul; it was the life, the precious life, they hunted for; it was his
death they longed for, [Psa 56:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#006). They
fought daily against him ([Psa 56:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001)),
and would daily swallow him up ([Psa
56:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#002)), and every day they wrested his
words, [Psa 56:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#005). Their malice would
not admit the least cessation of arms, or the acts of hostility, but
they were continually pushing at him. Such as this is the enmity of
Satan and his agents against the kingdom of Christ and the interests of
his holy religion, which if we cordially espouse, we must not think it
strange to meet with such treatment as this, as though some strange
thing happened to us. Our betters have been thus used. So persecuted
they the prophets.

II\. He encourages himself in God, and in his promises, power, and
providence, [Psa 56:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#003), [Psa
56:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#004). In the midst of his complaints,
and before he has said what he has to say of his enemies, he triumphs in
the divine protection. 1. He resolves to make God his confidence, then
when dangers were most threatening and all other confidences failed:
"What time I am afraid, in the day of my fear, when I am most terrified
from without and most timorous within, then I will trust in thee, and
thereby my fears shall be silenced." Note, There are some times which
are, in a special manner, times of fear with God's people; in these
times it is their duty and interest to trust in God as their God, and to
know whom they have trusted. This will fix the heart and keep it in
peace. 2. He resolves to make God's promises the matter of his praises,
and so we have reason to make them ([Psa
56:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#004)): "In God I will praise, not only
his work which he has done, but his word which he has spoken; I will
give him thanks for a promise, though not yet performed. In God (in his
strength and by his assistance) I will both glory in his word and give
him the glory of it." Some understand by his word his providences, every
event that he orders and appoints: "When I speak well of God I will with
him speak well of every thing that he does." 3. Thus supported, he will
bid defiance to all adverse powers: "When in God I have put my trust, I
am safe, I am easy, and I will not fear what flesh can do unto me; it is
but flesh, and cannot do much; nay, it can do nothing but by divine
permission." As we must not trust to an arm of flesh when it is engaged
for us, so we must not be afraid of an arm of flesh when it is stretched
out against us.

III\. He foresees and foretels the fall of those that fought against
him, and of all others that think to establish themselves in and by any
wicked practices ([Psa 56:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#007)): Shall
they escape by iniquity? They hope to escape God's judgments, as they
escape men's, by violence and fraud, and the arts of injustice and
treachery; but shall they escape? No, certainly they shall not. The sin
of sinners will never be their security, nor will either their impudence
or their hypocrisy bring them off at God's bar; God will in his anger
cast down and cast out such people, [Rom
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#003). None are raised so high, or
settled so firmly, but that the justice of God can bring them down, both
from their dignities and from their confidences. Who knows the power of
God's anger, how high it can reach, and how forcibly it can strike?

[Psalms 56:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 56:8</span></span>

Several things David here comforts himself with in the day of his
distress and fear.

I. That God took particular notice of all his grievances and all his
griefs, [Psa 56:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#008). 1. Of all the
inconveniences of his state: Thou tellest my wanderings, my flittings,
so the old translation. David was now but a young (under thirty) and yet
he had had many removes, from his father's house to the court, thence to
the camp, and now driven out to sojourn where he could find a place, but
not allowed to rest any where; he was hunted like a partridge upon the
mountains; continual terrors and toils attended him; but this comforted
him, that God kept a particular account of all his motions, and numbered
all the weary steps he took, by night or by day. Note, God takes
cognizance of all the afflictions of his people; and he does not cast
out from his care and love those whom men have cast out from their
acquaintance and converse. 2. Of all the impressions thus made upon his
spirit. When he was wandering he was often weeping, and therefore prays,
"Put thou my tears into thy bottle, to be preserved and looked upon;
nay, I know they are in thy book, the book of thy remembrance." God has
a bottle and a book for his people's tears, both those for their sins
and those for their afflictions. This intimates, (1.) That he observes
them with compassion and tender concern; he is afflicted in their
afflictions, and knows their souls in adversity. As the blood of his
saints, and their deaths, are precious in the sight of the Lord, so are
their tears, not one of them shall fall to the ground. I have seen thy
tears, [Kg2 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#005). I have heard Ephraim
bemoaning himself, [Jer 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018). (2.)
That he will remember them and review them, as we do the accounts we
have booked. Paul was mindful of Timothy's tears ([Ti2
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#004)), and God will not forget the
sorrows of his people. The tears of God's persecuted people are bottled
up and sealed among God's treasures; and, when these books come to be
opened, they will be found vials of wrath, which will be poured out upon
their persecutors, whom God will surely reckon with for all the tears
they have forced from his people's eyes; and they will be breasts of
consolation to God's mourners, whose sackcloth will be turned into
garments of praise. God will comfort his people according to the time
wherein he has afflicted them, and give to those to reap in joy who
sowed in tears. What was sown a tear will come up a pearl.

II\. That his prayers would be powerful for the defeat and discomfiture
of his enemies, as well as for his own support and encouragement ([Psa
56:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#009)): "When I cry unto thee, then
shall my enemies turn back; I need no other weapons than prayers and
tears; this I know, for God is for me, to plead my cause, to protect and
deliver me; and, if God be for me, who can be against me so as to
prevail?" The saints have God for them; they may know it; and to him
they must cry when they are surrounded with enemies; and, if they do
this in faith, they shall find a divine power exerted and engaged for
them; their enemies shall be made to turn back, their spiritual enemies,
against whom we fight best upon our knees, [Eph
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#018).

III\. That his faith in God would set him above the fear of man, [Psa
56:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#010), [Psa
56:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#011). Here he repeats, with a strong
pathos, what he had said ([Psa 56:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#004)),
"In God will I praise his word; that is, I will firmly depend upon the
promise for the sake of him that made it, who is true and faithful, and
has wisdom, power, and goodness enough to make it good." When we give
credit to a man's bill we honour him that drew it; so when we do, and
suffer, for God, in a dependence upon his promise, not staggering at it,
we give glory to God, we praise his word, and so give praise to him.
Having thus put his trust in God, he looks with a holy contempt upon the
threatening power of man: "In God have I put my trust, and in him only,
and therefore I will not be afraid what man can do unto me ([Psa
56:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#011)), though I know very well what
he would do if he could," [Psa 56:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001),
[Psa 56:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#002). This triumphant word, so
expressive of a holy magnanimity, the apostle puts into the mouth of
every true believer, whom he makes a Christian hero, [Heb
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#006). We may each of us boldly say,
The Lord is my helper, and then I will not fear what man shall do unto
me; for he has no power but what he has given him from above.

IV\. That he was in bonds to God ([Psa
56:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#012)): "Thy vows are upon me, O God!
- not upon me as a burden which I am loaded with, but as a badge which I
glory in, as that by which I am known to be thy menial servant - not
upon me as fetters that hamper me (such are superstitious vows), but
upon me as a bridle that restrains me from what would be hurtful to me,
and directs me in the way of my duty. Thy vows are upon me, the vows I
have made to thee, to which thou art not only a witness, but a party,
and which thou hast commanded and encouraged me to make." It is probably
that he means especially those vows which he had made to God in the day
of his trouble and distress, which he would retain the remembrance of,
and acknowledge the obligations of, when his fright was over. Note, It
ought to be the matter of our consideration and joy that the vows of God
are upon us - our baptismal vows renewed at the Lord's table, our
occasional vows under convictions, under corrections, by these we are
bound to live to God.

V. That he should still have more and more occasion to praise him: I
will render praises unto thee. This is part of the performance of his
vows; for vows of thankfulness properly accompany prayers for mercy, and
when the mercy is received must be made good. When we study what we
shall render this is the least we can resolve upon, to render praises to
God - poor returns for rich receivings! Two things he will praise God
for: - 1. For what he had done for him ([Psa
56:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#013)): "Thou has delivered my soul,
my life, from death, which was just ready to seize me." If God have
delivered us from sin, either from the commission of it by preventing
grace or from the punishment of it by pardoning mercy, we have reason to
own that he has thereby delivered our souls from death, which is the
wages of sin. If we, who were by nature dead in sin, are quickened
together with Christ, and are made spiritually alive, we have reason to
own that God has delivered our souls from death. 2. For what he would do
for him: "Thou hast delivered my soul from death, and so hast given me a
new life, and thereby hast given me an earnest of further mercy, that
thou wilt deliver my feet from falling; thou hast done the greater, and
therefore thou wilt do the less; thou hast begun a good work, and
therefore thou wilt carry it on and perfect it." This may be taken
either as the matter of his prayer, pleading his experience, or as the
matter of his praise, raising his expectations; and those that know how
to praise in faith will give God thanks for mercies in promise and
prospect, as well as in possession. See here, (1.) What David hopes for,
that God would deliver his feet from falling either into sin, which
would wound his conscience, or into the appearance of sin, from which
his enemies would take occasion to wound his good name. Those that think
the stand must take heed lest they fall, because the best stand no
longer than God is pleased to uphold them. We are weak, our way is
slippery, many stumbling-blocks are in it, our spiritual enemies are
industrious to thrust us down, and therefore we are concerned by faith
and prayer to commit ourselves to his care who keeps the feet of his
saints. (2.) What he builds this hope upon: "Thou hast delivered my soul
from death, and therein hast magnified thy power and goodness, and put
me into a capacity of receiving further mercy from thee; and now wilt
thou not secure and crown thy own work?" God never brought his people
out of Egypt to slay them in the wilderness. He that in conversion
delivers the soul from so great a death as sin is will not fail to
preserve it to his heavenly kingdom. (3.) What he designs in these
hopes: That I may walk before God in the light of the living, that is,
\[1.\] "That I may get to heaven, the only land of light and life; for
in this world darkness and death reign." \[2.\] "That I may do my duty
while this life lasts." Note, This we should aim at, in all our desires
and expectations of deliverance both from sin and trouble, that we may
do God so much the better service - that, being delivered out of the
hands of our enemies, we may serve him without fear.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 57](psa057)

</div>
