<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa024)  [Next](psa026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 25:0</span></span>

This psalm is full of devout affection to God, the out-goings of holy
desires towards his favour and grace and the lively actings of faith in
his promises. We may learn out of it, I. What it is to pray ([Psa
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#001), [Psa
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#015)). II. What we must pray for, the
pardon of sin ([Psa 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#006), [Psa
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#007), [Psa
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#018)), direction in the way of duty
([Psa 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#004), [Psa
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#005)), the favour of God ([Psa
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#016)), deliverance out of our
troubles ([Psa 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#017), [Psa
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#018)), preservation from our enemies
([Psa 25:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#020), [Psa
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#021)), and the salvation of the
church of God ([Psa 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#022)). III. What
we may plead in prayer, our confidence in God ([Psa
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#002), [Psa
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#003), [Psa
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#005), [Psa
25:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#020), [Psa
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#021)), our distress and the malice of
our enemies ([Psa 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#017), [Psa
25:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#019)), our sincerity ([Psa
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#021)). IV. What precious promises we
have to encourage us in prayer, of guidance and instruction ([Psa
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#008), [Psa
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#009), [Psa
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#012)), the benefit of the covenant
([Psa 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#010)), and the pleasure of
communion with God ([Psa 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#013), [Psa
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#014)). It is easy to apply the
several passages of this psalm to ourselves in the singing of it; for we
have often troubles, and always sins, to complain of at the throne of
grace.

A psalm of David.

[Psalms 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 25:1</span></span>

Here we have David's professions of desire towards God and dependence on
him. He often begins his psalms with such professions, not to move God,
but to move himself, and to engage himself to answer those professions.

I. He professes his desire towards God: Unto thee, O Lord! do I lift up
my soul, [Psa 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#001). In the foregoing
psalm ([Psa 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#004)) it was made the
character of a good man that he has not lifted up his soul to vanity;
and a call was given to the everlasting gates to lift up their heads for
the King of glory to come in, [Psa
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#001). To this character, to this call,
David here answers, "Lord, I lift up my soul, not to vanity, but to
thee." Note, In worshipping God we must lift up our souls to him. Prayer
is the ascent of the soul to God; God must be eyed and the soul
employed. Sursum corda - Up with you hearts, was anciently used as a
call to devotion. With a holy contempt of the world and the things of
it, by a fixed thought and active faith, we must set God before us, and
let out our desires towards him as the fountain of our happiness.

II\. He professes his dependence upon God and begs for the benefit and
comfort of that dependence ([Psa
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#002)): O my God! I trust in thee. His
conscience witnessed for him that he had no confidence in himself nor in
any creature, and that he had no diffidence of God or of his power or
promise. He pleases himself with this profession of faith in God. Having
put his trust in God, he is easy, is well satisfied, and quiet from the
fear of evil; and he pleads it with God whose honour it is to help those
that honour him by trusting in him. What men put a confidence in is
either their joy or their shame, according as it proves. Now David here,
under the direction of faith, prays earnestly, 1. That shame might not
be his lot: "Let me not be ashamed of my confidence in thee; let me not
be shaken from it by any prevailing fears, and let me not be, in the
issue, disappointed of what I depend upon thee for; but, Lord, keep what
I have committed unto thee." Note, If we make our confidence in God our
stay, it shall not be our shame; and, if we triumph in him, our enemies
shall not triumph over us, as they would if we should now sink under our
fears, or should, in the issue, come short of our hopes. 2. That it
might not be the lot of any that trusted in God. All the saints have
obtained a like precious faith; and therefore, doubtless, it will be
alike successful in the issue. Thus the communion of saints is kept up,
even by their praying one for another. True saints will make
supplication for all saints. It is certain that none who, by a believing
attendance, wait on God, and, by a believing hope, wait for him, shall
be made ashamed of it. 3. That it might be the lot of the transgressors;
Let those be ashamed that transgress without cause, or vainly, as the
word is. (1.) Upon no provocation. They revolt from God and their duty,
from David and his government (so some), without any occasion given
them, not being able to pretend any iniquity they have found in God, or
that in any thing he has wearied them. The weaker the temptation is by
which men are drawn to sin the stronger the corruption is by which they
are driven by it. Those are the worst transgressors that sin for
sinning-sake. (2.) To no purpose. They know their attempts against God
are fruitless; they imagine a vain thing, and therefore they will soon
be ashamed of it.

III\. He begs direction from God in the way of his duty, [Psa
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#004), [Psa
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#005). Once and again he here prays to
God to teach him. He was a knowing man himself, but the most
intelligent, the most observant, both need and desire to be taught of
God; from him we must be ever learning. Observe,

1\. What he desired to learn: "Teach me, not fine words or fine notions,
but thy ways, thy paths, thy truth, the ways in which thou walkest
towards men, which are all mercy and truth ([Psa
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#010)), and the ways in which thou
wouldst have me to walk towards thee." Those are best taught who
understand their duty, and know the good things they should do, [Ecc
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#003). God's paths and his truth are the
same; divine laws are all founded upon divine truths. The way of God's
precepts is the way of truth, [Psa
119:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#030). Christ is both the way and the
truth, and therefore we must learn Christ.

2\. What he desired of God, in order to this. (1.) That he would
enlighten his understanding concerning his duty: "Show me thy way, and
so teach me." In doubtful cases we should pray earnestly that God would
make it plain to us what he would have us to do. (2.) That he would
incline his will to do it, and strengthen him in it: "Lead me, and so
teach me." Not only as we lead one that is dimsighted, to keep him from
missing his way, but as we lead one that is sick, and feeble, and faint,
to help him forward in the way and to keep him from fainting and
falling. We go no further in the way to heaven than God is pleased to
lead us and to hold us up.

3\. What he pleads, (1.) His great expectation from God: Thou art the
God of my salvation. Note, Those that choose salvation of God as their
end, and make him the God of their salvation, may come boldly to him for
direction in the way that leads to that end. If God save us, he will
teach us and lead us. He that gives salvation will give instruction.
(2.) His constant attendance on God: On thee do I wait all the day.
Whence should a servant expect direction what to do but from his own
master, on whom he waits all the day? If we sincerely desire to know our
duty, with a resolution to do it, we need not question but that God will
direct us in it.

IV\. He appeals to God's infinite mercy, and casts himself upon that,
not pretending to any merit of his own ([Psa
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#006)): "Remember, O Lord! thy tender
mercies, and, for the sake of those mercies, lead me, and teach me; for
they have been ever of old." 1. "Thou always wast a merciful God; it is
thy name, it is thy nature and property, to show mercy." 2. "Thy
counsels and designs of mercy were from everlasting; the vessels of
mercy were, before all worlds, ordained to glory." 3. "The instances of
thy mercy to the church in general, and to me in particular, were early
and ancient, and constant hitherto; they began of old, and never ceased.
Thou hast taught me from my youth up, teach me now."

V. He is in a special manner earnest for the pardon of his sins ([Psa
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#007)): "O remember not the sins of my
youth. Lord, remember thy mercies ([Psa
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#006)), which speak for me, and not my
sins, which speak against me." Here is, 1. An implicit confession of
sin; he specifies particularly the sins of his youth. Note, Our youthful
faults and follies should be matter of our repentance and humiliation
long after, because time does not wear out the guilt of sin. Old people
should mourn for the sinful mirth and be in pain for the sinful
pleasures of their youth. He aggravates his sins, calling them his
transgressions; and the more holy, just, and good the law is, which sin
is the transgression of, the more exceedingly sinful it ought to appear
to us. 2. An express petition for mercy, (1.) That he might be acquitted
from guilt: "Remember not the sins of my youth; that is, remember them
not against me, lay them not to my charge, enter not into judgment with
me for them." When God pardons sin he is said to remember it no more,
which denotes a plenary remission; he forgives and forgets. (2.) That he
might be accepted in God's sight: "Remember thou me; think on me for
good, and come in seasonably for my succour." We need desire no more to
make us happy than for God to remember us with favour. His plea is,
"according to thy mercy, and for thy goodness-sake." Note, It is God's
goodness and not ours, his mercy and not our own merit, that must be our
plea for the pardon of sin and all the good we stand in need of. This
plea we must always rely upon, as those that are sensible of our poverty
and unworthiness and as those that are satisfied of the riches of God's
mercy and grace.

[Psalms 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 25:8</span></span>

God's promises are here mixed with David's prayers. Many petitions there
were in the former part of the psalm, and many we shall find in the
latter; and here, in the middle of the psalm, he meditates upon the
promises, and by a lively faith sucks and is satisfied from these
breasts of consolation; for the promises of God are not only the best
foundation of prayer, telling us what to pray for and encouraging our
faith and hope in prayer, but they are a present answer to prayer. Let
the prayer be made according to the promise, and then the promise may be
read as a return to the prayer; and we are to believe the prayer is
heard because the promise will be performed. But, in the midst of the
promises, we fine one petition which seems to come in somewhat abruptly,
and should have followed upon [Psa
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#007). It is that ([Psa
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#011)), Pardon my iniquity. But
prayers for the pardon of sin are never impertinent; we mingle sin with
all our actions, and therefore should mingle such prayers with all our
devotions. He enforces this petition with a double plea. The former is
very natural: "For thy name's sake pardon my iniquity, because thou hast
proclaimed thy name gracious and merciful, pardoning iniquity, for thy
glory-sake, for thy promise-sake, for thy own sake," [Isa
43:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#025). But the latter is very
surprising: "Pardon my iniquity, for it is great, and the greater it is
the more will divine mercy be magnified in the forgiveness of it." It is
the glory of a great God to forgive great sins, to forgive iniquity,
transgression, and sin, [Exo 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#007). "It
is great, and therefore I an undone, for ever undone, if infinite mercy
do not interpose for the pardon of it. It is great; I see it to be so."
The more we see of the heinousness of our sins the better qualified we
are to find mercy with God. When we confess sin we must aggravate it.

Let us now take a view of the great and precious promises which we have
in these verses, and observe,

I. To whom these promises belong and who may expect the benefit of them.
We are all sinners; and can we hope for any advantage by them? Yes ([Psa
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#008)), He will teach sinners, though
they be sinners; for Christ came into the world to save sinners, and, in
order to that, to teach sinners, to call sinners to repentance. These
promises are sure to those who though they have been sinners, have gone
astray, yet now keep God's word, 1. To such as keep his covenant and his
testimonies ([Psa 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#010)), such as take
his precepts for their rule and his promises for their portion, such as,
having taken God to be to them a God, live upon that, and, having given
up themselves to be him a people, live up to that. Though, through the
infirmity of the flesh, they sometimes break the command, yet by a
sincere repentance when at any time they do amiss, and a constant
adherence by faith to God as their God, they keep the covenant and do
not break that. 2. To such as fear him ([Psa
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#012) and again [Psa
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#014)), such as stand in awe of his
majesty and worship him with reverence, submit to his authority and obey
him with cheerfulness, dread his wrath and are afraid of offending him.

II\. Upon what these promises are grounded, and what encouragement we
have to build upon them. Here are two things which ratify and confirm
all the promises: - 1. The perfections of God's nature. We value the
promise by the character of him that makes its. We may therefore depend
upon God's promises; for good and upright is the Lord, and therefore he
will be as good as his word. He is so kind that he cannot deceive us, so
true that he cannot break his promise. Faithful is he who hath promised,
who also will do it. He was good in making the promise, and therefore
will be upright in performing it. 2. The agreeableness of all he says
and does with the perfections of his nature ([Psa
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#010)): All the paths of the Lord
(that is, all his promises and all his providences) are mercy and truth;
they are, like himself, good and upright. All God's dealings with his
people are according to the mercy of his purposes and the truth of his
promises; all he does comes from love, covenant-love; and they may see
in it his mercy displayed and his word fulfilled. What a rich
satisfaction may this be to good people, that, whatever afflictions they
are exercised with, All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, and
so it will appear when they come to their journey's end.

III\. What these promises are.

1\. That God will instruct and direct them in the way of their duty.
This is most insisted upon, because it is an answer to David's prayers
([Psa 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#004), [Psa
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#005)), Show me thy ways and lead me.
We should fix our thoughts, and act our faith, most on those promises
which suit our present case. (1.) He will teach sinners in the way,
because they are sinners, and therefore need teaching. When they see
themselves sinners, and desire teaching, then he will teach them the way
of reconciliation to God, the way to a well-grounded peace of
conscience, and the way to eternal life. He does, by his gospel, make
this way known to all, and, by his Spirit, open the understanding and
guide penitent sinners that enquire after it. The devil leads men
blindfold to hell, but God enlightens men's eyes, sets things before
them in a true light, and so leads them to heaven. (2.) The meek will he
guide, the meek will he teach, that is, those that are humble and low in
their own eyes, that are distrustful of themselves, desirous to be
taught, and honestly resolved to follow the divine guidance. Speak,
Lord, for thy servant hears. These he will guide in judgment, that is,
by the rule of the written word; he will guide them in that which is
practical, which relates to sin and duty, so that they may keep
conscience void of offence; and he will do it judiciously (so some),
that is, he will suit his conduct to their case; he will teach sinners
with wisdom, tenderness, and compassion, and as they are able to bear.
He will teach them his way. All good people make God's way their way,
and desire to be taught that; and those that do so shall be taught and
led in that way. (3.) Him that feareth the Lord he will teach in the way
that he shall choose, either in the way that God shall choose or that
the good man shall choose. It comes all to one, for he that fears the
Lord chooses the things that please him. If we choose the right way, he
that directed our choice will direct our steps, and will lead us in it.
If we choose wisely, God will give us grace to walk wisely.

2\. That God will make them easy ([Psa
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#013)): His soul shall dwell at ease,
shall lodge in goodness, marg. Those that devote themselves to the fear
of God, and give themselves to be taught of God, will be easy, if it be
not their own fault. The soul that is sanctified by the grace of God,
and, much more, that is comforted by the peace of God, dwells at ease.
Even when the body is sick and lies in pain, yet the soul may dwell at
ease in God, may return to him, and repose in him as its rest. Many
things occur to make us uneasy, but there is enough in the covenant of
grace to counterbalance them all and to make us easy.

3\. That he will give to them and theirs as much of this world as is
good for them: His seed shall inherit the earth. Next to our care
concerning our souls is our care concerning our seed, and God has a
blessing in store for the generation of the upright. Those that fear God
shall inherit the earth, shall have a competency in it and the comfort
of it, and their children shall fare the better for their prayers when
they are gone.

4\. That God will admit them into the secret of communion with himself
([Psa 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#014)): The secret of the Lord
is with those that fear him. They understand his word; for, if any man
do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God, [Joh
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#017). Those that receive the truth in
the love of it, and experience the power of it, best understand the
mystery of it. They know the meaning of his providence, and what God is
doing with them, better than others. Shall I hide from Abraham the
things that I do? [Gen 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#017). He call
them not servants, but friends, as he called Abraham. They know by
experience the blessings of the covenant and the pleasure of that
fellowship which gracious souls have with the Father and with his Son
Jesus Christ. This honour have all his saints.

[Psalms 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 25:15</span></span>

David, encouraged by the promises he had been meditating upon, here
renews his addresses to God, and concludes the psalm, as he began, with
professions of dependence upon God and desire towards him.

I. He lays open before God the calamitous condition he was in. His feet
were in the net, held fast and entangled, so that he could not extricate
himself out of his difficulties, [Psa
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#015). He was desolate and afflicted,
[Psa 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#016). It is common for those
that are afflicted to be desolate; their friends desert them then, and
they are themselves disposed to sit alone and keep silence, [Lam
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#028). David calls himself desolate and
solitary because he depended not upon his servants and soldiers, but
relied as entirely upon God as if he had no prospect at all of help and
succour from any creature. Being in distress, in many distresses, the
troubles of his heart were enlarged ([Psa
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#017)), he grew more and more
melancholy and troubled in mind. Sense of sin afflicted him more than
any thing else: this it was that broke and wounded his spirit, and made
his outward troubles lie heavily upon him. He was in affliction and
pain, [Psa 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#018). His enemies that
persecuted him were many and malicious (they hated him), and very
barbarous; it was with a cruel hatred that they hated him, [Psa
25:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#019). Such were Christ's enemies and
the persecutors of his church.

II\. He expresses the dependence he had upon God in these distresses
([Psa 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#015)): My eyes are ever towards
the Lord. Idolaters were for gods that they could see with their bodily
eyes, and they had their eyes ever towards their idols, [Isa
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#007), [Isa
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#008). But it is an eye of faith that
we must have towards God, who is a Spirit, [Zac
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001). Our meditation of him must be
sweet, and we must always set him before us: in all our ways we must
acknowledge him and do all to his glory. Thus we must live a life of
communion with God, not only in ordinances, but in providences, not only
in acts of devotion, but in the whole course of our conversation. David
had the comfort of this in his affliction; for, because his eyes were
ever towards the Lord, he doubted not but he would pluck his feet out of
the net, that he would deliver him from the corruptions of his own heart
(so some), from the designs of his enemies against him, so others. Those
that have their eye ever towards God shall not have their feet long in
the net. He repeats his profession of dependence upon God ([Psa
25:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#020)) - Let me not be ashamed, for I
put my trust in thee; and of expectation from him - I wait on thee, [Psa
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#021). It is good thus to hope and
quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord.

III\. He prays earnestly to God for relief and succour,

1\. For himself.

(1.) See how he begs, \[1.\] For the remission of sin ([Psa
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#018)): Forgive all my sins. Those
were his heaviest burdens, and which brought upon him all other burdens.
He had begged ([Psa 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#007)) for the
pardon of the sins of his youth, and ([Psa
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#011)) for the pardon of some one
particular iniquity that was remarkably great, which some think, was his
sin in the matter of Uriah. But her he prays, Lord, forgive all, take
away all iniquity. It is observable that, as to his affliction, he asks
for no more than God's regard to it: "Look upon my affliction and my
pain, and do with it as thou pleasest." But, as to his sin, he asks for
no less than a full pardon: Forgive all my sins. When at any time we are
in trouble we should be more concerned about our sins, to get them
pardoned, than about our afflictions, to get them removed. Yet he prays,
\[2.\] For the redress of his grievances. His mind was troubled for
God's withdrawings from him and under the sense he had of his
displeasure against him for his sins; and therefore he prays ([Psa
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#016)), Turn thou unto me. And, if God
turn to us, no matter who turns from us. His condition was troubled,
and, in reference to that, he prays, "O bring thou me out of my
distresses. I see no way of deliverance open; but thou canst either find
one or make one." His enemies were spiteful; and in reference to that,
he prays, "O keep my soul from falling into their hands, or else deliver
me out of their hands."

(2.) Four things he mentions by way of plea to enforce these petitions,
and refers himself and them to God's consideration: - \[1.\] He pleads
God's mercy: Have mercy upon me. Men of the greatest merits would be
undone if they had not to do with a God of infinite mercies. \[2.\] He
pleads his own misery, the distress he was in, his affliction and pain,
especially the troubles of his heart, all which made him the proper
object of divine mercy. \[3.\] He pleads the iniquity of his enemies:
"Lord, consider them, how cruel they are, and deliver me out of their
hands." \[4.\] He pleads his own integrity, [Psa
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#012). Though he had owned himself
guilty before God, and had confessed his sins against him, yet, as to
his enemies, he had the testimony of his conscience that he had done
them no wrong, which was his comfort when they hated him with cruel
hatred; and he prays that this might preserve him, This intimates that
he did not expect to be safe any longer than he continued in his
integrity and uprightness, and that, while he did continue in it, he did
not doubt of being safe. Sincerity will be our best security in the
worst of times. Integrity and uprightness will be a man's preservation
more than the wealth and honour of the world can be. These will preserve
us to the heavenly kingdom. We should therefore pray to God to preserve
us in our integrity and then be assured that that will preserve us.

2\. For the church of God ([Psa
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#022)): Redeem Israel, O God! out of
all his troubles. David was now in trouble himself, but he thinks it not
strange, since trouble is the lot of all God's Israel. Why should any
one member fare better than the whole body? David's troubles were
enlarged, and very earnest he was with God to deliver him, yet he
forgets not the distresses of God's church; for, when we have ever so
much business of our own at the throne of grace, we must still remember
to pray for the public. Good men have little comfort in their own safety
while the church is in distress and danger. This prayer is a prophecy
that God would, at length, give David rest, and therewith give Israel
rest from all their enemies round about. It is a prophecy of the sending
of the Messiah in due time to redeem Israel from his iniquities ([Psa
130:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#008)) and so to redeem them from
their troubles. It refers also to the happiness of the future state. In
heaven, and in heaven only, will God's Israel be perfectly redeemed from
all troubles.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 26](psa026)

</div>
