<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa040)  [Next](psa042) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 41](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 41:0</span></span>

God's kindness and truth have often been the support and comfort of the
saints when they have had most experience of man's unkindness and
treachery. David here found them so, upon a sick-bed; he found his
enemies very barbarous, but his God very gracious. I. He here comforts
himself in his communion with God under his sickness, by faith receiving
and laying hold of God's promises to him ([Psa
41:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001)) and lifting up his heart in
prayer to God ([Psa 41:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#004)). II. He here
represents the malice of his enemies against him, their malicious
censures of him, their spiteful reflections upon him, and their insolent
conduct towards him ([Psa 41:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#005)).
III. He leaves his case with God, not doubting but that he would own and
favour him ([Psa 41:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#010)), and so the
psalm concludes with a doxology ([Psa
41:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#013)). Is any afflicted with
sickness? let him sing the beginning of this psalm. Is any persecuted by
enemies? let him sing the latter end of it; and we may any of us, in
singing it, meditate upon both the calamities and comforts of good
people in this world.

To the chief musician. A psalm of David.

[Psalms 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 41:1</span></span>

In these verses we have,

I. God's promises of succour and comfort to those that consider the
poor; and,

1\. We may suppose that David makes mention of these with application
either, (1.) To his friends, who were kind to him, and very considerate
of his case, now that he was in affliction: Blessed is he that considers
poor David. Here and there he met with one that sympathized with him,
and was concerned for him, and kept up his good opinion of him and
respect for him, notwithstanding his afflictions, while his enemies were
so insolent and abusive to him; on these he pronounced this blessing,
not doubting but that God would recompense to them all the kindness they
had done him, particularly when they also came to be in affliction. The
provocations which his enemies gave him did but endear his friends so
much the more to him. Or, (2.) To himself. He had the testimony of his
conscience for him that he had considered the poor, that when he was in
honour and power at court he had taken cognizance of the wants and
miseries of the poor and had provided for their relief, and therefore
was sure God would, according to his promise, strengthen and comfort him
in his sickness.

2\. We must regard them more generally with application to ourselves.
Here is a comment upon that promise, Blessed are the merciful, for they
shall obtain mercy. Observe, (1.) What the mercy is which is required of
us. It is to consider the poor or afflicted, whether in mind, body, or
estate. These we are to consider with prudence and tenderness; we must
take notice of their affliction and enquire into their state, must
sympathize with them and judge charitably concerning them. We must
wisely consider the poor; that is, we must ourselves be instructed by
the poverty and affliction of others; it must be Maschil to us, that is
the word here used. (2.) What the mercy is that is promised to us if we
thus show mercy. He that considers the poor (if he cannot relieve them,
yet he considers them, and has a compassionate concern for them, and in
relieving them acts considerately and with discretion) shall be
considered by his God: he shall not only be recompensed in the
resurrection of the just, but he shall be blessed upon the earth This
branch of godliness, as much as any, has the promise of the life that
now is and is usually recompensed with temporal blessings. Liberality to
the poor is the surest and safest way of thriving; such as practise it
may be sure of seasonable and effectual relief from God, \[1.\] In all
troubles: He will deliver them in the day of evil, so that when the
times are at the worst it shall go well with them, and they shall not
fall into the calamities in which others are involved; if any be hidden
in the day of the Lord's anger, they shall. Those who thus distinguish
themselves from those that have hard hearts God will distinguish from
those that have hard usage. Are they in danger? he will preserve and
keep them alive; and those who have a thousand times forfeited their
lives, as the best have, must acknowledge it as a great favour if they
have their lives given them for a prey. He does not say, "They shall be
preferred," but, "They shall be preserved and kept alive, when the
arrows of death fly thickly round about them." Do their enemies threaten
them? God will not deliver them into the will of their enemies; and the
most potent enemy we have can have no power against us but what is given
him from above. The good-will of a God that loves us is sufficient to
secure us from the ill-will of all that hate us, men and devils; and
that good-will we may promise ourselves an interest in if we have
considered the poor and helped to relieve and rescue them. \[2.\]
Particularly in sickness ([Psa 41:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#003)):
The Lord will strengthen him, both in body and mind, upon the bed of
languishing, on which he had long lain sick, and he will make all his
bed - a very condescending expression, alluding to the care of those
that nurse and tend sick people, especially of mothers for their
children when they are sick, which is to make their beds easy for them;
and that bed must needs be well made which God himself has the making
of. He will make all his bed from head to foot, so that no part shall be
uneasy; he will turn his bed (so the word is), to shake it up and make
it very easy; or he will turn it into a bed of health. Note, God has
promised his people that he will strengthen them, and make them easy,
under their bodily pains and sicknesses. He has not promised that they
shall never be sick, nor that they shall not lie long languishing, nor
that their sickness shall not be unto death; but he has promised to
enable them to bear their affliction with patience, and cheerfully to
wait the issue. The soul shall by his grace be made to dwell at ease
when the body lies in pain.

II\. David's prayer, directed and encouraged by these promises ([Psa
41:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#004)): I said, Heal my soul. It is
good for us to keep some account of our prayers, that we may not unsay,
in our practices, any thing that we said in our prayers. Here is, 1. His
humble petition: Lord be merciful to me. He appeals to mercy, as one
that knew he could not stand the test of strict justice. The best
saints, even those that have been merciful to the poor, have not made
God their debtor, but must throw themselves on his mercy. When we are
under the rod we must thus recommend ourselves to the tender mercy of
our God: Lord, heal my soul. Sin is the sickness of the soul; pardoning
mercy heals it; renewing grace heals it; and this spiritual healing we
should be more earnest for than for bodily health. 2. His penitent
confession: "I have sinned against thee, and therefore my soul needs
healing. I am a sinner, a miserable sinner; therefore, God be merciful
to me," [Luk 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013). It does not appear
that this has reference to any particular gross act of sin, but, in
general, to his many sins of infirmity, which his sickness set in order
before him, and the dread of the consequences of which made him pray,
Heal my soul.

[Psalms 41:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 41:5</span></span>

David often complains of the insolent conduct of his enemies towards him
when he was sick, which, as it was very barbarous in them, so it could
not but be very grievous to him. They had not indeed arrived at that
modern pitch of wickedness of poisoning his meat and drink, or giving
him something to make him sick; but, when he was sick, they insulted
over him ([Psa 41:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#005)): My enemies speak
evil of me, designing thereby to grieve his spirit, to ruin his
reputation, and so to sink his interest. Let us enquire,

I. What was the conduct of his enemies towards him. 1. They longed for
his death: When shall he die, and his name perish with him? He had but
an uncomfortable life, and yet they grudged him that. But it was a
useful life; he was, upon all accounts, the greatest ornament and
blessing of his country; and yet, it seems, there were some who were
sick of him, as the Jews were of Paul, crying out, Away with such a
fellow from the earth. We ought not to desire the death of any; but to
desire the death of useful men, for their usefulness, has much in it of
the venom of the old serpent. They envied him his name, and the honour
he had won, and doubted not but, if he were dead, that would be laid in
the dust with him; yet see how they were mistaken: when he had served
his generation he did die ([Act
13:36](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#036)), but did his name perish? No;
it lives and flourishes to this day in the sacred writings, and will to
the end of time; for the memory of the just is, and shall be, blessed.
2. They picked up every thing they could to reproach him with ([Psa
41:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#006)): "If he come to see me" (as it
has always been reckoned a piece of neighbourly kindness to visit the
sick) "he speaks vanity; that is, he pretends friendship, and that his
errand is to mourn with me and to comfort me; he tells me he is very
sorry to see me so much indisposed, and wishes me my health; but it is
all flattery and falsehood." We complain, and justly, of the want of
sincerity in our days, and that there is scarcely any true friendship to
be found among men; but it seems, by this, that the former days were no
better than these. David's friends were all compliment, and had nothing
of that affection for him in their hearts which they made profession of.
Nor was that the worst of it; it was upon a mischievous design that they
came to see him, that they might make invidious remarks upon every thing
he said or did, and might represent it as they pleased to others, with
their own comments upon it, so as to render him odious or ridiculous:
His heart gathereth iniquity to itself, puts ill constructions upon
every thing; and the, when he goes among his companions, he tells it to
them, that they may tell it to others. Report, say they, and we will
report it, [Jer 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#010). If he
complained much of his illness, they would reproach him for his
pusillanimity; if he scarcely complained at all, they would reproach him
for his stupidity. If he prayed, or gave them good counsel, they would
banter it, and call it canting; if he kept silence from good, when the
wicked were before him, they would say that he had forgotten his
religion now that he was sick. There is no fence against those whose
malice thus gathers iniquity. 3. They promised themselves that he would
never recover from this sickness, nor ever wipe off the odium with which
they had loaded him. They whispered together against him ([Psa
41:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#007)), speaking that secretly in one
another's ears which they could not for shame speak out, and which, if
they did, they knew would be confuted. Whisperers and backbiters are put
together among the worst of sinners, [Rom
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#029), [Rom
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#030). They whispered, that their plot
against him might not be discovered and so defeated; there is seldom
whispering (we say) but there is lying, or some mischief on foot. Those
whisperers devised evil to David. Concluding he would die quickly, they
contrived how to break all the measures he had concerted for the public
good, to prevent the prosecution of them, and to undo all that he had
hitherto been doing. This he calls devising hurt against him; and they
doubted not but to gain their point: An evil disease (a thing of
Belial), say they, cleaves fast to him. The reproach with which they had
loaded his name, they hoped, would cleave so fast to it that it would
perish with him, and then they should gain their point. They went by a
modern maxim, Fortiter calumniari, aliquid adhaerebit - Fling an
abundance of calumny, and some will be sure to stick. "The disease he is
now under will certainly make an end of him; for it is the punishment of
some great enormous crime, which he will not be brought to repent of,
and proves him, however he has appeared, a son of Belial." Or, "It is
inflicted by Satan, who is called Belial," the wicked one, [Co2
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#015). "It is" (according to a loose
way of speaking some have) "a devilish disease, and therefore it will
cleave fast to him; and now that he lieth, now that his distemper
prevails so far as to oblige him to keep his bed, he shall rise up no
more; we shall get rid of him, and divide the spoil of his preferments."
We are not to think it strange if, when good men are sick, there be
those that fear it, which makes the world not worthy of them, [Rev
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#010). 4. There was one particularly,
in whom he had reposed a great deal of confidence, that took part with
his enemies and was as abusive to him as any of them ([Psa
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#009)): My own familiar friend;
probably he means Ahithophel, who had been his bosom-friend and
prime-minister of state, in whom he trusted as one inviolably firm to
him, whose advice he relied much upon in dealing with his enemies, and
who did eat of his bread, that is, with whom he had been very intimate
and whom he had taken to sit at the table with hi, nay, whom he had
maintained and given a livelihood to, and so obliged, both in gratitude
and interest, to adhere to him. Those that had their maintenance from
the king's palace did not think it meet for them to see the king's
dishonour ([Ezr 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#014)), much less to do
him dishonour. Yet this base and treacherous confidant of David's forgot
all the eaten bread, and lifted up his heel against him that had lifted
up his head; not only deserted him, but insulted him, kicked at him,
endeavoured to supplant him. Those are wicked indeed whom no courtesy
done them, nor confidence reposed in them, will oblige; and let us not
think it strange if we receive abuses from such: David did, and the Son
of David; for of Judas the traitor David here, in the Spirit, spoke; our
Saviour himself so expounds this, and therefore gave Judas the sop, that
the scripture might be fulfilled, He that eats bread with me has lifted
up his heel against me, [Joh 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#018),
[Joh 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#016). Nay, have not we ourselves
behaved thus perfidiously and disingenuously towards God? We eat of his
bread daily, and yet lift up the heel against him, as Jeshurun, that
waxed fat and kicked, [Deu 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015).

II\. How did David bear this insolent ill-natured conduct of his enemies
towards him?

1\. He prayed to God that they might be disappointed. He said nothing to
them, but turned himself to God: O Lord! be thou merciful to me, for
they are unmerciful, [Psa 41:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#010). He
had prayed in reference to the insults of his enemies, Lord, be merciful
to me, for this is a prayer which will suit every case. God's mercy has
in it a redress for every grievance, "They endeavour to run me down,
but, Lord, do thou raise me up from this bed of languishing, from which
they think I shall never arise. Raise me up that I may requite them,
that I may render them good for evil" (so some), for that was David's
practice, [Psa 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#004); [Psa
35:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#013). A good man will even wish for
an opportunity of making it to appear that he bears no malice to those
that have been injurious to him, but, on the contrary, that he is ready
to do them any good office. Or, "That, as a king, I may put them under
the marks of my just displeasure, banish them the court, and forbid them
my table for the future," which would be a necessary piece of justice,
for warning to others. Perhaps in this prayer is couched a prophecy of
the exaltation of Christ, whom God raised up, that he might be a just
avenger of all the wrongs done to him and to his people, particularly by
the Jews, whose utter destruction followed not long after.

2\. He assured himself that they would be disappointed ([Psa
41:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#011)): "By this I know that thou
favourest me and my interest, because my enemy doth not triumph over
me." They hoped for his death, but he found himself, through mercy,
recovering, and this would add to the comfort of his recovery, (1.) That
it would be a disappointment to his adversaries; they would be
crest-fallen and wretchedly ashamed, and there would be no occasion to
upbraid them with their disappointment; they would fret at it
themselves. Note. Though we may not take a pleasure in the fall of our
enemies, we may take a pleasure in the frustrating of their designs
against us. (2.) That is would be a token of God's favour to him, and a
certain evidence that he did favour him, and would continue to do so.
Note, When we can discern the favour of God to us in any mercy, personal
or public, that doubles it and sweetens it.

3\. He depended upon God, who had thus delivered him from many an evil
work, to preserve him to his heavenly kingdom, as blessed Paul, [Ti2
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#018). "As for me, forasmuch as thou
favourest me, as a fruit of that favour, and to qualify me for the
continuance of it, thou upholdest me in my integrity, and, in order to
that, settest me before thy face, hast thy eye always upon me for good;"
or, "Because thou dost, by thy grace, uphold me in my integrity, I know
that thou wilt, in thy glory, set me for ever before thy face." Note,
(1.) When at any time we suffer in our reputation our chief concern
should be about our integrity, and then we may cheerfully leave it to
God to secure our reputation. David knows that, if he can but persevere
in his integrity, he needs not fear his enemies' triumphs over him. (2.)
The best man in the world holds his integrity no longer then God upholds
him in it; for by his grace we are what we are; if we be left to
ourselves, we shall not only fall, but fall away. (3.) It is a great
comfort to us that, however weak we are, God is able to uphold us in our
integrity, and will do it if we commit the keeping of it to him. (4.) If
the grace of God did not take a constant care of us, we should not be
upheld in our integrity; his eye is always upon us, else we should soon
start aside from him. (5.) Those whom God now upholds in their integrity
he will set before his face for ever, and make happy in the vision and
fruition of himself. He that endures to the end shall be saved.

4\. The psalm concludes with a solemn doxology, or adoration of God as
the Lord God of Israel, [Psa 41:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#013). It
is not certain whether this verse pertains to this particular psalm (if
so, it teaches us this, That a believing hope of our preservation
through grace to glory is enough to fill our hearts with joy and our
mouths with everlasting praise, even in our greatest straits) or whether
it was added as the conclusion of the first book of Psalms, which is
reckoned to end here (the like being subjoined to Ps. 72, 89, 106), and
then it teaches us to make God the Omega who is the Alpha, to make him
the end who is the beginning of every good work. We are taught, (1.) To
give glory to God as the Lord God of Israel, a God in covenant with his
people, who has done great and kind things for them and has more and
better in reserve. (2.) To give him glory as an eternal God, that has
both his being and his blessedness from everlasting and to everlasting.
(3.) To do this with great affection and fervour of spirit, intimated in
the double seal set to it - Amen, and Amen. Be it so now, be it so to
all eternity. We say Amen to it, and let all others say Amen too.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 42](psa042)

</div>
