<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa037)  [Next](psa039) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 38](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 38:0</span></span>

This is one of the penitential psalms; it is full of grief and complaint
from the beginning to the end. David's sins and his afflictions are the
cause of his grief and the matter of his complaints. It should seem he
was now sick and in pain, which reminded him of his sins and helped to
humble him for them; he was, at the same time, deserted by his friends
and persecuted by his enemies; so that the psalm is calculated for the
depth of distress and a complication of calamities. He complains, I. Of
God's displeasure, and of his own sin which provoked God against him
([Psa 38:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#001)). II. Of his bodily
sickness ([Psa 38:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#006)). III. Of the
unkindness of his friends ([Psa
38:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#011)). IV. Of the injuries which his
enemies did him, pleading his good conduct towards them, yet confessing
his sins against God ([Psa 38:12-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#012)).
Lastly, he concludes the psalm with earnest prayers to God for his
gracious presence and help ([Psa
38:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#021), [Psa
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#022)). In singing this psalm we ought
to be much affected with the malignity of sin; and, if we have not such
troubles as are here described, we know not how soon we may have, and
therefore must sing of them by way of preparation and we know that
others have them, and therefore we must sing of the by way of sympathy.

A psalm of David to bring to remembrance.

[Psalms 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 38:1</span></span>

The title of this psalm is very observable; it is a psalm to bring to
remembrance; the 70th psalm, which was likewise penned in a day of
affliction, is so entitled. It is designed, 1. To bring to his own
remembrance. We will suppose it penned when he was sick and in pain, and
then it teaches us that times of sickness are times to bring to
remembrance, to bring the sin to remembrance, for which God contended
with us, to awaken our consciences to deal faithfully and plainly with
us, and set our sins in order before us, for our humiliation. In a day
of adversity consider. Or we may suppose it penned after his recovery,
but designed as a record of the convictions he was under and the
workings of his heart when he was in affliction, that upon every review
of this psalm he might call to mind the good impressions then made upon
him and make a fresh improvement of them. To the same purport was the
writing of Hezekiah when he had been sick. 2. To put others in mind of
the same things which he was himself mindful of, and to teach them what
to think and what to say when they are sick and in affliction; let them
think as he did, and speak as he did.

I. He deprecates the wrath of God and his displeasure in his affliction
([Psa 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#001)): O Lord! rebuke me not in
thy wrath. With this same petition he began another prayer for the
visitation of the sick, [Psa 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001). This
was most upon his heart, and should be most upon ours when we are in
affliction, that, however God rebukes and chastens us, it may not be in
wrath and displeasure, for that will be wormwood and gall in the
affliction and misery. Those that would escape the wrath of God must
pray against that more than any outward affliction, and be content to
bear any outward affliction while it comes from, and consists with, the
love of God.

II\. He bitterly laments the impressions of God's displeasure upon his
soul ([Psa 38:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#002)): Thy arrows stick
fast in me. Let Job's complaint ([Job
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#004)) expound this of David. By the
arrows of the Almighty he means the terrors of God, which did set
themselves in array against him. He was under a very melancholy
frightful apprehension of the wrath of God against him for his sins, and
thought he could look for nothing but judgment and fiery indignation to
devour him. God's arrows, as they are sure to hit the mark, so they are
sure to stick where they hit, to stick fast, till he is pleased to draw
them out and to bind up with his comforts the wound he has made with his
terrors. This will be the everlasting misery of the damned - the arrows
of God's wrath will stick fast in them and the wound will be incurable.
"Thy hand, thy heavy hand, presses me sore, and I am ready to sink under
it; it not only lies hard upon me, but it lies long; and who knows the
power of God's anger, the weight of his hand?" Sometimes God shot his
arrows, and stretched forth his hand, for David ([Psa
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#014)), but now against him; so
uncertain is the continuance of divine comforts, where yet the
continuance of divine grace is assured. He complains of God's wrath as
that which inflicted the bodily distemper he was under ([Psa
38:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#003)): There is no soundness in my
flesh because of thy anger. The bitterness of it, infused in his mind,
affected his body; but that was not the worst: it caused the disquietude
of his heart, by reason of which he forgot the courage of a soldier, the
dignity of a prince, and all the cheerfulness of the sweet psalmist of
Israel, and roared terribly, [Psa
38:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#008). Nothing will disquiet the heart
of a good man so much as the sense of God's anger, which shows what a
fearful thing it is to fall into his hands. The way to keep the heart
quiet is to keep ourselves in the love of God and to do nothing to
offend him.

III\. He acknowledges his sin to be the procuring provoking cause of all
his troubles, and groans more under the load of guilt than any other
load, [Psa 38:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#003). He complains that his
flesh had no soundness, his bones had no rest, so great an agitation he
was in. "It is because of thy anger; that kindles the fire which burns
so fiercely;" but, in the next words, he justifies God herein, and takes
all the blame upon himself: "It is because of my sin. I have deserved
it, and so have brought it upon myself. My own iniquities do correct
me." If our trouble be the fruit of God's anger, we may thank ourselves;
it is our sin that is the cause of it. Are we restless? It is sin that
makes us so. If there were not sin in our souls, there would be no pain
in our bones, no illness in our bodies. It is sin therefore that this
good man complains most of, 1. As a burden, a heavy burden ([Psa
38:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#004)): "My iniquities have gone over
my head, as proud waters over a man that is sinking and drowning, or as
a heavy burden upon my head, pressing me down more than I am able to
bear or to bear up under." Note, Sin is a burden. The power of sin
dwelling in us is a weight, [Heb 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#001).
All are clogged with it; it keeps men from soaring upward and pressing
forward. All the saints are complaining of it as a body of death they
are loaded with, [Rom 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024). The guilt
of sin committed by us is a burden, a heavy burden; it is a burden to
God (he is pressed under it, [Amo
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#013)), a burden to the whole creation,
which groans under it, [Rom 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021), [Rom
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#022). It will, first or last, be a
burden to the sinner himself, either a burden of repentance when he is
pricked to the heart for it, labours, and is heavy-laden, under it, or a
burden of ruin when it sinks him to the lowest hell and will for ever
detain him there; it will be a talent of lead upon him, [Zac
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#008). Sinners are said to bear their
iniquity. Threatenings are burdens. 2. As wounds, dangerous wounds ([Psa
38:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#005)): "My wounds stink and are
corrupt (as wounds in the body rankle, and fester, and grow foul, for
want of being dressed and looked after), and it is through my own
foolishness." Sins are wounds ([Gen
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#023)), painful mortal wounds. Our
wounds by sin are often in a bad condition, no care taken of them, no
application made to them, and it is owing to the sinner's foolishness in
not confessing sin, [Psa 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#003), [Psa
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#004). A slight sore, neglected, may
prove of fatal consequence, and so may a slight sin slighted and left
unrepented of.

IV\. He bemoans himself because of his afflictions, and gives ease to
his grief by giving vent to it and pouring out his complaint before the
Lord.

1\. He was troubled in mind, his conscience was pained, and he had no
rest in his own spirit; and a wounded spirit who can bear? He was
troubled, or distorted, bowed down greatly, and went mourning all the
day long, [Psa 38:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#006). He was always
pensive and melancholy, which made him a burden and terror to himself.
His spirit was feeble and sorely broken, and his heart disquieted, [Psa
38:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#008). Herein David, in his sufferings,
was a type of Christ, who, being in his agony, cried out, My soul is
exceedingly sorrowful. This is a sorer affliction than any other in this
world; whatever God is pleased to lay upon us, we have no reason to
complain as long as he preserves to us the use of our reason and the
peace of our consciences.

2\. He was sick and weak in body; his loins were filled with a loathsome
disease, some swelling, or ulcer, or inflammation (some think a
plague-sore, such as Hezekiah's boil), and there was no soundness in his
flesh, but, like Job, he was all over distempered. See (1.) What vile
bodies these are which we carry about with us, what grievous diseases
they are liable to, and what an offence and grievance they may soon be
made by some diseases to the souls that animate them, as they always are
a cloud and cog. (2.) That the bodies both of the greatest and of the
best of men have in them the same seeds of diseases that the bodies of
others have, and are liable to the same disasters. David himself, though
so great a prince and so great a saint, was not exempt from the most
grievous diseases: there was no soundness even in his flesh. Probably
this was after his sin in the matter of Uriah, and thus did he smart in
his flesh for his fleshly lusts. When, at any time, we are distempered
in our bodies, we ought to remember how God has been dishonoured in and
by our bodies. He was feeble and sorely broken, [Psa
38:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#008). His heart panted, and was in a
continual palpitation, [Psa 38:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#010). His
strength and limbs failed him. As for the light of his eyes, that had
gone from him, either with much weeping or by a defluxion of rheum upon
them, or perhaps through the lowness of his spirits and the frequent
returns of fainting. Note, Sickness will tame the strongest body and the
stoutest spirit. David was famed for his courage and great exploits; and
yet, when God contended with him by bodily sickness and the impressions
of his wrath upon his mind, his hair is cut, his heart fails him, and he
becomes weak as water. Therefore let not the strong man glory in his
strength, nor any man set grief at defiance, however it may be thought
at a distance.

3\. His friends were unkind to him ([Psa
38:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#011)): My lovers (such as had been
merry with him in the day of his mirth) now stand aloof from my sore;
they would not sympathize with him in his griefs, nor so much as come
within hearing of his complaints, but, like the priest and Levite ([Luk
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#031)), passed on the other side. Even
his kinsmen, that were bound to him by blood and alliance, stood afar
off. See what little reason we have to trust in man or to wonder if we
disappointed in our expectations of kindness from men. Adversity tries
friendship, and separates between the precious and the vile. It is our
wisdom to make sure a friend in heaven, who will not stand aloof from
our sore and from whose love no tribulation nor distress shall be able
to separate us. David, in his troubles, was a type of Christ in his
agony, Christ, on his cross, feeble and sorely broken, and then deserted
by his friends and kinsmen, who beheld afar off.

V. In the midst of his complaints, he comforts himself with the
cognizance God graciously took both of his griefs and of his prayers
([Psa 38:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#009)): "Lord, all my desire is
before thee. Thou knowest what I want and what I would have: My groaning
is not hidden from thee. Thou knowest the burdens I groan under and the
blessings I groan after." The groanings which cannot be uttered are not
hidden from him that searches the heart and knows what is the mind of
the Spirit, [Rom 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026), [Rom
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#027).

In singing this, and praying it over, whatever burden lies upon our
spirits, we would by faith cast it upon God, and all our care concerning
it, and then be easy.

[Psalms 38:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 38:12</span></span>

In these verses,

I. David complains of the power and malice of his enemies, who, it
should seem, not only took occasion from the weakness of his body and
the trouble of his mind to insult over him, but took advantage thence to
do him a mischief. He has a great deal to say against them, which he
humbly offers as a reason why God should appear for him, as [Psa
25:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#019), Consider my enemies. 1. "They
are very spiteful and cruel: They seek my hurt; nay, they seek after my
life," [Psa 38:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#012). That life which was
so precious in the sight of the Lord and all good men was aimed at, as
if it had been forfeited, or a public nuisance. Such is the enmity of
the serpent's seed against the seed of the woman; it would wound the
head, though it can but reach the heel. It is the blood of the saints
that is thirsted after. 2. "They are very subtle and politic. They lay
snares, they imagine deceits, and herein they are restless and
unwearied: they do it all the day long. They speak mischievous things
one to another; every one has something or other to propose that may be
a mischief to me." Mischief, covered and carried on by deceit, may well
be called a snare. 3. "They are very insolent and abusive: When my foot
slips, when I fall into any trouble, or when I make any mistake,
misplace a word, or take a false step, they magnify themselves against
me; they are pleased with it, and promise themselves that it will ruin
my interest, and that if I slip I shall certainly fall and be undone."
4. "They are not only unjust, but very ungrateful: They hate me
wrongfully, [Psa 38:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#019). I never did
them any ill turn, nor so much as bore them any ill-will, nor ever gave
them any provocation; nay, they render evil for good, [Psa
38:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#020). Many a kindness I have done
them, for which I might have expected a return of kindness; but for my
love they are my adversaries," [Psa
109:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#004). Such a rooted enmity there is
in the hearts of wicked men to goodness for its own sake that they hate
it, even when they themselves have the benefit of it; they hate prayer
even in those that pray for them, and hate peace even in those that
would be at peace with them. Very ill-natured indeed those are whom no
courtesy will oblige, but who are rather exasperated by it. 5. "They are
very impious and devilish: They are my adversaries merely because I
follow the thing that good is." They hated him, not only for his
kindness to them, but for his devotion and obedience to God; they hated
him because they hated God and all that bear his image. If we suffer ill
for doing well, we must not think it strange; from the beginning it was
so (Cain slew Abel, because his works were righteous); nor must we think
it hard, because it will not be always so; for so much the greater will
our reward be. 6. "They are many and mighty: They are lively; they are
strong; they are multiplied, [Psa
38:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#019). Lord, how are those increased
that trouble me?" [Psa 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#001). Holy David
was weak and faint; his heart panted, and his strength failed; he was
melancholy and of a sorrowful spirit, and persecuted by his friends; but
at the same time his wicked enemies were strong and lively, and their
number increased. Let us not therefore pretend to judge of men's
characters by their outward condition; none knows love or hatred by all
that is before him. It should seem that David in this, as in other
complaints he makes of his enemies, has an eye to Christ, whose
persecutors were such as are here described, perfectly lost to all
honour and virtue. None hate Christianity but such as have first
divested themselves of the first principles of humanity and broken
through its most sacred bonds.

II\. He reflects, with comfort, upon his own peaceable and pious
behaviour under all the injuries and indignities that were done him. It
is then only that our enemies do us a real mischief when they provoke us
to sin ([Neh 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#013)), when they prevail
to put us out of the possession of our own souls, and drive us from God
and our duty. If by divine grace we are enabled to prevent this
mischief, we quench their fiery darts, and are saved from harm. If still
we hold fast our integrity and our peace, who can hurt us? This David
did here. 1. He kept his temper, and was not ruffled nor discomposed by
any of the slights that were put upon him or the mischievous things that
were said or done against him ([Psa
38:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#013), [Psa
38:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#014)): "I, as a deaf man, heard not;
I took no notice of the affronts put upon me, did not resent them, nor
was put into disorder by them, much less did I meditate revenge, or
study to return the injury." Note, The less notice we take of the
unkindness and injuries that are done us the more we consult the quiet
of our own minds. Being deaf, he was dumb, as a man in whose mouth there
are no reproofs; he was as silent as if he had nothing to say for
himself, for fear of putting himself into a heat and incensing his
enemies yet more against him; he would not only not recriminate upon
them, but not so much as vindicate himself, lest his necessary defence
should be construed his offence. Though they sought after his life, and
his silence might be taken for a confession of his guilt, yet he was as
a dumb man that opens not his mouth. Note, When our enemies are most
clamorous it is generally our prudence to be silent, or to say little,
lest we make bad worse. David could not hope by his mildness to win upon
his enemies, nor by his soft answers to turn away their wrath; for they
were men of such base spirits that they rendered him evil for good; and
yet he conducted himself thus meekly towards them, that he might prevent
his own sin and might have the comfort of it in the reflection. Herein
David was a type of Christ, who was as a sheep dumb before the shearer,
and, when he was reviled, reviled not again; and both are examples to us
not to render railing for railing. 2. He kept close to his God by faith
and prayer, and so both supported himself under these injuries and
silenced his own resentments of them. (1.) He trusted in God ([Psa
38:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#015)): "I was as a man that opens not
his mouth, for in thee, O Lord! do I hope. I depend upon thee to plead
my cause and clear my innocency, and, some way or other, to put my
enemies to silence and shame." His lovers and friends, that should have
owned him, and stood by him, and appeared as witnesses for him, withdrew
from him, [Psa 38:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#010). but God is a
friend that will never fail us if we hope in him. "I was as a man that
heareth not, for thou wilt hear. Why need I hear, and God hear too?" He
careth for you ([Pe1 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#007)), and why
need you care and God care too? "Thou wilt answer" (so some) "and
therefore I will say nothing." Note, It is a good reason why we should
bear reproach and calumny with silence and patience, because God is a
witness to all the wrong that is done us, and, in due time, will be a
witness for us and against those that do us wrong; therefore let us be
silent, because, if we be, then we may expect that God will appear for
us, for this is an evidence that we trust in him; but, if we undertake
to manage for ourselves, we take God's work out of his hands and forfeit
the benefit of his appearing for us. Our Lord Jesus, when he suffered,
threatened not, because he committed himself to him that judges
righteously ([Pe1 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#023)); and we shall
lose nothing, at last, by doing so. Thou shalt answer, Lord, for me.
(2.) He called upon God ([Psa 38:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#016)):
For I said, Hear me (that is supplied); "I said so" (as [Psa
38:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#015)); "in thee do I hope, for thou
wilt hear, lest they should rejoice over me. I comforted myself with
that when I was apprehensive that they would overwhelm me." It is a
great support to us, when men are false and unkind, that we have a God
to go to whom we may be free with and who will be faithful to us.

III\. He here bewails his own follies and infirmities. 1. He was very
sensible of the present workings of corruption in him, and that he was
now ready to repine at the providence of God and to be put into a
passion by the injuries men did him: I am ready to halt, [Psa
38:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#017). This will best be explained by
a reflection like this which the psalmist made upon himself in a similar
case ([Psa 73:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#002)): My feet were almost
gone, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked. So here: I was ready to
halt, ready to say, I have cleansed my hands in vain. His sorrow was
continual: All the day long have I been plagued. ([Psa
73:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#013), [Psa
73:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#014)), and it was continually before
him; he could not forbear poring upon it, and that made him almost ready
to halt between religion and irreligion. The fear of this drove him to
his God: "In thee do I hope, not only that thou wilt plead my cause, but
that thou wilt prevent my falling into sin." Good men, by setting their
sorrow continually before them, have been ready to halt, who, by setting
God always before them, have kept their standing. 2. He remembered
against himself his former transgressions, acknowledging that by them he
had brought these troubles upon himself and forfeited the divine
protection. Though before men he could justify himself, before God he
will judge and condemn himself ([Psa
38:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#018)): "I will declare my iniquity,
and not cover it; I will be sorry for my sin, and not make a light
matter of it;" and this helped to make him silent under the rebukes of
Providence and the reproaches of men. Note, If we be truly penitent for
sin, that will make us patient under affliction, and particularly under
unjust censures. Two things are required in repentance: - (1.)
Confession of sin: "I will declare my iniquity; I will not only in
general own myself a sinner, but I will make a particular acknowledgment
of what I have done amiss." We must declare our sins before God freely
and fully, and with their aggravating circumstances, that we may give
glory to God and take shame to ourselves. (2.) Contrition for sin: I
will be sorry for it. Sin will have sorrow; every true penitent grieves
for the dishonour he has done to God and the wrong he has done to
himself. "I will be in care or fear about my sin" (so some), "in fear
lest it ruin me and in care to get it pardoned."

IV\. He concludes with very earnest prayers to God for his gracious
presence with him and seasonable powerful succour in his distress ([Psa
38:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#021), [Psa
38:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#011)): "Forsake me not, O Lord!
though my friends forsake me, and though I deserve to be forsaken by
thee. Be not far from me, as my unbelieving heart is ready to fear thou
art." Nothing goes nearer to the heart of a good man in affliction than
to be under the apprehension of God's deserting him in wrath; nor does
any thing therefore come more feelingly from his heart than this prayer:
"Lord, be not thou far from me; make haste for my help; for I am ready
to perish, and in danger of being lost if relief do not come quickly."
God gives us leave, not only to call upon him when we are in trouble,
but to hasten him. He pleads, "Thou art my God, whom I serve, and on
whom I depend to bear me out; and my salvation, who alone art able to
save me, who hast engaged thyself by promise to save me, and from whom
alone I expect salvation." Is any afflicted? let him thus pray, let him
thus plead, let him thus hope, in singing this psalm.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 39](psa039)

</div>
