<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa079)  [Next](psa081) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 80](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 80:0</span></span>

This psalm is much to the same purport with the foregoing. Some think it
was penned upon occasion of the desolation and captivity of the ten
tribes, as the foregoing psalm of the two. But many were the distresses
of the Israel of God, many perhaps which are not recorded in the sacred
history some whereof might give occasion for the drawing up of this
psalm, which is proper to be sung in the day of Jacob's trouble, and if,
in singing it, we express a true love to the church and a hearty concern
for its interest, with a firm confidence in God's power to help it out
of its greatest distresses, we make melody with our hearts to the Lord.
The psalmist here, I. Begs for the tokens of God's presence with them
and favour to them ([Psa 80:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001)). II.
He complains of the present rebukes they were under ([Psa
80:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#004)). III. He illustrates the
present desolations of the church, by the comparison of a vine and a
vineyard, which had flourished, but was now destroyed ([Psa
80:8-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008)). IV. He concludes with prayer
to God for the preparing of mercy for them and the preparing of them for
mercy ([Psa 80:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#017)). This, as many
psalms before and after, relates to the public interests of God's
Israel, which ought to lie nearer to our hearts than any secular
interest of our own.

To the chief musician upon Shoshannim, Eduth. A psalm of Asaph.

[Psalms 80:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 80:1</span></span>

The psalmist here, in the name of the church, applies to God by prayer,
with reference to the present afflicted state of Israel.

I. He entreats God's favour for them ([Psa
80:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001), [Psa
80:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#002)); that is all in all to the
sanctuary when it is desolate, and is to be sought in the first place.
Observe, 1. How he eyes God in his address as the Shepherd of Israel,
whom he had called the sheep of his pasture ([Psa
79:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#013)), under whose guidance and care
Israel was, as the sheep are under the care and conduct of the shepherd.
Christ is the great and good Shepherd, to whom we may in faith commit
the custody of his sheep that were given to him. He leads Joseph like a
flock, to the best pastures, and out of the way of danger; if Joseph
follow him not as obsequiously as the sheep do the shepherd, it is his
own fault. He dwells between the cherubim, where he is ready to receive
petitions and to give directions. The mercy-seat was between the
cherubim; and it is very comfortable in prayer to look up to God as
sitting on a throne of grace, and that it is so to us is owning to the
great propitiation, for the mercy-seat was the propitiatory. 2. What he
expects and desires from God, that he would give ear to the cry of their
miseries and of their prayers, that he would shine forth both in his own
glory and in favour and kindness to his people, that he would show
himself and smile on them, that he would sir up his strength, that he
would excite it and exert it. It had seemed to slumber: "Lord, awaken
it." His cause met with great opposition and the enemies threatened to
overpower it: "Lord, put forth thy strength so much the more, and come
for salvation to us; be to thy people a powerful help and a present
help; Lord, do this before Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasseh," that is,
"In the sight of all the tribes of Israel; let them see it to their
satisfaction." Perhaps these three tribes are named because they were
the tribes which formed that squadron of the camp of Israel that in
their march through the wilderness followed next after the tabernacle;
so that before them the ark of God's strength rose to scatter their
enemies.

II\. He complains of God's displeasure against them. God was angry, and
he dreads that more than any thing, [Psa
80:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#004). 1. It was great anger. He
apprehended that God was angry against the prayer of his people, not
only that he was angry notwithstanding their prayers, by which they
hoped to turn away his wrath from them, but that he was angry with their
prayers, though they were his own people that prayed. That God should be
angry at the sins of his people and at the prayers of his enemies is not
strange; but that he should be angry at the prayers of his people is
strange indeed. He not only delayed to answer them (that he often does
in love), but he was displeased at them. If he be really angry at the
prayers of his people, we may be sure it is because they ask amiss, [Jam
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#003). They pray, but they do not
wrestle in prayer; their ends are not right, or there is some secret sin
harboured and indulged in them; they do not lift up pure hands, or they
lift them up with wrath and doubting. But perhaps it is only in their
own apprehension; he seems angry with their prayers when really he is
not; for thus he will try their patience and perseverance in prayer, as
Christ tried the woman of Canaan when he said, It is not meet to take
the children's bread and cast it to dogs. 2. It was anger that had
continued a great while: "How long wilt thou be angry? We have still
continued praying and yet are still under thy frowns." Now the tokens of
God's displeasure which they had been long under were both their sorrow
and shame. (1.) Their sorrow ([Psa
80:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#005)): Thou feedest them with the
bread of tears; they eat their meat from day to day in tears; this is
the vinegar in which they dipped their morsel, [Psa
42:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#003). They had tears given them to
drink, not now and then a taste of that bitter cup, but in great
measure. Note, There are many that spend their time in sorrow who yet
shall spend their eternity in joy. (2.) It was their shame, [Psa
80:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#006). God, by frowning upon them, made
them a strife unto their neighbours; each strove which should expose
them most, and such a cheap and easy prey were they made to them that
all the strife was who should have the stripping and plundering of them.
Their enemies laughed among themselves to see the frights they were in,
the straits they were reduced to, and the disappointments they met with.
When God is displeased with his people we must expect to see them in
tears and their enemies in triumph.

III\. He prays earnestly for converting grace in order to their
acceptance with God, and their salvation: Turn us again, O God! [Psa
80:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#003). Turn us again, O God of hosts!
([Psa 80:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#007)) and then cause thy face to
shine and we shall be saved. It is the burden of the song, for we have
it again, [Psa 80:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#019). They are
conscious to themselves that they have gone astray from God and their
duty, and have turned aside into sinful ways, and that it was this that
provoked God to hide his face from them and to give them up into the
hand of their enemies; and therefore they desire to begin their work at
the right end: "Lord, turn us to thee in a way of repentance and
reformation, and then, no doubt, thou wilt return to us in a way of
mercy and deliverance." Observe, 1. No salvation but from God's favour:
"Cause thy face to shine, let us have thy love and the light of thy
countenance, and then we shall be saved." 2. No obtaining favour with
God unless we be converted to him. We must turn again to God from the
world and the flesh, and then he will cause his face to shine upon us.
3. No conversion to God but by his own grace; we must frame our doings
to turn to him ([Hos 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#004)) and then
pray earnestly for his grace, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned,
pleading that gracious promise ([Pro
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#023)), Burn you at my reproof; behold,
I will pour out my Spirit unto you. The prayer here is for a national
conversion; in this method we must pray for national mercies, that what
is amiss may be amended, and then our grievances would be soon
redressed. National holiness would secure national happiness.

[Psalms 80:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 80:8</span></span>

The psalmist is here presenting his suit for the Israel of God, and
pressing it home at the throne of grace, pleading with God for mercy and
grace for them. The church is here represented as a vine ([Psa
80:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008), [Psa
80:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#014)) and a vineyard, [Psa
80:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#015). The root of this vine is
Christ, [Rom 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#018). The branches are
believers, [Joh 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005). The church is
like a vine, weak and needing support, unsightly and having an
unpromising outside, but spreading and fruitful, and its fruit most
excellent. The church is a choice and noble vine; we have reason to
acknowledge the goodness of God that he has planted such a vine in the
wilderness of this world, and preserved it to this day. Now observe
here,

I. How the vine of the Old Testament church was planted at first. It was
brought out of Egypt with a high hand; the heathen were cast out of
Canaan to make room for it, seven nations to make room for that one.
Thou didst sweep before it (so some read [Psa
80:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#009)), to make clear work; the nations
were swept away as dirt with the besom of destruction. God, having made
room for it, and planted it, cause it to take deep root by a happy
establishment of their government both in church and state, which was so
firm that, though their neighbours about them often attempted it, they
could not prevail to pluck it up.

II\. How it spread and flourished. 1. The land of Canaan itself was
fully peopled. At first they were not so numerous as to replenish it,
[Exo 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#029). But in Solomon's time
Judah and Israel were many as the sand of the sea; the land was filled
with them, and yet such a fruitful land that it was not over-stocked,
[Psa 80:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#010). The hills of Canaan were
covered with their shadow, and the branches, though they extended
themselves far, like those of the vine, yet were not weak like them, but
as strong as those of the goodly cedars. Israel not only had abundance
of men, but those mighty men of valour. 2. They extended their conquests
and dominion to the neighbouring countries ([Psa
80:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#011)): She sent out her boughs to the
sea, the great sea westward, and her branches to the river, to the river
of Egypt southward, the river of Damascus northward, or rather the river
Euphrates eastward, [Gen 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018).
Nebuchadnezzar's greatness is represented by a flourishing tree, [Dan
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#020), [Dan
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#021). But it is observable here
concerning this vine that it is praised for its shadow, its boughs, and
its branches, but not a word of its fruit, for Israel was an empty vine,
[Hos 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#001). God came looking for
grapes, but, behold, wild grapes, [Isa
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#002). And, if a vine do not bring forth
fruit, no tree so useless, so worthless, [Eze
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#002), [Eze
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#006).

III\. How it was wasted and ruined: "Lord, thou hast done great things
for this vine, and why shall it be all undone again? If it were a plant
not of God's planting, it were not strange to see it rooted up; but will
God desert and abandon that which he himself gave being to?" [Psa
80:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#012). Why hast thou then broken down
her hedges? There was a good reason for this change in God's way towards
them. This noble vine had become the degenerate plant of a strange vine
([Jer 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021)), to the reproach of its
great owner, and then no marvel if he took away its hedge ([Isa
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#005)); yet God's former favours to this
vine are urged as pleas in prayer to God, and improved as encouragements
to faith, that, notwithstanding all this, God would not wholly cast them
off. Observe, 1. The malice and enmity of the Gentile nations against
Israel. As soon as ever God broke down their hedges and left them
exposed troops of enemies presently broke in upon them, that waited for
an opportunity to destroy them. Those that passed by the way plucked at
them; the board out of the wood and the wild beast of the field were
ready to ravage it, [Psa 80:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#013). But,
2. See also the restraint which these cruel enemies were under; for till
God had broken down their hedges they could not pluck a leaf of this
vine. The devil could not hurt Job so long as God continued the hedge
round about him, [Job 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#010). See how
much it is the interest of any people to keep themselves in the favour
of God and then they need not fear any wild beast of the field, [Job
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#023). If we provoke God to withdraw,
our defence has departed from us, and we are undone. The deplorable
state of Israel is described ([Psa
80:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#016)): It is burnt with fire; it is
cut down; the people are treated like thorns and briers, that are nigh
unto cursing and whose end is to be burned, and no longer like vines
that are protected and cherished. They perish not through the rage of
the wild beast and the boar, but at the rebuke of thy countenance; that
was it which they dreaded and to which they attributed all their
calamities. It is well or ill with us according as we are under God's
smiles or frowns.

IV\. What their requests were to God hereupon. 1. That God would help
the vine ([Psa 80:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#014), [Psa
80:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#015)), that he would graciously take
cognizance of its case and do for it as he thought fit: "Return, we
beseech thee, O Lord of hosts! for thou hast seemed to go away from us.
Look down from heaven, to which thou hast retired, - from heaven, that
place of prospect, whence thou seest all the wrongs that are done us,
that place of power, whence thou canst send effectual relief, - from
heaven, where thou hast prepared thy throne of judgment, to which we
appeal, and where thou hast prepared a better country for those that are
Israelites indeed, - thence give a gracious look, thence make a gracious
visit, to this vine. Take our woeful condition into thy compassionate
consideration, and for the particular fruits of thy pity we refer
ourselves to thee. Only behold the vineyard, or rather the root, which
thy right hand hath planted, and which therefore we hope thy right hand
will protect, that branch which thou madest strong for thyself, to show
forth thy praise ([Isa 43:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#021)), that
with the fruit of it thou mightest be honoured. Lord, it is formed by
thyself and for thyself, and therefore it may with a humble confidence
be committed to thyself and to thy own care." As for God, his work is
perfect. What we read the branch in the Hebrew is the son (Ben), whom in
thy counsel thou hast made strong for thyself. That branch was to come
out of the stock of Israel (my servant the branch, [Zac
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#008)), and therefore, till he should
come, Israel in general, and the house of David in particular, must be
preserved, and upheld, and kept in being. He is the true vine, [Joh
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001); [Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001). Destroy it not for that blessing
is in it, [Isa 65:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#008). 2. That he would
help the vine-dresser ([Psa 80:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#017),
[Psa 80:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#018)): "Let thy hand be upon the
man of thy right hand," that king (whoever it was) of the house of David
that was now to go in and out before them; "let they hand be upon him,
not only to protect and cover him, but to own him, and strengthen him,
and give him success." We have this phrase, [Ezr
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#028), And I was strengthened as the
hand of the Lord my God was upon me. Their king is called the man of
God's right hand as he was the representative of their state, which was
dear to God, as his Benjamin, the son of his right hand, as he was
president in their affairs and an instrument in God's right hand of much
good to them, defending them from themselves and from their enemies and
directing them in the right way, and as he was under-shepherd under him
who was the great shepherd of Israel. Princes, who have power, must
remember that they are sons of men, of Adam (so the word is), that, if
they are strong, it is God that has made them strong, and he has made
them so for himself, for they are his ministers to serve the interests
of his kingdom among men, and, if they do this in sincerity, his hand
shall be upon them; and we should pray in faith that it may be so,
adding this promise, that, if God will adhere to our governors, we will
adhere to him: So will not we go back from thee; we will never desert a
cause which we see that God espouses and is the patron of. Let God be
our leader and we will follow him. Adding also this prayer, "Quicken us,
put life into us, revive our dying interests, revive our drooping
spirits, and then we will call upon thy name. We will continue to do so
upon all occasions, having found it not in vain to do so." We cannot
call upon God's name in a right manner unless he quicken us; but it is
he that puts life into our souls, that puts liveliness into our prayers.
But many interpreters, both Jewish and Christian, apply this to the
Messiah, the Son of David, the protector and Saviour of the church and
the keeper of the vineyard. (1.) He is the man of God's right hand, to
whom he has sworn by his right hand (so the Chaldee), whom he has
exalted to his right hand, and who is indeed his right hand, the arm of
the Lord, for all power is given to him. (2.) He is that son of man whom
he made strong for himself, for the glorifying of his name and the
advancing of the interests of his kingdom among men. (3.) God's hand is
upon him throughout his whole undertaking, to bear him out and carry him
on, to protect and animate him, that the good pleasure of the Lord might
prosper in his hand. (4.) The stability and constancy of believers are
entirely owing to the grace and strength which are laid up for us in
Jesus Christ, [Psa 68:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#028). In him is
our strength found, by which we are enabled to persevere to the end. Let
thy hand be upon him; on him let our help be laid who is mighty; let him
be made able to save to the uttermost and that will be our security; so
will not we go back from thee.

Lastly, The psalm concludes with the same petition that had been put up
twice before, and yet it is no vain repetition ([Psa
80:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#019)): Turn us again. The title given
to God rises, [Psa 80:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#003), O God! [Psa
80:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#007), O God of hosts! [Psa
80:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#019), O Lord (Jehovah) God of hosts!
When we come to God for his grace, his good-will towards us and his good
work in us, we should pray earnestly, continue instant in prayer, and
pray more earnestly.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 81](psa081)

</div>
