<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa020)  [Next](psa022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 21:0</span></span>

As the foregoing psalm was a prayer for the king that God would protect
and prosper him, so this is a thanksgiving for the success God had
blessed him with. Those whom we have prayed for we ought to give thanks
for, and particularly for kings, in whose prosperity we share. They are
here taught, I. To congratulate him on his victories, and the honour he
had achieved ([Psa 21:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#001)). II. To
confide in the power of God for the completing of the ruin of the
enemies of his kingdom ([Psa 21:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#007)).
In this there is an eye to Messiah the Prince, and the glory of his
kingdom; for to him divers passages in this psalm are more applicable
than to David himself.

To the chief musician. A psalm of David.

[Psalms 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 21:1</span></span>

David here speaks for himself in the first place, professing that his
joy was in God's strength and in his salvation, and not in the strength
or success of his armies. He also directs his subjects herein to rejoice
with him, and to give God all the glory of the victories he had
obtained; and all with an eye to Christ, of whose triumphs over the
powers of darkness David's victories were but shadows. 1. They here
congratulate the king on his joys and concur with him in them ([Psa
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#001)): "The king rejoices, he uses to
rejoice in thy strength, and so do we; what pleases the king pleases
us," [Sa2 3:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#036). Happy the people the
character of whose king it is that he makes God's strength his
confidence and God's salvation his joy, that is pleased with all the
advancements of God's kingdom and trusts God to bear him out in all he
does for the service of it. Our Lord Jesus, in his great undertaking,
relied upon help from heaven, and pleased himself with the prospect of
that great salvation which he was thereby to work out. 2. They gave God
all the praise of those things which were the matter of their king's
rejoicing. (1.) That God had heard his prayers ([Psa
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#002)): Thou hast given him his heart's
desire (and there is no prayer accepted but what is the heart's desire),
the very thing they begged of God for him, [Psa
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#004). Note, God's gracious returns of
prayer do, in a special manner, require our humble returns of praise.
When God gives to Christ the heathen for his inheritance, gives him to
see his seed, and accepts his intercession for all believers, he give
him his heart's desire. (2.) That God had surprised him with favours,
and much outdone his expectations ([Psa
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#003)): Thou preventest him with the
blessings of goodness. All our blessings are blessings of goodness, and
are owing, not at all to any merit of ours, but purely and only to God's
goodness. But the psalmist here reckons it in a special manner obliging
that these blessings were given in a preventing way; this fixed his eye,
enlarged his soul, and endeared his God, as one expresses it. When God's
blessings come sooner and prove richer than we imagine, when they are
given before we prayed for them, before we were ready for them, nay,
when we feared the contrary, then it may be truly said that he prevented
us with them. Nothing indeed prevented Christ, but to mankind never was
any favour more preventing than our redemption by Christ and all the
blessed fruits of his mediation. (3.) That God had advanced him to the
highest honour and the most extensive power: "Thou hast set a crown of
pure gold upon his head and kept it there, when his enemies attempted to
throw it off." Note, Crowns are at God's disposal; no head wears them
but God sets them there, whether in judgment to his land or for mercy
the event will show. On the head of Christ God never set a crown of
gold, but of thorns first, and then of glory. (4.) That God had assured
him of the perpetuity of his kingdom, and therein had done more for him
than he was able either to ask or think ([Psa
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#004)): "When he went forth upon a
perilous expedition he asked his life of thee, which he then put into
his hand, and thou not only gavest him that, but withal gavest him
length of days for ever and ever, didst not only prolong his life far
beyond his expectation, but didst assure him of a blessed immortality in
a future state and of the continuance of his kingdom in the Messiah that
should come of his loins." See how God's grants often exceed our
petitions and hopes, and infer thence how rich he is in mercy to those
that call upon him. See also and rejoice in the length of the days of
Christ's kingdom. He was dead, indeed, that we might live through him;
but he is alive, and lives for evermore, and of the increase of his
government and peace there shall be no end; and because he thus lives we
shall thus live also. (5.) That God had advanced him to the highest
honour and dignity ([Psa 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#005)): "His
glory is great, far transcending that of all the neighbouring princes,
in the salvation thou hast wrought for him and by him." The glory which
every good man is ambitious of is to see the salvation of the Lord.
Honour and majesty hast thou laid upon him, as a burden which he must
bear, as a charge which he must account for. Jesus Christ received from
God the Father honour and glory ([Pe2
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#017)), the glory which he had with him
before the worlds were, [Joh 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005). And
on him is laid the charge of universal government and to him all power
in heaven and earth is committed. (6.) That God had given him the
satisfaction of being the channel of all bliss to mankind ([Psa
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#006)): "Thou hast set him to be
blessings for ever" (so the margin reads it), "thou hast made him to be
a universal blessing to the world, in whom the families of the earth
are, and shall be blessed; and so thou hast made him exceedingly glad
with the countenance thou hast given to his undertaking and to him in
the prosecution of it." See how the spirit of prophecy gradually rises
here to that which is peculiar to Christ, for none besides is blessed
for ever, much less a blessing for ever to that eminency that the
expression denotes: and of him it is said that God made him full of joy
with his countenance.

In singing this we should rejoice in his joy and triumph in his
exaltation.

[Psalms 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 21:7</span></span>

The psalmist, having taught his people to look back with joy and praise
on what God had done for him and them, here teaches them to look forward
with faith, and hope, and prayer, upon what God would further do for
them: The king rejoices in God ([Psa
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#001)), and therefore we will be
thankful; the king trusteth in God ([Psa
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#007)), therefore will we be
encouraged. The joy and confidence of Christ our King is the ground of
all our joy and confidence.

I. They are confident of the stability of David's kingdom. Through the
mercy of the Most High, and not through his own merit or strength, he
shall not be moved. His prosperous state shall not be disturbed; his
faith and hope in God, which are the stay of his spirit, shall not be
shaken. The mercy of the Most High (the divine goodness, power, and
dominion) is enough to secure our happiness, and therefore our trust in
that mercy should be enough to silence all our fears. God being at
Christ's right hand in his sufferings ([Psa
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#008)) and he being at God's right hand
in his glory, we may be sure he shall not, he cannot, be moved, but
continues ever.

II\. They are confident of the destruction of all the impenitent
implacable enemies of David's kingdom. The success with which God had
blessed David's arms hitherto was an earnest of the rest which God would
give him from all his enemies round about, and a type of the total
overthrow of all Christ's enemies who would not have him to reign over
them. Observe, 1. The description of his enemies. They are such as hate
him, [Psa 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#008). They hated David
because God had set him apart for himself, hated Christ because they
hated the light; but both were hated without any just cause, and in both
God was hated, [Joh 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#023), [Joh
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#025). 2. The designs of his enemies
([Psa 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#011)): They intended evil
against thee, and imagined a mischievous device; they pretended to fight
against David only, but their enmity was against God himself. Those that
aimed to un-king David aimed, in effect, to un-God Jehovah. What is
devised and designed against religion, and against the instruments God
raises up to support and advance it, is very evil and mischievous, and
God takes it as devised and designed against himself and will so reckon
for it. (3.) The disappointment of them: "They devise what they are not
able to perform," [Psa 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#011). Their
malice is impotent, and they imagine a vain thing, [Psa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001). (4.) The discovery of them ([Psa
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#008)): "Thy hand shall find them out.
Though ever so artfully disguised by the pretences and professions of
friendship, though mingled with the faithful subjects of this kingdom
and hardly to be distinguished from them, though flying from justice and
absconding in their close places, yet thy hand shall find them out
wherever they are." There is no escaping God's avenging eye, no going
out of the reach of his hand; rocks and mountains will be no better
shelter at last than fig-leaves were at first. (5.) The destruction of
them; it will be an utter destruction ([Luk
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#027)); they shall be swallowed up and
devoured, [Psa 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#009). Hell, the portion
of all Christ's enemies, is the complete misery both of body and soul.
Their fruit and their seed shall be destroyed, [Psa
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#010). The enemies of God's kingdom,
in every age, shall fall under the same doom, and the whole generation
of them will at last be rooted out, and all opposing rule, principality,
and power, shall be put down. The arrows of God's wrath shall confound
them and put them to flight, being levelled at the face of them, [Psa
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#012). That will be the lot of daring
enemies that face God. The fire of God's wrath will consume them ([Psa
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#009)); they shall not only be cast
into a furnace of fire ([Mat 13:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#042)),
but he shall make them themselves as a fiery oven or furnace; they shall
be their own tormentors; the reflections and terrors of their own
consciences will be their hell. Those that might have had Christ to rule
and save them, but rejected him and fought against him, shall find that
even the remembrance of that will be enough to make them, to eternity, a
fiery oven to themselves: it is the worm that dies not.

III\. In this confidence they beg of God that he would still appear for
his anointed ([Psa 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#013)), that he
would act for him in his own strength, by the immediate operations of
his power as Lord of hosts and Father of spirits, making little use of
means and instruments. And, 1. Hereby he would exalt himself and glorify
his own name. "We have but little strength, and are not so active for
thee as we should be, which is our shame; Lord, take the work into thy
own hands, do it, without us, and it will be thy glory." 2. Hereupon
they would exalt him: "So will we sing, and praise thy power, the more
triumphantly." The less God has of our service when a deliverance is in
the working the more he must have of our praises when it is wrought
without us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 22](psa022)

</div>
