<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa002)  [Next](psa004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 3:0</span></span>

As the foregoing psalm, in the type of David in preferment, showed us
the royal dignity of the Redeemer, so this, by the example of David in
distress, shows us the peace and holy security of the redeemed, how safe
they really are, and think themselves to be, under the divine
protection. David, being now driven out from his palace, from the royal
city, from the holy city, by his rebellious son Absalom, I. Complains to
God of his enemies ([Psa 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#001), [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002)). II. Confides in God, and
encourages himself in him as his God, notwithstanding ([Psa
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#003)). III. Recollects the satisfaction
he had in the gracious answers God gave to his prayers, and his
experience of his goodness to him ([Psa
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#004), [Psa
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#005)). IV. Triumphs over his fears
([Psa 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#006)) and over his enemies, whom
he prays against, ([Psa 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#007)). V. Gives
God the glory and takes to himself the comfort of the divine blessing
and salvation which are sure to all the people of God ([Psa
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#008)). Those speak best of the truths
of God who speak experimentally; so David here speaks of the power and
goodness of God, and of the safety and tranquility of the godly.

A psalm of David, when he fled from Absalom his son.

[Psalms 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 3:1</span></span>

The title of this psalm and many others is as a key hung ready at the
door, to open it, and let us into the entertainments of it; when we know
upon what occasion a psalm was penned we know the better how to expound
it. This was composed, or at least the substance of it was meditated and
digested in David's thought, and offered up to God, when he fled from
Absalom his son, who formed a conspiracy against him, to take away, not
his crown only, but his life; we have the story, 2 Sa. 15, etc. 1. David
was now in great grief; when, in his flight, he went up the Mount of
Olives, he wept greatly, with his head covered, and marching bare-foot;
yet then he composed this comfortable psalm. He wept and prayed, wept
and sung, wept and believed; this was sowing in tears. Is any afflicted?
Let him pray; nay, let him sing psalms, let him sing this psalm. Is any
afflicted with undutiful disobedient children? David was; and yet that
did not hinder his joy in God, nor put him out of tune for holy songs.
2. He was now in great danger; the plot against him was laid deep, the
party that sought his ruin was very formidable, and his own son at the
head of them, so that his affairs seemed to be at the last extremity;
yet then he kept hold of his interest in God and improved that. Perils
and frights should drive us to God, not drive us from him. 3. He had now
a great deal of provocation given him by those from whom he had reason
to expect better things, from his son, whom he had been indulgent of,
from his subjects, whom he had been so great a blessing to; this he
could not but resent, and it was enough to break in upon any man's
temper; yet he was so far from any indecent expressions of passion and
indignation that he had calmness enough for those acts of devotion which
require the greatest fixedness and freedom of thought. The sedateness of
his mind was evinced by the Spirit's coming upon him; for the Spirit
chooses to move upon the still waters. Let no unkindness, no, not of a
child or a friend, ever be laid so much to heart as to disfit us for
communion with God. 4. He was now suffering for his sin in the matter of
Uriah; this was the evil which, for that sin, God threatened to raise up
against him out of his own house ([Sa2
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#011)), which, no doubt, he observed,
and took occasion thence to renew his repentance for it. Yet he did not
therefore cast away his confidence in the divine power and goodness, nor
despair of succour. Even our sorrow for sin must not hinder either our
joy in God or our hope in God. 5. He seemed cowardly in fleeing from
Absalom, and quitting his royal city, before he had had one struggle for
it; and yet, by this psalm, it appears he was full of true courage
arising from his faith in God. True Christian fortitude consists more in
a gracious security and serenity of mind, in patiently bearing and
patiently waiting, than in daring enterprises with sword in hand.

In these three verses he applies to God. Whither else should we go but
to him when any thing grieves us or frightens us? David was now at a
distance from his own closet, and from the courts of God's house, where
he used to pray; and yet he could find a way open heaven-ward. Wherever
we are we may have access to God, and may draw nigh to him whithersoever
we are driven. David, in his flight, attends his God,

I. With a representation of his distress, [Psa
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#001), [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002). He looks round, and as it were
takes a view of his enemies' camp, or receives information of their
designs against him, which he brings to God, not to his own
council-board. Two things he complains of, concerning his enemies: - 1.
That they were very many: Lord, how are they increased! beyond what they
were at first, and beyond whatever he thought they would have been.
Absalom's faction, like a snow-ball, strangely gathered in its motion.
He speaks of it as one amazed, and well he might, that a people he had
so many ways obliged should almost generally revolt from him, rebel
against him, and choose for their head such a foolish and giddy young
man as Absalom was. How slippery and deceitful are the many! And how
little fidelity and constancy are to be found among men! David had had
the hearts of his subjects as much as ever any king had, and yet now, of
a sudden, he had lost them. As people must not trust too much to princes
([Psa 146:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#003)), so princes must not
build too much upon their interest in the people. Christ, the Son of
David, had many enemies. When a great multitude came to seize him, when
the crowd cried, Crucify him, Crucify him, how were those then increased
that troubled him! Even good people must not think it strange if the
stream be against them and the powers that threaten them grow more and
more formidable. 2. That they were very malicious. They rose up against
him; they aimed to trouble him; but that was not all: they said of his
soul, There is no help for him in God. That is, (1.) They put a spiteful
and invidious construction upon his troubles, as Job's friends did upon
him, concluding that, because his servants and subjects forsook him thus
and did not help him, God had deserted him and abandoned his cause, and
he was therefore to be looked on, or rather to be looked off, as a
hypocrite and a wicked man. (2.) They blasphemously reflected upon God
as unable to relieve him: "His danger is so great that God himself
cannot help him." It is strange that so great unbelief should be found
in any, especially in many, in Israel, as to think any party of men too
strong for Omnipotence to deal with. (3.) They endeavoured to shake his
confidence in God and drive him to despair of relief from him: "They
have said it to my soul;" so it may be read; compare [Psa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001); [Psa
42:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#010). This grieved him worst of all,
that they had so bad an opinion of him as to think it possible to take
him off from that foundation. The mere temptation was a buffeting to
him, a thorn in his flesh, nay, a sword in his bones. Note, A child of
God startles at the very thought of despairing of help in God; you
cannot vex him with any thing so much as if you offer to persuade him
that there is no help for him in God. David comes to God, and tells him
what his enemies said of him, as Hezekiah spread Rabshakeh's blasphemous
letter before the Lord. "They say, There is no help for me in thee; but,
Lord, if it be so, I am undone. They say to my soul, There is no
salvation" (for so the word is) "for him in God; but, Lord, do thou say
unto my soul, I am thy salvation ([Psa
35:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#003)) and that shall satisfy me, and
in due time silence them." To this complaint he adds Selah, which occurs
about seventy times in the book of Psalms. Some refer it to the music
with which, in David's time, the psalms were sung; others to the sense,
and that it is a note commanding a solemn pause. Selah - Mark that, or,
"Stop there, and consider a little." As here, they say, There is no help
for him in God, Selah. "Take time for such a thought as this. Get thee
behind me, Satan. The Lord rebuke thee! Away with such a vile
suggestion!"

II\. With a profession of his dependence upon God, [Psa
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#003). An active believer, the more he
is beaten off from God, either by the rebukes of Providence or the
reproaches of enemies, the faster hold he will take of him and the
closer will he cleave to him; so David here, when his enemies said,
There is no help for him in God, cries out with so much the more
assurance, "But thou, O Lord! art a shield for me; let them say what
they will, I am sure thou wilt never desert me, and I am resolved I will
never distrust thee." See what God is to his people, what he will be,
what they have found him, what David found in him. 1. Safety: "Thou art
a shield for me, a shield about me" (so some), "to secure me on all
sides, since my enemies surrounded me." Not only my shield ([Gen
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001)), which denotes an interest in
the divine protection, but a shield for me, which denotes the present
benefit and advantage of that protection. 2. Honour: Thou art my glory.
Those whom God owns for his are not safe and easy, but really look
great, and have true honour put upon them, far above that which the
great ones of the earth are proud of. David was now in disgrace; the
crown had fallen from his head; but he will not think the worse of
himself while he has God for his glory, [Isa
60:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#019). "Thou art my glory; thy glory I
reckon mine" (so some); "this is what I aim at, and am ambitious of,
whatever my lot is, and whatever becomes of my honour - that I may be to
my God for a name and a praise." 3. Joy and deliverance: "Thou art the
lifter up of my head; thou wilt lift up my head out of my troubles, and
restore me to my dignity again, in due time; or, at least, thou wilt
lift up my head under my troubles, so that I shall not droop nor be
discouraged, nor shall my spirits fail." If, in the worst of times,
God's people can lift up their heads with joy, knowing that all shall
work for good to them, they will own it is God that is the lifter up of
their head, that gives them both cause to rejoice and hearts to rejoice.

In singing this, and praying it over, we should possess ourselves with
an apprehension of the danger we are in from the multitude and malice of
our spiritual enemies, who seek the ruin of our souls by driving us from
our God, and we should concern ourselves in the distresses and dangers
of the church of God, which is every where spoken again, every where
fought against; but, in reference to both, we should encourage ourselves
in our God, who owns and protects and will in due time crown his own
interest both in the world and in the hearts of his people.

[Psalms 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 3:4</span></span>

David, having stirred up himself by the irritations of his enemies to
take hold on God as his God, and so gained comfort in looking upward
when, if he looked round about him, nothing appeared but what was
discouraging, here looks back with pleasing reflections upon the benefit
he had derived from trusting in God and looks forward with pleasing
expectations of a very bright and happy issue to which the dark
dispensation he was now under would shortly be brought.

I. See with what comfort he looks back upon the communion he had had
with God, and the communications of his favour to him, either in some
former trouble he had been in, and through God's goodness got through,
or in this hitherto. David had been exercised with many difficulties,
often oppressed and brought very low; but still he had found God
all-sufficient. He now remembered with pleasure,

1\. That his troubles had always brought him to his knees, and that, in
all his difficulties and dangers, he had been enabled to acknowledge God
and to lift up his heart to him, and his voice too (this will be
comfortable reflection when we are in trouble): I cried unto God with my
voice. Care and grief do us good and no hurt when they set us a praying,
and engage us, not only to speak to God, but to cry to him, as those
that are in earnest. And though God understands the language of the
heart, when the voice is not heard ([Sa1
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#013)), and values not the hypocritical
prayers of those who cause their voice to be heard on high ([Isa
58:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#004)), vox et praeterea nihil - mere
sound, yet, when the earnestness of the voice comes from the fervency of
the heart, it shall be taken notice of, in the account, that we cried
unto God with our voice.

2\. That he had always found God ready to answer his prayers: He heard
me out of his holy hill, from heaven, the high and holy place, from the
ark on Mount Sion, whence he used to give answers to those that sought
to him. David had ordered Zadok to carry back the ark into the city when
he was flying from Absalom ([Sa2
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#025)), knowing that God was not tied,
no, not to the ark of his presence, and that, notwithstanding the
distance of place, he could by faith receive answers of peace from the
holy hill. No such things can fix a gulf between the communications of
God's grace towards us and the operations of his grace in us, between
his favour and our faith. The ark of the covenant was in Mount Zion, and
all the answers to our prayers come from the promises of that covenant.
Christ was set King upon the holy hill of Zion ([Psa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006)), and it is through him, whom the
Father hears always, that our prayers are heard.

3\. That he had always been very safe and very easy under the divine
protection ([Psa 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#005)): "I laid myself
down and slept, composed and quiet; and awaked refreshed, for the Lord
sustained me." (1.) This is applicable to the common mercies of every
night, which we ought to give thanks for alone, and with our families,
every morning. Many have not where to lay their head (but wander in
deserts), or, if they have, dare not lie down for fear of the enemy; but
we have laid ourselves down in peace. Many lie down and cannot sleep,
but are full of tossings to and fro till the dawning of the day, through
pain of body, or anguish of mind, or the continual alarms of fear in the
night; but we lie down and sleep in safety, though incapable of doing
any thing then for our own preservation. Many lie down and sleep, and
never awake again, they sleep the sleep of death, as the first-born of
the Egyptians; but we lie down and sleep, and awake again to the light
and comfort of another day; and whence is it, but because the Lord has
sustained us with sleep as with food? We have been safe under his
protection and easy in the arms of his good providence. (2.) It seems
here to be meant of the wonderful quietness and calmness of David's
spirit, in the midst of his dangers. Having by prayer committed himself
and his cause to God, and being sure of his protection, his heart was
fixed, and he was easy. The undutifulness of his son, the disloyalty of
his subjects, the treachery of many of his friends, the hazard of his
person, the fatigues of his march, and the uncertainty of the event,
never deprived him of an hour's sleep, nor gave any disturbance to his
repose; for the Lord, by his grace and the consolations of his Spirit,
powerfully sustained him and made him easy. It is a great mercy when we
are in trouble to have our minds stayed upon God, so as never either to
eat or sleep with trembling and astonishment. (3.) Some of the ancients
apply it to the resurrection of Christ. In his sufferings he offered up
strong cries, and was heard; and therefore, though he laid down and
slept the sleep of death, yet he awaked the third day, for the Lord
sustained him, that he should not see corruption.

4\. That God had often broken the power and restrained the malice of his
enemies, had smitten them upon the cheek-bone ([Psa
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#007)), had silenced them and spoiled
their speaking, blemished them and put them to shame, smitten them on
the cheek reproachfully, had disabled them to do the mischief they
intended; for he had broken their teeth. Saul and the Philistines, who
were sometimes ready to swallow him up, could not effect what they
designed. The teeth that are gnashed or sharpened against God's people
shall be broken. When, at any time, the power of the church's enemies
seems threatening, it is good to remember how often God has broken it;
and we are sure that his arm is not shortened. He can stop their mouths
and tie their hands.

II\. See with what confidence he looks forward to the dangers he had yet
in prospect. Having put himself under God's protection and often found
the benefit of it, 1. His fears were all stilled and silenced, [Psa
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#006). With what a holy bravery does he
bid defiance to the impotent menaces and attempts of his enemies! "I
will not be afraid of ten thousands of people, that either in a foreign
invasion or an intestine rebellion set themselves, or encamp, against me
round about." No man seemed less safe (his enemies are numerous, ten
thousands; they are spiteful and resolute, "They have set themselves
against me; nay, they have prevailed far, and seem to have gained their
point; for they are against me round about on every side, thousands
against one"), and yet no man was more secure: "I will not be afraid,
for all this; they cannot hurt me, and therefore they shall not frighten
me; whatever prudent methods I take for my own preservation, I will not
disquiet myself, distrust my God, nor doubt of a good issue at last."
When David, in his flight from Absalom, bade Zadok carry back the ark,
he spoke doubtfully of the issue of his present troubles, and concluded,
like a humble penitent, Here I am; let him do to me what seemeth to him
good, [Sa2 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#026). But now, like a
strong believer, he speaks confidently, and has no fear concerning the
event. Note, A cheerful resignation to God is the way to obtain a
cheerful satisfaction and confidence in God. 2. His prayers were
quickened and encouraged, [Psa 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#007). He
believed God was his Saviour, and yet prays; nay, he therefore prays,
Arise, O Lord! save me, O my God! Promises of salvation do not
supersede, but engage, our petitions for it. He will for this be
enquired of. 3. His faith became triumphant. He began the psalm with
complaints of the strength and malice of his enemies, but concludes it
with exultation in the power and grace of his God, and now sees more
with him than against him, [Psa 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#008).
Two great truths he here builds his confidence upon and fetches comfort
from. (1.) That salvation belongeth unto the Lord; he has power to save,
be the danger ever so great; it is his prerogative to save, when all
other helps and succours fail; it is his pleasure, it is his property,
it is his promise to those that are his, whose salvation is not of
themselves, but of the Lord. Therefore all that have the Lord for their
God, according to the tenour of the new covenant, are sure of salvation;
for he that is their God is the God of salvation. (2.) That his blessing
is upon his people; he not only has power to save them, but he has
assured them of his kind and gracious intentions towards them. He has,
in his word, pronounced a blessing upon his people; and we are bound to
believe that that blessing does accordingly rest upon them, though there
be not the visible effects of it. Hence we may conclude that God's
people, though they may lie under the reproaches and censures of men,
are surely blessed of him, who blesses indeed, and therefore can command
a blessing.

In singing this, and praying it over, we must own the satisfaction we
have had in depending upon God and committing ourselves to him, and
encourage ourselves, and one another to continue still hoping and
quietly waiting for the salvation of the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 4](psa004)

</div>
