<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa089)  [Next](psa091) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 90](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 90:0</span></span>

The foregoing psalm is supposed to have been penned as late as the
captivity in Babylon; this, it is plain, was penned as early as the
deliverance out of Egypt, and yet they are put close together in this
collection of divine songs. This psalm was penned by Moses (as appears
by the title), the most ancient penman of sacred writ. We have upon
record a praising song of his (Ex. 15, which is alluded to [Rev
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#003)), and an instructing song of his,
Deu. 32. But this is of a different nature from both, for it is called a
prayer. It is supposed that this psalm was penned upon occasion of the
sentence passed upon Israel in the wilderness for their unbelief,
murmuring, and rebellion, that their carcases should fall in the
wilderness, that they should be wasted away by a series of miseries for
thirty-eight years together, and that none of them that were then of age
should enter Canaan. This was calculated for their wanderings in the
wilderness, as that other song of Moses ([Deu
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#019), [Deu
31:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#021)) was for their settlement in
Canaan. We have the story to which this psalm seems to refer, Num. 14.
Probably Moses penned this prayer to be daily used, either by the people
in their tents, or, at lest, by the priests in the tabernacle-service,
during their tedious fatigue in the wilderness. In it, I. Moses comforts
himself and his people with the eternity of God and their interest in
him ([Psa 90:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001), [Psa
90:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002)). II. He humbles himself and his
people with the consideration of the frailty of man ([Psa
90:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#003)). III. He submits himself and
his people to the righteous sentence of God passed upon them ([Psa
90:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#007)). IV. He commits himself and
his people to God by prayer for divine mercy and grace, and the return
of God's favour ([Psa 90:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#012)).
Though it seems to have been penned upon this particular occasion, yet
it is very applicable to the frailty of human life in general, and, in
singing it, we may easily apply it to the years of our passage through
the wilderness of this world, and it furnishes us with meditations and
prayers very suitable to the solemnity of a funeral.

A Prayer of Moses the man of God.

[Psalms 90:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 90:1</span></span>

This psalm is entitled a prayer of Moses. Where, and in what volume, it
was preserved from Moses's time till the collection of psalms was begun
to be made, is uncertain; but, being divinely inspired, it was under a
special protection: perhaps it was written in the book of Jasher, or the
book of the wars of the Lord. Moses taught the people of Israel to pray,
and put words into their mouths which they might make use of in turning
to the Lord. Moses is here called the man of God, because he was a
prophet, the father of prophets, and an eminent type of the great
prophet. In these verses we are taught,

I. To give God the praise of his care concerning his people at all
times, and concerning us in our days ([Psa
90:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001)): Lord, thou hast been to us a
habitation, or dwelling-place, a refuge or help, in all generations. Now
that they had fallen under God's displeasure, and he threatened to
abandon them, they plead his former kindnesses to their ancestors.
Canaan was a land of pilgrimage to their fathers the patriarchs, who
dwelt there in tabernacles; but then God was their habitation, and,
wherever they went, they were at home, at rest, in him. Egypt had been a
land of bondage to them for many years, but even then God was their
refuge; and in him that poor oppressed people lived and were kept in
being. Note, True believers are at home in God, and that is their
comfort in reference to all the toils and tribulations they meet with in
this world. In him we may repose and shelter ourselves as in our
dwelling-place.

II\. To give God the glory of his eternity ([Psa
90:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002)): Before the mountains were
brought forth, before he made the highest part of the dust of the world
(as it is expressed, [Pro 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#026)),
before the earth fell in travail, or, as we may read it, before thou
hadst formed the earth and the world (that is, before the beginning of
time) thou hadst a being; even from everlasting to everlasting thou art
God, an eternal God, whose existence has neither its commencement nor
its period with time, nor is measured by the successions and revolutions
of it, but who art the same yesterday, today, and for ever, without
beginning of days, or end of life, or change of time. Note, Against all
the grievances that arise from our own mortality, and the mortality of
our friends, we may take comfort from God's immortality. We are dying
creatures, and all our comforts in the world are dying comforts, but God
is an everliving God, and those shall find him so who have him for
theirs.

III\. To own God's absolute sovereign dominion over man, and his
irresistible incontestable power to dispose of him as he pleases ([Psa
90:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#003)): Thou turnest man to
destruction, with a word's speaking, when thou pleasest, to the
destruction of the body, of the earthly house; and thou sayest, Return,
you children of men. 1. When God is, by sickness or other afflictions,
turning men to destruction, he does thereby call men to return unto him,
that is, to repent of their sins and live a new life. This God speaketh
once, yea, twice. "Return unto me, from whom you have revolted," [Jer
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#001). 2. When God is threatening to
turn men to destruction, to bring them to death, and they have received
a sentence of death within themselves, sometimes he wonderfully restores
them, and says, as the old translation reads it, Again thou sayest,
Return to life and health again. For God kills and makes alive again,
brings down to the grave and brings up. 3. When God turns men to
destruction, it is according to the general sentence passed upon all,
which is this, "Return, you children of men, one, as well as another,
return to your first principles; let the body return to the earth as it
was (dust to dust, [Gen 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)) and let
the soul return to God who gave it," [Ecc
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#007). 4. Though God turns all men to
destruction, yet he will again say, Return, you children of men, at the
general resurrection, when, though a man dies, yet he shall live again;
and "then shalt thou call and I will answer ([Job
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#014), [Job
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#015)); thou shalt bid me return, and
I shall return." The body, the soul, shall both return and unite again.

IV\. To acknowledge the infinite disproportion there is between God and
men, [Psa 90:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#004). Some of the patriarchs
lived nearly a thousand years; Moses knew this very well, and had
recorded it: but what is their long life to God's eternal life? "A
thousand years, to us, are a long period, which we cannot expect to
survive; or, if we could, it is what we could not retain the remembrance
of; but it is, in thy sight, as yesterday, as one day, as that which is
freshest in mind; nay, it is but as a watch of the night," which was but
three hours. 1. A thousand years are nothing to God's eternity; they are
less than a day, than an hour, to a thousand years. Betwixt a minute and
a million of years there is some proportion, but betwixt time and
eternity there is none. The long lives of the patriarchs were nothing to
God, not so much as the life of a child (that is born and dies the same
day) is to theirs. 2. All the events of a thousand years, whether past
or to come, are as present to the Eternal Mind as what was done
yesterday, or the last hour, is to us, and more so. God will say, at the
great day, to those whom he has turned to destruction, Return - Arise
you dead. But it might be objected against the doctrine of the
resurrection that it is a long time since it was expected and it has not
yet come. Let that be no difficulty, for a thousand years, in God's
sight, are but as one day. Nullum tempus occurrit regi - To the king all
periods are alike. To this purport these words are quoted, [Pe2
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#008).

V. To see the frailty of man, and his vanity even at his best estate
([Psa 90:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#005), [Psa
90:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#006)): look upon all the children of
men, and we shall see, 1. That their life is a dying life: Thou carriest
them away as with a flood, that is, they are continually gliding down
the stream of time into the ocean of eternity. The flood is continually
flowing, and they are carried away with it; as soon as we are born we
begin to die, and every day of our life carries us so much nearer death;
or we are carried away violently and irresistibly, as with a flood of
waters, as with an inundation, which sweeps away all before it; or as
the old world was carried away with Noah's flood. Though God promised
not so to drown the world again, yet death is a constant deluge. 2. That
it is a dreaming life. Men are carried away as with a flood and yet they
are as a sleep; they consider not their own frailty, nor are aware how
near they approach to an awful eternity. Like men asleep, they imagine
great things to themselves, till death wakes them, and puts an end to
the pleasing dream. Time passes unobserved by us, as it does with men
asleep; and, when it is over, it is as nothing. 3. That it is a short
and transient life, like that of the grass which grows up and
flourishes, in the morning looks green and pleasant, but in the evening
the mower cuts it down, and it immediately withers, changes its colour,
and loses all its beauty. Death will change us shortly, perhaps
suddenly; and it is a great change that death will make with us in a
little time. Man, in his prime, does but flourish as the grass, which is
weak, and low, and tender, and exposed, and which, when the winter of
old age comes, will wither of itself: but he may be mown down by disease
or disaster, as the grass is, in the midst of summer. All flesh is as
grass.

[Psalms 90:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 90:7</span></span>

Moses had, in the foregoing verses, lamented the frailty of human life
in general; the children of men are as a sleep and as the grass. But
here he teaches the people of Israel to confess before God that
righteous sentence of death which they were under in a special manner,
and which by their sins they had brought upon themselves. Their share in
the common lot of mortality was not enough, but they are, and must live
and die, under peculiar tokens of God's displeasure. Here they speak of
themselves: We Israelites are consumed and troubled, and our days have
passed away.

I. They are here taught to acknowledge the wrath of God to be the cause
of all their miseries. We are consumed, we are troubled, and it is by
thy anger, by thy wrath ([Psa 90:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#007));
our days have passed away in thy wrath, [Psa
90:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#009). The afflictions of the saints
often come purely from God's love, as Job's; but the rebukes of sinners,
and of good men for their sins, must be seen coming from the anger of
God, who takes notice of, and is much displeased with, the sins of
Israel. We are too apt to look upon death as no more than a debt owing
to nature; whereas it is not so; if the nature of man had continued in
its primitive purity and rectitude, there would have been no such debt
owing to it. It is a debt to the justice of God, a debt to the law. Sin
entered into the world, and death by sin. Are we consumed by decays of
nature, the infirmities of age, or any chronic disease? We must ascribe
it to God's anger. Are we troubled by any sudden or surprising stroke?
That also is the fruit of God's wrath, which is thus revealed from
heaven against the ungodliness and unrighteousness of men.

II\. They are taught to confess their sins, which had provoked the wrath
of God against them ([Psa 90:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#008)): Thou
hast set our iniquities before thee, even our secret sins. It was not
without cause that God was angry with them. He had said, Provoke me not,
and I will do you no hurt; but they had provoked him, and will own that,
in passing this severe sentence upon them, he justly punished them, 1.
For their open contempts of him and the daring affronts they had given
him: Thou hast set our iniquities before thee. God had herein an eye to
their unbelief and murmuring, their distrusting his power and their
despising the pleasant land: these he set before them when he passed
that sentence on them; these kindled the fire of God's wrath against
them and kept good things from them. 2. For their more secret departures
from him: "Thou hast set our secret sins (those which go no further than
the heart, and which are at the bottom of all the overt acts) in the
light of thy countenance; that is, thou hast discovered these, and
brought these also to the account, and made us to see them, who before
overlooked them." Secret sins are known to God and shall be reckoned
for. Those who in heart return into Egypt, who set up idols in their
heart, shall be dealt with as revolters or idolaters. See the folly of
those who go about to cover their sins, for they cannot cover them.

III\. They are taught to look upon themselves as dying and passing away,
and not to think either of a long life or of a pleasant one; for the
decree gone forth against them was irreversible ([Psa
90:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#009)): All our days are likely to be
passed away in thy wrath, under the tokens of thy displeasure; and,
though we are not quite deprived of the residue of our years, yet we are
likely to spend them as a tale that is told. The thirty-eight years
which, after this, they wore away in the wilderness, were not the
subject of the sacred history; for little or nothing is recorded of that
which happened to them from the second year to the fortieth. After they
came out of Egypt their time was perfectly trifled away, and was not
worthy to be the subject of a history, but only of a tale that is told;
for it was only to pass away time, like telling stories, that they spent
those years in the wilderness; all that while they were in the
consuming, and another generation was in the raising. When they came out
of Egypt there was not one feeble person among their tribes ([Psa
105:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#037)); but now they were feeble.
Their joyful prospect of a prosperous glorious life in Canaan was turned
into the melancholy prospect of a tedious inglorious death in the
wilderness; so that their whole life was now as impertinent a thing as
ever any winter-tale was. That is applicable to the state of every one
of us in the wilderness of this world: We spend our years, we bring them
to an end, each year, and all at last, as a tale that is told - as the
breath of our mouth in winter (so some), which soon disappears - as a
thought (so some), than which nothing more quick - as a word, which is
soon spoken, and then vanishes into air - or as a tale that is told. The
spending of our years is like the telling of a tale. A year, when it
past, is like a tale when it is told. Some of our years are a pleasant
story, others as a tragical one, most mixed, but all short and
transient: that which was long in the doing may be told in a short time.
Our years, when they are gone, can no more be recalled than the word
that we have spoken can. The loss and waste of our time, which are our
fault and folly, may be thus complained of: we should spend our years
like the despatch of business, with care and industry; but, alas! we do
spend them like the telling of a tale, idle, and to little purpose,
carelessly, and without regard. Every year passed as a tale that is
told; but what was the number of them? As they were vain, so they were
few ([Psa 90:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010)), seventy or eighty at
most, which may be understood either, 1. Of the lives of the Israelites
in the wilderness; all those that were numbered when they came out of
Egypt, above twenty years old, were to die within thirty-eight years;
they numbered those only that were able to go forth to war, most of
whom, we may suppose, were between twenty and forty, who therefore must
have all died before eighty years old, and many before sixty, and
perhaps much sooner, which was far short of the years of the lives of
their fathers. And those that lived to seventy or eighty, yet, being
under a sentence of consumption and a melancholy despair of ever seeing
through this wilderness-state, their strength, their life, was nothing
but labour and sorrow, which otherwise would have been made a new life
by the joys of Canaan. See what work sin made. Or, 2. Of the lives of
men in general, ever since the days of Moses. Before the time of Moses
it was usual for men to live about 100 years, or nearly 150; but, since,
seventy or eighty is the common stint, which few exceed and multitudes
never come near. We reckon those to have lived to the age of man, and to
have had as large a share of life as they had reason to expect, who live
to be seventy years old; and how short a time is that compared with
eternity! Moses was the first that committed divine revelation to
writing, which, before, had been transmitted by tradition; now also both
the world and the church were pretty well peopled, and therefore there
were not now the same reasons for men's living long that there had been.
If, by reason of a strong constitution, some reach to eighty years, yet
their strength then is what they have little joy of; it does but serve
to prolong their misery, and make their death the more tedious; for even
their strength then is labour and sorrow, much more their weakness; for
the years have come which they have no pleasure in. Or it may be taken
thus: Our years are seventy, and the years of some, by reason of
strength, are eighty; but the breadth of our years (for so the latter
word signifies, rather than strength), the whole extent of them, from
infancy to old age, is but labour and sorrow. In the sweat of our face
we must eat bread; our whole life is toilsome and troublesome; and
perhaps, in the midst of the years we count upon, it is soon cut off,
and we fly away, and do not live out half our days.

IV\. They are taught by all this to stand in awe of the wrath of God
([Psa 90:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#011)): Who knows the power of
thy anger? 1. None can perfectly comprehend it. The psalmist speaks as
one afraid of God's anger, and amazed at the greatness of the power of
it; who knows how far the power of God's anger can reach and how deeply
it can wound? The angels that sinned knew experimentally the power of
God's anger; damned sinners in hell know it; but which of us can fully
comprehend or describe it? 2. Few do seriously consider it as they
ought. Who knows it, so as to improve the knowledge of it? Those who
make a mock at sin, and make light of Christ, surely do not know the
power of God's anger. For, according to thy fear, so is thy wrath; God's
wrath is equal to the apprehensions which the most thoughtful serious
people have of it; let men have ever so great a dread upon them of the
wrath of God, it is not greater than there is cause for and than the
nature of the thing deserves. God has not in his word represented his
wrath as more terrible than really it is; nay, what is felt in the other
world is infinitely worse than what is feared in this world. Who among
us can dwell with that devouring fire?

[Psalms 90:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 90:12</span></span>

These are the petitions of this prayer, grounded upon the foregoing
meditations and acknowledgments. Is any afflicted? Let him learn thus to
pray. Four things they are here directed to pray for: -

I. For a sanctified use of the sad dispensation they were now under.
Being condemned to have our days shortened, "Lord, teach us to number
our days ([Psa 90:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#012)); Lord, give us
grace duly to consider how few they are, and how little a while we have
to live in this world." Note, 1. It is an excellent art rightly to
number our days, so as not to be out in our calculation, as he was who
counted upon many years to come when, that night, his soul was required
of him. We must live under a constant apprehension of the shortness and
uncertainty of life and the near approach of death and eternity. We must
so number our days as to compare our work with them, and mind it
accordingly with a double diligence, as those that have no time to
trifle. 2. Those that would learn this arithmetic must pray for divine
instruction, must go to God, and beg of him to teach them by his Spirit,
to put them upon considering and to give them a good understanding. 3.
We then number our days to good purpose when thereby our hearts are
inclined and engaged to true wisdom, that is, to the practice of serious
godliness. To be religious is to be wise; this is a thing to which it is
necessary that we apply our hearts, and the matter requires and deserves
a close application, to which frequent thoughts of the uncertainty of
our continuance here, and the certainty of our removal hence, will very
much contribute.

II\. For the turning away of God's anger from them, that though the
decree had gone forth, and was past revocation, there was no remedy, but
they must die in the wilderness: "Yet return, O Lord! be thou reconciled
to us, and let it repent thee concerning thy servants ([Psa
90:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#013)); send us tidings of peace to
comfort us again after these heavy tidings. How long must we look upon
ourselves as under thy wrath, and when shall we have some token given us
of our restoration to thy favour? We are thy servants, thy people ([Isa
64:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#009)); when wilt thou change thy way
toward us?" In answer to this prayer, and upon their profession of
repentance ([Num 14:39](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#039), [Num
14:40](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#040)), God, in the next chapter,
proceeding with the laws concerning sacrifices ([Num
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#001), etc.), which was a token that it
repented him concerning his servants; for, if the Lord had been pleased
to kill them, he would not have shown them such things as these.

III\. For comfort and joy in the returns of God's favour to them, [Psa
90:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#014), [Psa
90:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#015). They pray for the mercy of God;
for they pretend not to plead any merit of their own. Have mercy upon
us, O God! is a prayer we are all concerned to say Amen to. Let us pray
for early mercy, the seasonable communications of divine mercy, that
God's tender mercies may speedily prevent us, early in the morning of
our days, when we are young and flourishing, [Psa
90:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#006). Let us pray for the true
satisfaction and happiness which are to be had only in the favour and
mercy of God, [Psa 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#006), [Psa
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#007). A gracious soul, if it may but be
satisfied of God's lovingkindness, will be satisfied with it, abundantly
satisfied, will take up with that, and will take up with nothing short
of it. Two things are pleaded to enforce this petition for God's mercy:
- 1. That it would be a full fountain of future joys: "O satisfy us with
thy mercy, not only that we may be easy and at rest within ourselves,
which we can never be while we lie under thy wrath, but that we may
rejoice and be glad, not only for a time, upon the first indications of
thy favour, but all our days, though we are to spend them in the
wilderness." With respect to those that make God their chief joy, as
their joy may be full ([Jo1 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#004)), so
it may be constant, even in this vale of tears; it is their own fault if
they are not glad all their days, for his mercy will furnish them with
joy in tribulation and nothing can separate them from it. 2. That it
would be a sufficient balance to their former griefs: "Make us glad
according to the days wherein thou has afflicted us; let the days of our
joy in thy favour be as many as the days of our pain for thy displeasure
have been and as pleasant as those have been gloomy. Lord, thou usest to
set the one over-against the other ([Ecc
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#014)); do so in our case. Let it
suffice that we have drunk so long of the cup of trembling; now put into
our hands the cup of salvation." God's people reckon the returns of
God's lovingkindness a sufficient recompence for all their troubles.

IV\. For the progress of the work of God among them notwithstanding,
[Psa 90:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#016), [Psa
90:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#017). 1. That he would manifest
himself in carrying it on: "Let thy work appear upon thy servants; let
it appear that thou hast wrought upon us, to bring us home to thyself
and to fit us for thyself." God's servants cannot work for him unless he
work upon them, and work in them both to will and to do; and then we may
hope the operations of God's providence will be apparent for us when the
operations of his grace are apparent upon us. "Let thy work appear, and
in it thy glory will appear to us and those that shall come after us."
In praying for God's grace God's glory must be our end; and we must
therein have an eye to our children as well as to ourselves, that they
also may experience God's glory appearing upon them, so as to change
them into the same image, from glory to glory. Perhaps, in this prayer,
they distinguish between themselves and their children, for so God
distinguished in his late message to them ([Num
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#031), Your carcases shall fall in
this wilderness, but your little ones I will bring into Canaan): "Lord,"
say they, "let thy work appear upon us, to reform us, and bring us to a
better temper, and then let thy glory appear to our children, in
performing the promise to them which we have forfeited the benefit of."
2. That he would countenance and strengthen them in carrying it on, in
doing their part towards it. (1.) That he would smile upon them in it:
Let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us; let it appear that God
favours us. Let us have God's ordinances kept up among us and the tokens
of God's presence with his ordinances; so some. We may apply this
petition both to our sanctification and to our consolation. Holiness is
the beauty of the Lord our God; let that be upon us in all we say and
do; let the grace of God in us, and the light of our good works, make
our faces to shine (that is the comeliness God puts upon us, and those
are comely indeed who are so beautified), and then let divine
consolations put gladness into our hearts, and a lustre upon our
countenances, and that also will be the beauty of the Lord upon us, as
our God. (2.) That he would prosper them in it: Establish thou the work
of our hands upon us. God's working upon us ([Psa
90:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#016)) does not discharge us from
using our utmost endeavours in serving him and working out our
salvation. But, when we have done all, we must wait upon God for the
success, and beg of him to prosper our handy works, to give us to
compass what we aim at for his glory. We are so unworthy of divine
assistance, and yet so utterly insufficient to bring any thing to pass
without it, that we have need to be earnest for it and to repeat the
request: Yea, the work of our hands, establish thou it, and, in order to
that, establish us in it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 91](psa091)

</div>
