<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa018)  [Next](psa020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 19:0</span></span>

There are two excellent books which the great God has published for the
instruction and edification of the children of men; this psalm treats of
them both, and recommends them both to our diligent study. I. The book
of the creatures, in which we may easily read the power and godhead of
the Creator ([Psa 19:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)). II. The
book of the scriptures, which makes known to us the will of God
concerning our duty. He shows the excellency and usefulness of that book
([Psa 19:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007)) and then teaches us how
to improve it ([Psa 19:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#012)).

To the chief musician. A psalm of David.

[Psalms 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 19:1</span></span>

From the things that are seen every day by all the world the psalmist,
in these verses, leads us to the consideration of the invisible things
of God, whose being appears incontestably evident and whose glory shines
transcendently bright in the visible heavens, the structure and beauty
of them, and the order and influence of the heavenly bodies. This
instance of the divine power serves not only to show the folly of
atheists, who see there is a heaven and yet say, "There is no God," who
see the effect and yet say, "There is no cause," but to show the folly
of idolaters also, and the vanity of their imagination, who, though the
heavens declare the glory of God, yet gave that glory to the lights of
heaven which those very lights directed them to give to God only, the
Father of lights. Now observe here,

1\. What that is which the creatures notify to us. They are in many ways
useful and serviceable to us, but in nothing so much as in this, that
they declare the glory of God, by showing his handy-works, [Psa
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001). They plainly speak themselves to
be God's handy-works; for they could not exist from eternity; all
succession and motion must have had a beginning; they could not make
themselves, that is a contradiction; they could not be produced by a
casual hit of atoms, that is an absurdity, fit rather to be bantered
than reasoned with: therefore they must have a Creator, who can be no
other than an eternal mind, infinitely wise, powerful, and good. Thus it
appears they are God's works, the works of his fingers ([Psa
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#003)), and therefore they declare his
glory. From the excellency of the work we may easily infer the infinite
perfection of its great author. From the brightness of the heavens we
may collect that the Creator is light; their vastness of extent bespeaks
his immensity;, their height his transcendency and sovereignty, their
influence upon this earth his dominion, and providence, and universal
beneficence: and all declare his almighty power, by which they were at
first made, and continue to this day according to the ordinances that
were then settled.

II\. What are some of those things which notify this? 1. The heavens and
the firmament - the vast expanse of air and ether, and the spheres of
the planets and fixed stars. Man has this advantage above the beasts, in
the structure of his body, that whereas they are made to look downwards,
as their spirits must go, he is made erect, to look upwards, because
upwards his spirit must shortly go and his thoughts should now rise. 2.
The constant and regular succession of day and night ([Psa
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#002)): Day unto day, and night unto
night, speak the glory of that God who first divided between the light
and the darkness, and has, from the beginning to this day, preserved
that established order without variation, according to God's covenant
with Noah ([Gen 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#022)), that, while the
earth remains, day and night shall not cease, to which covenant of
providence the covenant of grace is compared for its stability, [Jer
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#020); [Jer
31:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#035). The counterchanging of day and
night, in so exact a method, is a great instance of the power of God,
and calls us to observe that, as in the kingdom of nature, so in that of
providence, he forms the light and creates the darkness ([Isa
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#007)), and sets the one over-against
the other. It is likewise an instance of his goodness to man; for he
makes the out-goings of the morning and evening to rejoice, [Psa
65:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#008). He not only glorifies himself,
but gratifies us, by this constant revolution; for as the light of the
morning befriends the business of the day, so the shadows of the evening
befriend the repose of the night; every day and every night speak the
goodness of God, and, when they have finished their testimony, leave it
to the next day, to the next night, to stay the same. 3. The light and
influence of the sun do, in a special manner, declare the glory of God;
for of all the heavenly bodies that is the most conspicuous in itself
and most useful to this lower world, which would be all dungeon, and all
desert, without it. It is not an improbable conjecture that David penned
this psalm when he had the rising sun in view, and from the brightness
of it took occasion to declare the glory of God. Concerning the sun
observe here, (1.) The place appointed him. In the heavens God has set a
tabernacle for the sun. The heavenly bodies are called hosts of heaven,
and therefore are fitly said to dwell in tents, as soldiers in their
encampments. The sun is said to have a tabernacle set him, no only
because he is in continual motion and never has a fixed residence, but
because the mansion he has will, at the end of time, be taken down like
a tent, when the heavens shall be rolled together like a scroll and the
sun shall be turned to darkness. (2.) The course assigned him. That
glorious creature was not made to be idle, but his going forth (at least
as it appears to our eye) is from one point of the heavens, and his
circuit thence to the opposite point, and thence (to complete his
diurnal revolution) to the same point again; and this with such
steadiness and constancy that we can certainly foretel the hour and the
minute at which the sun will rise at such a place, any day to come. (3.)
The brightness wherein he appears. He is as a bridegroom coming out of
his chamber, richly dressed and adorned, as fine as hands can make him,
looking pleasantly himself and making all about him pleasant; for the
friend of the bridegroom rejoices greatly to hear the bridegroom's
voice, [Joh 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029). (4.) The
cheerfulness wherewith he makes this tour. Though it seems a vast round
which he has to walk, and he has not a moment's rest, yet in obedience
to the law of this creation, and for the service of man, he not only
does it, but does it with a great deal of pleasure and rejoices as a
strong man to run a race. With such satisfaction did Christ, the Sun of
righteousness, finish the work that was given him to do. (5.) His
universal influence on this earth: There is nothing hidden from the
heart thereof, no, not metals in the bowels of the earth, which the sun
has an influence upon.

III\. To whom this declaration is made of the glory of God. It is made
to all parts of the world ([Psa 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#003),
[Psa 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)): There is no speech nor
language (no nation, for the nations were divided after their tongues,
[Gen 10:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#031), [Gen
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#032)) where their voice is not heard.
Their line has gone through all the earth (the equinoctial line,
suppose) and with it their words to the end of the world, proclaiming
the eternal power of God of nature, [Psa
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004). The apostle uses this as a
reason why the Jews should not be angry with him and others for
preaching the gospel to the Gentiles, because God had already made
himself known to the Gentile world by the works of creation, and left
not himself without witness among them ([Rom
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018)), so that they were without
excuse if they were idolaters, [Rom
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020), [Rom
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021). And those were without blame,
who, by preaching the gospel to them, endeavoured to turn them from
their idolatry. If God used these means to prevent their apostasy, and
they proved ineffectual, the apostles did well to use other means to
recover them from it. They have no speech or language (so some read it)
and yet their voice is heard. All people may hear these natural immortal
preachers speak to them in their own tongue the wonderful works of God.

In singing these verses we must give God the glory of all the comfort
and benefit we have by the lights of the heaven, still looking above and
beyond them to the Sun of righteousness.

[Psalms 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 19:7</span></span>

God's glory, (that is, his goodness to man) appears much in the works of
creation, but much more in and by divine revelation. The holy scripture,
as it is a rule both of our duty to God and of our expectation from him,
is of much greater use and benefit to us than day or night, than the air
we breathe in, or the light of the sun. The discoveries made of God by
his works might have served if man had retained his integrity; but, to
recover him out of his fallen state, another course must be taken; that
must be done by the word of God. And here,

1\. The psalmist gives an account of the excellent properties and uses
of the word of God, in six sentences ([Psa
19:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007)), in each of which the name
Jehovah is repeated, and no vain repetition, for the law has its
authority and all its excellency from the law-maker. Here are six
several titles of the word of God, to take in the whole of divine
revelation, precepts and promises, and especially the gospel. Here are
several good properties of it, which proves its divine original, which
recommend it to our affection, and which extol it above all other laws
whatsoever. Here are several good effects of the law upon the minds of
men, which show what it is designed for, what use we are to make of it,
and how wonderful the efficacy of divine grace is, going along with it,
and working by it. 1. The law of the Lord is perfect. It is perfectly
free from all corruption, perfectly filled with all good, and perfectly
fitted for the end for which it is designed; and it will make the man of
God perfect, [Ti2 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#017). Nothing is to
be added to it nor taken from it. It is of use to convert the soul, to
bring us back to ourselves, to our God, to our duty; for it shows us our
sinfulness and misery in our departures from God and the indispensable
necessity of our return to him. 2. The testimony of the Lord (which
witnesses for him to us) is sure, incontestably and inviolably sure,
what we may give credit to, may rely upon, and may be confident it will
not deceive us. It is a sure discovery of the divine truth, a sure
direction in the way of duty. It is a sure foundation of living comforts
and a sure foundation of lasting hopes. It is of use to make us wise,
wise to salvation, [Ti2 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015). It will
give us an insight into things divine and a foresight of things to come.
It will employ us in the best work and secure to us our true interests.
It will make even the simple (poor contrivers as they may be for the
present world) wise for their souls and eternity. Those that are humbly
simple, sensible of their own folly and willing to be taught, shall be
made wise by the word of God, [Psa
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#009). 3. The statutes of the Lord
(enacted by his authority, and binding on all wherever they come) are
right, exactly agreeing with the eternal rules and principles of good
and evil, that is, with the right reason of man and the right counsels
of God. All God's precepts, concerning all things, are right ([Psa
119:128](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#128)), just as they should be; and
they will set us to rights if we receive them and submit to them; and,
because they are right, they rejoice the heart. The law, as we see it in
the hands of Christ, gives cause for joy; and, when it is written in our
hearts, it lays a foundation for everlasting joy, by restoring us to our
right mind. 4. The commandment of the Lord is pure; it is clear, without
darkness; it is clean, without dross and defilement. It is itself
purified from all alloy, and is purifying to those that receive and
embrace it. It is the ordinary means which the Spirit uses in
enlightening the eyes; it brings us to a sight and sense of our sin and
misery, and directs us in the way of duty. 5. The fear of the Lord (true
religion and godliness prescribed in the word, reigning in the heart,
and practised in the life) is clean, clean itself, and will make us
clean ([Joh 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#003)); it will cleanse our
way, [Psa 119:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#009). And it endureth for
ever; it is of perpetual obligation and can never be repealed. The
ceremonial law is long since done away, but the law concerning the fear
of God is ever the same. Time will not alter the nature of moral good
and evil. 6. The judgments of the Lord (all his precepts, which are
framed in infinite wisdom) are true; they are grounded upon the most
sacred and unquestionable truths; they are righteous, all consonant to
natural equity; and they are so altogether: there is no unrighteousness
in any of them, but they are all of a piece.

II\. He expresses the great value he had for the word of God, and the
great advantage he had, and hoped to have, from it, [Psa
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#010), [Psa
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#011).

1\. See how highly he prized the commandments of God. It is the
character of all good people that they prefer their religion and the
word of God, (1.) Far before all the wealth of the world. It is more
desirable than gold, than fine gold, than much fine gold. Gold is of the
earth, earthly; but grace is the image of the heavenly. Gold is only for
the body and the concerns of time; but grace is for the soul and the
concerns of eternity. (2.) Far before all pleasures and delights of
sense. The word of God, received by faith, is sweet to the soul, sweeter
than honey and the honey comb. The pleasures of sense are the delight of
brutes, and therefore debase the great soul of man; the pleasures of
religion are the delight of angels, and exalt the soul. The pleasures of
sense are deceitful, will soon surfeit, and yet never satisfy; but those
of religion are substantial and satisfying, and there is no danger of
exceeding in them.

2\. See what use he made of the precepts of God's word: By them is thy
servant warned. The word of God is a word of warning to the children of
men; it warns us of the duty we are to do, the dangers we are to avoid,
and the deluge we are to prepare for, [Eze
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#017); [Eze
33:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#007). It warns the wicked not to go on
in his wicked way, and warns the righteous not to turn from his good
way. All that are indeed God's servants take this warning.

3\. See what advantage he promised himself by his obedience to God's
precepts: In keeping them there is great reward. Those who make
conscience of their duty will not only be no losers by it, but
unspeakable gainers. There is a reward, not only after keeping, but in
keeping, God's commandments, a present great reward of obedience.
Religion is health and honour; it is peace and pleasure; it will make
our comforts sweet and our crosses easy, life truly valuable and death
itself truly desirable.

III\. He draws some good inferences from this pious meditation upon the
excellency of the word of God. Such thoughts as these should excite in
us devout affections, and they are to good purpose.

1\. He takes occasion hence to make a penitent reflection upon his sins;
for by the law is the knowledge of sin. "Is the commandment thus holy,
just, and good? Then who can understand his errors? I cannot, whoever
can." From the rectitude of the divine law he learns to call his sins
his errors. If the commandment be true and righteous, every
transgressions of the commandment is an error, as grounded upon a
mistake; every wicked practice takes rise from some corrupt principle;
it is a deviation from the rule we are to work by, the way we are to
walk in. From the extent, the strictness, and spiritual nature, of the
divine law he learns that his sins are so many that he cannot understand
the number of them, and so exceedingly sinful that he cannot understand
the heinousness and malignity of them. We are guilty of many sins which,
through our carelessness and partiality to ourselves, we are not aware
of; many we have been guilty of which we have forgotten; so that, when
we have been ever so particular in the confession of sin, we must
conclude with an et cetera - and such like; for God knows a great deal
more evil of us than we do of ourselves. In many things we all offend,
and who can tell how often he offends? It is well that we are under
grace, and not under the law, else we were undone.

2\. He takes occasion hence to pray against sin. All the discoveries of
sin made to us by the law should drive us to the throne of grace, there
to pray, as David does here, (1.) For mercy to pardon. Finding himself
unable to specify all the particulars of his transgressions, he cries
out, Lord, cleanse me from my secret faults; not secret to God, so none
are, nor only such as were secret to the world, but such as were hidden
from his own observation of himself. The best of men have reason to
suspect themselves guilty of many secret faults, and to pray to God to
cleanse them from that guilt and not to lay it to their charge; for even
our sins of infirmity and inadvertency, and our secret sins, would be
our ruin if God should deal with us according to the desert of them.
Even secret faults are defiling, and render us unfit for communion with
God; but, when they are pardoned, we are cleansed from them, [Jo1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#007). (2.) For grace to help in time of
need. Having prayed that his sins of infirmity might be pardoned, he
prays that presumptuous sins might be prevented, [Psa
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#013). All that truly repent of their
sins, and have them pardoned, are in care not to relapse into sin, nor
to return again to folly, as appears by their prayers, which concur with
David's here, where observe, \[1.\] His petition: "Keep me from ever
being guilty of a wilful presumptuous sin." We ought to pray that we may
be kept from sins of infirmity, but especially from presumptuous sins,
which most offend God and wound conscience, which wither our comforts
and shock our hopes. "However, let none such have dominion over me, let
me not be at the command of any such sin, nor be enslaved by it." \[2.\]
His plea: "So shall I be upright; I shall appear upright; I shall
preserve the evidence and comfort of my uprightness; and I shall be
innocent from the great transgression;" so he calls a presumptuous sin,
because no sacrifice was accepted for it, [Num
15:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#028). Note, First, Presumptuous
sins are very heinous and dangerous. those that sin against the habitual
convictions and actual admonitions of their consciences, in contempt and
defiance of the law and its sanctions, that sin with a high hand, sin
presumptuously, and it is a great transgression. Secondly, Even good men
ought to be jealous of themselves, and afraid of sinning presumptuously,
yea, though through the grace of God they have hitherto been kept from
them. Let none be high-minded, but fear. Thirdly, Being so much exposed,
we have great need to pray to God, when we are pushing forward towards a
presumptuous sin, to keep us back from it, either by his providence
preventing the temptation or by his grace giving us victory over it.

3\. He takes occasion humbly to beg the divine acceptance of those his
pious thoughts and affections, [Psa
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#014). Observe the connexion of this
with what goes before. He prays to God to keep him from sin, and then
begs he would accept his performances; for, if we favour our sins, we
cannot expect God should favour us or our services, [Psa
66:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#018). Observe, (1.) What his services
were - the words of his mouth and the meditations of his heart, his holy
affections offered up to God. The pious meditations of the heart must
not be smothered, but expressed in the words of our mouth, for God's
glory and the edification of others; and the words of our mouth in
prayer and praise must not be formal, but arising from the meditation of
the heart, [Psa 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001). (2.) What was
his care concerning these services - that they might be acceptable with
God; for, if our services be not acceptable to God, what do they avail
us? Gracious souls must have all they aim at if they be accepted of God,
for that is their bliss. (3.) What encouragement he had to hope for
this, because God was his strength and his redeemer. If we seek
assistance from God as our strength in our religious duties, we may hope
to find acceptance with God in the discharge of our duties; for by his
strength we have power with him.

In singing this we should get our hearts much affected with the
excellency of the word of God and delivered into it, we should be much
affected with the evil of sin, the danger we are in of it and the danger
we are in by it, and we should fetch in help from heaven against it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 20](psa020)

</div>
