<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa103)  [Next](psa105) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 104](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 104:0</span></span>

It is very probable that this psalm was penned by the same hand, and at
the same time, as the former; for as that ended this begins, with "Bless
the Lord, O my soul!" and concludes with it too. The style indeed is
somewhat different, because the matter is so: the scope of the foregoing
psalm was to celebrate the goodness of God and his tender mercy and
compassion, to which a soft and sweet style was most agreeable; the
scope of this is to celebrate his greatness, and majesty, and sovereign
dominion, which ought to be done in the most stately lofty strains of
poetry. David, in the former psalm, gave God the glory of his
covenant-mercy and love to his own people; in this he gives him the
glory of his works of creation and providence, his dominion over, and
his bounty to, all the creatures. God is there praised as the God of
grace, here as the God of nature. And this psalm is wholly bestowed on
that subject; not as [Psa 19:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001),
which begins with it, but passes from it to the consideration of the
divine law; nor as [Psa 8:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001), which
speaks of this but prophetically, and with an eye to Christ. This noble
poem is thought by very competent judges greatly to excel, not only for
piety and devotion (that is past dispute), but for flight of fancy,
brightness of ideas, surprising turns, and all the beauties and
ornaments of expression, the Greek and Latin poets upon any subject of
this nature. Many great things the psalmist here gives God the glory of
I. The splendour of his majesty in the upper world ([Psa
104:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001)). II. The creation of the sea
and the dry land ([Psa 104:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#005)). III.
The provision he makes for the maintenance of all the creatures
according to their nature ([Psa
104:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#010), [Psa
104:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#027), [Psa
104:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#028)). IV. The regular course of the
sun and moon ([Psa 104:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#019)). V. The
furniture of the sea ([Psa 104:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#025),
[Psa 104:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#026)). IV. God's sovereign
power over all the creatures ([Psa
104:29-32](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029)). And, lastly, he concludes
with a pleasant and firm resolution to continue praising God ([Psa
104:33-35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#033)), with which we should
heartily join in singing this psalm.

[Psalms 104:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 104:1</span></span>

When we are addressing ourselves to any religious service we must stir
up ourselves to take hold on God in it ([Isa
64:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#007)); so David does here. "Come, my
soul, where art thou? What art thou thinking of? Here is work to be
done, good work, angels' work; set about it in good earnest; let all the
powers and faculties be engaged and employed in it: Bless the Lord, O my
soul!" In these verses,

I. The psalmist looks up to the divine glory shining in the upper world,
of which, though it is one of the things not seen, faith is the
evidence. With what reverence and holy awe does he begin his meditation
with that acknowledgment: O Lord my God! thou art very great! It is the
joy of the saints that he who is their God is a great God. The grandeur
of the prince is the pride and pleasure of all his good subjects. The
majesty of God is here set forth by various instances, alluding to the
figure which great princes in their public appearances covet to make.
Their equipage, compared with his (even of the eastern kings, who most
affected pomp), is but as the light of a glow-worm compared with that of
the sun, when he goes forth in his strength. Princes appear great, 1. In
their robes; and what are God's robes? Thou art clothed with honour and
majesty, [Psa 104:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001). God is seen in
his works, and these proclaim him infinitely wise and good, and all that
is great. Thou coverest thyself with light as with a garment, [Psa
104:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002). God is light ([Jo1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005)), the Father of lights ([Jam
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017)); he dwells in light ([Ti1
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)); he clothes himself with it. The
residence of his glory is in the highest heaven, that light which was
created the first day, [Gen 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003). Of
all visible beings light comes nearest to the nature of a spirit, and
therefore with that God is pleased to cover himself, that is, to reveal
himself under that similitude, as men are seen in the clothes with which
they cover themselves; and so only, for his face cannot be seen. 2. In
their palaces or pavilions, when they take the field; and what is God's
palace and his pavilion? He stretches out the heavens like a curtain,
[Psa 104:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002). So he did at first, when
he made the firmament, which in the Hebrew has its name from its being
expanded, or stretched out, [Gen 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#007).
He made it to divide the waters as a curtain divides between two
apartments. So he does still: he now stretches out the heavens like a
curtain, keeps them upon the stretch, and they continue to this day
according to his ordinance. The regions of the air are stretched out
about the earth, like a curtain about a bed, to keep it warm, and drawn
between us and the upper world, to break its dazzling light; for, though
God covers himself with light, yet, in compassion to us, he makes
darkness his pavilion. Thick clouds are a covering to him. The vastness
of this pavilion may lead us to consider how great, how very great, he
is that fills heaven and earth. He has his chambers, his upper rooms (so
the word signifies), the beams whereof he lays in the waters, the waters
that are above the firmament ([Psa
104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003)), as he has founded the earth
upon the seas and floods, the waters beneath the firmament. Though air
and water are fluid bodies, yet, by the divine power, they are kept as
tight and as firm in the place assigned them as a chamber is with beams
and rafters. How great a God is he whose presence-chamber is thus
reared, thus fixed! 3. In their coaches of state, with their stately
horses, which add much to the magnificence of their entries; but God
makes the clouds his chariots, in which he rides strongly, swiftly, and
far above out of the reach of opposition, when at any time he will act
by uncommon providences in the government of this world. He descended in
a cloud, as in a chariot, to Mount Sinai, to give the law, and to Mount
Tabor, to proclaim the gospel ([Mat
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005)), and he walks (a gentle pace
indeed, yet stately) upon the wings of the wind. See [Psa
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#010), [Psa
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#011). He commands the winds, directs
them as he pleases, and serves his own purposes by them. 4. In their
retinue or train of attendants; and here also God is very great, for
([Psa 104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004)) he makes his angels
spirits. This is quoted by the apostle ([Heb
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#007)) to prove the pre-eminence of
Christ above the angels. The angels are here said to be his angels and
his ministers, for they are under his dominion and at his disposal; they
are winds, and a flame of fire, that is, they appeared in wind and fire
(so some), or they are as swift as winds, and pure as flames; or he
makes them spirits, so the apostle quotes it. They are spiritual beings;
and, whatever vehicles they may have proper to their nature, it is
certain they have not bodies as we have. Being spirits, they are so much
the further removed from the encumbrances of the human nature and so
much the nearer allied to the glories of the divine nature. And they are
bright, and quick, and ascending, as fire, as a flame of fire. In
Ezekiel's vision they ran and returned like a flash of lightning, [Eze
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#014). Thence they are called seraphim
- burners. Whatever they are, they are what God made them, what he still
makes them; they derive their being from him, having the being he gave
them, are held in being by him, and he makes what use he pleases of
them.

II\. He looks down, and looks about, to the power of God shining in this
lower world. He is not so taken up with the glories of his court as to
neglect even the remotest of his territories; no, not the sea and dry
land.

1\. He has founded the earth, [Psa
104:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#005). Though he has hung it upon
nothing ([Job 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#002)), ponderibus
librata suis - balanced by its own weight, yet it is as immovable as if
it had been laid upon the surest foundations. He has built the earth
upon her basis, so that though it has received a dangerous shock by the
sin of man, and the malice of hell strikes at it, yet it shall not be
removed for ever, that is, not till the end of time, when it must give
way to the new earth. Dr. Hammond's paraphrase of this is worth noting:
"God has fixed so strange a place for the earth, that, being a heavy
body, one would think it should fall every minute; and yet, which way
soever we would imagine it to stir, it must, contrary to the nature of
such a body, fall upwards, and so can have no possible ruin but by
tumbling into heaven."

2\. He has set bounds to the sea; for that also is his. (1.) He brought
it within bounds in the creation. At first the earth, which, being the
more ponderous body, would subside of course, was covered with the deep
([Psa 104:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#006)): The waters were above
the mountains; and so it was unfit to be, as it was designed, a
habitation for man; and therefore, on the third day, God said, Let the
waters under the heaven be gathered to one place, and let the dry land
appear, [Gen 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#009). This command of God
is here called his rebuke, as if he gave it because he was displeased
that the earth was thus covered with water and not fit for man to dwell
on. Power went along with this word, and therefore it is also called
here the voice of his thunder, which is a mighty voice and produces
strange effects, [Psa 104:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#007). At thy
rebuke, as if they were made sensible that they were out of their place,
they fled; they hasted away (they called, and not in vain, to the rocks
and mountains to cover them), as it is said on another occasion ([Psa
77:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#016)), The waters saw thee, O God!
the waters saw thee; they were afraid. Even those fluid bodies received
the impression of God's terror. But was the Lord displeased against the
rivers? No; it was for the salvation of his people, [Hab
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#008), [Hab
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#013). So here; God rebuked the waters
for man's sake, to prepare room for him; for men must not be made as the
fishes of the sea ([Hab 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#014)); they
must have air to breathe in. Immediately therefore, with all speed, the
waters retired, [Psa 104:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#008). They go
over hill and dale (as we say), go up by the mountains and down by the
valleys; they will neither stop at the former nor lodge in the latter,
but make the best of their way to the place which thou hast founded for
them, and there they make their bed. Let the obsequiousness even of the
unstable waters teach us obedience to the word and will of God; for
shall man alone of all the creatures be obstinate? Let their retiring to
and resting in the place assigned them teach us to acquiesce in the
disposals of that wise providence which appoints us the bounds of our
habitation. (2.) He keeps it within bounds, [Psa
104:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#009). The waters are forbidden to
pass over the limits set them; they may not, and therefore they do not,
turn again to cover the earth. Once they did, in Noah's flood, because
God bade them, but never since, because he forbids them, having promised
not to drown the world again. God himself glorifies in this instance of
his power ([Job 38:8](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#008), etc.) and uses
it as an argument with us to fear him, [Jer
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#022). This, if duly considered, would
keep the world in awe of the Lord and his goodness, That the waters of
the sea would soon cover the earth if God did not restrain them.

[Psalms 104:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 104:10</span></span>

Having given glory to God as the powerful protector of this earth, in
saving it from being deluged, here he comes to acknowledge him as its
bountiful benefactor, who provides conveniences for all the creatures.

I. He provides fresh water for their drink: He sends the springs into
the valleys, [Psa 104:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#010). There is
water enough indeed in the sea, that is, enough to drown us, but not one
drop to refresh us, be we ever so thirsty - it is all so salt; and
therefore God has graciously provided water fit to drink. Naturalists
dispute about the origin of fountains; but, whatever are their second
causes, here is their first cause; it is God that sends the springs into
the brooks, which walk by easy steps between the hills, and receive
increase from the rain-water that descends from them. These give drink,
not only to man, and those creatures that are immediately useful to him,
but to every beast of the field ([Psa
104:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#011)); for where God has given life
he provides a livelihood and takes care of all the creatures. Even the
wild asses, though untameable and therefore of no use to man, are
welcome to quench their thirst; and we have no reason to grudge it them,
for we are better provided for, though born like the wild ass's colt. We
have reason to thank God for the plenty of fair water with which he has
provided the habitable part of his earth, which otherwise would not be
habitable. That ought to be reckoned a great mercy the want of which
would be a great affliction; and the more common it is the greater mercy
it is. Usus communis aquarum - water is common for all.

II\. He provides food convenient for them, both for man and beast: The
heavens drop fatness; they hear the earth, but God hears them, [Hos
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#021). He waters the hills from his
chambers ([Psa 104:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#013)), from those
chambers spoken of ([Psa 104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003)), the
beams of which he lays in the waters, those store-chambers, the clouds
that distil fruitful showers. The hills that are not watered by the
rivers, as Egypt was by the Nile, are watered by the rain from heaven,
which is called the river of God ([Psa
65:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#009)), as Canaan was, [Deu
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#011), [Deu
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#012). Thus the earth is satisfied
with the fruit of his works, either with the rain it drinks in (the
earth knows when it has enough; it is a pity that any man should not) or
with the products it brings forth. It is a satisfaction to the earth to
bear the fruit of God's works for the benefit of man, for thus it
answers the end of its creation. The food which God brings forth out of
the earth ([Psa 104:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#014)) is the fruit
of his works, which the earth is satisfied with. Observe how various and
how valuable its products are.

1\. For the cattle there is grass, and the beasts of prey, that live not
on grass, feed on those that do; for man there is herb, a better sort of
grass (and a dinner of herbs and roots is not to be despised); nay, he
is furnished with wine, and oil, and bread, [Psa
104:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#015). We may observe here,
concerning our food, that which will help to make us both humble and
thankful. (1.) To make us humble let us consider that we have a
necessary dependence upon God for all the supports of this life (we live
upon alms; we are at his finding, for our own hands are not sufficient
for us), - that our food comes all out of the earth, to remind us whence
we ourselves were taken and whither we must return, - and that therefore
we must not think to live by bread alone, for that will feed the body
only, but must look into the word of God for the meat that endures to
eternal life. Let us also consider that we are in this respect
fellow-commoners with the beasts; the same earth, the same spot of
ground, that brings grass for the cattle, brings corn for man. (2.) To
make us thankful let us consider, \[1.\] That God not only provides for
us, but for our servants. The cattle that are of use to man are
particularly taken care of; grass is made to grow in great abundance for
them, when the young lions, that are not for the service of man, often
lack and suffer hunger. \[2.\] That our food is nigh us, and ready to
us. Having our habitation on the earth, there we have our storehouse,
and depend not on the merchant-ships that bring food from afar, [Pro
31:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#014). \[3.\] That we have even from
the products of the earth, not only for necessity, but for ornament and
delight, so good a Master do we serve. First, Does nature call for
something to support it, and repair its daily decays? Here is bread,
which strengthens man's heart, and is therefore called the staff of
life; let none who have that complain of want. Secondly, Does nature go
further, and covet something pleasant? Here is wine, that makes glad the
heart, refreshes the spirits, and exhilarates them, when it is soberly
and moderately used, that we may not only go through our business, but
go through it cheerfully. It is a pity that that should be abused to
overcharge the heart, and unfit men for their duty, which was given to
revive their heart and quicken them in their duty. Thirdly, Is nature
yet more humoursome, and does it crave something for ornament too? Here
is that also out of the earth - oil to make the face to shine, that the
countenance may not only be cheerful but beautiful, and we may be the
more acceptable to one another.

2\. Nay, the divine providence not only furnishes animals with their
proper food, but vegetables also with theirs ([Psa
104:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#016)): The trees of the Lord are
full of sap, not only men's trees, which they take care of and have an
eye to, in their orchards, and parks, and other enclosures, but God's
trees, which grow in the wildernesses, and are taken care of only by his
providence; they are full of sap and want no nourishment. Even the
cedars of Lebanon, an open forest, though they are high and bulky, and
require a great deal of sap to feed them, have enough from the earth;
they are trees which he has planted, and which therefore he will protect
and provide for. We may apply this to the trees of righteousness, which
are the planting of the Lord, planted in his vineyard; these are full of
sap, for what God plants he will water, and those that are planted in
the house of the Lord shall flourish in the courts of our God, [Psa
92:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#013).

III\. He takes care that they shall have suitable habitations to dwell
in. To men God has given discretion to build for themselves and for the
cattle that are serviceable to them; but there are some creatures which
God more immediately provides a settlement for. 1. The birds. Some
birds, by instinct, make their nests in the bushes near rivers ([Psa
104:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#012)): By the springs that run among
the hills some of the fowls of heaven have their habitation, which sing
among the branches. They sing, according to their capacity, to the
honour of their Creator and benefactor, and their singing may shame our
silence. Our heavenly Father feeds them ([Mat
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#026)), and therefore they are easy and
cheerful, and take no thought for the morrow. The birds being made to
fly above the earth (as we find, [Gen
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#020)), they make their nests on high,
in the tops of trees ([Psa 104:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#017)); it
should seem as if nature had an eye to this in planting the cedars of
Lebanon, that they might be receptacles for the birds. Those that fly
heavenward shall not want resting-places. The stork is particularly
mentioned; the fir-trees, which are very high, are her house, her
castle. 2. The smaller sort of beasts ([Psa
104:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#018)): The wild goats, having
neither strength nor swiftness to secure themselves, are guided by
instinct to the high hills, which are a refuge to them; and the rabbits,
which are also helpless animals, find shelter in the rocks, where they
can set the beasts of prey at defiance. Does God provide thus for the
inferior creatures; and will he not himself be a refuge and
dwelling-place to his own people?

[Psalms 104:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 104:19</span></span>

We are here taught to praise and magnify God,

I. For the constant revolutions and succession of day and night, and the
dominion of sun and moon over them. The heathen were so affected with
the light and influence of the sun and moon, and their serviceableness
to the earth, that they worshipped them as deities; and therefore the
scripture takes all occasions to show that the gods they worshipped are
the creatures and servants of the true God ([Psa
104:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#019)): He appointed the moon for
seasons, for the measuring of the months, the directing of the seasons
for the business of the husbandman, and the governing of the tides. The
full and change, the increase and decrease, of the moon, exactly observe
the appointment of the Creator; so does the sun, for he keeps as
punctually to the time and place of his going down as if he were an
intellectual being and knew what he did. God herein consults the comfort
of man. 1. The shadows of the evening befriend the repose of the night
([Psa 104:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#020)): Thou makes darkness and
it is night, which, though black, contributes to the beauty of nature,
and is as a foil to the light of the day; and under the protection of
the night all the beasts of the forest creep forth to feed, which they
are afraid to do in the day, God having put the fear and dread of man
upon every beast of the earth ([Gen
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#002)), which contributes as much to
man's safety as to his honour. See how nearly allied those are to the
disposition of the wild beasts who wait for the twilight ([Job
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#015)) and have fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness; and compare to this the danger of
ignorance and melancholy, which are both as darkness to the soul; when,
in either of those ways, it is night, then all the beasts of the forest
creep forth. Satan's temptations then assault us and have advantage
against us. Then the young lions roar after their prey; and, as
naturalists tell us, their roaring terrifies the timorous beasts so that
they have not strength nor spirit to escape from them, which otherwise
they might do, and so they become an easy prey to them. They are said to
seek their meat from God, because it is not prepared for them by the
care and forecast of man, but more immediately by the providence of God.
The roaring of the young lions, like the crying of the young ravens, is
interpreted asking their meat of God. Does God put this construction
upon the language of mere nature, even in venomous creatures? and shall
he not much more interpret favourably the language of grace in his own
people, though it be weak and broken, groanings which cannot be uttered?
2. The light of the morning befriends the business of the day ([Psa
104:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#022), [Psa
104:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#023)): The sun arises (for, as he
knows his going down, so, thanks be to God, he knows his rising again),
and then the wild beasts betake themselves to their rest; even they have
some society among them, for they gather themselves together and lay
down in their dens, which is a great mercy to the children of men, that
while they are abroad, as becomes honest travellers, between sun and
sun, care is taken that they shall not be set upon by wild beasts, for
they are then drawn out of the field, and the sluggard shall have no
ground to excuse himself from the business of the day with this, That
there is a lion in the way. Therefore then man goes forth to his work
and to his labour. The beasts of prey creep forth with fear; man goes
forth with boldness, as one that has dominion. The beasts creep forth to
spoil and do mischief; man goes forth to work and do good. There is the
work of every day, which is to be done in its day, which man must apply
to every morning (for the lights are set up for us to work by, not to
play by) and which he must stick to till evening; it will be time enough
to rest when the night comes, in which no man can work.

II\. For the replenishing of the ocean ([Psa
104:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#025), [Psa
104:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#026)): As the earth is full of God's
riches, well stocked with animals, and those well provided for, so that
it is seldom that any creature dies merely for want of food, so is this
great and wide sea which seems a useless part of the globe, at least not
to answer the room it takes up; yet God has appointed it its place and
made it serviceable to man both for navigation (there go the ships, in
which goods are conveyed, to countries vastly distant, speedily and much
more cheaply than by land-carriage) and also to be his storehouse for
fish. God made not the sea in vain, any more than the earth; he made it
to be inherited, for there are things swimming innumerable, both small
and great animals, which serve for man's dainty food. The whale is
particularly mentioned in the history of the creation ([Gen
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#021)) and is here called the
leviathan, as [Job 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#001). He is made to
play in the sea; he has nothing to do, as man has, who goes forth to his
work; he has nothing to fear, as the beasts have, that lie down in their
dens; and therefore he plays with the waters. It is a pity that any of
the children of men, who have nobler powers and were made for nobler
purposes, should live as if they were sent into the world, like
leviathan into the waters, to play therein, spending all their time in
pastime. The leviathan is said to play in the waters, because he is so
well armed against all assaults that he sets them at defiance and laughs
at the shaking of a spear, [Job 41:29](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#029).

III\. For the seasonable and plentiful provision which is made for all
the creatures, [Psa 104:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#027), [Psa
104:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#028). 1. God is a bountiful
benefactor to them: He gives them their meat; he opens his hand and they
are filled with good. He supports the armies both of heaven and earth.
Even the meanest creatures are not below his cognizance. He is
open-handed in the gifts of his bounty, and is a great and good
housekeeper that provides for so large a family. 2. They are patient
expectants from him: They all wait upon him. They seek their food,
according to the natural instinct God has put into them and in the
proper season for it, and affect not any other food, or at any other
time, than nature has ordained. They do their part for the obtaining of
it: what God gives them they gather, and expect not that Providence
should put it into their mouths; and what they gather they are satisfied
with - they are filled with good. They desire no more than what God sees
fit for them, which may shame our murmurings, and discontent, and
dissatisfaction with our lot.

IV\. For the absolute power and sovereign dominion which he has over all
the creatures, by which every species is still continued, though the
individuals of each are daily dying and dropping off. See here, 1. All
the creatures perishing ([Psa 104:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029)):
Thou hidest thy face, withdrawest thy supporting power, thy supplying
bounty, and they are troubled immediately. Every creature has as
necessary a dependence upon God's favours as every saint is sensible he
has and therefore says with David ([Psa
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#007)), Thou didst hide thy face and I
was troubled. God's displeasure against this lower world for the sin of
man is the cause of all the vanity and burden which the whole creation
groans under. Thou takest away their breath, which is in thy hand, and
then, and not till then, they die and return to their dust, to their
first principles. The spirit of the beast, which goes downward, is at
God's command, as well as the spirit of a man, which goes upward. The
death of cattle was one of the plagues of Egypt, and is particularly
taken notice of in the drowning of the world. 2. All preserved
notwithstanding, in a succession ([Psa
104:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#030)): Thou sendest forth thy
spirit, they are created. The same spirit (that is, the same divine will
and power) by which they were all created at first still preserves the
several sorts of creatures in their being, and place, and usefulness; so
that, though one generation of them passes away, another comes, and from
time to time they are created; new ones rise up instead of the old ones,
and this is a continual creation. Thus the face of the earth is renewed
from day to day by the light of the sun (which beautifies it anew every
morning), from year to year by the products of it, which enrich it anew
every spring and put quite another face upon it from what it had all
winter. The world is as full of creatures as if none died, for the place
of those that die is filled up. This (the Jews say) is to be applied to
the resurrection, which every spring is an emblem of, when a new world
rises out of the ashes of the old one.

In the midst of this discourse the psalmist breaks out into wonder at
the works of God ([Psa 104:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#024)): O
Lord! how manifold are thy works! They are numerous, they are various,
of many kinds, and many of every kind; and yet in wisdom hast thou made
them all. When men undertake many works, and of different kinds,
commonly some of them are neglected and not done with due care; but
God's works, though many and of very different kinds, are all made in
wisdom and with the greatest exactness; there is not the least flaw nor
defect in them. The works of art, the more closely they are looked upon
with the help of microscopes, the more rough they appear; the works of
nature through these glasses appear more fine and exact. They are all
made in wisdom, for they are all made to answer the end they were
designed to serve, the good of the universe, in order to the glory of
the universal Monarch.

[Psalms 104:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">psa 104:31</span></span>

The psalmist concludes this meditation with speaking,

I. Praise to God, which is chiefly intended in the psalm.

1\. He is to be praised, (1.) As a great God, and a God of matchless
perfection: The glory of the Lord shall endure for ever, [Psa
104:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#031). It shall endure to the end of
time in his works of creation and providence; it shall endure to
eternity in the felicity and adorations of saints and angels. Man's
glory is fading; God's glory is everlasting. Creatures change, but with
the Creator there is no variableness. (2.) As a gracious God: The Lord
shall rejoice in his works. He continues that complacency in the
products of his own wisdom and goodness which he had when he saw every
thing that he had made, and behold it was very good, and rested the
seventh day. We often do that which, upon the review, we cannot rejoice
in, but are displeased at, and wish undone again, blaming our own
management. But God always rejoices in his works, because they are all
done in wisdom. We regret our bounty and beneficence, but God never
does; he rejoices in the works of his grace: his gifts and callings are
without repentance. (3.) As a God of almighty power ([Psa
104:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#032)): He looks on the earth, and it
trembles, as unable to bear his frowns - trembles, as Sinai did, at the
presence of the Lord. He touches the hills, and they smoke. The
volcanoes, or burning mountains, such as Aetna, are emblems of the power
of God's wrath fastening upon proud unhumbled sinners. If an angry look
and a touch have such effects, what will the weight of his heavy hand do
and the operations of his outstretched arm? Who knows the power of his
anger? Who then dares set it at defiance? God rejoices in his works
because they are all so observant of him; and he will in like manner
take pleasure in those that fear him and that tremble at his word.

2\. The psalmist will himself be much in praising him ([Psa
104:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#033)): "I will sing unto the Lord,
unto my God, will praise him as Jehovah, the Creator, and as my God, a
God in covenant with me, and this not now only, but as long as I live,
and while I have my being." Because we have our being from God, and
depend upon him for the support and continuance of it, as long as we
live and have our being we must continue to praise God; and when we have
no life, no being, on earth, we hope to have a better life and better
being in a better world and there to be doing this work in a better
manner and in better company.

II\. Joy to himself ([Psa 104:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#034)): My
meditation of him shall be sweet; it shall be fixed and close; it shall
be affecting and influencing; and therefore it shall be sweet. Thoughts
of God will then be most pleasing, when they are most powerful. Note,
Divine meditation is a very sweet duty to all that are sanctified: "I
will be glad in the Lord; it shall be a pleasure to me to praise him; I
will be glad of all opportunities to set forth his glory; and I will
rejoice in the Lord always and in him only." All my joys shall centre in
him, and in him they shall be full.

III\. Terror to the wicked ([Psa
104:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#035)): Let the sinners be consumed
out of the earth; and let the wicked be no more. 1. Those that oppose
the God of power, and fight against him, will certainly be consumed;
none can prosper that harden themselves against the Almighty. 2. Those
that rebel against the light of such convincing evidence of God's being,
and refuse to serve him whom all the creatures serve, will justly be
consumed. Those that make that earth to groan under the burden of their
impieties which God thus fills with his riches deserve to be consumed
out of it, and that it should spue them out. 3. Those that heartily
desire to praise God themselves cannot but have a holy indignation at
those that blaspheme and dishonour him, and a holy satisfaction in the
prospect of their destruction and the honour that God will get to
himself upon them. Even this ought to be the matter of their praise:
"While sinners are consumed out of the earth, let my soul bless the Lord
that I am not cast away with the workers of iniquity, but distinguished
from them by the special grace of God. When the wicked are no more I
hope to be praising God world without end; and therefore, Praise you the
Lord; let all about me join with me in praising God. Hallelujah; sing
praise to Jehovah." This is the first time that we meet with Hallelujah;
and it comes in here upon occasion of the destruction of the wicked; and
the last time we meet with it is upon a similar occasion. When the New
Testament Babylon is consumed, this is the burden of the song,
Hallelujah, [Rev 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001), [Rev
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#003), [Rev
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#004), [Rev
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#006).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 105](psa105)

</div>
