<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa127)  [Next](psa129) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 128](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 128:0</span></span>

This, as the former, is a psalm for families. In that we were taught
that the prosperity of our families depends upon the blessing of God; in
this we are taught that the only way to obtain that blessing which will
make our families comfortable is to live in the fear of God and in
obedience to him. Those that do so, in general, shall be blessed ([Psa
128:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#001), [Psa
128:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#002), [Psa
128:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#004)), In particular, I. They shall
be prosperous and successful in their employments ([Psa
128:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#002)). II. Their relations shall be
agreeable ([Psa 128:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#003)). III. They
shall live to see their families brought up ([Psa
128:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#006)). IV. They shall have the
satisfaction of seeing the church of God in a flourishing condition
([Psa 128:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#005), [Psa
128:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#006)). We must sing this psalm in the
firm belief of this truth, That religion and piety are the best friends
to outward prosperity, giving God the praise that it is so and that we
have found it so, and encouraging ourselves and others with it.

A song of degrees.

[Psalms 128:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 128:1</span></span>

It is here shown that godliness has the promise of the life that now is
and of that which is to come.

I. It is here again and again laid down as an undoubted truth that those
who are truly holy are truly happy. Those whose blessed state we are
here assured of are such as fear the Lord and walk in his ways, such as
have a deep reverence of God upon their spirits and evidence it by a
regular and constant conformity to his will. Where the fear of God is a
commanding principle in the heart the tenour of the conversation will be
accordingly; and in vain do we pretend to be of those that fear God if
we do not make conscience both of keeping to his ways and not trifling
in them or drawing back. Such are blessed ([Psa
128:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#001)), and shall be blessed, [Psa
128:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#004). God blesses them, and his
pronouncing them blessed makes them so. They are blessed now, they shall
be blessed still, and for ever. This blessedness, arising from this
blessing, is here secured, 1. To all the saints universally: Blessed is
everyone that fears the Lord, whoever he be; in every nation he that
fears God and works righteousness is accepted of him, and therefore is
blessed whether he be high or low, rich or poor, in the world; if
religion rule him, it will protect and enrich him. 2. To such a saint in
particular: Thus shall the man be blessed, not only the nation, the
church in its public capacity, but the particular person in his private
interests. 3. We are encouraged to apply it to ourselves ([Psa
128:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#002)): "Happy shalt thou be; thou
mayest take the comfort of the promise, and expect the benefit of it, as
if it were directed to thee by name, if thou fear God and walk in his
ways. Happy shalt thou be, that is, It shall be well with thee; whatever
befals thee, good shall be brought out of it; it shall be well with thee
while thou livest, better when thou diest, and best of all to eternity."
It is asserted ([Psa 128:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#004)) with a
note commanding attention: Behold, thus shall the man be blessed; behold
it by faith in the promise; behold it by observation in the performance
of the promise; behold it with assurance that it shall be so, for God is
faithful, and with admiration that it should be so, for we merit no
favour, no blessing, from him.

II\. Particular promises are here made to godly people, which they may
depend upon, as far as is for God's glory and their good; and that is
enough.

1\. That, by the blessing of God, they shall get an honest livelihood
and live comfortably upon it. It is not promised that they shall live at
ease, without care or pains, but, Thou shalt eat the labour of thy
hands. Here is a double promise, (1.) That they shall have something to
do (for an idle life is a miserable uncomfortable life) and shall have
health, and strength, and capacity of mind to do it, and shall not be
forced to be beholden to others for necessary food, and to live, as the
disabled poor do, upon the labours of other people. It is as much a
mercy as it is a duty with quietness to work and eat our own bread, [Th2
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#012). (2.) That they shall succeed in
their employments, and they and theirs shall enjoy what they get; others
shall not come and eat the bread out of their mouths, nor shall it be
taken from them either by oppressive rulers or invading enemies. God
will not blast it and blow upon it (as he did, [Hag
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#009)), and his blessing will make a
little go a great way. It is very pleasant to enjoy the fruits of our
own industry; as the sleep, so the food, of a labouring man is sweet.

2\. That they shall have abundance of comfort in their family-relations.
As a wife and children are very much a man's care, so, if by the grace
of God they are such as they should be, they are very much a man's
delight, as much as any creature-comfort. (1.) The wife shall be as a
vine by the sides of the house, not only as a spreading vine which
serves for an ornament, but as a fruitful vine which is for profit, and
with the fruit whereof both God and man are honoured, [Jdg
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#013). The vine is a weak and tender
plant, and needs to be supported and cherished, but it is a very
valuable plant, and some think (because all the products of it were
prohibited to the Nazarites) it was the tree of knowledge itself. The
wife's place is the husband's house; there her business lies, and that
is her castle. Where is Sarah thy wife? Behold, in the tent; where
should she be else? Her place is by the sides of the house, not
under-foot to be trampled on, nor yet upon the house-top to domineer (if
she be so, she is but as the grass upon the house-top, in the next
psalm), but on the side of the house, being a rib out of the side of the
man. She shall be a loving wife, as the vine, which cleaves to the
house-side, an obedient wife, as the vine, which is pliable, and grows
as it is directed. She shall be fruitful as the vine, not only in
children, but in the fruits of wisdom, and righteousness, and good
management, the branches of which run over the wall ([Gen
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#022); [Psa
80:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#011)), like a fruitful vine, not
cumbering the ground, nor bringing forth sour grapes, or grapes of
Sodom, but good fruit. (2.) The children shall be as olive plants,
likely in time to be olive-trees, and, though wild by nature, yet
grafted into the good olive, and partaking of its root and fatness, [Rom
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#017). It is pleasant to parents who
have a table spread, though but with ordinary fare, to see their
children round about it, to have many children, enough to surround it,
and those with them, and not scattered, or the parents forced from them.
Job makes it one of the first instances of his former prosperity that
his children were about him, [Job
29:5](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#005). Parents love to have their
children at table, to keep up the pleasantness of the table-talk, to
have them in health, craving food and not physic, to have them like
olive-plants, straight and green, sucking in the sap of their good
education, and likely in due time to be serviceable.

3\. That they shall have those things which God has promised and which
they pray for: The Lord shall bless thee out of Zion, where the ark of
the covenant was, and where the pious Israelites attended with their
devotions. Blessings out of Zion are the best-blessings, which flow, not
from common providence, but from special grace, [Psa
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#002).

4\. That they shall live long, to enjoy the comforts of the rising
generations: "Thou shalt see thy children's children, as Joseph, [Gen
50:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#023). Thy family shall be built up
and continued, and thou shalt have the pleasure of seeing it."
Children's children, if they be good children, are the crown of old men
([Pro 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#006)), who are apt to be fond of
their grandchildren.

5\. That they shall see the welfare of God's church, and the land of
their nativity, which every man who fears God is no less concerned for
than for the prosperity of his own family. "Thou shalt be blessed in
Zion's blessing, and wilt think thyself so. Thou shalt see the good of
Jerusalem as long as thou shalt live, though thou shouldest live long,
and shalt not have thy private comforts allayed and embittered by public
troubles." A good man can have little comfort in seeing his children's
children, unless withal he see peace upon Israel, and have hopes of
transmitting the entail of religion pure and entire to those that shall
come after him, for that is the best inheritance.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 129](psa129)

</div>
