<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa099)  [Next](psa101) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 100](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 100:0</span></span>

It is with good reason that many sing this psalm very frequently in
their religious assemblies, for it is very proper both to express and to
excite pious and devout affections towards God in our approach to him in
holy ordinances; and, if our hearts go along with the words, we shall
make melody in it to the Lord. The Jews say it was penned to be sung
with their thank-offerings; perhaps it was; but we say that as there is
nothing in it peculiar to their economy so its beginning with a call to
all lands to praise God plainly extends it to the gospel-church. Here,
I. We are called upon to praise God and rejoice in him ([Psa
100:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#001), [Psa
100:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#002), [Psa
100:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#004)). II. We are furnished with
matter for praise; we must praise him, considering his being and
relation to us ([Psa 100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003)) and his
mercy and truth ([Psa 100:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#005)). These
are plain and common things, and therefore the more fit to be the matter
of devotion.

A psalm of praise.

[Psalms 100:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 100:1</span></span>

Here, I. The exhortations to praise are very importunate. The psalm does
indeed answer to the title, A psalm of praise; it begins with that call
which of late we have several times met with ([Psa
100:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#001)), Make a joyful noise unto the
Lord, all you lands, or all the earth, all the inhabitants of the earth.
When all nations shall be discipled, and the gospel preached to every
creature, then this summons will be fully answered to. But, if we take
the foregoing psalm to be (as we have opened it) a call to the Jewish
church to rejoice in the administration of God's kingdom, which they
were under (as the four psalms before it were calculated for the days of
the Messiah), this psalm, perhaps, was intended for proselytes, that
came over out of all lands to the Jews' religion. However, we have here,
1. A strong invitation to worship God; not that God needs us, or any
thing we have or can do, but it is his will that we should serve the
Lord, should devote ourselves to his service and employ ourselves in it;
and that we should not only serve him in all instances of obedience to
his law, but that we should come before his presence in the ordinances
which he has appointed and in which he has promised to manifest himself
([Psa 100:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#002)), that we should enter
into his gates and into his courts ([Psa
100:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#004)), that we should attend upon him
among his servants, and keep there where he keeps court. In all acts of
religious worship, whether in secret or in our families, we come into
God's presence, and serve him; but it is in public worship especially
that we enter into his gates and into his courts. The people were not
permitted to enter into the holy place; there the priests only went in
to minister. But let the people be thankful for their place in the
courts of God's house, to which they were admitted and where they gave
their attendance. 2. Great encouragement given us, in worshipping God,
to do it cheerfully ([Psa 100:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#002)):
Serve the Lord with gladness. This intimates a prediction that in
gospel-times there should be special occasion for joy; and it prescribes
this as a rule of worship: Let God be served with gladness. By holy joy
we do really serve God; it is an honour to him to rejoice in him; and we
ought to serve him with holy joy. Gospel-worshippers should be joyful
worshippers; if we serve God in uprightness, let us serve him with
gladness. We must be willing and forward to it, glad when we are called
to go up to the house of the Lord ([Psa
122:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#001)), looking upon it as the comfort
of our lives to have communion with God; and we must be pleasant and
cheerful in it, must say, It is good to be here, approaching to God, in
every duty, as to God our exceeding Joy, [Psa
43:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#004). We must come before his presence
with singing, not only songs of joy, but songs of praise. Enter into his
gates with thanksgiving, [Psa 100:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#004).
We must not only comfort ourselves, but glorify God, with our joy, and
let him have the praise of that which we have the pleasure of. Be
thankful to him and bless his name; that is, (1.) We must take it as a
favour to be admitted into his service, and give him thanks that we have
liberty of access to him, that we have ordinances instituted and
opportunity continued of waiting upon God in those ordinances. (2.) We
must intermix praise and thanksgiving with all our services. This golden
thread must run through every duty ([Heb
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015)), for it is the work of angels.
In every thing give thanks, in every ordinance, as well as in every
providence.

II\. The matter of praise, and motives to it, are very important, [Psa
100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003), [Psa
100:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#005). Know you what God is in himself
and what he is to you. Note, Knowledge is the mother of devotion and of
all obedience: blind sacrifices will never please a seeing God. "Know
it; consider and apply it, and then you will be more close and constant,
more inward and serious, in the worship of him." Let us know then these
seven things concerning the Lord Jehovah, with whom we have to do in all
the acts of religious worship: - 1. That the Lord he is God, the only
living and true God - that he is a Being infinitely perfect,
self-existent, and self-sufficient, and the fountain of all being; he is
God, and not a man as we are. He is an eternal Spirit, incomprehensible
and independent, the first cause and last end. The heathen worshipped
the creature of their own fancy; the workmen made it, therefore it is
not God. We worship him that made us and all the world; he is God, and
all other pretended deities are vanity and a lie, and such as he has
triumphed over. 2. That he is our Creator: It is he that has made us,
and not we ourselves. I find that I am, but cannot say, I am that I am,
and therefore must ask, Whence am I? Who made me? Where is God my Maker?
And it is the Lord Jehovah. He gave us being, he gave us this being; he
is both the former of our bodies and the Father of our spirits. We did
not, we could not, make ourselves. It is God's prerogative to be his own
cause; our being is derived and depending. 3. That therefore he is our
rightful owner. The Masorites, by altering one letter in the Hebrew,
read it, He made us, and his we are, or to him we belong. Put both the
readings together, and we learn that because God made us, and not we
ourselves, therefore we are not our own, but his. He has an
incontestable right to, and property in, us and all things. His we are,
to be actuated by his power, disposed of by his will, and devoted to his
honour and glory. 4. That he is our sovereign ruler: We are his people
or subjects, and he is our prince, our rector or governor, that gives
law to us as moral agents, and will call us to an account for what we
do. The Lord is our judge; the Lord is our lawgiver. We are not at
liberty to do what we will, but must always make conscience of doing as
we are bidden. 5. That he is our bountiful benefactor. We are not only
his sheep, whom he is entitled to, but the sheep of his pasture, whom he
takes care of; the flock of his feeding (so it may be read); therefore
the sheep of his hand; at his disposal because the sheep of his pasture,
[Psa 95:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#007). He that made us maintains
us, and gives us all good things richly to enjoy. 6. That he is a God of
infinite mercy and goodness ([Psa
100:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#005)): The Lord is good, and
therefore does good; his mercy is everlasting; it is a fountain that can
never be drawn dry. The saints, who are now the sanctified vessels of
mercy, will be, to eternity, the glorified monuments of mercy. 7. That
he is a God of inviolable truth and faithfulness: His truth endures to
all generations, and no word of his shall fall to the ground as
antiquated or revoked. The promise is sure to all the seed, from age to
age.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 101](psa101)

</div>
