<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa145)  [Next](psa147) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 146](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 146:0</span></span>

This and all the rest of the psalms that follow begin and end with
Hallelujah, a word which puts much of God's praise into a little
compass; for in it we praise him by his name Jah, the contraction of
Jehovah. In this excellent psalm of praise, I. The psalmist engages
himself to praise God ([Psa 146:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#001),
[Psa 146:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#002)). II. He engages others to
trust in him, which is one necessary and acceptable way of praising him.
1. He shows why we should not trust in men ([Psa
146:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#003), [Psa
146:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#004)). 2. Why we should trust in God
([Psa 146:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#005)), because of his power in
the kingdom of nature ([Psa 146:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#006)),
his dominion in the kingdom of providence ([Psa
146:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#007)), and his grace in the kingdom
of the Messiah ([Psa 146:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#008), [Psa
146:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#009)), that everlasting kingdom ([Psa
146:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#010)), to which many of the Jewish
writers refer this psalm, and to which therefore we should have an eye,
in the singing of it.

[Psalms 146:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 146:1</span></span>

David is supposed to have penned this psalm; and he was himself a
prince, a mighty prince; as such, it might be thought, 1. That he should
be exempted from the service of praising God, that it was enough for him
to see that his priests and people did it, but that he needed not to do
it himself in his own person. Michal thought it a disparagement to him
to dance before the ark; but he was so far from being of this mind that
he would himself be first and foremost in the work, [Psa
146:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#001), [Psa
146:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#002). He considered his dignity as so
far from excusing him from it that it rather obliged him to lead in it,
and he thought it so far from lessening him that it really magnified
him; therefore he stirred up himself to it and to make a business of it:
Praise the Lord, O my soul! and he resolved to abide by it: "I will
praise him with my heart, I will sing praises to him with my mouth.
Herein I will have an eye to him as the Lord, infinitely blessed and
glorious in himself, and as my God, in covenant with me." Praise is most
pleasant when, in praising God, we have an eye to him as ours, whom we
have an interest in and stand in relation to. "This I will do constantly
while I live, every day of my life, and to my life's end; nay, I will do
it while I have any being, for when I have no being on earth I hope to
have a being in heaven, a better being, to be doing it better." That
which is the great end of our being ought to be our great employment and
delight while we have any being. "In thee must our time and powers be
spent." 2. It might be thought that he himself, having been so great a
blessing to his country, should be adored, according to the usage of the
heathen nations, who deified their heroes, that they should all come and
trust in his shadow and make him their stay and strong-hold. "No," says
David, "Put not your trust in princes ([Psa
146:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#003)), not in me, not in any other;
do not repose your confidence in them; do not raise your expectations
from them. Be not too sure of their sincerity; some have thought they
knew better how to reign by knowing how to dissemble. Be not too sure of
their constancy and fidelity; it is possible they may both change their
minds and break their words." But, though we suppose them very wise and
as good as David himself, yet we must not be too sure of their ability
and continuance, for they are sons of Adam, weak and mortal. There is
indeed a Son of man in whom there is help, in whom there is salvation,
and who will not fail those that trust in him. But all other sons of men
are like the man they are sprung of, who, being in honour, did not
abide. (1.) We cannot be sure of their ability. Even the power of kings
may be so straitened, cramped, and weakened, that they may not be in a
capacity to do that for us which we expect. David himself owned ([Sa2
3:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#039)), I am this day weak, though
anointed king. So that in the son of man there is often no help, no
salvation; he is at a loss, at his wits' end, as a man astonished, and
then, though a mighty man, he cannot save, [Jer
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#009). (2.) We cannot be sure of their
continuance. Suppose he has it in his power to help us while he lives,
yet he may be suddenly taken off when we expect most from him ([Psa
146:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#004)): His breath goes forth, so it
does every moment, and comes back again, but that is an intimation that
it will shortly go for good and all, and then he returns to his earth.
The earth is his, in respect of his original as a man, the earth out of
which he was taken, and to which therefore he must return, according to
the sentence, [Gen 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019). It is his, if
he be a worldly man, in respect of choice, his earth which he has chosen
for his portion, and on the things of which he has set his affections.
He shall go to his own place. Or, rather, it is his earth because of the
property he has in it; and though he has had large possessions on earth
a grave is all that will remain to him. The earth God has given to the
children of men, and great striving there is about it, and, as a mark of
their authority, men call their lands by their own names. But, after a
while, no part of the earth will be their own but that in which the dead
body shall make its bed, and that shall be theirs while the earth
remains. But, when he returns to his earth, in that very day his
thoughts perish; all the projects and designs he had of kindness to us
vanish and are gone, and he cannot take one step further in them; all
his purposes are cut off and buried with him, [Job
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#011). And then what becomes of our
expectations from him? Princes are mortal, as well as other men, and
therefore we cannot have that assurance of help from them which we may
have from that Potentate who hath immortality. Cease from man, whose
breath is in his nostrils and will not be there long.

[Psalms 146:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 146:5</span></span>

The psalmist, having cautioned us not to trust in princes (because, if
we do, we shall be miserably disappointed), here encourages us to put
our confidence in God, because, if we do so, we shall be happily
secured: Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, that has an
interest in his attributes and promises, and has them engaged for him,
and whose hope is in the Lord his God.

I. Let us take a view of the character here given of those whom God will
uphold. Those shall have God for their help, 1. Who take him for their
God, and serve and worship him accordingly. 2. Who have their hope in
him, and live a life of dependence upon him, who have good thoughts of
him, and encourage themselves in him, when all other supports fail.
Every believer may look upon him as the God of Jacob, of the church in
general, and therefore may expect relief from him, in reference to
public distresses, and as his God in particular, and therefore may
depend upon him in all personal wants and straits. We must hope, (1.) In
the providence of God for all the good things we need, which relate to
the life that now is. (2.) In the grace of Christ for all the good
things which relate to the life that is to come. To this especially the
learned Dr. Hammond refers this and the following verses, looking upon
the latter part of this psalm to have a most visible remarkable aspect
towards the eternal Son of God in his incarnation. He quotes one of the
rabbies, who says of [Psa 146:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#010) that
it belongs to the days of the Messiah. And that it does so he thinks
will appear by comparing [Psa 146:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#007),
[Psa 146:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#008), with the characters Christ
gives of the Messiah ([Mat 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#005), [Mat
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#006)), The blind receive their sight,
the lame walk; and the closing words there, Blessed is he whosoever
shall not be offended in me, he thinks may very well be supposed to
refer to [Psa 146:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#005). Happy is the man
that hopes in the Lord his God, and who is not offended in him.

II\. Let us take a view of the great encouragements here given us to
hope in the Lord our God. 1. He is the Maker of the world, and therefore
has all power in himself, and the command of the powers of all the
creatures, which, being derived from him, depend upon him ([Psa
146:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#006)): He made heaven and earth, the
sea, and all that in them is, and therefore his arm is not shortened,
that it cannot save. It is very applicable to Christ, by whom God made
the world, and without whom was not any thing made that was made. It is
a great support to faith that the Redeemer of the world is the same that
was the Creator of it, and therefore has a good-will to it, a perfect
knowledge of its case, and power to help it. 2. He is a God of
inviolable fidelity. We may venture to take God's word, for he keepeth
truth for ever, and therefore no word of his shall fall to the ground;
it is true from the beginning, and therefore true to the end. Our Lord
Jesus is the Amen, the faithful witness, as well as the beginning, the
author and principle, of the creation of God, [Rev
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014). The keeping of God's truth for
ever is committed to him, for all the promises are in him yea and amen.
3. He is the patron of injured innocency: He pleads the cause of the
oppressed, and (as we read it) he executes judgment for them. He often
does it in his providence, giving redress to those that suffer wrong and
clearing up their integrity. He will do it in the judgment of the great
day. The Messiah came to rescue the children of men out of the hands of
Satan the great oppressor, and, all judgment being committed to him, the
executing of judgment upon persecutors is so among the rest, [Jde
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#015). 4. He is a bountiful benefactor
to the necessitous: He gives food to the hungry; so God does in an
ordinary way for the answering of the cravings of nature; so he has done
sometimes in an extraordinary way, as when ravens fed Elijah; so Christ
did more than once when he fed thousands miraculously with that which
was intended but for one meal or two for his own family. This encourages
us to hope in him as the nourisher of our souls with the bread of life.
5. He is the author of liberty to those that were bound: The Lord
looseth the prisoners. He brought Israel out of the house of bondage in
Egypt and afterwards in Babylon. The miracles Christ wrought, in making
the dumb to speak and the deaf to hear with that one word, Ephphatha -
Be opened, his cleansing lepers, and so discharging them from their
confinements, and his raising the dead out of their graves, may all be
included in this one of loosing the prisoners; and we may take
encouragement from those to hope in him for that spiritual liberty which
he came to proclaim, [Isa 61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001), [Isa
61:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#002). 6. He gives sight to those that
have been long deprived of it; The Lord can open the eyes of the blind,
and has often given to his afflicted people to see that comfort which
before they were not aware of; witness [Gen
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#019), and the prophet's servant, [Kg2
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#017). But this has special reference
to Christ; for since the world began was it not heard that any man
opened the eyes of one that was born blind till Christ did it ([Joh
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#032)) and thereby encouraged us to
hope in him for spiritual illumination. 7. He sets that straight which
was crooked, and makes those easy that were pained and ready to sink: He
raises those that are bowed down, by comforting and supporting them
under their burdens, and, in due time, removing their burdens. This was
literally performed by Christ when he made a poor woman straight that
had been bowed together, and could in no wise lift up herself ([Luk
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#012)); and he still does it by his
grace, giving rest to those that were weary and heavily laden, and
raising up with his comforts those that were humbled and cast down by
convictions. 8. He has a constant kindness for all good people: The Lord
loveth the righteous, and they may with the more confidence depend upon
his power when they are sure of his good-will. Our Lord Jesus showed his
love to the righteous by fulfilling all righteousness. 9. He has a
tender concern for those that stand in special need of his care: The
Lord preserves the strangers. It ought not to pass without remark that
the name of Jehovah is repeated here five times in five lines, to
intimate that it is an almighty power (that of Jehovah) that is engaged
and exerted for the relief of the oppressed, and that it is as much the
glory of God to succour those that are in misery as it is to ride on the
heavens by his name Jah, [Psa 68:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#004).
(1.) Strangers are exposed, and are commonly destitute of friends, but
the Lord preserves them, that they be not run down and ruined. Many a
poor stranger has found the benefit of the divine protection and been
kept alive by it. (2.) Widows and fatherless children, that have lost
the head of the family, who took care of the affairs of it, often fall
into the hands of those that make a prey of them, that will not do them
justice, nay, that will do them injustice; but the Lord relieveth them,
and raiseth up friends for them. See [Exo
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#022), [Exo
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#023). Our Lord Jesus came into the
world to help the helpless, to receive Gentiles, strangers, into his
kingdom, and that with him poor sinners, that are as fatherless, may
find mercy, [Hos 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#003). 10. He will
appear for the destruction of all those that oppose his kingdom and
oppress the faithful subjects of it: The way of the wicked he turns
upside down, and therefore let us hope in him, and not be afraid of the
fury of the oppressor, as though he were ready to destroy. It is the
glory of the Messiah that he will subvert all the counsels of hell and
earth that militate against his church, so that, having him for us, we
need not fear any thing that can be done against us. 11. His kingdom
shall continue through all the revolutions of time, to the utmost ages
of eternity, v. 10. Let this encourage us to trust in God at all times
that the Lord shall reign for ever, in spite of all the malignity of the
powers of darkness, even thy God, O Zion! unto all generations. Christ
is set King on the holy hill of Zion, and his kingdom shall continue in
an endless glory. It cannot be destroyed by an invader; it shall not be
left to a successor, either to a succeeding monarch or a succeeding
monarchy, but it shall stand for ever. It is matter of unspeakable
comfort that the Lord reigns as Zion's God, as Zion's king, that the
Messiah is head over all things to the church, and will be so while the
world stands.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 147](psa147)

</div>
