<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa129)  [Next](psa131) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 130](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 130:0</span></span>

This psalm relates not to any temporal concern, either personal or
public, but it is wholly taken up with the affairs of the soul. It is
reckoned one of the seven penitential psalms, which have sometimes been
made use of by penitents, upon their admission into the church; and, in
singing it, we are all concerned to apply it to ourselves. The psalmist
here expresses, I. His desire towards God ([Psa
130:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#001), [Psa
130:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#002)). II. His repentance before God
([Psa 130:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#003), [Psa
130:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#004)). III. His attendance upon God
([Psa 130:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#005), [Psa
130:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#006)). IV. His expectations from God
([Psa 130:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#007), [Psa
130:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#008)). And, as in water face answers
to face, so does the heart of one humble penitent to another.

A song of degrees.

[Psalms 130:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 130:1</span></span>

In these verses we are taught,

I. Whatever condition we are in, though ever so deplorable, to continue
calling upon God, [Psa 130:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#001). The best
men may sometimes be in the depths, in great trouble and affliction, and
utterly at a loss what to do, in the depths of distress and almost in
the depths of despair, the spirit low and dark, sinking and drooping,
cast down and disquieted. But, in the greatest depths, it is our
privilege that we may cry unto God and be heard. A prayer may reach the
heights of heaven, though not out of the depths of hell, yet out of the
depths of the greatest trouble we can be in in this world, Jeremiah's
out of the dungeon, Daniel's out of the den, and Jonah's out of the
fish's belly. It is our duty and interest to cry unto God, for that is
the likeliest way both to prevent our sinking lower and to recover us
out of the horrible pit and miry clay, [Psa
40:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#001), [Psa
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#002).

II\. While we continue calling upon God to assure ourselves of an answer
of peace from him; for this is that which David in faith prays for ([Psa
130:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#002)): Lord, hear my voice, my
complaint and prayer, and let thy ears be attentive to the voice both of
my afflictions and of my supplications.

III\. We are taught to humble ourselves before the justice of God as
guilty in his sight, and unable to answer him for one of a thousand of
our offences ([Psa 130:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#003)): If thou,
Lord, shouldst mark iniquities, O Lord! who shall stand? His calling God
Lord twice, in so few words, Jah and Adonai, is very emphatic, and
intimates a very awful sense of God's glorious majesty and a dread of
his wrath. Let us learn here, 1. To acknowledge our iniquities, that we
cannot justify ourselves before God, or plead Not guilty. There is that
which is remarkable in our iniquities and is liable to be animadverted
upon. 2. To own the power and justice of God, which are such that, if he
were extreme to mark what we do amiss, there would be no hopes of coming
off. His eye can discover enough in the best man to ground a
condemnation upon; and, if he proceed against us, we have no way to help
ourselves, we cannot stand, but shall certainly be cast. If God deal
with us in strict justice, we are undone; if he make remarks upon our
iniquities, he will find them to be many and great, greatly aggravated
and very provoking; and then, if he should proceed accordingly, he would
shut us out from all hope of his favour and shut us up under his wrath;
and what could we do to help ourselves? We could not make our escape,
nor resist not bear up under his avenging hand. 3. Let us admire God's
patience and forbearance; we should be undone if he were to mark
iniquities, and he knows it, and therefore bears with us. It is of his
mercy that we are not consumed by his wrath.

IV\. We are taught to cast ourselves upon the pardoning mercy of God,
and to comfort ourselves with that when we see ourselves obnoxious to
his justice, [Psa 130:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#004). Here is, 1.
God's grace discovered, and pleaded with him, by a penitent sinner: But
there is forgiveness with thee. It is our unspeakable comfort, in all
our approaches to God, that there is forgiveness with him, for that is
what we need. He has put himself into a capacity to pardon sin; he has
declared himself gracious and merciful, and ready to forgive, [Exo
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006), [Exo
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#007). He has promised to forgive the
sins of those that do repent. Never any that dealt with him found him
implacable, but easy to be entreated, and swift to show mercy. With us
there is iniquity, and therefore it is well for us that with him there
is forgiveness. There is a propitiation with thee, so some read it.
Jesus Christ is the great propitiation, the ransom which God has found;
he is ever with him, as advocate for us, and through him we hope to
obtain forgiveness. 2. Our duty designed in that discovery, and inferred
from it: "There is forgiveness with thee, not that thou mayest be made
bold with and presumed upon, but that thou mayest be feared - in
general, that thou mayest be worshipped and served by the children of
men, who, being sinners, could have no dealings with God, if he were not
a Master that could pass by a great many faults." But this encourages us
to come into his service that we shall not be turned off for every
misdemeanour; no, nor for any, if we truly repent. This does in a
special manner invite those who have sinned to repent, and return to the
fear of God, that he is gracious and merciful, and will receive them
upon their repentance, [Joe 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013); [Mat
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002). And, particularly, we are to have
a holy awe and reverence of God's pardoning mercy ([Hos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005), They shall fear the Lord, and his
goodness); and then we may expect the benefit of the forgiveness that is
with God when we make it the object of our holy fear.

[Psalms 130:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 130:5</span></span>

Here, I. The psalmist engages himself to trust in God and to wait for
him, [Psa 130:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#005), [Psa
130:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#006). Observe, 1. His dependence upon
God, expressed in a climax, it being a a song of degrees, or ascents: "I
wait for the Lord; from him I expect relief and comfort, believing it
will come, longing till it does come, but patiently bearing the delay of
it, and resolving to look for it from no other hand. My soul doth wait;
I wait for him in sincerity, and not in profession only. I am an
expectant, and it is for the Lord that my soul waits, for the gifts of
his grace and the operations of his power." 2. The ground of that
dependence: In his word do I hope. We must hope for that only which he
has promised in his word, and not for the creatures of our own fancy and
imagination; we must hope for it because he has promised it, and not
from any opinion of our own merit. 3. The degree of that dependence -
"more than those that watch for the morning, who are, (1.) Well-assured
that the morning will come; and so am I that God will return in mercy to
me, according to his promise; for God's covenant is more firm than the
ordinances of day and night, for they shall come to an end, but that is
everlasting." (2.) Very desirous that it would come. Sentinels that keep
guard upon the walls, those that watch with sick people, and travellers
that are abroad upon their journey, long before day wish to see the
dawning of the day; but more earnestly does this good man long for the
tokens of God's favour and the visits of his grace, and more readily
will he be aware of his first appearances than they are of day. Dr.
Hammond reads it thus, My soul hastens to the Lord, from the guards in
the morning, the guards in the morning, and gives this sense of it, "To
thee I daily betake myself, early in the morning, addressing my prayers,
and my very soul, before thee, at the time that the priests offer their
morning sacrifice."

II\. He encourages all the people of God in like manner to depend upon
him and trust in him: Let Israel hope in the Lord and wait for him; not
only the body of the people, but every good man, who surnames himself by
the name of Israel, [Isa 44:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#005). Let all
that devote themselves to God cheerfully stay themselves upon him ([Psa
130:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#007), [Psa
130:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#008)), for two reasons: - 1. Because
the light of nature discovers to us that there is mercy with him, that
the God of Israel is a merciful God and the Father of mercies. Mercy is
with him; not only inherent in his nature, but it is his delight, it is
his darling attribute; it is with him in all his works, in all his
counsels. 2. Because the light of the gospel discovers to us that there
is redemption with him, contrived by him, and to be wrought out in the
fulness of time; it was in the beginning hidden in God. See here, (1.)
The nature of this redemption; it is redemption from sin, from all sin,
and therefore can be no other than that eternal redemption which Jesus
Christ became the author of; for it is he that saves his people from
their sins ([Mat 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021)), that redeems
them from all iniquity ([Tit 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#014)),
and turns away ungodliness from Jacob, [Rom
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026). It is he that redeems us both
from the condemning and from the commanding power of sin. (2.) The
riches of this redemption; it is plenteous redemption; there is an
all-sufficient fulness of merit and grace in the Redeemer, enough for
all, enough for each; enough for me, says the believer. Redemption from
sin includes redemption from all other evils, and therefore is a
plenteous redemption. (3.) The persons to whom the benefits of this
redemption belong: He shall redeem Israel, Israel according to the
spirit, all those who are in covenant with God, as Israel was, and who
are Israelites indeed, in whom is no guile.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 131](psa131)

</div>
