<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa122)  [Next](psa124) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 123](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 123:0</span></span>

This psalm was penned at a time then the church of God was brought low
and trampled upon; some think it was when the Jews were captives in
Babylon, though that was not the only time that they were insulted over
by the proud. The psalmist begins as if he spoke for himself only ([Psa
123:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#001)), but presently speaks in the
name of the church. Here is, I. Their expectation of mercy from God
([Psa 123:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#001), [Psa
123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002)). II. Their plea for mercy with
God, ([Psa 123:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#003), [Psa
123:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#004)). In singing it we must have our
eye up to God's favour with a holy concern, and then an eye down to
men's reproach with a holy contempt.

A song of degrees.

[Psalms 123:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 123:1</span></span>

We have here,

I. The solemn profession which God's people make of faith and hope in
God, [Psa 123:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#001), [Psa
123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002). Observe, 1. The title here
given to God: O thou that dwellest in the heavens. Our Lord Jesus has
taught us, in prayer, to have an eye to God as our Father in heaven; not
that he is confined there, but there especially he manifests his glory,
as the King in his court. Heaven is a place of prospect and a place of
power; he that dwells there beholds thence all the calamities of his
people and thence can send to save them. Sometimes God seems to have
forsaken the earth, and the enemies of God's people ask, Where is now
your God? But then they can say with comfort, Our God is in the heavens.
O thou that sittest in the heavens (so some), sittest as Judge there;
for the Lord has prepared his throne in the heavens, and to that throne
injured innocency may appeal. 2. The regard here had to God. The
psalmist himself lifted up his eyes to him. The eyes of a good man are
ever towards the Lord, [Psa 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#015). In
every prayer we lift up our soul, the eye of our soul, to God,
especially in trouble, which was the case here. The eyes of the people
waited on the Lord, [Psa 123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002). We
find mercy coming towards a people when the eyes of man, as of all the
tribes of Israel, are towards the Lord, [Zac
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001). The eyes of the body are
heaven-ward. Os homini sublime dedit - To man he gave an erect mien, to
teach us which way to direct the eyes of the mind. Our eyes wait on the
Lord, the eye of desire and prayer, the begging eye, and the eye of
dependence, hope, and expectation, the longing eye. Our eyes must wait
upon God as the Lord, and our God, until that he have mercy upon us. We
desire mercy from him, we hope he will show us mercy, and we will
continue our attendance on him till the mercy come. This is illustrated
([Psa 123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002)) by a similitude: Our eyes
are to God as the eyes of a servant, and handmaid, to the hand of their
master and mistress. The eyes of a servant are, (1.) To his master's
directing hand, expecting that he will appoint him his work, and cut it
out for him, and show him how he must do it. Lord, what wilt thou have
me to do? (2.) To his supplying hand. Servants look to their master, or
their mistress, for their portion of meat in due season, [Pro
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#015). And to God must we look for
daily bread, for grace sufficient; from him we must receive it
thankfully. (3.) To his assisting hand. If the servant cannot do his
work himself, where must he look for help but to his master? And in the
strength of the Lord God we must go forth and go on. (4.) To his
protecting hand. If the servant meet with opposition in his work, if he
be questioned for what he does, if he be wronged and injured, who should
bear him out and right him, but his master that set him on work? The
people of God, when they are persecuted, may appeal to their Master, We
are thine; save us. (5.) To his correcting hand. If the servant has
provoked his master to beat him, he does not call for help against his
master, but looks at the hand that strikes him, till it shall say, "It
is enough; I will not contend for ever." The people of God were now
under his rebukes; and whither should they turn but to him that smote
them? [Isa 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#013). To whom should they
make supplication but to their Judge? They will not do as Hagar did, who
ran away from her mistress when she put some hardships upon her ([Gen
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#006)), but they submit themselves to
and humble themselves under God's mighty hand. (6.) To his rewarding
hand. The servant expects his wages, his well-done, from his master.
Hypocrites have their eye to the world's hand; thence they have their
reward ([Mat 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#002)); but true Christians
have their eye to God as their rewarder.

II\. The humble address which God's people present to him in their
calamitous condition ([Psa 123:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#003), [Psa
123:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#004)), wherein, 1. They sue for
mercy, not prescribing to God what he shall do for them, nor pleading
any merit of their own why he should do it for them, but, Have mercy
upon us, O Lord! have mercy upon us. We find little mercy with men;
their tender mercies are cruel; there are cruel mockings. But this is
our comfort, that with the Lord there is mercy and we need desire no
more to relieve us, and make us easy, than the mercy of God. Whatever
the troubles of the church are, God's mercy is a sovereign remedy. 2.
They set forth their grievances: We are exceedingly filled with
contempt. Reproach is the wound, the burden, they complain of. Observe,
(1.) Who were reproached: "We, who have our eyes up to thee." Those who
are owned of God are often despised and trampled on by the world. Some
translate the words which we render, those that are at ease, and the
proud, so as to signify the persons that are scorned and contemned. "Our
soul is troubled to see how those that are at peace, and the excellent
ones, are scorned and despised." The saints are a peaceable people and
yet are abused ([Psa 35:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#020)), the
excellent ones of the earth and yet undervalued, [Lam
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#001), [Lam
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#002). (2.) Who did reproach them.
Taking the words as we read them, they were the epicures who lived at
ease, carnal sensual people, [Job
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#005). The scoffers are such as walk
after their own lusts and serve their own bellies, and the proud such as
set God himself at defiance and had a high opinion of themselves; they
trampled on God's people, thinking they magnified themselves by
vilifying them. (3.) To what degree they were reproached: "We are
filled, we are surfeited with it. Our soul is exceedingly filled with
it." The enemies thought they could never jeer them enough, nor say
enough to make them despicable; and they could not but lay it to heart;
it was a sword in their bones, [Psa
42:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#010). Note, \[1.\] Scorning and
contempt have been, and are, and are likely to be, the lot of God's
people in this world. Ishmael mocked Isaac, which is called persecuting
him; and so it is now, [Gal 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#029).
\[2.\] In reference to the scorn and contempt of men it is matter of
comfort that there is mercy with God, mercy to our good names when they
are barbarously used. Hear, O our God! for we are despised.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 124](psa124)

</div>
