<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa141)  [Next](psa143) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 142](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 142:0</span></span>

This psalm is a prayer, the substance of which David offered up to God
when he was forced by Saul to take shelter in a cave, and which he
afterwards penned in this form. Here is, I. The complaint he makes to
God ([Psa 142:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#001), [Psa
142:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#002)) of the subtlety, strength, and
malice, of his enemies ([Psa 142:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#003),
[Psa 142:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#006)), and the coldness and
indifference of his friends ([Psa
142:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#004)). II. The comfort he takes in
God that he knew his case ([Psa 142:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#003))
and was his refuge ([Psa 142:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#005)). III.
His expectation from God that he would hear and deliver him ([Psa
142:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#006), [Psa
142:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#007)). IV His expectation from the
righteous that they would join with him in praises ([Psa
142:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#007)). Those that are troubled in
mind, body, or estate, may, in singing this psalm (if they sing it in
some measure with David's spirit), both warrant his complaints and fetch
in his comforts.

Maschil of David. A prayer when he was in the cave.

[Psalms 142:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 142:1</span></span>

Whether it was in the cave of Adullam, or that of Engedi, that David
prayed this prayer, is not material; it is plain that he was in
distress. It was a great disgrace to so great a soldier, so great a
courtier, to be put to such shifts for his own safety, and a great
terror to be so hotly pursued and every moment in expectation of death;
yet then he had such a presence of mind as to pray this prayer, and,
wherever he was, still had his religion about him. Prayers and tears
were his weapons, and, when he durst not stretch forth his hands against
his prince, he lifted them up to his God. There is no cave so deep, so
dark, but we may out of it send up our prayers, and our souls in prayer,
to God. He calls this prayer Maschil - a psalm of instruction, because
of the good lessons he had himself learnt in the cave, learnt on his
knees, which he desired to teach others. In these verses observe,

I. How David complained to God, [Psa
142:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#001), [Psa
142:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#002). When the danger was over he was
not ashamed to own (as great spirits sometimes are) the fright he had
been in and the application he had made to God. Let no men of the first
rank think it any diminution or disparagement to them, when they are in
affliction, to cry to God, and to cry like children to their parents
when any thing frightens them. David poured out his complaint, which
denotes a free and full complaint; he was copious and particular in it.
His heart was as full of his grievances as it could hold, but he made
himself easy by pouring them out before the Lord; and this he did with
great fervency: He cried unto the Lord with his voice, with the voice of
his mind (so some think), for, being hidden in the cave, he durst not
speak with an audible voice, lest that should betray him; but mental
prayer is vocal to God, and he hears the groanings which cannot, or dare
not, be uttered, [Rom 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026). Two things
David laid open to God, in this complaint: - 1. His distress. He
exhibited a remonstrance or memorial of his case: I showed before him my
trouble, and all the circumstances of it. He did not prescribe to God,
nor show him his trouble, as if God did not know it without his showing;
but as one that put a confidence in God, desired to keep up communion
with him, and was willing to refer himself entirely to him, he unbosomed
himself to him, humbly laid the matter before him, and then cheerfully
left it with him. We are apt to show our trouble too much to ourselves,
aggravating it, and poring upon it, which does us no service, whereas by
showing it to God we might cast the care upon him who careth for us, and
thereby ease ourselves. Nor should we allow of any complaint to
ourselves or others which we cannot with due decency and sincerity of
devotion make to God, and stand to before him. 2. His desire. When he
made his complaint he made his supplication ([Psa
142:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#001)), not claiming relief as a debt,
but humbly begging it as a favour. Complainants must be suppliants, for
God will be sought unto.

II\. What he complained of: "In the way wherein I walked, suspecting no
danger, have they privily laid a snare for me, to entrap me." Saul gave
Michal his daughter to David on purpose that she might be a snare to
him, [Sa1 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#021). This he complains of
to God, that every thing was done with a design against him. If he had
gone out of his way, and met with snares, he might have thanked himself;
but when he met with them in the way of his duty he might with humble
boldness tell God of them.

III\. What comforted him in the midst of these complaints ([Psa
142:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#003)): "When my spirit was
overwhelmed within me, and ready to sink under the burden of grief and
fear, when I was quite at a loss and ready to despair, then thou knewest
my path, that is, then it was a pleasure to me to think that thou
knewest it. Thou knewest my sincerity, the right path which I have
walked in, and that I am not such a one as my persecutors represent me.
Thou knewest my condition in all the particulars of it; when my spirit
was so overwhelmed that I could not distinctly show it, this comforted
me, that thou knewest it, [Job 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#010).
Thou knewest it, that is, thou didst protect, preserve, and secure it,"
[Psa 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#007); [Deu
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#007).

[Psalms 142:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 142:4</span></span>

The psalmist here tells us, for our instruction, 1. How he was disowned
and deserted by his friends, [Psa
142:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#004). When he was in favour at court
he seemed to have a great interest, but when he was made an out-law, and
it was dangerous for any one to harbour him (witness Ahimelech's fate),
then no man would know him, but every body was shy of him. He looked on
his right hand for an advocate ([Psa
109:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#031)), some friend or other to speak
a good word for him; but, since Jonathan's appearing for him had like to
have cost him his life, nobody was willing to venture in defence of his
innocency, but all were ready to say they knew nothing of the matter. He
looked round to see if any would open their doors to him; but refuge
failed him. None of all his old friends would give him a night's
lodging, or direct him to any place of secresy and safety. How many good
men have been deceived by such swallow-friends, who are gone when winter
comes! David's life was exceedingly precious, and yet, when he was
unjustly proscribed, no man cared for it, nor would move a hand for the
protection of it. Herein he was a type of Christ, who, in his sufferings
for us, was forsaken of all men, even of his own disciples, and trod the
wine-press alone, for there was none to help, none to uphold, [Isa
63:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#005). 2. How he then found
satisfaction in God, [Psa 142:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#005).
Lovers and friends stood aloof from him, and it was in vain to call to
them. "But," said he, "I cried unto thee, O Lord! who knowest me, and
carest for me, when none else will, and wilt not fail me nor forsake me
when men do;" for God is constant in his love. David tells us what he
said to God in the cave: "Thou art my refuge and my portion in the land
of the living; I depend upon thee to be so, my refuge to save me from
being miserable, my portion to make me happy. The cave I am in is but a
poor refuge. Lord, thy name is the strong tower that I run into. Thou
art my refuge, in whom alone I shall think myself safe. The crown I am
in hopes of is but a poor portion; I can never think myself well
provided for till I know that the Lord is the portion of my inheritance
and of my cup." Those who in sincerity take the Lord for their God shall
find him all-sufficient both as a refuge and as a portion, so that, as
no evil shall hurt them, so no good shall be wanting to them; and they
may humbly claim their interest: "Lord, thou art my refuge and my
portion; every thing else is a refuge of lies and a portion of no value.
Thou art so in the land of the living, that is, while I live and have my
being, whether in this world or in a better." There is enough in God to
answer all the necessities of this present time. We live in a world of
dangers and wants; but what danger need we fear if God is our refuge, or
what wants if he be our portion? Heaven, which alone deserves to be
called the land of the living, will be to all believers both a refuge
and a portion. 3. How, in this satisfaction, he addressed himself to God
([Psa 142:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#005), [Psa
142:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#006)): "Lord, give a gracious ear to
my cry, the cry of my affliction, the cry of my supplication, for I am
brought very low, and, if thou help me not, I shall be quite sunk. Lord,
deliver me from my persecutors, either tie their hands or turn their
hearts, break their power or blast their projects, restrain them or
rescue me, for they are stronger than I, and it will be thy honour to
take part with the weakest. Deliver me from them, or I shall be ruined
by them, for I am not yet myself a match for them. Lord, bring my soul
out of prison, not only bring me safe out of this cave, but bring me out
of all my perplexities." We may apply it spiritually: the souls of good
men are often straitened by doubts and fears, cramped and fettered
through the weakness of faith and the prevalency of corruption; and it
is then their duty and interest to apply themselves to God, and beg of
him to set them at liberty and to enlarge their hearts, that they may
run the way of his commandments. 4. How much he expected his deliverance
would redound to the glory of God. (1.) By his own thanksgivings, into
which his present complaints would then be turned: "Bring my soul out of
prison, not that I may enjoy myself and my friends and live at ease, no,
nor that I may secure my country, but that I may praise thy name." This
we should have an eye to, in all our prayers to God for deliverance out
of trouble, that we may have occasion to praise God and may live to his
praise. This is the greatest comfort of temporal mercies that they
furnish us with matter, and give us opportunity, for the excellent duty
of praise. (2.) By the thanksgivings of many on his behalf ([Co2
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#011)): "When I am enlarged the
righteous shall encompass me about; for my cause they shall make thee a
crown of praise, so the Chaldee. They shall flock about me to
congratulate me on my deliverance, to hear my experiences, and to
receive (Maschil) instructions from me; they shall encompass me, to join
with me in my thanksgivings, because thou shalt have dealt bountifully
with me." Note, The mercies of others ought to be the matter of our
praises to God; and the praises of others, on our behalf, ought to be
both desired and rejoiced in by us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 143](psa143)

</div>
