<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa146)  [Next](psa148) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 147](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 147:0</span></span>

This is another psalm of praise. Some think it was penned after the
return of the Jews from their captivity; but it is so much of a piece
with Ps. 145 that I rather think it was penned by David, and what is
said ([Psa 147:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#002), [Psa
147:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#013)) may well enough be applied to
the first building and fortifying of Jerusalem in his time, and the
gathering in of those that had been out-casts in Saul's time. The
Septuagint divides it into two; and we may divide it into the first and
second part, but both of the same import. I. We are called upon to
praise God ([Psa 147:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#001), [Psa
147:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#007), [Psa
147:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#012)). II. We are furnished with
matter for praise, for God is to be glorified, 1. As the God of nature,
and so he is very great ([Psa 147:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#004),
[Psa 147:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#005), [Psa
147:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#008), [Psa
147:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#009), [Psa
147:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#015)). 2. As the God of grace,
comforting his people ([Psa 147:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#003),
[Psa 147:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#006), [Psa
147:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#010), [Psa
147:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#011)). 3. As the God of Israel,
Jerusalem, and Zion, settling their civil state ([Psa
147:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#002), [Psa
147:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#013), [Psa
147:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#014)), and especially settling
religion among them ([Psa 147:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#019), [Psa
147:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#020)). It is easy, in singing this
psalm, to apply it to ourselves, both as to personal and national
mercies, were it but as easy to do so with suitable affections.

[Psalms 147:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 147:1</span></span>

Here, I. The duty of praise is recommended to us. It is not without
reason that we are thus called to it again and again: Praise you the
Lord ([Psa 147:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#001)), and again ([Psa
147:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#007)), Sing unto the Lord with
thanksgiving, sing praise upon the harp to our God (let all our praises
be directed to him and centre in him), for it is good to do so; it is
our duty, and therefore good in itself; it is our interest, and
therefore good for us. It is acceptable to our Creator and it answers
the end of our creation. The law for it is holy, just, and good; the
practice of it will turn to a good account. It is good, for 1. It is
pleasant. Holy joy or delight are required as the principle of it, and
that is pleasant to us as men; giving glory to God is the design and
business of it, and that is pleasant to us as saints that are devoted to
his honour. Praising God is work that is its own wages; it is heaven
upon earth; it is what we should be in as in our element. 2. It is
comely; it is that which becomes us as reasonable creatures, much more
as people in covenant with God. In giving honour to God we really do
ourselves a great deal of honour.

II\. God is recommended to us as the proper object of our most exalted
and enlarged praises, upon several accounts.

1\. The care he takes of his chosen people, [Psa
147:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#002). Is Jerusalem to be raised out
of small beginnings? Is it to be recovered out of its ruins? In both
cases, The Lord builds up Jerusalem. The gospel-church, the Jerusalem
that is from above, is of this building. He framed the model of it in
his own counsels; he founded it by the preaching of his gospel; he adds
to it daily such as shall be saved, and so increases it. He will build
it up unto perfection, build it up as high as heaven. Are any of his
people outcasts? Have they made themselves so by their own folly? He
gathers them by giving them repentance and bringing them again into the
communion of saints. Have they been forced out by war, famine, or
persecution? He opens a door for their return; many that were missing,
and thought to be lost, are brought back, and those that were scattered
in the cloudy and dark day are gathered together again.

2\. The comforts he has laid up for true penitents, [Psa
147:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#003). They are broken in heart, and
wounded, humbled, and troubled, for sin, inwardly pained at the
remembrance of it, as a man is that is sorely wounded. Their very hearts
are not only pricked, but rent, under the sense of the dishonour they
have done to God and the injury they have done to themselves by sin. To
those whom God heals with the consolations of his Spirit he speaks
peace, assures them that their sins are pardoned and that he is
reconciled to them, and so makes them easy, pours the balm of Gilead
into the bleeding wounds, and then binds them up, and makes them to
rejoice. Those who have had experience of this need not be called upon
to praise the Lord; for when he brought them out of the horrible pit,
and set their feet upon a rock, he put a new song into their mouths,
[Psa 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#002), [Psa
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#003). And for this let others praise
him also.

3\. The sovereign dominion he has over the lights of heaven, [Psa
147:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#004), [Psa
147:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#005). The stars are innumerable, many
of them being scarcely discernible with the naked eye, and yet he counts
them, and knows the exact number of them, for they are all the work of
his hands and the instruments of his providence. Their bulk and power
are very great; but he calleth them all by their names, which shows his
dominion over them and the command he has them at, to make what use of
them he pleases. They are his servants, his soldiers; he musters them,
he marshals them; they come and go at his bidding, and all their motions
are under his direction. He mentions this as one instance of many, to
show that great is our Lord and of great power (he can do what he
pleases), and of his understanding there is no computation, so that he
can contrive every thing for the best. Man's knowledge is soon drained,
and you have his utmost length; hitherto his wisdom can reach and no
further. But God's knowledge is a depth that can never be fathomed.

4\. The pleasure he takes in humbling the proud and exalting those of
low degree ([Psa 147:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#006)): The Lord
lifts up the meek, who abase themselves before him, and whom men trample
on; but the wicked, who conduct themselves insolently towards God and
scornfully towards all mankind, who lift up themselves in pride and
folly, he casteth down to the ground, sometimes by very humbling
providences in this world, at furthest in the day when their faces shall
be filled with everlasting shame. God proves himself to be God by
looking on the proud and abasing them, [Job
40:12](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#012).

5\. The provision he makes for the inferior creatures. Though he is so
great as to command the stars, he is so good as not to forget even the
fowls, [Psa 147:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#008), [Psa
147:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#009). Observe in what method he feeds
man and beast. (1.) He covereth the heaven with clouds, which darken the
air and intercept the beams of the sun, and yet in them he prepareth
that rain for the earth which is necessary to its fruitfulness. Clouds
look melancholy, and yet without them we could have no rain and
consequently no fruit. Thus afflictions, for the present, look black,
and dark, and unpleasant, and we are in heaviness because of them, as
sometimes when the sky is overcast it makes us dull; but they are
necessary, for from these clouds of affliction come those showers that
make the harvest to yield the peaceable fruits of righteousness ([Heb
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#011)), which should help to reconcile
us to them. Observe the necessary dependence which the earth has upon
the heavens, which directs us on earth to depend on God in heaven. All
the rain with which the earth is watered is of God's preparing. (2.) By
the rain which distils on the earth he makes grass to grow upon the
mountains, even the high mountains, which man neither takes care of nor
reaps the benefit of. The mountains, which are not watered with the
springs and rivers, as the valleys are, are yet watered so that they are
not barren. (3.) This grass he gives to the beast for his food, the
beast of the mountains which runs wild, which man makes no provision
for. And even the young ravens, which, being forsaken by their old ones,
cry, are heard by him, and ways are found to feed them, so that they are
kept from perishing in the nest.

6\. The complacency he takes in his people, [Psa
147:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#010), [Psa
147:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#011). In times when great things are
doing, and there are great expectations of the success of them, it
concerns us to know (since the issue proceeds from the Lord) whom, and
what, God will delight to honour and crown with victory. It is not the
strength of armies, but the strength of grace, that God is pleased to
own. (1.) Not the strength of armies - not in the cavalry, for he
delighteth not in the strength of the horse, the war-horse, noted for
his courage ([Job 39:19](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#019),. etc.) - nor
in the infantry, for he taketh no pleasure in the legs of a man; he does
not mean the swiftness of them for flight, to quit the field, but the
steadiness of them for charging, to stand the ground. If one king,
making war with another king, goes to God to pray for success, it will
not avail him to plead, "Lord, I have a gallant army, the horse and foot
in good order; it is a pity that they should suffer any disgrace;" for
that is no argument with God, [Psa
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007). Jehoshaphat's was much better:
Lord, we have no might, [Ch2 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#012).
But, (2.) God is pleased to own the strength of grace. A serious and
suitable regard to God is that which is, in the sight of God, of great
price in such a case. The Lord accepts and takes pleasure in those that
fear him and that hope in his mercy. Observe, \[1.\] A holy fear of God
and hope in God not only may consist, but must concur. In the same
heart, at the same time, there must be both a reverence of his majesty
and a complacency in his goodness, both a believing dread of his wrath
and a believing expectation of his favour; not that we must hang in
suspense between hope and fear, but we must act under the gracious
influences of hope and fear. Our fear must save our hope from swelling
into presumption, and our hope must save our fear from sinking into
despair; thus must we take our work before us. \[2.\] We must hope in
God's mercy, his general mercy, even when we cannot find a particular
promise to stay ourselves upon. A humble confidence in the goodness of
God's nature is very pleasing to him, as that which turns to the glory
of that attribute in which he most glories. Every man of honour loves to
be trusted.

[Psalms 147:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 147:12</span></span>

Jerusalem, and Zion, the holy city, the holy hill, are here called upon
to praise God, [Psa 147:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#012). For where
should praise be offered up to God but where his altar is? Where may we
expect that glory should be given to him but in the beauty of holiness?
Let the inhabitants of Jerusalem praise the Lord in their own houses;
let the priests and Levites, who attend in Zion, the city of their
solemnities, in a special manner praise the Lord. They have more cause
to do it than others, and they lie under greater obligations to do it
than others; for it is their business, it is their profession. "Praise
thy God, O Zion! he is thine, and therefore thou art bound to praise
him; his being thine includes all happiness, so that thou canst never
want matter for praise." Jerusalem and Zion must praise God,

I. For the prosperity and flourishing state of their civil interests,
[Psa 147:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#013), [Psa
147:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#014). 1. For their common safety.
They had gates, and kept their gates barred in times of danger; but that
would not have been an effectual security to them if God had not
strengthened the bars of their gates and fortified their fortifications.
The most probable means we can devise for our own preservation will not
answer the end, unless God give his blessing with them; we must
therefore in the careful and diligent use of those means, depend upon
him for that blessing, and attribute the undisturbed repose of our land
more to the wall of fire than to the wall of water round about us, [Zac
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#005). 2. For the increase of their
people. This strengthens the bars of the gates as much as any thing: He
hath blessed thy children within thee, with that first and great
blessing, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the land. It is a
comfort to parents to see their children blessed of the Lord ([Isa
61:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#009)), and a comfort to the generation
that is going off to see the rising generation numerous and hopeful, for
which blessing God must be blessed. 3. For the public tranquillity, that
they were delivered from the terrors and desolations of war: He makes
peace in thy borders, by putting an end to the wars that were, and
preventing the wars that were threatened and feared. He makes peace
within thy borders, that is, in all parts of the country, by composing
differences among neighbours, that there may be no intestine broils and
animosities, and upon thy borders, that they may not be attacked by
invasions from abroad. If there be trouble any where, it is in the
borders, the marches of a country; the frontier-towns lie most exposed,
so that, if there be peace in the borders, there is a universal peace, a
mercy we can never be sufficiently thankful for. 4. For great plenty,
the common effect of peace: He filleth thee with the finest of the wheat
- wheat, the most valuable grain, the fat, the finest of that, and a
fulness thereof. What would they more? Canaan abounded with the best
wheat ([Deu 32:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#014)) and exported it to
the countries abroad, as appears, [Eze
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#017). The land of Israel was not
enriched with precious stones nor spices, but with the finest of the
wheat, with bread, which strengthens man's heart. This made it the glory
of all lands, and for this God was praised in Zion.

II\. For the wonderful instances of his power in the weather,
particularly the winter-weather. He that protects Zion and Jerusalem is
that God of power from whom all the powers of nature are derived and on
whom they depend, and who produces all the changes of the seasons,
which, if they were not common, would astonish us.

1\. In general, whatever alterations there are in this lower world (and
it is that world that is subject to continual changes) they are produced
by the will, and power, and providence of God ([Psa
147:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#015)): He sendeth forth his
commandment upon earth, as one that has an incontestable authority to
give orders, and innumerable attendants ready to carry his orders and
put them in execution. As the world was at first made, so it is still
upheld and governed, by a word of almighty power. God speaks and it is
done, for all are his servants. That word takes effect, not only surely,
but speedily. His word runneth very swiftly, for nothing can oppose or
retard it. As the lightning, which passes through the air in an instant,
such is the word of God's providence, and such the word of his grace,
when it is sent forth with commission, [Luk
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#024). Angels, who carry his word and
fulfil it, fly swiftly, [Dan 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#021).

2\. In particular, frosts and thaws are both of them wonderful changes,
and in both we must acknowledge the word of his power.

(1.) Frosts are from God. With him are the treasures of the snow and the
hail ([Job 38:22](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#022), [Job
38:23](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#023)), and out of these treasures he
draws as he pleases. \[1.\] He giveth snow like wool. It is compared to
wool for its whiteness ([Isa 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)),
and its softness; it falls silently, and makes no more noise than the
fall of a lock of wool; it covers the earth, and keeps it warm like a
fleece of wool, and so promotes its fruitfulness. See how God can work
by contraries, and bring meat out of the eater, can warm the earth with
cold snow. \[2.\] He scatters the hoar-frost, which is dew congealed, as
the snow and hail are rain congealed. This looks like ashes scattered
upon the grass, and is sometimes prejudicial to the products of the
earth and blasts them as if it were hot ashes, [Psa
78:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#047). \[3.\] He casts forth his ice
like morsels, which may be understood either of large hail-stones, which
are as ice in the air, or of the ice which covers the face of the
waters, and when it is broken, though naturally it was as drops of
drink, it is as morsels of meat, or crusts of bread. \[4.\] When we see
the frost, and snow, and ice, we feel it in the air: Who can stand
before his cold? The beasts cannot; they retire into dens ([Job
37:8](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#008)); they are easily conquered then,
[Sa2 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#020). Men cannot, but are forced
to protect themselves by fires, or furs, or both, and all little enough
where and when the cold is in extremity. We see not the causes when we
feel the effects; and therefore we must call it his cold; it is of his
sending, and therefore we must bear it patiently, and be thankful for
warm houses, and clothes, and beds, to relieve us against the rigour of
the season, and must give him the glory of his wisdom and sovereignty,
his power and faithfulness, which shall not cease any more than summer,
[Gen 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#022). And let us also infer from
it, If we cannot stand before the cold of his frosts, how can we stand
before the heat of his wrath?

(2.) Thaws are from God. When he pleases ([Psa
147:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#018)) he sends out his word and
melts them; the frost, the snow, the ice, are all dissolved quickly, in
order to which he causes the wind, the south wind, to blow, and the
waters, which were frozen, flow again as they did before. We are soon
sensible of the change, but we see not the causes of it, but must
resolve it into the will of the First Cause. And in it we must take
notice not only of the power of God, that he can so suddenly, so
insensibly, make such a great and universal alteration in the temper of
the air and the face of the earth (what cannot he do that does this
every winter, perhaps often every winter?) but also of the goodness of
God. Hard weather does not always continue; it would be sad if it
should. He does not contend for ever, but renews the face of the earth.
As he remembered Noah, and released him ([Gen
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#001)), so he remembers the earth, and
his covenant with the earth, [Sol
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#011), [Sol
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#012). This thawing word may represent
the gospel of Christ, and this thawing wind the Spirit of Christ (for
the Spirit is compared to the wind, [Joh
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008)); both are sent for the melting of
frozen souls. Converting grace, like the thaw, softens the heart that
was hard, moistens it, and melts it into tears of repentance; it warms
good affections, and makes them to flow, which, before, were chilled and
stopped up. The change which the thaw makes is universal and yet
gradual; it is very evident, and yet how it is done is unaccountable:
such is the change wrought in the conversion of a soul, when God's word
and Spirit are sent to melt it and restore it to itself.

III\. For his distinguishing favour to Israel, in giving them his word
and ordinances, a much more valuable blessing than their peace and
plenty ([Psa 147:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#014)), as much as the
soul is more excellent than the body. Jacob and Israel had God's
statutes and judgments among them. They were under his peculiar
government; the municipal laws of their nation were of his framing and
enacting, and their constitution was a theocracy. They had the benefit
of divine revelation; the great things of God's law were written to
them. They had a priesthood of divine institution for all things
pertaining to God, and prophets for all extraordinary occasions. No
people besides went upon sure grounds in their religion. Now this was,
1. A preventing mercy. They did not find out God's statutes and
judgments of themselves, but God showed his word unto Jacob, and by that
word he made known to them his statutes and judgments. It is a great
mercy to any people to have the word of God among them; for faith comes
by hearing and reading that word, that faith without which it is
impossible to please God. 2. A distinguishing mercy, and upon that
account the more obliging: "He hath not dealt so with every nation, not
with any nation; and, as for his judgments, they have not known them,
nor are likely to know them till the Messiah shall come and take down
the partition-wall between Jew and Gentile, that the gospel may be
preached to every creature." Other nations had plenty of outward good
things; some nations were very rich, others had pompous powerful princes
and polite literature, but none were blessed with God's statutes and
judgments as Israel were. Let Israel therefore praise the Lord in the
observance of these statutes. Lord, how is it that thou wilt manifest
thyself to us, and not to the world! Even so, Father, because it seemed
good in thy eyes.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 148](psa148)

</div>
