<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa137)  [Next](psa139) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 138](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 138:0</span></span>

It does not appear, nor is it material to enquire, upon what occasion
David penned this psalm; but in it, I. He looks back with thankfulness
upon the experiences he had had of God's goodness to him ([Psa
138:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#001)). II. He looks forward with
comfort, in hopes, 1. That others would go on to praise God like him
([Psa 138:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#004), [Psa
138:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#005)). 2. That God would go on to do
good to him ([Psa 138:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#006)). In singing
this psalm we must in like manner devote ourselves to God's praise and
glory and repose ourselves in his power and goodness.

A psalm of David.

[Psalms 138:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 138:1</span></span>

I. How he would praise God, compare [Psa
111:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#001). 1. He will praise him with
sincerity and zeal - "With my heart, with my whole heart, with that
which is within me and with all that is within me, with uprightness of
intention and fervency of affection, inward impressions agreeing with
outward expressions." 2. With freedom and boldness: Before the gods will
I sing praise unto thee, before the princes, and judges, and great men,
either those of other nations that visited him or those of his own
nation that attended on him, even in their presence. He will not only
praise God with his heart, which we may do by pious ejaculations in any
company, but will sing praise if there be occasion. Note, Praising God
is work which the greatest of men need not be ashamed of; it is the work
of angels, the work of heaven. Before the angels (so some understand
it), that is, in religious assemblies, where there is a special presence
of angels, [Co1 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#010). 3. In the way
that God had appointed: I will worship towards thy holy temple. The
priests alone went into the temple; the people, at the nearest, did but
worship towards it, and that they might do at a distance. Christ is our
temple, and towards him we must look with an eye of faith, as Mediator
between us and God, in all our praises of him. Heaven is God's holy
temple, and thitherward we must lift up our eyes in all our addresses to
God. Our Father in heaven.

II\. What he would praise God for. 1. For the fountain of his comforts -
for thy lovingkindness and for thy truth, for thy goodness and for thy
promise, mercy hidden in thee and mercy revealed by thee, that God is a
gracious God in himself and has engaged to be so to all those that trust
in him. For thou hast magnified thy word (thy promise, which is truth)
above all thy name. God has made himself known to us in many ways in
creation and providence, but most clearly by his word. The judgments of
his mouth are magnified even above those of his hand, and greater things
are done by them. The wonders of grace exceed the wonders of nature; and
what is discovered of God by revelation is much greater than what is
discovered by reason. In what God had done for David his faithfulness to
his work appeared more illustriously, and redounded more to his glory,
than any other of his attributes. Some good interpreters understand it
of Christ, the essential Word, and of his gospel, which are magnified
above all the discoveries God had before made of himself to the fathers.
He that magnified the law, and made that honourable, magnifies the
gospel much more. 2. For the streams flowing from that fountain, in
which he himself had tasted that the Lord is gracious, [Psa
138:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#003). He had been in affliction, and
he remembers, with thankfulness, (1.) The sweet communion he then had
with God. He cried, he prayed, and prayed earnestly, and God answered
him, gave him to understand that his prayer was accepted and should have
a gracious return in due time. The intercourse between God and his
saints is carried on by his promises and their prayers. (2.) The sweet
communications he then had from God: Thou strengthenedst me with
strength in my soul. This was the answer to his prayer, for God gives
more than good words, [Psa 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#006).
Observe, \[1.\] It was a speedy answer: In the day when I cried. Note,
Those that trade with heaven by prayer grow rich by quick returns. While
we are yet speaking God hears, [Isa
65:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#024). \[2.\] It was a spiritual
answer. God gave him strength in his soul, and that is a real and
valuable answer to the prayer of faith in the day of affliction. If God
give us strength in our souls to bear the burdens, resist the
temptations, and do the duties of an afflicted state, if he strengthen
us to keep hold of himself by faith, to maintain the peace of our own
minds and to wait with patience for the issue, we must own that he has
answered us, and we are bound to be thankful.

III\. What influence he hoped that his praising God would have upon
others, [Psa 138:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#004), [Psa
138:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#005). David was himself a king, and
therefore he hoped that kings would be wrought upon by his experiences,
and his example, to embrace religion; and, if kings became religious,
their kingdoms would be every way better. Now, 1. This may have
reference to the kings that were neighbours to David, as Hiram and
others. "They shall all praise thee." When they visited David, and,
after his death, when they sought the presence of Solomon (as all the
kings of the earth are expressly said to have done, [Ch2
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#023)), they readily joined in the
worship of the God of Israel. 2. It may look further, to the calling of
the Gentiles and the discipling of all nations by the gospel of Christ,
of whom it is said that all kings shall fall down before him, [Psa
72:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#011). Now it is here foretold, (1.)
That the kings of the earth shall hear the words of God. All that came
near David should hear them from him, [Psa
119:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#046). In the latter days the
preachers of the gospel should be sent into all the world. (2.) That
then they shall praise God, as all those have reason to do that hear his
word, and receive it in the light and love of it, [Act
13:48](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#048). (3.) That they shall sing in
the ways of the Lord, in the ways of his providence and grace towards
them; they shall rejoice in God, and give glory to him, however he is
pleased to deal with them in the ways of their duty and obedience to
him. Note, Those that walk in the ways of the Lord have reason to sing
in those ways, to go on in them with a great deal of cheerfulness, for
they are ways of pleasantness, and it becomes us to be pleasant in them;
and, if we are so, great is the glory of the Lord. It is very much for
the honour of God that kings should walk in his ways, and that all those
who walk in them should sing in them, and so proclaim to all the world
that he is a good Master and his work its own wages.

[Psalms 138:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 138:6</span></span>

David here comforts himself with three things: -

I. The favour God bears to his humble people ([Psa
138:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#006)): Though the Lord be high, and
neither needs any of his creatures nor can be benefited by them, yet has
he respect unto the lowly, smiles upon them as well pleased with them,
overlooks heaven and earth to cast a gracious look upon them ([Isa
57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015); [Isa
66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)), and, sooner or later, he will
put honour upon them, while he knows the proud afar off, knows them, but
disowns them and rejects them, how proudly soever they pretend to his
favour. Dr. Hammond makes this to be the sum of that gospel which the
kings of the earth shall hear and welcome - that penitent sinners shall
be accepted of God, but the impenitent cast out; witness the instance of
the Pharisee and the publican, Lu. 18.

II\. The care God takes of his afflicted oppressed people, [Psa
138:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#007). David, though a great and good
man, expects to walk in the midst of trouble, but encourages himself
with hope, 1. That God would comfort him: "When my spirit is ready to
sink and fail, thou shalt revive me, and make me easy and cheerful under
my troubles." Divine consolations have enough in them to revive us even
when we walk in the midst of troubles and are ready to die away for
fear. 2. That he would protect him, and plead his cause: "Thou shalt
stretch forth thy hand, though not against my enemies to destroy them,
yet against the wrath of my enemies, to restrain that and set bounds to
it." 3. That he would in due time work deliverance for him: Thy right
hand shall save me. As he has one hand to stretch out against his
enemies, so he has another to save his own people. Christ is the right
hand of the Lord, that shall save all those who serve him.

III\. The assurance we have that whatever good work God has begun in and
for his people he will perform it ([Psa
138:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#008)): The Lord will perfect that
which concerns me, 1. That which is most needful for me; and he knows
best what is so. We are careful and cumbered about many things that do
not concern us, but he knows what are the things that really are of
consequence to us ([Mat 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#032)) and he
will order them for the best. 2. That which we are most concerned about.
Every good man is most concerned about his duty to God and his happiness
in God, that the former may be faithfully done and the latter
effectually secured; and if indeed these are the things that our hearts
are most upon, and concerning which we are most solicitous, there is a
good work begun in us, and he that has begun it will perfect it, we may
be confident he will, [Phi 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#006).
Observe, (1.) What ground the psalmist builds this confidence upon: Thy
mercy, O Lord! endures for ever. This he had made very much the matter
of his praise ([Psa 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#006)), and
therefore he could here with the more assurance make it the matter of
his hope. For, if we give God the glory of his mercy, we may take to
ourselves the comfort of it. Our hopes that we shall persevere must be
founded, not upon our own strength, for that will fail us, but upon the
mercy of God, for that will not fail. It is well pleaded, "Lord, thy
mercy endures for ever; let me be for ever a monument of it." (2.) What
use he makes of this confidence; it does not supersede, but quicken
prayer; he turns his expectation into a petition: "Forsake not, do not
let go, the work of thy own hands. Lord, I am the work of thy own hands,
my soul is so, do not forsake me; my concerns are so, do not lay by thy
care of them." Whatever good there is in us it is the work of God's own
hands; he works in us both to will and to do; it will fail if he forsake
it; but his glory, as Jehovah, a perfecting God, is so much concerned in
the progress of it to the end that we may in faith pray, "Lord, do not
forsake it." Whom he loves he loves to the end; and, as for God, his
work is perfect.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 139](psa139)

</div>
