<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev002)  [Next](rev004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 3:0</span></span>

Here we have three more of the epistles of Christ to the churches: I. To
Sardis ([Rev 3:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#001)). II. To
Philadelphia ([Rev 3:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#007)). III. To
Laodicea ([Rev 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014) to the end).

[Revelation 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 3:1</span></span>

Here is, I. The preface, showing, 1. To whom this letter is directed: To
the angel of the church of Sardis, an ancient city of Lydia, on the
banks of the mountain Tmolus, said to have been the chief city of Asia
the Less, and the first city in that part of the world that was
converted by the preaching of John; and, some say, the first that
revolted from Christianity, and one of the first that was laid in its
ruins, in which it still lies, without any church or ministry. 2. By
whom this message was sent - the Lord Jesus, who here assumes the
character of him that hath the seven spirits of God, and the seven
stars, taken out of [Rev 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004), where
the seven spirits are said to be before the throne. (1.) He hath the
seven spirits, that is, the Holy Spirit with his various powers, graces,
and operations; for he is personally one, though efficaciously various,
and may be said here to be seven, which is the number of the churches,
and of the angels of the churches, to show that to every minister, and
to every church, there is a dispensation and measure of the Spirit given
for them to profit withal - a stock of spiritual influence for that
minister and church to improve, both for enlargement and continuance,
which measure of the Spirit is not ordinarily withdrawn from them, till
they forfeit it by misimprovement. Churches have their spiritual stock
and fund, as well as particular believers; and, this epistle being sent
to a languishing ministry and church, they are very fitly put in mind
that Christ has the seven spirits, the Spirit without measure and in
perfection, to whom they may apply themselves for the reviving of his
work among them. (2.) He hath the seven stars, the angels of the
churches; they are disposed of by him, and accountable to him, which
should make them faithful and zealous. He has ministers to employ, and
spiritual influences to communicate to his ministers for the good of his
church. The Holy Spirit usually works by the ministry, and the ministry
will be of no efficacy without the Spirit; the same divine hand holds
them both.

II\. The body of this epistle. There is this observable in it, that
whereas in the other epistles Christ begins with commending what is good
in the churches, and then proceeds to tell them what is amiss, in this
(and in the epistle to Laodicea) he begins,

1\. With a reproof, and a very severe one: I know thy works, that thou
hast a name that thou livest, and art dead. Hypocrisy, and a lamentable
decay in religion, are the sins charged upon this church, by one who
knew her well, and all her works. (1.) This church had gained a great
reputation; it had a name, and a very honourable one, for a flourishing
church, a name for vital lively religion, for purity of doctrine, unity
among themselves, uniformity in worship, decency, and order. We read not
of any unhappy divisions among themselves. Every thing appeared well, as
to what falls under the observation of men. (2.) This church was not
really what it was reputed to be. They had a name to live, but they were
dead; there was a form of godliness, but not the power, a name to live,
but not a principle of life. If there was not a total privation of life,
yet there was a great deadness in their souls and in their services, a
great deadness in the spirits of their ministers, and a great deadness
in their ministrations, in their praying, in their preaching, in their
converse, and a great deadness in the people in hearing, in prayer, and
in conversation; what little life was yet left among them was, in a
manner, expiring, ready to die.

2\. Our Lord proceeds to give this degenerate church the best advice: Be
watchful, and strengthen the things, etc., [Rev
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#002). (1.) He advises them to be upon
their watch. The cause of their sinful deadness and declension was that
they had let down their watch. Whenever we are off our watch, we lose
ground, and therefore must return to our watchfulness against sin, and
Satan, and whatever is destructive to the life and power of godliness.
(2.) To strengthen the things that remain, and that are ready to die.
Some understand this of persons; there were some few who had retained
their integrity, but they were in danger of declining with the rest. It
is a difficult thing to keep up to the life and power of godliness
ourselves, when we see a universal deadness and declension prevailing
round about us. Or it may be understood of practices, as it follows: I
have not found thy works perfect before God, not filled up; there is
something wanting in them; there is the shell, but not the kernel; there
is the carcase, but not the soul - the shadow, but not the substance.
The inward thing is wanting, thy works are hollow and empty; prayers are
not filled up with holy desires, alms-deeds not filled up with true
charity, sabbaths not filled up with suitable devotion of soul to God;
there are not inward affections suitable to outward acts and
expressions. Now when the spirit is wanting the form cannot long
subsist. (3.) To recollect themselves, and remember how they have
received and heard ([Rev 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#003)); not
only to remember what they had received and heard, what messages they
had received from God, what tokens of his mercy and favour towards them,
what sermons they had heard, but how they had received and heard, what
impressions the mercies of God had made upon their souls at first, what
affections they felt working under their word and ordinances, the love
of their espousals, the kindness of their youth, how welcome the gospel
and the grace of God were to them when they first received them. Where
is the blessedness they then spoke of? (4.) To hold fast what they had
received, that they might not lose all, and repent sincerely that they
had lost so much of the life of religion, and had run the risk of losing
all.

3\. Christ enforces his counsel with a dreadful threatening in case it
should be despised: I will come unto thee as a thief, and thou shalt not
know the hour, [Rev 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#003). Observe, (1.)
When Christ leaves a people as to his gracious presence, he comes to
them in judgment; and his judicial presence will be very dreadful to
those who have sinned away his gracious presence. (2.) His judicial
approach to a dead declining people will be surprising; their deadness
will keep them in security, and, as it procures an angry visit from
Christ to them, it will prevent their discerning it and preparing for
it. (3.) Such a visit from Christ will be to their loss; he will come as
a thief, to strip them of their remaining enjoyments and mercies, not by
fraud, but in justice and righteousness, taking the forfeiture they have
made of all to him.

4\. Our blessed Lord does not leave this sinful people without some
comfort and encouragement: In the midst of judgment he remembers mercy
([Rev 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#004)), and here (1.) He makes
honourable mention of the faithful remnant in Sardis, though but small:
Thou hast a few names in Sardis which have not defiled their garments;
they had not given into the prevailing corruptions and pollution of the
day and place in which they lived. God takes notice of the smallest
number of those who abide with him; and the fewer they are the more
precious in his sight. (2.) He makes a very gracious promise to them:
They shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy - in the stola,
the white robes of justification, and adoption, and comfort, or in the
white robes of honour and glory in the other world. They shall walk with
Christ in the pleasant walks of the heavenly paradise; and what
delightful converse will there be between Christ and them when they thus
walk together! This is an honour proper and suitable to their integrity,
which their fidelity has prepared them for, and which it is no way
unbecoming Christ to confer upon them, though it is not a legal but a
gospel worthiness that is ascribed to them, not merit but meetness.
Those who walk with Christ in the clean garments of real practical
holiness here, and keep themselves unspotted from the world, shall walk
with Christ in the white robes of honour and glory in the other world:
this is a suitable reward.

III\. We now come to the conclusion of this epistle, in which, as
before, we have,

1\. A great reward promised to the conquering Christian ([Rev
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#005)), and it is very much the same
with what has been already mentioned: He that overcometh shall be
clothed in white raiment. The purity of grace shall be rewarded with the
perfect purity of glory. Holiness, when perfected, shall be its own
reward; glory is the perfection of grace, differing not in kind, but in
degree. Now to this is added another promise very suitable to the case:
I will not blot his name out of the book of life, but will confess his
name before my Father, and before his angels. Observe, (1.) Christ has
his book of life, a register and roll of all who shall inherit eternal
life. \[1.\] The book of eternal election. \[2.\] The book of
remembrance of all those who have lived to God, and have kept up the
life and power of godliness in evil times. (2.) Christ will not blot the
names of his chosen and faithful ones out of this book of life; men may
be enrolled in the registers of the church, as baptized, as making a
profession, as having a name to live, and that name may come to be
blotted out of the roll, when it appears that it was but a name, a name
to live, without spiritual life; such often lose the very name before
they die, they are left of God to blot out their own names by their
gross and open wickedness. But the names of those that overcome shall
never be blotted out. (3.) Christ will produce this book of life, and
confess the names of the faithful who stand there, before God, and all
the angels; he will do this as their Judge, when the books shall be
opened; he will do this as their captain and head, leading them with him
triumphantly to heaven, presenting them to the Father: Behold me, and
the children that thou hast given me. How great will this honour and
reward be!

2\. The demand of universal attention finishes the message. Every word
from God deserves attention from men; that which may seem more
particularly directed to one body of men has something in it instructive
to all.

[Revelation 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 3:7</span></span>

We have now come to the sixth letter, sent to one of the Asian churches,
where observe,

I. The inscription, showing,

1\. For whom it was more immediately designed: The angel of the church
of Philadelphia; this also was a city in Asia Minor, seated upon the
borders of Mysia and Lydia, and had its name from that brotherly love
for which it was eminent. We can hardly suppose that this name was given
to it after it received the Christian religion, and that it was so
called from that Christian affection that all believers have, and should
have, one for another, as the children of one Father and the brethren of
Christ; but rather that it was its ancient name, on account of the love
and kindness which the citizens had and showed to each other as a civil
fraternity. This was an excellent spirit, and, when sanctified by the
grace of the gospel, would render them an excellent church, as indeed
they were, for here is no one fault found with this church, and yet,
doubtless, there were faults in it of common infirmity; but love covers
such faults.

2\. By whom this letter was signed; even by the same Jesus who is alone
the universal head of all the churches; and here observe by what title
he chooses to represent himself to this church: He that is holy, he that
is true, he that hath the key of David, etc. You have his personal
character: He that is holy and he that is true, holy in his nature, and
therefore he cannot but be true to his word, for he hath spoken in his
holiness; and you have also his political character: He hath the key of
David, he openeth, and no man shutteth; he hath the key of the house of
David, the key of government and authority in and over the church.
Observe, (1.) The acts of his government. \[1.\] He opens. He opens a
door of opportunity to his churches; he opens a door of utterance to his
ministers; he opens a door of entrance, opens the heart; he opens a door
of admission into the visible church, laying down the terms of
communion; and he opens the door of admission into the church
triumphant, according to the terms of salvation fixed by him. \[2.\] He
shuts the door. When he pleases, he shuts the door of opportunity and
the door of utterance, and leaves obstinate sinners shut up in the
hardness of their hearts; he shuts the door of church-fellowship against
unbelievers and profane persons; and he shuts the door of heaven against
the foolish virgins who have slept away their day of grace, and against
the workers of iniquity, how vain and confident soever they may be. (2.)
The way and manner in which he performs these acts, and that is absolute
sovereignty, independent upon the will of men, and irresistible by the
power of men: He openeth, and no man shutteth; he shutteth, and no man
openeth; he works to will and to do, and, when he works, none can
hinder. These were proper characters for him, when speaking to a church
that had endeavoured to be conformed to Christ in holiness and truth,
and that had enjoyed a wide door of liberty and opportunity under his
care and government.

II\. The subject-matter of this epistle, where,

1\. Christ puts them in mind of what he had done for them: I have set
before thee an open door, and no man can shut it, [Rev
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#008). I have set it open, and kept it
open, though there be many adversaries. Learn here, (1.) Christ is to be
acknowledged as the author of all the liberty and opportunity his
churches enjoy. (2.) He takes notice and keeps account, how long he has
preserved their spiritual liberties and privileges for them. (3.) Wicked
men envy the people of God their door of liberty, and would be glad to
shut it against them. (4.) If we do not provoke Christ to shut this door
against us, men cannot do it.

2\. This church is commended: Thou hast a little strength, and hast kept
my word, and hast not denied my name, [Rev
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#008). In this there seems to be couched
a gentle reproof: "Thou hast a little strength, a little grace, which,
though it be not proportionate to the wide door of opportunity which I
have opened to thee, yet is true grace, and has kept thee faithful."
True grace, though weak, has the divine approbation; but, though Christ
accepts a little strength, yet believers should not rest satisfied in a
little, but should strive to grow in grace, to be strong in faith,
giving glory to God. True grace, though weak, will do more than the
greatest gifts or highest degrees of common grace, for it will enable
the Christian to keep the word of Christ, and not to deny his name.
Obedience, fidelity, and a free confession of the name of Christ, are
the fruits of true grace, and are pleasing to Christ as such.

3\. Here is a promise of the great favour God would bestow on this
church, [Rev 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#009), [Rev
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#010). This favour consists in two
things: -

(1.) Christ would make this church's enemies subject to her. \[1.\]
Those enemies are described to be such as said they were Jews, but lied
in saying so - pretended to be the only and peculiar people of God, but
were really the synagogue of Satan. Assemblies that worship God in
spirit and in truth are the Israel of God; assemblies that either
worship false gods, or the true God in a false manner, are the
synagogues of Satan: though they may profess to be the only people of
God, their profession is a lie. \[2.\] Their subjection to the church is
described: They shall worship at thy feet; not pay a religious and
divine honour to the church itself, nor to the ministry of it, but shall
be convinced that they have been in the wrong, that this church is in
the right and is beloved of Christ, and they shall desire to be taken
into communion with her and that they may worship the same God after the
same manner. How shall this great change be wrought? By the power of God
upon the hearts of his enemies, and by signal discoveries of his
peculiar favour to his church: They shall know that I have loved thee.
Observe, First, The greatest honour and happiness any church can enjoy
consist in the peculiar love and favour of Christ. Secondly, Christ can
discover this his favour to his people in such a manner that their very
enemies shall see it, and be forced to acknowledge it. Thirdly, This
will, by the grace of Christ, soften the hearts of their enemies, and
make them desirous to be admitted into communion with them.

(2.) Another instance of favour that Christ promises to this church is
persevering grace in the most trying times ([Rev
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#010)), and this as the reward of their
past fidelity. To him that hath shall be given. Here observe, \[1.\] The
gospel of Christ is the word of his patience. It is the fruit of the
patience of God to a sinful world; it sets before men the exemplary
patience of Christ in all his sufferings for men; it calls those that
receive it to the exercise of patience in conformity to Christ. \[2.\]
This gospel should be carefully kept by all that enjoy it; they must
keep up to the faith, and practice, and worship prescribed in the
gospel. \[3.\] After a day of patience we must expect an hour of
temptation; a day of gospel peace and liberty is a day of God's
patience, and it is seldom so well improved as it should be and
therefore it is often followed by an hour of trial and temptation.
\[4.\] Sometimes the trial is more general and universal; it comes upon
all the world, and, when it is so general, it is usually the shorter.
\[5.\] Those who keep the gospel in a time of peace shall be kept by
Christ in an hour of temptation. By keeping the gospel they are prepared
for the trial; and the same divine grace that has made them fruitful in
times of peace will make them faithful in times of persecution.

4\. Christ calls the church to that duty which he before promised he
would enable her to do, and that is, to persevere, to hold fast that
which she had. (1.) The duty itself: "Hold fast that which thou hast,
that faith, that truth, that strength of grace, that zeal, that love to
the brethren; thou hast been possessed of this excellent treasure, hold
it fast." (2.) The motives, taken from the speedy appearance of Christ:
"Behold, I come quickly. See, I am just a coming to relieve them under
the trial, to reward their fidelity, and to punish those who fall away;
they shall lose that crown which they once seemed to have a right to,
which they hoped for, and pleased themselves with the thoughts of. The
persevering Christian shall win the prize from backsliding professors,
who once stood fair for it."

III\. The conclusion of this epistle, [Rev
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#012), [Rev
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#013). Here,

1\. After his usual manner, our Saviour promises a glorious reward to
the victorious believer, in two things: - (1.) He shall be a monumental
pillar in the temple of God; not a pillar to support the temple (heaven
needs no such props), but a monument of the free and powerful grace of
God, a monument that shall never be defaced nor removed, as many stately
pillars erected in honour to the Roman emperors and generals have been.
(2.) On this monumental pillar there shall be an honourable inscription,
as in those cases is usual. \[1.\] The name of God, in whose cause he
engaged, whom he served, and for whom he suffered in this warfare; and
the name of the city of God, the church of God, the new Jerusalem, which
came down from heaven. On this pillar shall be recorded all the services
the believer did to the church of God, how he asserted her rights,
enlarged her borders, maintained her purity and honour; this will be a
greater name than Asiaticus, or Africanus; a soldier under God in the
wars of the church. And then another part of the inscription is, \[2.\]
The new name of Christ, the Mediator, the Redeemer, the captain of our
salvation; by this it will appear under whose banner this conquering
believer had enlisted, under whose conduct he acted, by whose example he
was encouraged, and under whose influence he fought the good fight, and
came off victorious.

2\. The epistle is closed up with the demand of attention: He that hath
an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches, how Christ
loves and values his faithful people, how he commends, and how he will
crown their fidelity.

[Revelation 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 3:14</span></span>

We now come to the last and worst of all the seven Asian churches, the
reverse of the church of Philadelphia; for, as there was nothing
reproved in that, here is nothing commended in this, and yet this was
one of the seven golden candlesticks, for a corrupt church may still be
a church. Here we have, as before,

I. The inscription, to whom, and from whom. 1. To whom: To the angel of
the church of Laodicea. This was a once famous city near the river
Lycus, had a wall of vast compass, and three marble theatres, and, like
Rome, was built on seven hills. It seems, the apostle Paul was very
instrumental in planting the gospel in this city, from which he wrote a
letter, as he mentions in the epistle to the Colossians, the last
chapter, in which he sends salutations to them, Laodicea not being above
twenty miles distant from Colosse. In this city was held a council in
the fourth century, but it has been long since demolished, and lies in
its ruins to this day, an awful monument of the wrath of the Lamb. 2.
From whom this message was sent. Here our Lord Jesus styles himself the
Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation of
God. (1.) The Amen, one that is steady and unchangeable in all his
purposes and promises, which are all yea, and all amen. (2.) The
faithful and true witness, whose testimony of God to men ought to be
received and fully believed, and whose testimony of men to God will be
fully believed and regarded, and will be a swift but true witness
against all indifferent lukewarm professors. (3.) The beginning of the
creation of God, either of the first creation, and so he is the
beginning, that is, the first cause, the Creator, and the Governor of
it; or of the second creation, the church; and so he is the head of that
body, the first-born from the dead, as it is in [Rev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005), whence these titles are taken.
Christ, having raised up himself by his own divine power, as the head of
a new world, raises up dead souls to be a living temple and church to
himself.

II\. The subject-matter, in which observe,

1\. The heavy charge drawn up against this church, ministers and people,
by one who knew them better than they knew themselves: Thou art neither
cold nor hot, but worse than either; I would thou wert cold or hot, [Rev
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#015). Lukewarmness or indifference in
religion is the worst temper in the world. If religion is a real thing,
it is the most excellent thing, and therefore we should be in good
earnest in it; if it is not a real thing, it is the vilest imposture,
and we should be earnest against it. If religion is worth any thing, it
is worth every thing; an indifference here is inexcusable: Why halt you
between two opinions? If God be God, follow him; if Baal (be God),
follow him. Here is no room for neutrality. An open enemy shall have a
fairer quarter than a perfidious neuter; and there is more hope of a
heathen than of such. Christ expects that men should declare themselves
in earnest either for him or against him.

2\. A severe punishment threatened: I will spue thee out of my mouth. As
lukewarm water turns the stomach, and provokes to a vomit, lukewarm
professors turn the heart of Christ against them. He is sick of them,
and cannot long bear them. They may call their lukewarmness charity,
meekness, moderation, and a largeness of soul; it is nauseous to Christ,
and makes those so that allow themselves in it. They shall be rejected,
and finally rejected; for far be it from the holy Jesus to return to
that which has been thus rejected.

3\. We have one cause of this indifference and inconsistency in religion
assigned, and that is self-conceitedness or self-delusion. They thought
they were very well already, and therefore they were very indifferent
whether they grew better or no: Because thou sayest, I am rich, and
increased with goods, etc., [Rev 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#017).
Here observe, What a difference there was between the thoughts they had
of themselves and the thoughts that Christ had of them. (1.) The high
thoughts they had of themselves: Thou sayest, I am rich, and increased
with goods, and have need of nothing, rich, and growing richer, and
increased to such a degree as to be above all want or possibility of
wanting. Perhaps they were well provided for as to their bodies, and
this made them overlook the necessities of their souls. Or they thought
themselves well furnished in their souls: they had learning, and they
took it for religion; they had gifts, and they took them for grace; they
had wit, and they took it for true wisdom; they had ordinances, and they
took up with them instead of the God of ordinances. How careful should
we be not to put the cheat upon our own souls! Doubtless there are many
in hell that once thought themselves to be in the way to heaven. Let us
daily beg of God that we may not be left to flatter and deceive
ourselves in the concerns of our souls. (2.) The mean thoughts that
Christ had of them; and he was not mistaken. He knew, though they knew
not, that they were wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked. Their state was wretched in itself, and such as called for pity
and compassion from others: though they were proud of themselves, they
were pitied by all who knew their case. For, \[1.\] They were poor,
really poor, when they said and thought they were rich; they had no
provision for their souls to live upon; their souls were starving in the
midst of their abundance; they were vastly in debt to the justice of
God, and had nothing to pay off the least part of the debt. \[2.\] They
were blind; they could not see their state, nor their way, nor their
danger; they could not see into themselves; they could not look before
them; they were blind, and yet they thought they saw; the very light
that was in them was darkness, and then how great must that darkness be!
They could not see Christ, though evidently set forth, and crucified,
before their eyes. They could not see God by faith, though always
present in them. They could not see death, though it was just before
them. They could not look into eternity, though they stood upon the very
brink of it continually. \[3.\] They were naked, without clothing and
without house and harbour for their souls. They were without clothing,
had neither the garment of justification nor that of sanctification.
Their nakedness both of guilt and pollution had no covering. They lay
always exposed to sin and shame. Their righteousnesses were but filthy
rags; they were rags, and would not cover them, filthy rags, and would
defile them. And they were naked, without house or harbour, for they
were without God, and he has been the dwelling-place of his people in
all ages; in him alone the soul of man can find rest, and safety, and
all suitable accommodations. The riches of the body will not enrich the
soul; the sight of the body will not enlighten the soul; the most
convenient house for the body will not afford rest nor safety to the
soul. The soul is a different thing from the body, and must have
accommodation suitable to its nature, or else in the midst of bodily
prosperity it will be wretched and miserable.

4\. We have good counsel given by Christ to this sinful people, and that
is that they drop their vain and false opinion they had of themselves,
and endeavour to be that really which they would seem to be: I counsel
thee to buy of me, etc., [Rev 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#018).
Observe, (1.) Our Lord Jesus Christ continues to give good counsel to
those who have cast his counsels behind their backs. (2.) The condition
of sinners in never desperate, while they enjoy the gracious calls and
counsels of Christ. (3.) Our blessed Lord, the counsellor, always gives
the best advice, and that which is most suitable to the sinner's case;
as here, \[1.\] These people were poor; Christ counsels them to buy of
him gold tried in the fire, that they might be rich. He lets them know
where they might have true riches and how they might have them. First,
Where they might have them - from himself; he sends them not to the
streams of Pactolus, nor to the mines of Potosi, but invites them to
himself, the pearl of price. Secondly, And how must they have this true
gold from him? They must buy it. This seems to be unsaying all again.
How can those that are poor buy gold? Just as they may buy of Christ
wine and milk, that is, without money and without price, [Isa
55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001). Something indeed must be parted
with, but it is nothing of a valuable consideration, it is only to make
room for receiving true riches. "Part with sin and self-sufficiency, and
come to Christ with a sense of your poverty and emptiness, that you may
be filled with his hidden treasure." \[2.\] These people were naked;
Christ tells them where they might have clothing, and such as would
cover the shame of their nakedness. This they must receive from Christ;
and they must only put off their filthy rags that they might put on the
white raiment which he had purchased and provided for them - his own
imputed righteousness for justification and the garments of holiness and
sanctification. \[3.\] They were blind; and he counsels them to buy of
him eye-salve, that they might see, to give up their own wisdom and
reason, which are but blindness in the things of God, and resign
themselves to his word and Spirit, and their eyes shall be opened to see
their way and their end, their duty and their true interest; a new and
glorious scene would then open itself to their souls; a new world
furnished with the most beautiful and excellent objects, and this light
would be marvellous to those who were but just now delivered from the
powers of darkness. This is the wise and good counsel Christ gives to
careless souls; and, if they follow it, he will judge himself bound in
honour to make it effectual.

5\. Here is added great and gracious encouragement to this sinful people
to take the admonition and advice well that Christ had given them, [Rev
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#019), [Rev
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#020). He tells them, (1.) It was given
them in true and tender affection: "Whom I love, I rebuke and chasten.
You may think I have given you hard words and severe reproofs; it is all
out of love to your souls. I would not have thus openly rebuked and
corrected your sinful lukewarmness and vain confidence, if I had not
been a lover of your souls; had I hated you, I would have let you alone,
to go on in sin till it had been your ruin." Sinners ought to take the
rebukes of God's word and rod as tokens of his good-will to their souls,
and should accordingly repent in good earnest, and turn to him that
smites them; better are the frowns and wounds of a friend than the
flattering smiles of an enemy. (2.) If they would comply with his
admonitions, he was ready to make them good to their souls: Behold, I
stand at the door and knock, etc., [Rev
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#020). Here observe, \[1.\] Christ is
graciously pleased by his word and Spirit to come to the door of the
heart of sinners; he draws near to them in a way of mercy, ready to make
them a kind visit. \[2.\] He finds this door shut against him; the heart
of man is by nature shut up against Christ by ignorance, unbelief,
sinful prejudices. \[3.\] When he finds the heart shut, he does not
immediately withdraw, but he waits to be gracious, even till his head be
filled with the dew. \[4.\] He uses all proper means to awaken sinners,
and to cause them to open to him: he calls by his word, he knocks by the
impulses of his Spirit upon their conscience. \[5.\] Those who open to
him shall enjoy his presence, to their great comfort and advantage. He
will sup with them; he will accept of what is good in them; he will eat
his pleasant fruit; and he will bring the best part of the entertainment
with him. If what he finds would make but a poor feast, what he brings
will make up the deficiency: he will give fresh supplies of graces and
comforts, and thereby stir up fresh actings of faith, and love, and
delight; and in all this Christ and his repenting people will enjoy
pleasant communion with each other. Alas! what do careless obstinate
sinners lose by refusing to open the door of the heart to Christ!

III\. We now come to the conclusion of this epistle; and here we have as
before,

1\. The promise made to the overcoming believer. It is here implied,
(1.) That though this church seemed to be wholly overrun and overcome
with lukewarmness and self-confidence, yet it was possible that by the
reproofs and counsels of Christ they might be inspired with fresh zeal
and vigour, and might come off conquerors in their spiritual warfare.
(2.) That, if they did so, all former faults should be forgiven, and
they should have a great reward. And what is that reward? They shall sit
down with me on my throne, as I also overcame, and have sat down with my
Father on his throne, [Rev 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#021). Here
it is intimated, \[1.\] That Christ himself had met with his temptations
and conflicts. \[2.\] That he overcame them all, and was more than a
conqueror. \[3.\] That, as the reward of his conflict and victory, he
has sat down with God the Father on his throne, possessed of that glory
which he had with the Father from eternity, but which he was pleased
very much to conceal on earth, leaving it as it were in the hands of the
Father, as a pledge that he would fulfil the work of a Saviour before he
reassumed that manifestative glory; and, having done so, then pignus
reposcere - he demands the pledge, to appear in his divine glory equal
to the Father. \[4.\] That those who are conformed to Christ in his
trials and victories shall be conformed to him in his glory; they shall
sit down with him on his throne, on his throne of judgment at the end of
the world, on his throne of glory to all eternity, shining in his beams
by virtue of their union with him and relation to him, as the mystical
body of which he is the head.

2\. All is closed up with the general demand of attention ([Rev
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#022)), putting all to whom these
epistles shall come in mind that what is contained in them is not of
private interpretation, not intended for the instruction, reproof, and
correction of those particular churches only, but of all the churches of
Christ in all ages and parts of the world: and as there will be a
resemblance in all succeeding churches to these, both in their graces
and sins, so they may expect that God will deal with them as he dealt
with these, which are patterns to all ages what faithful, and fruitful
churches may expect to receive from God, and what those who are
unfaithful may expect to suffer from his hand; yea, that God's dealings
with his churches may afford useful instruction to the rest of the
world, to put them upon considering, If judgment begin at the house of
God, what shall the end of those be that do not obey the gospel of
Christ? [Pe1 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017). Thus end the
messages of Christ to the Asian churches, the epistolary part of this
book. We now come to the prophetical part.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 4](rev004)

</div>
