<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom005)  [Next](rom007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 6:0</span></span>

The apostle having at large asserted, opened, and proved, the great
doctrine of justification by faith, for fear lest any should suck poison
out of that sweet flower, and turn that grace of God into wantonness and
licentiousness, he, with a like zeal, copiousness of expression, and
cogency of argument, presses the absolute necessity of sanctification
and a holy life, as the inseparable fruit and companion of
justification; for, wherever Jesus Christ is made of God unto any soul
righteousness, he is made of God unto that soul sanctification, [Co1
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030). The water and the blood came
streaming together out of the pierced side of the dying Jesus. And what
God hath thus joined together let not us dare to put asunder.

[Romans 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 6:1</span></span>

The apostle's transition, which joins this discourse with the former, is
observable: "What shall we say then? [Rom
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001). What use shall we make of this
sweet and comfortable doctrine? Shall we do evil that good may come, as
some say we do? [Rom 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#008). Shall we
continue in sin that grace may abound? Shall we hence take encouragement
to sin with so much the more boldness, because the more sin we commit
the more will the grace of God be magnified in our pardon? Is this a use
to be made of it?" No, it is an abuse, and the apostle startles at the
thought of it ([Rom 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002)): "God forbid;
far be it from us to think such a thought." He entertains the objection
as Christ did the devil's blackest temptation ([Mat
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#010)): Get thee hence, Satan. Those
opinions that give any countenance to sin, or open a door to practical
immoralities, how specious and plausible soever they be rendered, by the
pretension of advancing free grace, are to be rejected with the greatest
abhorrence; for the truth as it is in Jesus is a truth according to
godliness, [Tit 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001). The apostle is
very full in pressing the necessity of holiness in this chapter, which
may be reduced to two heads: - His exhortations to holiness, which show
the nature of it; and his motives or arguments to enforce those
exhortations, which show the necessity of it.

I. For the first, we may hence observe the nature of sanctification,
what it is, and wherein it consists. In general it has two things in it,
mortification and vivification - dying to sin and living to
righteousness, elsewhere expressed by putting off the old man and
putting on the new, ceasing to do evil and learning to do well.

1\. Mortification, putting off the old man; several ways this is
expressed. (1.) We must live no longer in sin ([Rom
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002)), we must not be as we have been
nor do as we have done. The time past of our life must suffice, [Pe1
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#003). Though there are none that live
without sin, yet, blessed be God, there are those that do not live in
sin, do not live in it as their element, do not make a trade of it: this
is to be sanctified. (2.) The body of sin must be destroyed, [Rom
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006). The corruption that dwelleth in
us is the body of sin, consisting of many parts and members, as a body.
This is the root to which the axe must be laid. We must not only cease
from the acts of sin (this may be done through the influence of outward
restraints, or other inducements), but we must get the vicious habits
and inclinations weakened and destroyed; not only cast away the idols of
iniquity out of the heart. - That henceforth we should not serve sin.
The actual transgression is certainly in a great measure prevented by
the crucifying and killing of the original corruption. Destroy the body
of sin, and then, though there should be Canaanites remaining in the
land, yet the Israelites will not be slaves to them. It is the body of
sin that sways the sceptre, wields the iron rod; destroy this, and the
yoke is broken. The destruction of Eglon the tyrant is the deliverance
of oppressed Israel from the Moabites. (3.) We must be dead indeed unto
sin, [Rom 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#011). As the death of the
oppressor is a release, so much more is the death of the oppressed, [Job
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#017), [Job
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#018). Death brings a writ of ease to
the weary. Thus must we be dead to sin, obey it, observe it, regard it,
fulfil its will no more than he that is dead doth his quandam
task-masters - be as indifference to the pleasures and delights of sin
as a man that is dying is to his former diversions. He that is dead is
separated from his former company, converse, business, enjoyments,
employments, is not what he was, does not what he did, has not what he
had. Death makes a mighty change; such a change doth sanctification make
in the soul, it cuts off all correspondence with sin. (4.) Sin must not
reign in our mortal bodies that we should obey it, [Rom
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012). Though sin may remain as an
outlaw, though it may oppress as a tyrant, yet let it not reign as a
king. Let it not make laws, nor preside in councils, nor command the
militia; let it not be uppermost in the soul, so that we should obey it.
Though we may be sometimes overtaken and overcome by it, yet let us
never be obedient to it in the lusts thereof; let not sinful lusts be a
law to you, to which you would yield a consenting obedience. In the
lusts thereof - en tais epithumiais autou. It refers to the body, not to
sin. Sin lies very much in the gratifying of the body, and humouring
that. And there is a reason implied in the phrase your mortal body;
because it is a mortal body, and hastening apace to the dust, therefore
let not sin reign in it. It was sin that made our bodies mortal, and
therefore do not yield obedience to such an enemy. (5.) We must not
yield our members as instruments of unrighteousness, [Rom
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013). The members of the body are made
use of by the corrupt nature as tools, by which the wills of the flesh
are fulfilled; but we must not consent to that abuse. The members of the
body are fearfully and wonderfully made; it is a pity they should be the
devil's tools of unrighteousness unto sin, instruments of the sinful
actions, according to the sinful dispositions. Unrighteousness is unto
sin; the sinful acts confirm and strengthen the sinful habits; one sin
begets another; it is like the letting forth of water, therefore leave
it before it be meddled with. The members of the body may perhaps,
through the prevalency of temptation, be forced to be instruments of
sin; but do not yield them to be so, do not consent to it. This is one
branch of sanctification, the mortification of sin.

2\. Vivification, or living to righteousness; and what is that? (1.) It
is to walk in newness of life, [Rom
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004). Newness of life supposes newness
of heart, for out of the heart are the issues of life, and there is not
way to make the stream sweet but by making the spring so. Walking, in
scripture, is put for the course and tenour of the conversation, which
must be new. Walk by new rules, towards new ends, from new principles.
Make a new choice of the way. Choose new paths to walk in, new leaders
to walk after, new companions to walk with. Old things should pass away,
and all things become new. The man is what he was not, does what he did
not. (2.) It is to be alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord, [Rom
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#011). To converse with God, to have a
regard to him, a delight in him, a concern for him, the soul upon all
occasions carried out towards him as towards an agreeable object, in
which it takes a complacency: this is to be alive to God. The love of
God reigning in the heart is the life of the soul towards God. Anima est
ubi amat, non ubi animat - The soul is where it loves, rather than where
it lives. It is to have the affections and desires alive towards God.
Or, living (our live in the flesh) unto God, to his honour and glory as
our end, by his word and will as our rule - in all our ways to
acknowledge him, and to have our eyes ever towards him; this is to live
unto God. - Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Christ is our spiritual life;
there is no living to God but through him. He is the Mediator; there can
be no comfortable receivings from God, nor acceptable regards to God,
but in and through Jesus Christ; no intercourse between sinful souls and
a holy God, but by the mediation of the Lord Jesus. Through Christ as
the author and maintainer of this life; through Christ as the head from
whom we receive vital influence; through Christ as the root by which we
derive sap and nourishment, and so live. In living to God, Christ is all
in all. (3.) It is to yield ourselves to God, as those that are alive
from the dead, [Rom 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013). The very
life and being of holiness lie in the dedication of ourselves to the
Lord, giving our own selves to the Lord, [Co2
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#005). "Yield yourselves to him, not
only as the conquered yields to the conqueror, because he can stand it
out no longer; but as the wife yields herself to her husband, to whom
her desire is, as the scholar yields himself to the teacher, the
apprentice to his master, to be taught and ruled by him. Not yield your
estates to him, but yield yourselves; nothing less than your whole
selves;" parastēsate eautous - accommodate vos ipsos Deo - accommodate
yourselves to God; so Tremellius, from the Syriac. "Not only submit to
him, but comply with him; not only present yourselves to him once for
all, but be always ready to serve him. Yield yourselves to him as wax to
the seal, to take any impression, to be, and have, and do, what he
pleases." When Paul said, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? ([Act
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#006)) he was then yielded to God. As
those that are alive from the dead. To yield a dead carcase to a living
God is not to please him, but to mock him: "Yield yourselves as those
that are alive and good for something, a living sacrifice," [Rom
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001). The surest evidence of our
spiritual life is the dedication of ourselves to God. It becomes those
that are alive from the dead (it may be understood of a death in law),
that are justified and delivered from death, to give themselves to him
that hath so redeemed them. (4.) It is to yield our members as
instruments of righteousness to God. The members of our bodies, when
withdrawn from the service of sin, are not to lie idle, but to be made
use of in the service of God. When the strong man armed is dispossessed,
let him whose right it is divide the spoils. Though the powers and
faculties of the soul be the immediate subjects of holiness and
righteousness, yet the members of the body are to be instruments; the
body must be always ready to serve the soul in the service of God. Thus
([Rom 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019)), "Yield your members
servants to righteousness unto holiness. Let them be under the conduct
and at the command of the righteous law of God, and that principle of
inherent righteousness which the Spirit, as sanctifier, plants in the
soul." Righteousness unto holiness, which intimates growth, and
progress, and ground obtained. As every sinful act confirms the sinful
habit, and makes the nature more and more prone to sin (hence the
members of a natural man are here said to be servants to iniquity unto
iniquity - one sin makes the heart more disposed for another), so every
gracious act confirms the gracious habit: serving righteousness is unto
holiness; one duty fits us for another; and the more we do the more we
may do for God. Or serving righteousness, eis hagiasmon - as an evidence
of sanctification.

II\. The motives or arguments here used to show the necessity of
sanctification. There is such an antipathy in our hearts by nature to
holiness that it is no easy matter to bring them to submit to it: it is
the Spirit's work, who persuades by such inducements as these set home
upon the soul.

1\. He argues from our sacramental conformity to Jesus Christ. Our
baptism, with the design and intention of it, carried in it a great
reason why we should die to sin, and live to righteousness. Thus we must
improve our baptism as a bridle of restraint to keep us in from sin, as
a spur of constraint to quicken us to duty. Observe this reasoning.

(1.) In general, we are dead to sin, that is, in profession and in
obligation. Our baptism signifies our cutting off from the kingdom of
sin. We profess to have no more to do with sin. We are dead to sin by a
participation of virtue and power for the killing of it, and by our
union with Christ and interest in him, in and by whom it is killed. All
this is in vain if we persist in sin; we contradict a profession,
violate an obligation, return to that to which we were dead, like
walking ghosts, than which nothing is more unbecoming and absurd. For
([Rom 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#007)) he that is dead is freed
from sin; that is, he that is dead to it is freed from the rule and
dominion of it, as the servant that is dead is freed from his master,
[Job 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#019). Now shall we be such fools
as to return to that slavery from which we are discharged? When we are
delivered out of Egypt, shall we talk of going back to it again?

(2.) In particular, being baptized into Jesus Christ, we were baptized
into his death, [Rom 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003). We were
baptized eis Christon - unto Christ, as [Co1
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#002), eis Mōsēn - unto Moses. Baptism
binds us to Christ, it binds us apprentice to Christ as our teacher, it
is our allegiance to Christ as our sovereign. Baptism is externa ansa
Christi - the external handle of Christ, by which Christ lays hold on
men, and men offer themselves to Christ. Particularly, we were baptized
into his death, into a participation of the privileges purchased by his
death, and into an obligation both to comply with the design of his
death, which was to redeem us from all iniquity, and to conform to the
pattern of his death, that, as Christ died for sin, so we should die to
sin. This was the profession and promise of our baptism, and we do not
do well if we do not answer this profession, and make good this promise.

\[1.\] Our conformity to the death of Christ obliges us to die unto sin;
thereby we know the fellowship of his sufferings, [Phi
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#010). Thus we are here said to be
planted together in the likeness of is death ([Rom
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005)), tō homoiōmati, not only a
conformity, but a conformation, as the engrafted stock is planted
together into the likeness of the shoot, of the nature of which it doth
participate. Planting is in order to life and fruitfulness: we are
planted in the vineyard in a likeness to Christ, which likeness we
should evidence in sanctification. Our creed concerning Jesus Christ is,
among other things, that he was crucified, dead, and buried; now baptism
is a sacramental conformity to him in each of these, as the apostle here
takes notice. First, Our old man is crucified with him, [Rom
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006). The death of the cross was a slow
death; the body, after it was nailed to the cross, gave many a throe and
many a struggle: but it was a sure death, long in expiring, but expired
at last; such is the mortification of sin in believers. It was a cursed
death, [Gal 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013). Sin dies as a
malefactor, devoted to destruction; it is an accursed thing. Though it
be a slow death, yet this must needs hasten it that it is an old man
that is crucified; not in the prime of its strength, but decaying: that
which waxeth old is ready to vanish away, [Heb
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#013). Crucified with him -
sunestaurōthē, not in respect of time, but in respect of causality. The
crucifying of Christ for us has an influence upon the crucifying of sin
in us. Secondly, We are dead with Christ, [Rom
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#008). Christ was obedient to death:
when he died, we might be said to die with him, as our dying to sin is
an act of conformity both to the design and to the example of Christ's
dying for sin. Baptism signifies and seals our union with Christ, our
engrafting into Christ; so that we are dead with him, and engaged to
have no more to do with sin than he had. Thirdly, We are buried with him
by baptism, [Rom 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004). Our conformity
is complete. We are in profession quite cut off from all commerce and
communion with sin, as those that are buried are quite cut off from all
the world; not only not of the living, but no more among the living,
have nothing more to do with them. Thus must we be, as Christ was,
separate from sin and sinners. We are buried, namely, in profession and
obligation: we profess to be so, and we are bound to be so: it was our
covenant and engagement in baptism; we are sealed to be the Lord's,
therefore to be cut off from sin. Why this burying in baptism should so
much as allude to any custom of dipping under water in baptism, any more
than our baptismal crucifixion and death should have any such
references, I confess I cannot see. It is plain that it is not the sign,
but the thing signified, in baptism, that the apostle here calls being
buried with Christ, and the expression of burying alludes to Christ's
burial. As Christ was buried, that he might rise again to a new and more
heavenly life, so we are in baptism buried, that is, cut off from the
life of sin, that we may rise again to a new life of faith and love.

\[2.\] Our conformity to the resurrection of Christ obliges us to rise
again to newness of life. This is the power of his resurrection which
Paul was so desirous to know, [Phi
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#010). Christ was raised up from the
dead by the glory of the Father, that is, by the power of the Father.
The power of God is his glory; it is glorious power, [Col
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#011). Now in baptism we are obliged to
conform to that pattern, to be planted in the likeness of his
resurrection ([Rom 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005)), to live with
him, [Rom 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#008). See [Col
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012). Conversion is the first
resurrection from the death of sin to the life of righteousness; and
this resurrection is conformable to Christ's resurrection. This
conformity of the saints to the resurrection of Christ seems to be
intimated in the rising of so many of the bodies of the saints, which,
though mentioned before by anticipation, is supposed to have been
concomitant with Christ's resurrection, [Mat
27:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#052). We have all risen with Christ.
In two things we must conform to the resurrection of Christ: - First, He
rose to die no more, [Rom 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009). We read
of many others that were raised from the dead, but they rose to die
again. But, when Christ rose, he rose to die no more; therefore he left
his grave-clothes behind him, whereas Lazarus, who was to die again,
brought them out with him, as one that should have occasion to use them
again: but over Christ death has no more dominion; he was dead indeed,
but he is alive, and so alive that he lives for evermore, [Rev
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#018). Thus we must rise from the grave
of sin never again to return to it, nor to have any more fellowship with
the works of darkness, having quitted that grave, that land of darkness
as darkness itself. Secondly, He rose to live unto God ([Rom
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#010)), to live a heavenly life, to
receive that glory which was set before him. Others that were raised
from the dead returned to the same life in every respect which they had
before lived; but so did not Christ: he rose again to leave the world.
Now I am no more in the world, [Joh
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001); [Joh
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#011). He rose to live to God, that
is, to intercede and rule, and all to the glory of the Father. Thus must
we rise to live to God: this is what he calls newness of life ([Rom
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)), to live from other principles,
by other rules, with other aims, than we have done. A life devoted to
God is a new life; before, self was the chief and highest end, but now
God. To live indeed is to live to God, with our eyes ever towards him,
making him the centre of all our actions.

2\. He argues from the precious promises and privileges of the new
covenant, [Rom 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#014). It might be
objected that we cannot conquer and subdue sin, it is unavoidably too
hard for us: "No," says he, "you wrestle with an enemy that may be dealt
with and subdued, if you will but keep your ground and stand to your
arms; it is an enemy that is already foiled and baffled; there is
strength laid up in the covenant of grace for your assistance, if you
will but use it. Sin shall not have dominion." God's promises to us are
more powerful and effectual for the mortifying of sin than our promises
to God. Sin may struggle in a believer, and may create him a great deal
of trouble, but it shall not have dominion; it may vex him, but shall
not rule over him. For we are not under the law, but under grace, not
under the law of sin and death, but under the law of the spirit of life,
which is in Christ Jesus: we are actuated by other principles than we
have been: new lords, new laws. Or, not under the covenant of works,
which requires brick, and gives no straw, which condemns upon the least
failure, which runs thus, "Do this, and live; do it not, and die;" but
under the covenant of grace, which accepts sincerity as our gospel
perfection, which requires nothing but what it promises strength to
perform, which is herein well ordered, that every transgression in the
covenant does not put us out of covenant, and especially that it does
not leave our salvation in our own keeping, but lays it up in the hands
of the Mediator, who undertakes for us that sin shall not have dominion
over us, who hath himself condemned it, and will destroy it; so that, if
we pursue the victory, we shall come off more than conquerors. Christ
rules by the golden sceptre of grace, and he will not let sin have
dominion over those that are willing subjects to that rule. This is a
very comfortable word to all true believers. If we were under the law,
we were undone, for the law curses every one that continues not in every
thing; but we are under grace, grace which accepts the willing mind,
which is not extreme to mark what we do amiss, which leaves room for
repentance, which promises pardon upon repentance; and what can be to an
ingenuous mind a stronger motive than this to have nothing to do with
sin? Shall we sin against so much goodness, abuse such love? Some
perhaps might suck poison out of this flower, and disingenuously use
this as an encouragement to sin. See how the apostle starts at such a
thought ([Rom 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#015)): Shall we sin
because we are not under the law, but under grace? God forbid. What can
be more black and ill-natured than from a friend's extraordinary
expressions of kindness and good-will to take occasion to affront and
offend him? To spurn at such bowels, to spit in the face of such love,
is that which, between man and man, all the world would cry out shame
on.

3\. He argues from the evidence that this will be of our state, making
for us, or against us ([Rom 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#016)): To
whom you yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants you are. All
the children of men are either the servants of God, or the servants of
sin; these are the two families. Now, if we would know to which of these
families we belong, we must enquire to which of these masters we yield
obedience. Our obeying the laws of sin will be an evidence against us
that we belong to that family on which death is entailed. As, on the
contrary, our obeying the laws of Christ will evidence our relation to
Christ's family.

4\. He argues from their former sinfulness, [Rom
6:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#017), where we may observe,

(1.) What they had been and done formerly. We have need to be often
reminded of our former state. Paul frequently remembers it concerning
himself, and those to whom he writes. \[1.\] You were the servants of
sin. Those that are now the servants of God would do well to remember
the time when they were the servants of sin, to keep them humble,
penitent, and watchful, and to quicken them in the service of God. It is
a reproach to the service of sin that so many thousands have quitted the
service, and shaken off the yoke; and never any that sincerely deserted
it, and gave themselves to the service of God, have returned to the
former drudgery. "God be thanked that you were so, that is, that though
you were so, yet you have obeyed. You were so; God be thanked that we
can speak of it as a thing past: you were so, but you are not now so.
Nay, your having been so formerly tends much to the magnifying of divine
mercy and grace in the happy change. God be thanked that the former
sinfulness is such a foil and such a spur to your present holiness."
\[2.\] You have yielded your members servants to uncleanness, and to
iniquity unto iniquity, [Rom 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019). It
is the misery of a sinful state that the body is made a drudge to sin,
than which there could not be a baser or a harder slavery, like that of
the prodigal that was sent into the fields to feed swine. You have
yielded. Sinners are voluntary in the service of sin. The devil could
not force them into the service, if they did not yield themselves to it.
This will justify God in the ruin of sinners, that they sold themselves
to work wickedness: it was their own act and deed. To iniquity unto
iniquity. Every sinful act strengthens and confirms the sinful habit: to
iniquity as the work unto iniquity as the wages. Sow the wind, and reap
the whirlwind; growing worse and worse, more and more hardened. This he
speaks after the manner of men, that is, he fetches a similitude from
that which is common among men, even the change of services and
subjections. \[3.\] You were free from righteousness ([Rom
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#020)); not free by any liberty given,
but by a liberty taken, which is licentiousness: "You were altogether
void of that which is good, - void of any good principles, motions, or
inclinations, - void of all subjection to the law and will of God, of
all conformity to his image; and this you were highly pleased with, as a
freedom and a liberty; but a freedom from righteousness is the worst
kind of slavery."

(2.) How the blessed change was made, and wherein it did consist.

\[1.\] You have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was
delivered to you, [Rom 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#017). This
describes conversion, what it is; it is our conformity to, and
compliance with, the gospel which was delivered to us by Christ and his
ministers. - Margin. Whereto you were delivered; eis hon paredothēte -
into which you were delivered. And so observe, First, The rule of grace,
that form of doctrine - tupon didachēs. The gospel is the great rule
both of truth and holiness; it is the stamp, grace is the impression of
that stamp; it is the form of healing words, [Ti2
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#013). Secondly, The nature of grace,
as it is our conformity to that rule. 1. It is to obey from the heart.
The gospel is a doctrine not only to be believed, but to be obeyed, and
that from the heart, which denotes the sincerity and reality of that
obedience; not in profession only, but in power - from the heart, the
innermost part, the commanding part of us. 2. It is to be delivered into
it, as into a mould, as the wax is cast into the impression of the seal,
answering it line for line, stroke for stroke, and wholly representing
the shape and figure of it. To be a Christian indeed is to be
transformed into the likeness and similitude of the gospel, our souls
answering to it, complying with it, conformed to it - understanding,
will, affections, aims, principles, actions, all according to that form
of doctrine.

\[2.\] Being made free from sin, you became servants of righteousness
([Rom 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#018)), servants to God, [Rom
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#022). Conversion is, First, A freedom
from the service of sin; it is the shaking off of that yoke, resolving
to have no more to do with it. Secondly, A resignation of ourselves to
the service of God and righteousness, to God as our master, to
righteousness as our work. When we are made free from sin, it is not
that we may live as we list, and be our own masters; no: when we are
delivered out of Egypt, we are, as Israel, led to the holy mountain, to
receive the law, and are there brought into the bond of the covenant.
Observe, We cannot be made the servants of God till we are freed from
the power and dominion of sin; we cannot serve two masters so directly
opposite one to another as God and sin are. We must, with the prodigal,
quit the drudgery of the citizen of the country, before we can come to
our Father's house.

(3.) What apprehensions they now had of their former work and way. He
appeals to themselves ([Rom 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021)),
whether they had not found the service of sin, \[1.\] An unfruitful
service: "What fruit had you then? Did you ever get any thing by it? Sit
down, and cast up the account, reckon your gains, what fruit had you
then?" Besides the future losses, which are infinitely great, the very
present gains of sin are not worth mentioning. What fruit? Nothing that
deserves the name of fruit. The present pleasure and profit of sin do
not deserve to be called fruit; they are but chaff, ploughing iniquity,
sowing vanity, and reaping the same. \[2.\] It is an unbecoming service;
it is that of which we are now ashamed - ashamed of the folly, ashamed
of the filth, of it. Shame came into the world with sin, and is still
the certain product of it - either the shame of repentance, or, if not
that, eternal shame and contempt. Who would wilfully do that which
sooner or later he is sure to be ashamed of?

5\. He argues from the end of all these things. it is the prerogative of
rational creatures that they are endued with a power of prospect, are
capable of looking forward, considering the latter end of things. To
persuade us from sin to holiness here are blessing and cursing, good and
evil, life and death, set before us; and we are put to our choice. (1.)
The end of sin is death ([Rom 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021)):
The end of those things is death. Though the way may seem pleasant and
inviting, yet the end is dismal: at the last it bites; it will be
bitterness in the latter end. The wages of sin is death, [Rom
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#023). Death is as due to a sinner when
he hath sinned as wages are to a servant when he hath done his work.
This is true of every sin. There is no sin in its own nature venial.
Death is the wages of the least sin. Sin is here represented either as
the work for which the wages are given, or as the master by whom the
wages are given; all that are sin's servants and do sin's work must
expect to be thus paid. (2.) If the fruit be unto holiness, if there be
an active principle of true and growing grace, the end will be
everlasting life - a very happy end! - Though the way be up-hill, though
it be narrow, and thorny, and beset, yet everlasting life at the end of
it is sure. So, [Rom 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#023), The gift of
God is eternal life. Heaven is life, consisting in the vision and
fruition of God; and it is eternal life, no infirmities attending it, no
death to put a period to it. This is the gift of God. The death is the
wages of sin, it comes by desert; but the life is a gift, it comes by
favour. Sinners merit hell, but saints do not merit heaven. There is no
proportion between the glory of heaven and our obedience; we must thank
God, and not ourselves, if ever we get to heaven. And this gift is
through Jesus Christ our Lord. It is Christ that purchased it, prepared
it, prepares us for it, preserves us to it; he is the Alpha and Omega,
All in all in our salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 7](rom007)

</div>
