<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom014)  [Next](rom016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 15:0</span></span>

The apostle, in this chapter, continues the discourse of the former,
concerning mutual forbearance in indifferent things; and so draws
towards a conclusion of the epistle. Where such differences of
apprehension, and consequently distances of affection, are among
Christians, there is need of precept upon precept, line upon line, to
allay the heat, and to beget a better temper. The apostle, being
desirous to drive the nail home, as a nail in a sure place, follows his
blow, unwilling to leave the subject till he has some hopes of
prevailing, to which end he orders the cause before them and fills his
mouth with the most pressing arguments. We may observe, in this chapter,
I. His precepts to them. II. His prayers for them. III. His apology for
writing to them. IV. His account of himself and his own affairs. V. His
declaration of his purpose to come and see them. VI. His desire of a
share in their prayers.

[Romans 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 15:1</span></span>

The apostle here lays down two precepts, with reasons to enforce them,
showing the duty of the strong Christian to consider and condescend to
the weakest.

I. We must bear the infirmities of the weak, [Rom
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001). We all have our infirmities; but
the weak are more subject to them than others - the weak in knowledge or
grace, the bruised reed and the smoking flax. We must consider these;
not trample upon them, but encourage them, and bear with their
infirmities. If through weakness they judge and censure us, and speak
evil of us, we must bear with them, pity them, and not have our
affections alienated from them. Alas! it is their weakness, they cannot
help it. Thus Christ bore with his weak disciples, and apologised for
them. But there is more in it; we must also bear their infirmities by
sympathizing with them, concerning ourselves for them, ministering
strength to them, as there is occasion. This is bearing one another's
burdens.

II\. We must not please ourselves, but our neighbour, [Rom
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001), [Rom
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#002). We must deny our own humour, in
consideration of our brethren's weakness and infirmity.

1\. Christians must not please themselves. We must not make it our
business to gratify all the little appetites and desires of our own
heart; it is good for us to cross ourselves sometimes, and then we shall
the better bear others crossing of us. We shall be spoiled (as Adonijah
was) if we be always humoured. The first lesson we have to learn is to
deny ourselves, [Mat 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#024).

2\. Christians must please their brethren. The design of Christianity is
to soften and meeken the spirit, to teach us the art of obliging and
true complaisance; not to be servants to the lust of any, but to the
necessities and infirmities of our brethren - to comply with all that we
have to do with as fare as we can with a good conscience. Christians
should study to be pleasing. As we must not please ourselves in the use
of our Christian liberty (which was allowed us, not for our own
pleasure, but for the glory of God and the profit and edification of
others), so we must please our neighbour. How amiable and comfortable a
society would the church of Christ be if Christians would study to
please one another, as now we see them commonly industrious to cross,
and thwart, and contradict one another! - Please his neighbour, not in
every thing, it is not an unlimited rule; but for his good, especially
for the good of his soul: not please him by serving his wicked wills,
and humouring him in a sinful way, or consenting to his enticements, or
suffering sin upon him; this is a base way of pleasing our neighbour to
the ruin of his soul: if we thus please men, we are not the servants of
Christ; but please him for his good; not for our own secular good, or to
make a prey of him, but for his spiritual good. - To edification, that
is, not only for his profit, but for the profit of others, to edify the
body of Christ, by studying to oblige one another. The closer the stones
lie, and the better they are squared to fit one another, the stronger is
the building. Now observe the reason why Christians must please one
another: For even Christ pleased not himself. The self-denial of our
Lord Jesus is the best argument against the selfishness of Christians.
Observe,

(1.) That Christ pleased not himself. He did not consult his own worldly
credit, ease, safety, nor pleasure; he had not where to lay his head,
lived upon alms, would not be made a king, detested no proposal with
greater abhorrence than that, Master, spare thyself, did not seek his
own will ([Joh 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#030)), washed his
disciples' feet, endured the contradiction of sinners against himself,
troubled himself ([Joh 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#033)), did not
consult his own honour, and, in a word, emptied himself, and made
himself of no reputation: and all this for our sakes, to bring in a
righteousness for us, and to set us an example. His whole life was a
self-denying self-displeasing life. He bore the infirmities of the weak,
[Heb 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015).

(2.) That herein the scripture was fulfilled: As it is written, The
reproaches of those that reproached thee fell on me. This is quoted out
of [Psa 69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009), the former part of which
verse is applied to Christ ([Joh
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#017)), The zeal of thine house hath
eaten me up; and the latter part here; for David was a type of Christ,
and his sufferings of Christ's sufferings. It is quoted to show that
Christ was so far from pleasing himself that he did in the highest
degree displease himself. Not as if his undertaking, considered on the
whole, were a task and grievance to him, for he was very willing to it
and very cheerful in it; but in his humiliation the content and
satisfaction of natural inclination were altogether crossed and denied.
He preferred our benefit before his own ease and pleasure. This the
apostle chooses to express in scripture language; for how can the things
of the Spirit of God be better spoken of than in the Spirit's own words?
And this scripture he alleges, The reproaches of those that reproached
thee fell on me. \[1.\] The shame of those reproaches, which Christ
underwent. Whatever dishonour was done to God was a trouble to the Lord
Jesus. He was grieved for the hardness of people's hearts, beheld a
sinful place with sorrow and tears. When the saints were persecuted,
Christ so far displeased himself as to take what was done to them as
done against himself: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Christ also
did himself endure the greatest indignities; there was much of reproach
in his sufferings. \[2.\] The sin of those reproaches, for which Christ
undertook to satisfy; so many understand it. Every sin is a kind of
reproach to God, especially presumptuous sins; now the guilt of these
fell upon Christ, when he was made sin, that is, a sacrifice, a
sin-offering for us. When the Lord laid upon him the iniquities of us
all, and he bore our sins in his own body upon the tree, they fell upon
him as upon our surety. Upon me be the curse. This was the greatest
piece of self-displacency that could be: considering his infinite
spotless purity and holiness, the infinite love of the Father to him,
and his eternal concern for his Father's glory, nothing could be more
contrary to him, nor more against him, than to be made sin and a curse
for us, and to have the reproaches of God fall upon him, especially
considering for whom he thus displeased himself, for strangers, enemies,
and traitors, the just for the unjust, [Pe1
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#018). This seems to come in as a
reason why we should bear the infirmities of the weak. We must not
please ourselves, for Christ pleased not himself; we must bear the
infirmities of the weak, for Christ bore the reproaches of those that
reproached God. He bore the guilt of sin and the curse for it; we are
only called to bear a little of the trouble of it. he bore the
presumptuous sins of the wicked; we are called only to bear the
infirmities of the weak. - Even Christ; kai gar ho Christos. Even he who
was infinitely happy in the enjoyment of himself, who needed not us nor
our services, - even he who thought it no robbery to be equal with God,
who had reason enough to pleas himself, and no reason to be concerned,
much less to be crossed, for us, - even he pleased not himself, even he
bore our sins. And should not we be humble, and self-denying, and ready
to consider one another, who are members one of another?

(3.) That therefore we must go and do likewise: For whatsoever things
were written aforetime were written for our learning. \[1.\] That which
is written of Christ, concerning his self-denial and sufferings, is
written for our learning; he hath left us an example. If Christ denied
himself, surely we should deny ourselves, from a principle of
ingenuousness and of gratitude, and especially of conformity to his
image. The example of Christ, in what he did and said, is recorded for
our imitation. \[2.\] That which is written in the scriptures of the Old
Testament in the general is written for our learning. What David had
said in his own person Paul had just now applied to Christ. Now lest
this should look like a straining of the scripture, he gives us this
excellent rule in general, that all the scriptures of the Old Testament
(much more those of the New) were written for our learning, and are not
to be looked upon as of private interpretation. What happened to the Old
Testament saint happened to them for ensample; and the scriptures of the
Old Testament have many fulfillings. The scriptures are left for a
standing rule to us: they are written, that they might remain for our
use and benefit. First, For our learning. There are many things to be
learned out of the scriptures; and that is the best learning which is
drawn from these fountains. Those are the most learned that are most
mighty in the scriptures. We must therefore labour, not only to
understand the literal meaning of the scripture, but to learn out of it
that which will do us good; and we have need of help therefore not only
to roll away the stone, but to draw out the water, for in many places
the well is deep. Practical observations are more necessary than
critical expositions. Secondly, That we through patience and comfort of
the scriptures might have hope. That hope which hath eternal life for
its object is here proposed as the end of scripture-learning. The
scripture was written that we might know what to hope for from God, and
upon what grounds, and in what way. This should recommend the scripture
to us that it is a special friend to Christian hope. Now the way of
attaining this hope is through patience and comfort of the scripture.
Patience and comfort suppose trouble and sorrow; such is the lot of the
saints in this world; and, were it not so, we should have no occasion
for patience and comfort. But both these befriend that hope which is the
life of our souls. Patience works experience, and experience hope, which
maketh not ashamed, [Rom 5:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003). The
more patience we exercise under troubles the more hopefully we may look
through our troubles; nothing more destructive to hope than impatience.
And the comfort of the scriptures, that comfort which springs from the
word of God (that is the surest and sweetest comfort) is likewise a
great stay to hope, as it is an earnest in hand of the good hoped for.
The Spirit, as a comforter, is the earnest of our inheritance.

[Romans 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 15:5</span></span>

The apostle, having delivered two exhortations, before he proceeds to
more, intermixes here a prayer for the success of what he had said.
Faithful ministers water their preaching with their prayers, because,
whoever sows the seed, it is God that gives the increase. We can but
speak to the ear; it is God's prerogative to speak to the heart.
Observe,

I. The title he gives to God: The God of patience and consolation, who
is both the author and the foundation of all the patience and
consolation of the saints, from whom it springs and on whom it is built.
He gives the grace of patience; he confirms and keeps it up as the God
of consolation; for the comforts of the Holy Ghost help to support
believers, and to bear them up with courage and cheerfulness under all
their afflictions. When he comes to beg the pouring out of the spirit of
love and unity he addresses himself to God as the God of patience and
consolation; that is, 1. As a God that bears with us and comforts us, is
not extreme to mark what we do amiss, but is ready to comfort those that
are cast down - to teach us so to testify our love to our brethren, and
by these means to preserve and maintain unity, by being patient one with
another and comfortable one to another. Or, 2. As a God that gives us
patience and comfort. He had spoken ([Rom
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#004)) of patience and comfort of the
scriptures; but here he looks up to God as the God of patience and
consolation: it comes through the scripture as the conduit-pipe, but
from God as the fountain-head. The more patience and comfort we receive
from God, the better disposed we are to love one another. Nothing breaks
the peace more than an impatient, and peevish, and fretful melancholy
temper.

II\. The mercy he begs of God: Grant you to be like-minded one towards
another, according to Christ Jesus. 1. The foundation of Christian love
and peace is laid in like-mindedness, a consent in judgment as far as
you have attained, or at least a concord and agreement in affection. To
auto phronein - to mind the same thing, all occasions of difference
removed, and all quarrels laid aside. 2. This like-mindedness must be
according to Christ Jesus, according to the precept of Christ, the royal
law of love, according to the pattern and example of Christ, which he
had propounded to them for their imitation, [Rom
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#003). Or, "Let Christ Jesus be the
centre of your unity. Agree in the truth, not in any error." It was a
cursed concord and harmony of those who were of one mind to give their
power and strength to the beast ([Rev
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#013)); this was not a like-mindedness
according to Christ, but against Christ; like the Babel-builders, who
were one in their rebellion, [Gen
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#006). The method of our prayer must be
first for truth, and then for peace; for such is the method of the
wisdom that is from above: it is first pure, then peaceable. This is to
be like-minded according to Christ Jesus. 3. Like-mindedness among
Christians, according to Christ Jesus, is the gift of God; and a
precious gift it is, for which we must earnestly seek unto him. He is
the Father of spirits, and fashions the hearts of men alike ([Psa
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#015)), opens the understanding,
softens the heart, sweetens the affections, and gives the grace of love,
and the Spirit as a Spirit of love, to those that ask him. We are taught
to pray that the will of God may be done on earth as it is done in
heaven - now there it is done unanimously, among the angels, who are one
in their praises and services; and our desire must be that the saints on
earth may be so too.

III\. The end of his desire: that God may be glorified, [Rom
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#006). This is his plea with God in
prayer, and is likewise an argument with them to seek it. We should have
the glory of God in our eye in every prayer; therefore our first
petition, as the foundation of all the rest, must be, Hallowed be thy
name. Like-mindedness among Christians is in order to our glorifying
God, 1. With one mind and one mouth. It is desirable that Christians
should agree in every thing, that so they may agree in this, to praise
God together. It tends very much to the glory of God, who is one, and
his name one, when it is so. It will not suffice that there be one
mouth, but there must be one mind, for God looks at the heart; nay,
there will hardly be one mouth where there is not one mind, and God will
scarcely be glorified where there is not a sweet conjunction of both.
One mouth in confessing the truths of God, in praising the name of God -
one mouth in common converse, not jarring, biting, and devouring one
another - one mouth in the solemn assembly, one speaking, but all
joining. 2. As the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. This is his New
Testament style. God must be glorified as he has now revealed himself in
the face of Jesus Christ, according to the rules of the gospel, and with
an eye to Christ, in whom he is our Father. The unity of Christians
glorifies God as the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, because it is a
kind of counter-part or representation of the oneness that is between
the Father and the Son. We are warranted so to speak of it, and, with
that in our eye, to desire it, and pray for it, from [Joh
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#021), That they all may be one, as
thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee: a high expression of the honour
and sweetness of the saints' unity. And it follows, The the world may
believe that thou hast sent me; and so God may be glorified as the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

[Romans 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 15:7</span></span>

The apostle here returns to his exhortation to Christians. What he says
here ([Rom 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#007)) is to the same
purport with the former; but the repetition shows how much the apostle's
heart was upon it. "Receive one another into your affection, into your
communion, and into your common conversation, as there is occasion." He
had exhorted the strong to receive the weak ([Rom
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001)), here, Receive one another; for
sometimes the prejudices of the weak Christian make him shy of the
strong, as much as the pride of the strong Christian makes him shy of
the weak, neither of which ought to be. Let there be a mutual embracing
among Christians. Those that have received Christ by faith must receive
all Christians by brotherly love; though poor in the world, though
persecuted and despised, though it may be matter of reproach and danger
to you to receive them, though in the less weighty matters of the law
they are of different apprehensions, though there may have been occasion
for private piques, yet, laying aside these and the like considerations,
receive you one another. Now the reason why Christians must receive one
another is taken, as before, from the condescending love of Christ to
us: As Christ also received us, to the glory of God. Can there be a more
cogent argument? Has Christ been so kind to us, and shall we be so
unkind to those that are his? Was he so forward to entertain us, and
shall we be backward to entertain our brethren? Christ has received us
into the nearest and dearest relations to himself: has received us into
his fold, into his family, into the adoption of sons, into a covenant of
friendship, yea, into a marriage-covenant with himself; he has received
us (though we were strangers and enemies, and had played the prodigal)
into fellowship and communion with himself. Those words, to the glory of
God, may refer both to Christ's receiving us, which is our pattern, and
to our receiving one another, which is our practice according to that
pattern.

I. Christ hath received us to the glory of God. The end of our reception
by Christ is that we might glorify God in this world, and be glorified
with him in that to come. It was the glory of God, and our glory in the
enjoyment of God, that Christ had in his eye when he condescended to
receive us. We are called to an eternal glory by Christ Jesus, [Joh
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#024). See to what he received us - to
a happiness transcending all comprehension; see for what he received us
- for his Father's glory; he had this in his eye in all the instances of
his favour to us.

II\. We must receive one another to the glory of God. This must be our
great end in all our actions, that God may be glorified; and nothing
more conduces to this than the mutual love and kindness of those that
profess religion; compare [Rom 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#006),
That you may with one mind and one mouth glorify God. That which was a
bone of contention among them was a different apprehension about meats
and drinks, which took rise in distinction between Jews and Gentiles.
Now, to prevent and make up this different, he shows how Jesus Christ
has received both Jews and Gentiles; in him they are both one, one new
man, [Eph 2:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014). Now it is a rule,
Quae conveniunt in aliquo tertio, inter se conveniunt - Things which
agree with a third thing agree with each other. Those that agree in
Christ, who is the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last, and the
great centre of unity, may well afford to agree among themselves. This
coalescence of the Jews and Gentiles in Christ and Christianity was a
thing that filled and affected Paul so much that he could not mention it
without some enlargement and illustration.

1\. He received the Jews, [Rom 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#008).
Let not any think hardly or scornfully therefore of those that were
originally Jews, and still, through weakness, retain some savour of
their old Judaism; for, (1.) Jesus Christ was a minister of the
circumcision. That he was a minister, diakonos - a servant, bespeaks his
great and exemplary condescension, and puts an honour upon the ministry:
but that he was a minister of the circumcision, was himself circumcised
and made under the law, and did in his own person preach the gospel to
the Jews, who were of the circumcision - this makes the nation of the
Jews more considerable than otherwise they appear to be. Christ
conversed with the Jews, blessed them, looked upon himself as primarily
sent to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, laid hold of the seed of
Abraham ([Heb 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#016), margin), and by
them, as it were, caught at the whole body of mankind. Christ's personal
ministry was appropriated to them, though the apostles had their
commission enlarged. (2.) He was so for the truth of God. That which he
preached to them was the truth; for he came into the world to bear
witness to the truth, [Joh 18:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#037). And
he is himself the truth, [Joh 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006).
Or, for the truth of God, that is, to make good the promises given to
the patriarchs concerning the special mercy God had in store for their
seed. It was not for the merit of the Jews, but for the truth of God,
that they were thus distinguished - that God might approve himself true
to this word which he had spoken. - To confirm the promises made unto
the fathers. The best confirmation of promises is the performance of
them. It was promised that in the seed of Abraham all the nations of the
earth should be blessed, that Shiloh should come from between the feet
of Judah, that out of Israel should he proceed that should have the
dominion, that out of Zion should go forth the law, and many the like.
There were many intermediate providences which seemed to weaken those
promises, providences which threatened the fatal decay of that people;
but when Messiah the Prince appeared in the fulness of time, as a
minister of the circumcision, all these promises were confirmed, and the
truth of them was made to appear; for in Christ all the promises of God,
both those of the Old Testament and those of the New, are Yea, and in
him Amen. Understanding by the promises made to the fathers the whole
covenant of grace, darkly administered under the Old Testament, and
brought to a clearer light now under the gospel, it was Christ's great
errand to confirm that covenant, [Dan
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027). He confirmed it by shedding the
blood of the covenant.

2\. He received the Gentiles likewise. This he shows, [Rom
15:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#009).

(1.) Observe Christ's favour to the Gentiles, in taking them in to
praise God - the work of the church on earth and the wages of that in
heaven. One design of Christ was that the Gentiles likewise might be
converted that they might be one with the Jews in Christ's mystical
body. A good reason why they should not think the worse of any Christian
for his having been formerly a Gentile; for Christ has received him. He
invites the Gentiles, and welcomes them. Now observe how their
conversion is here expressed: That the Gentiles might glorify God for
his mercy. A periphrasis of conversion. \[1.\] They shall have matter
for praise, even the mercy of God. Considering the miserable and
deplorable condition that the Gentile world was in, the receiving of
them appears more as an act of mercy than the receiving of the Jews.
Those that were Lo-ammi - not a people, were Lo-ruhama - not obtaining
mercy, [Hos 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#006), [Hos
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#009); [Hos
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023). The greatest mercy of God to any
people is the receiving of them into covenant with himself: and it is
good to take notice of God's mercy in receiving us. \[2.\] They shall
have a heart for praise. They shall glorify God for his mercy.
Unconverted sinners do nothing to glorify God; but converting grace
works in the soul a disposition to speak and do all to the glory of God;
God intended to reap a harvest of glory from the Gentiles, who had been
so long turning his glory into shame.

(2.) The fulfilling of the scriptures in this. The favour of God to the
Gentiles was not only mercy, but truth. Though there were not promises
directly given to them, as to the fathers of the Jews, yet there were
many prophesies concerning them, which related to the calling of them,
and the embodying of them in the church, some of which he mentions
because it was a thing that the Jews were hardly persuaded to believe.
Thus, by referring them to the Old Testament, he labours to qualify
their dislike of the Gentiles, and so to reconcile the parties at
variance. \[1.\] It was foretold that the Gentiles should have the
gospel preached to them: "I will confess to thee among the Gentiles
([Rom 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#009)), that is, thy name shall
be known and owned in the Gentile world, there shall gospel grace and
love be celebrated." This is quoted from [Psa
18:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#049), I will give thanks unto thee, O
Lord, among the heathen. A thankful explication and commemoration of the
name of God are an excellent means of drawing others to know and praise
God. Christ, in and by his apostles and ministers, whom he sent to
disciple all nations, did confess to God among the Gentiles. The
exaltation of Christ, as well as the conversion of sinners, is set forth
by the praising of God. Christ's declaring God's name to his brethren is
called his praising God in the midst of the congregation, [Psa
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#022). Taking these words as spoken by
David, they were spoken when he was old and dying, and he was not likely
to confess to God among the Gentiles; but when David's psalms are read
and sung among the Gentiles, to the praise and glory of God, it may be
said that David is confessing to God among the Gentiles, and singing to
his name. He that was the sweet psalmist of the Gentiles. Converting
grace makes people greatly in love with David's psalms. Taking them as
spoken by Christ, the Son of David, it may be understood of his
spiritual indwelling by faith in the hearts of all the praising saints.
If any confess to God among the Gentiles, and sing to his name, it is
not they, but Christ and his grace in them. I live, yet not I, but
Christ liveth in me; so, I praise, yet not I, but Christ in me. \[2.\]
That the Gentiles should rejoice with his people, [Rom
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#010). This is quoted from that song
of Moses, [Deu 32:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#043). Observe, Those
who were incorporated among his people are said to rejoice with his
people. No greater joy can come to any people than the coming of the
gospel among them in power. Those Jews that retain a prejudice against
the Gentiles will by no means admit them to any of their joyful
festivities; for (say they) a stranger intermeddleth not with the joy,
[Pro 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#010). But, the partition-wall
being taken down, the Gentiles are welcome to rejoice with his people.
Being brought into the church, they share in its sufferings, are
companions in patience and tribulation, to recompense which they share
in the joy. \[3.\] That they should praise God ([Rom
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#011)): Praise the Lord, all ye
Gentiles. This is quoted out of that short psalm, [Psa
117:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#001). Converting grace sets people a
praising God, furnishes with the richest matter for praise, and gives a
heart to it. The Gentiles had been, for many ages, praising their idols
of wood and stone, but now they are brought to praise the Lord; and this
David in spirit speaks of. In calling upon all the nations to praise the
Lord, it is intimated that they shall have the knowledge of him. \[4.\]
That they should believe in Christ (v. 12), quoted from [Isa
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010), where observe, First, The
revelation of Christ, as the Gentiles' king. He is here called the root
of Jesse, that is, such a branch from the family of David as is the very
life and strength of the family: compare [Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001). Christ was David's Lord, and yet
withal he was the Son of David ([Mat
22:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#045)), for he was the root and
offspring of David, [Rev 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016).
Christ, as God, was David's root; Christ, as man, was David's offspring.
- And he that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles. This explains the
figurative expression of the prophet, he shall stand for an ensign of
the people. When Christ rose from the dead, when he ascended on high, it
was to reign over the Gentiles. Secondly, The recourse of the Gentiles
to him: In him shall the Gentiles trust. Faith is the soul's confidence
in Christ and dependence on him. The prophet has it, to him shall the
Gentiles seek. The method of faith is first to seek unto Christ, as to
one proposed to us for a Saviour; and, finding him able and willing to
save, then to trust in him. Those that know him will trust in him. Or,
this seeking to him is the effect of a trust in him; seeking him by
prayer, and pursuant endeavours. We shall never seek to Christ till we
trust in him. Trust is the mother; diligence in the use of means the
daughter. Jews and Gentiles being thus united in Christ's love, why
should they not be united in one another's love?

[Romans 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 15:13</span></span>

Here is another prayer directed to God, as the God of hope; and it is,
as the former ([Rom 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#005), [Rom
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#006)), for spiritual blessings: these
are the blest blessings, and to be first and chiefly prayed for.

I. Observe how he addresses himself to God, as the God of hope. It is
good in prayer to fasten upon those names, titles, and attributes of
God, which are most suitable to the errand we come upon, and will best
serve to encourage our faith concerning it. Every word in the prayer
should be a plea. Thus should the cause be skilfully ordered, and the
mouth filled with arguments. God is the God of hope. He is the
foundation on which our hope is built, and he is the builder that doth
himself raise it: he is both the object of our hope, and the author of
it. That hope is but fancy, and will deceive us, which is not fastened
upon God (as the goodness hoped for, and the truth hoped in), and which
is not of his working in us. We have both together, [Psa
119:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#049). Thy word - there is God the
object; on which thou hast caused me to hope - there is God the author
of our hope, [Pe1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#003).

II\. What he asks of God, not for himself, but for them.

1\. That they might be filled with all joy and peace in believing. Joy
and peace are two of those things in which the kingdom of God consists,
[Rom 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017). Joy in God, peace of
conscience, both arising from a sense of our justification; see [Rom
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001), [Rom
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#002). Joy and peace in our own bosoms
would promote a cheerful unity and unanimity with our brethren. Observe,
(1.) How desirable this joy and peace are: they are filling. Carnal joy
puffs up the soul, but cannot fill it; therefore in laughter the heart
is sad. True, heavenly, spiritual joy is filling to the soul; it has a
satisfaction in it, answerable to the soul's vast and just desires. Thus
does God satiate and replenish the weary soul. Nothing more than this
joy, only more of it, even the perfection of it in glory, is the desire
of the soul that hath it, [Psa 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#006),
[Psa 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#007); [Psa
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#008); [Psa
63:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#005); [Psa
65:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#004). (2.) How it is attainable.
\[1.\] By prayer. We must go to God for it; he will for this be enquired
of. Prayer fetches in spiritual joy and peace. \[2.\] By believing; that
is the means to be used. It is vain, and flashy, and transient joy, that
is the product of fancy; true substantial joy is the fruit of faith.
Believing, you rejoice with joy unspeakable, [Pe1
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#008). It is owing to the weakness of
our faith that we are so much wanting in joy and peace. Only believe;
believe the goodness of Christ, the love of Christ, the promises of the
covenant, and the joys and glories of heaven; let faith be the substance
and evidence of these things, and the result must needs be joy and
peace. Observe, It is all joy and peace - all sorts of true joy and
peace. When we come to God by prayer we must enlarge our desires; we are
not straitened in him, why should we be straitened in ourselves? Ask for
all joy; open thy mouth wide, and he will fill it.

2\. That they might abound in hope through the power of the Holy Ghost.
The joy and peace of believers arise chiefly from their hopes. What is
laid out upon them is but little, compared with what is laid up for
them; therefore the more hope they have the more joy and peace they
have. We do then abound in hope when we hope for great things from God,
and are greatly established and confirmed in these hopes. Christians
should desire and labour after an abundance of hope, such hope as will
not make ashamed. This is through the power of the Holy Ghost. The same
almighty power that works grace begets and strengthens this hope. Our
own power will never reach it; and therefore where this hope is, and is
abounding, the blessed Spirit must have all the glory.

[Romans 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 15:14</span></span>

Here, I. He commends these Christians with the highest characters that
could be. He began his epistle with their praises ([Rom
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008)), Your faith is spoken of
throughout the world, thereby to make way for his discourse: and,
because sometimes he had reproved them sharply, he now concludes with
the like commendation, to qualify them, and to part friends. This he
does like an orator. It was not a piece of idle flattery and compliment,
but a due acknowledgment of their worth, and of the grace of God in
them. We must be forward to observe and commend in others that which is
excellent and praise-worthy; it is part of the present recompence of
virtue and usefulness, and will be of use to quicken others to a holy
emulation. It was a great credit to the Romans to be commended by Paul,
a man of such great judgment and integrity, too skilful to be deceived
and too honest to flatter. Paul had no personal acquaintance with these
Christians, and yet he says he was persuaded of their excellencies,
though he knew them only be hearsay. As we must not, on the one hand, be
so simple as to believe every word; so, on the other hand, we must not
be so skeptical as to believe nothing; but especially we must be forward
to believe good concerning others: in this case charity hopeth all
things, and believeth all things, and (if the probabilities be any way
strong, as here they were) is persuaded. It is safer to err on this
side. Now observe what it was that he commended them for. 1. That they
were full of goodness; therefore the more likely to take in good part
what he had written, and to account it a kindness; and not only so, but
to comply with it, and to put it in practice, especially that which
relates to their union and to the healing of their differences. A good
understanding of one another, and a good will to one another, would soon
put an end to strife. 2. Filled with all knowledge. Goodness and
knowledge together! A very rare and an excellent conjunction; the head
and the heart of the new man. All knowledge, all necessary knowledge,
all the knowledge of those things which belong to their everlasting
peace. 3. Able to admonish one another. To this there is a further gift
requisite, even the gift of utterance. Those that have goodness and
knowledge should communicate what they have for the use and benefit of
others. "You that excel so much in good gifts may think you have no need
of any instructions of mine." It is a comfort to faithful ministers to
see their work superseded by the gifts and graces of their people. How
gladly would ministers leave off their admonishing work, if people were
able and willing to admonish one another! Would to God that all the
Lord's people were prophets. But that which is every body's work is
nobody's work; and therefore,

II\. He clears himself from the suspicion of intermeddling needlessly
with that which did not belong to him, [Rom
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#015). Observe how affectionately he
speaks to them: My brethren ([Rom
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#014)), and again, brethren, [Rom
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#015). He had himself, and taught
others, the art of obliging. He calls them all his brethren, to teach
them brotherly love one to another. Probably he wrote the more
courteously to them because, being Roman citizens living near the court,
they were more genteel, and made a better figure; and therefore Paul,
who became all things to all men, was willing, by the respectfulness of
his style, to please them for their good. He acknowledges he had written
boldly in some sort - tolmēroteron apo merous, in a manner that looked
like boldness and presumption, and for which some might perhaps charge
him with taking too much upon him. But then consider,

1\. He did it only as their remembrancer: As putting you in mind. such
humble thoughts had Paul of himself, though he excelled in knowledge,
that he would not pretend to tell them that which they did not know
before, but only to remind them of that in which they had formerly been
by others instructed. So Peter, [Pe2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#012); [Pe2
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001). People commonly excuse themselves
from hearing the word with this, that the minister can tell them nothing
but what they knew before. If it be so, yet have they not need to know
it better, and to be put in mind of it?

2\. He did it as the apostle of the Gentiles. It was in pursuance of his
office: Because of the grace (that is, the apostleship, [Rom
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#005)) given to me of God, to be the
minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, [Rom
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016). Paul reckoned it a great
favour, and an honour that God had put upon him, in putting him into
that office, [Rom 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#013). Now, because
of this grace given to him, he thus laid out himself among the Gentiles,
that he might not receive that grace of God in vain. Christ received
that he might give; so did Paul; so have we talents which must not be
buried. Places and offices must be filled up with duty. It is good for
ministers to be often remembering the grace that is given unto them of
God. Minister verbi es, hoc age - You are a minister of the word; give
yourself wholly to it, was Mr. Perkins's motto. Paul was a minister.
Observe here, (1.) Whose minister he was: the minister of Jesus Christ,
[Co1 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#001). He is our Master; his we
are, and him we serve. (2.) To whom: to the Gentiles. So God had
appointed him, [Act 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#021). So Peter
and he had agreed, [Gal 2:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#007). These
Romans were Gentiles: "Now," says he, "I do not thrust myself upon you,
nor seek any lordship over you; I am appointed to it: if you think I am
rude and bold, my commission is my warrant, and must bear me out." (3.)
What he ministered: the gospel of God; hierourgounta to euangelion -
ministering as about holy things (so the word signifies), executing the
office of a Christian priest, more spiritual, and therefore more
excellent, than the Levitical priesthood. (4.) For what end: that the
offering up (or sacrificing) of the Gentiles might be acceptable - that
god might have the glory which would redound to his name by the
conversion of the Gentiles. Paul laid out himself thus to bring about
something that might be acceptable to God. Observe how the conversion of
the Gentiles is expressed: it is the offering up of the Gentiles; it is
prosphora tōn ethnōn - the oblation of the Gentiles, in which the
Gentiles are looked upon either, \[1.\] As the priests, offering the
oblation of prayer and praise and other acts of religion. Long had the
Jews been the holy nation, the kingdom of priests, but now the Gentiles
are made priests unto God ([Rev 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#010)),
by their conversion to the Christian faith consecrated to the service of
God, that the scripture may be fulfilled, In ever place incense shall be
offered, and a pure offering, [Mal
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011). The converted Gentiles are said
to be made nigh ([Eph 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#013)) - the
periphrasis of priests. Or, \[2.\] The Gentiles are themselves the
sacrifice offered up to God by Paul, in the name of Christ, a living
sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, [Rom
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001). A sanctified soul is offered up
to God in the flames of love, upon Christ the altar. Paul gathered in
souls by his preaching, not to keep them to himself, but to offer them
up to God: Behold, I, and the children that God hath given me. And it is
an acceptable offering, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost. Paul
preached to them, and dealt with them; but that which made them
sacrifices to God was their sanctification; and this was not his work,
but the work of the Holy Ghost. None are acceptably offered to God but
those that are sanctified: unholy things can never be pleasing to the
holy God.

[Romans 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 15:17</span></span>

The apostle here gives some account of himself and of his own affairs.
Having mentioned his ministry and apostleship, he goes on further to
magnify his office in the efficacy of it, and to mention to the glory of
God the great success of his ministry and the wonderful things that God
had done by him, for encouragement to the Christian church at Rome, that
they were not alone in the profession of Christianity, but though,
compared with the multitude of their idolatrous neighbours, they were
but a little flock, yet, up and down the country, there were many that
were their companions in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ. It
was likewise a great confirmation of the truth of the Christian doctrine
that it had such strange success, and was so far propagated by such weak
and unlikely means, such multitudes captivated to the obedience of
Christ by the foolishness of preaching. Therefore Paul gives them this
account, which he makes the matter of his glorying; not vain glory, but
holy gracious glorying, which appears by the limitations; it is through
Jesus Christ. Thus does he centre all his glorying in Christ; he teaches
us so to do, [Co1 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031). Not unto us,
[Psa 115:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#001). And it is in those things
which pertain to God. The conversion of souls is one of those things
that pertain to God, and therefore is the matter of Paul's glorying; not
the things of the flesh. Whereof I may glory, echō oun kauchēsin en
Christō lēsou ta pros Theon. I would rather read it thus: Therefore I
have a rejoicing in Christ Jesus (it is the same word that is used, [Co2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012), and [Phi
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#003), where it is the character of the
circumcision that they rejoice - kauchōmenoi, in Christ Jesus)
concerning the things of God; or those things that are offered to God -
the living sacrifices of the Gentiles, [Rom
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016). Paul would have them to rejoice
with him in the extent and efficacy of his ministry, of which he speaks
not only with the greatest deference possible to the power of Christ,
and the effectual working of the Spirit as all in all; but with a
protestation of the truth of what he said ([Rom
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#018)): I will not dare to speak of
any of those things which Christ hath not wrought by me. He would not
boast of things without his line, nor take the praise of another man's
work, as he might have done when he was writing to distant strangers,
who perhaps could not contradict him; but (says he) I dare not do it: a
faithful man dares not lie, however he be tempted, dares be true,
however he be terrified. now, in this account of himself, we may
observe,

I. His unwearied diligence and industry in his work. He was one that
laboured more abundantly than they all.

1\. He preached in many places: From Jerusalem, whence the law went
forth as a lamp that shineth, and round about unto Illyricum, many
hundred miles distant from Jerusalem. We have in the book of the Acts an
account of Paul's travels. There we find him, after he was sent forth to
preach to the Gentiles (Acts 13), labouring in that blessed work in
Seleucia, Cyprus, Pamphylia, Pisidia, and Lycaonia (Acts 13 and 14),
afterwards travelling through Syria and Cilicia, Phrygia, Galatia,
Mysia, Troas, and thence called over to Macedonia, and so into Europe,
Acts 15 and 16. Then we find him very busy at Thessalonica, Berea,
Athens, Corinth, Ephesus, and the parts adjacent. Those that know the
extent and distance of these countries will conclude Paul an active man,
rejoicing as a strong man to run a race. Illyricum is the country now
called Sclavonia, bordering upon Hungary. Some take it for the same with
Bulgaria; others for the lower Pannonia: however, it was a great way
from Jerusalem. Now it might be suspected that if Paul undertook so much
work, surely he did it by the halves. "No," says he, "I have fully
preached the Gospel of Christ - have given them a full account of the
truth and terms of the gospel, have not shunned to declare the whole
counsel of God ([Act 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#027)), have kept
back nothing that was necessary for them to know." Filled the gospel, so
the word is; peplērōkenai to euangelion, filled it as the net is filled
with fishes in a large draught; or filled the gospel, that is, filled
them with the gospel. Such a change does the gospel make that, when it
comes in power to any place, it fills the place. Other knowledge is
airy, and leaves souls empty, but he knowledge of the gospel is filling.

2\. He preached in places that had not heard the gospel before, [Rom
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#020), [Rom
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#021). He broke up the fallow ground,
laid the first stone in many places, and introduced Christianity where
nothing had reigned for many ages but idolatry and witchcraft, and all
sorts of diabolism. Paul broke the ice, and therefore must needs meet
with the more difficulties and discouragements in his work. Those who
preached in Judea had upon this account a much easier task than Paul,
who was the apostle of the Gentiles; for they entered into the labours
of others, [Joh 4:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#038). Paul, being a
hardy man, was called out to the hardest work; there were many
instructors, but Paul was the great father - many that watered, but Paul
was the great planter. Well, he was a bold man that made the first
attack upon the palace of the strong man armed in the Gentile world,
that first assaulted Satan's interest there, and Paul was that man who
ventured the first onset in many places, and suffered greatly for it. He
mentions this as a proof of his apostleship; for the office of the
apostles was especially to bring in those that were without, and to lay
the foundations of the new Jerusalem; see [Rev
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#014). Not but that Paul preached in
many places where others had been at work before him; but he principally
and mainly laid himself out for the good of those that sat in darkness.
He was in care not to build upon another man's foundation, lest he
should thereby disprove his apostleship, and give occasion to those who
sought occasion to reflect upon him. He quotes a scripture for this out
of [Isa 52:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#015), To whom he was not
spoken of, they shall see. That which had not been told them, shall they
see; so the prophet has it, much to the same purport. This made the
success of Paul's preaching the more remarkable. The transition from
darkness to light is more sensible than the after-growth and increase of
that light. And commonly the greatest success of the gospel is at its
first coming to a place; afterwards people become sermon-proof.

II\. The great and wonderful success that he had in his work: It was
effectual to make the Gentiles obedient. The design of the gospel is to
bring people to be obedient; it is not only a truth to be believed, but
a law to be obeyed. This Paul aimed at in all his travels; not his own
wealth and honour (if he had, he had sadly missed his aim), but the
conversion and salvation of souls: this his heart was upon, and for this
he travailed in birth again. Now how was this great work wrought? 1.
Christ was the principal agent. He does not say, "which I worked," but
"which Christ wrought by me," [Rom
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#018). Whatever good we do, it is not
we, but Christ by us, that does it; the work is his, the strength his;
he is all in all, he works all our works, [Phi
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013); [Isa
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#012). Paul takes all occasions to own
this, that the whole praise might be transmitted to Christ. 2. Paul was
a very active instrument: By word and deed, that is, by his preaching,
and by the miracles he wrought to confirm his doctrine; or his preaching
and his living. Those ministers are likely to win souls that preach both
by word and deed, by their conversation showing forth the power of the
truths they preach. This is according to Christ's example, who began
both to do and teach, [Act 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001). -
Through mighty signs and wonders: en dunamei sēmeiōn - by the power, or
in the strength, of signs and wonders. These made the preaching of the
word so effectual, being the appointed means of conviction, and the
divine seal affixed to the gospel-charter, [Mar
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#017), [Mar
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#018). 3. The power of the Spirit of
God made this effectual, and crowned all with the desired success, [Rom
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#019). (1.) The power of the Spirit in
Paul, as in the other apostles, for the working of those miracles.
Miracles were wrought by the power of the Holy Ghost ([Act
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#008)), therefore reproaching the
miracles is called the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. Or, (2.) The
power of the Spirit in the hearts of those to whom the word was
preached, and who saw the miracles, making these means effectual to some
and not to others. It is the Spirit's operation that makes the
difference. Paul himself, as great a preacher as he was, with all his
might signs and wonders, could not make one soul obedient further than
the power of the Spirit of God accompanied his labours. It was the
Spirit of the Lord of hosts that made those great mountains plain before
this Zerubbabel. This is an encouragement to faithful ministers, who
labour under the sense of great weakness and infirmity, that it is all
one to the blessed Spirit to work by many, or by those that have on
power. The same almighty Spirit that wrought with Paul often perfects
strength in weakness, and ordains praise out of the mouths of babes and
sucklings. This success which he had in preaching is that which he here
rejoices in; for the converted nations were his joy and crown of
rejoicing: and he tells them of it, not only that they might rejoice
with him, but that they might be the more ready to receive the truths
which he had written to them, and to own him whom Christ had thus
signally owned.

[Romans 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 15:22</span></span>

St. Paul here declares his purpose to come and see the Christians at
Rome. Upon this head his matter is but common and ordinary, appointing a
visit to his friends; but the manner of his expression is gracious and
savoury, very instructive, and for our imitation. We should learn by it
to speak of our common affairs in the language of Canaan. Even our
common discourse should have an air of grace; by this it will appear
what country we belong to. it should seem that Paul's company was very
much desired at Rome. He was a man that had as many friends and as many
enemies as most men ever had: he passed through evil report and good
report. No doubt they had heard much of him at Rome, and longed to see
him. Should the apostle of the Gentiles be a stranger at Rome, the
metropolis of the Gentile world? Why as to this he excuses it that he
had not come yet, he promises to come shortly, and gives a good reason
why he could not come now.

I. He excuses it that he never came yet. Observe how careful Paul was to
keep in with his friends, and to prevent or anticipate any exceptions
against him; not as one that lorded it over God's heritage. 1. He
assures them that he had a great desire to see them; not to see Rome,
though it was now in its greatest pomp and splendour, nor to see the
emperor's court, nor to converse with the philosophers and learned men
that were then at Rome, though such conversation must needs be very
desirable to so great a scholar as Paul was, but to come unto you ([Rom
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#003)), a company of poor despised
saints in Rome, hated of the world, but loving God, and beloved of him.
These were the men that Paul was ambitious of an acquaintance with at
Rome; they were the excellent ones in whom he delighted, [Psa
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#003). And he had a special desire to
see them, because of the great character they had in all the churches
for faith and holiness; they were men that excelled in virtue, and
therefore Paul was so desirous to come to them. This desire Paul had had
for many years, and yet could never compass it. The providence of God
wisely overrules the purposes and desires of men. God's dearest servants
are not always gratified in every thing that they have a mind to. Yet
all that delight in God have the desire of their heart fulfilled ([Psa
37:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#004)), though all the desires in their
heart be not humoured. 2. He tells them that the reason why he could not
come to them was because he had so much work cut out for him elsewhere.
For which cause, that is, because of his labours in other countries, he
was so much hindered. God had opened a wide door for him in other
places, and so turned him aside. Observe in this, (1.) The gracious
providence of God conversant in a special manner about his ministers,
casting their lot, not according to their contrivance, but according to
his own purpose. Paul was several times crossed in his intentions;
sometimes hindered by Satan (as [Th1
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#018)), sometimes forbidden by the
Spirit ([Act 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#007)), and here diverted
by other work. Man purposes but God disposes, [Pro
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#009); [Pro
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#021); [Jer
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#023). Ministers purpose, and their
friends purpose concerning them, but God overrules both, and orders the
journeys, removals, and settlements, of his faithful ministers as he
pleases. The stars are in the right hand of Christ, to shine where he
sets them. The gospel does not come by chance to any place, but by the
will and counsel of God. (2.) The gracious prudence of Paul, in
bestowing his time and pains where there was most need. Had Paul
consulted his own ease, wealth, and honour, the greatness of the word
would never have hindered him from seeing Rome, but would rather have
driven him thither, where he might have had more preferment and taken
less pains. But Paul sought the things of Christ more than his own
things, and therefore would not leave his work of planting churches, no,
not for a time, to go and see Rome. The Romans were whole, and needed
not the physician as other poor places that were sick and dying. While
men and women were every day dropping into eternity, and their precious
souls perishing for lack of vision, it was no time for Paul to trifle.
There was now a gale of opportunity, the fields were white unto the
harvest; such a season slipped might never be retrieved; the necessities
of poor souls were pressing, and called aloud, and therefore Paul must
be busy. It concerns us all to do that first which is most needful. True
grace teaches us to prefer that which is necessary before that which is
unnecessary, [Luk 10:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#041), [Luk
10:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#042). And Christian prudence teaches
us to prefer that which is more necessary before that which is less so.
This Paul mentions as a sufficient satisfying reason. We must not take
it ill of our friends if they prefer necessary work, which is pleasing
to God, before unnecessary visits and compliments, which may be pleasing
to us. In this, as in other things, we must deny ourselves.

II\. He promised to come and see them shortly, [Rom
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#023), [Rom
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#024), [Rom
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#029). Having no more place in these
parts, namely, in Greece, where he then was. The whole of that country
being more or less leavened with the savour of the gospel, churches
being planted in the most considerable towns and pastors settled to
carry on the work which Paul had begun, he had little more to do there.
He had driven the chariot of the gospel to the sea-coast, and having
thus conquered Greece he is ready to wish there were another Greece to
conquer. Paul was one that went through with his work, and yet then did
not think of taking his ease, but set himself to contrive more work, to
devise liberal things. Here was a workman that needed not to be ashamed.
Observe,

1\. How he forecasted his intended visit. His project was to see them in
his way to Spain. It appears by this that Paul intended a journey into
Spain, to plant Christianity there. The difficulty and peril of the
work, the distance of the place, the danger of the voyage, the other
good works (though less needful, he thinks) which Paul might find to do
in other places, did not quench the flame of his holy zeal for the
propagating of the gospel, which did even eat him up, and make him
forget himself. But it is not certain whether ever he fulfilled his
purpose, and went to Spain. Many of the best expositors think he did
not, but was hindered in this as he was in others of his purposes. He
did indeed come to Rome, but he was brought thither a prisoner, and
there was detained two years; and whither he went after is uncertain:
but several of his epistles which he wrote in prison intimate his
purpose to go eastward, and not towards Spain. However, Paul, forasmuch
as it was in thine heart to bring the light of the gospel into Spain,
thou didst well, in that it was in thine heart; as God said to David,
[Ch2 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#008). The grace of God often with
favour accepts the sincere intention, when the providence of God in
wisdom prohibits the execution. And do not we serve a good Master then?
[Co2 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#012). Now, in his way to Spain he
proposed to come to them. Observe his prudence. It is wisdom for every
one of us to order our affairs so that we may do the most work in the
least time. Observe how doubtfully he speaks: I trust to see you: not,
"I am resolved I will," but, "I hope I shall." We must purpose all our
purposes and make all our promises in like manner with a submission to
the divine providence; not boasting ourselves of tomorrow, because we
know not what a day may bring forth, [Pro
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#001); [Jam
4:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013).

2\. What he expected in his intended visit. (1.) What he expected from
them. He expected they would bring him on his way towards Spain. It was
not a stately attendance, such as princes have but a loving attendance,
such as friends give, that Paul expected. Spain was then a province of
the empire, well known to the Romans, who had a great correspondence
with it, and therefore they might be helpful to Paul in his voyage
thither; and it was not barely their accompanying him part of the way,
but their furthering him in his expedition, that he counted upon: not
only out of their respect to Paul, but out of respect to the souls of
those poor Spaniards that Paul was going to preach to. It is justly
expected from all Christians that they should lay out themselves for the
promoting and furthering of every good work, especially that blessed
work of the conversion of souls, which they should contrive to make as
easy as may be to their ministers, and as successful as may be to poor
souls. (2.) What he expected in them: to be somewhat filled with their
company. That which Paul desired was their company and conversation. The
good company of the saints is very desirable and delightful. Paul was
himself a man of great attainments in knowledge and grace, taller by
head and shoulders than other Christians in these things, and yet see
how he pleased himself with the thoughts of good company; for as iron
sharpens iron so does a man the countenance of his friend. He intimates
that he intended to make some stay with them, for he would be filled
with their company; not just look at them, and away: and yet he thinks
their converse so pleasant that he should never have enough of it; it is
but somewhat filled, he thought he should leave them with a desire of
more of their company. Christian society, rightly managed and improved,
is a heaven upon earth, a comfortable earnest of our gathering together
unto Christ at the great day. Yet observe, It is but somewhat filled,
apo merous - in part. The satisfaction we have in communion with the
saints in this world is but partial; we are but somewhat filled. It is
partial compared with our communion with Christ; that, and that only,
will completely satisfy, that will fill the soul. It is partial compared
with the communion we hope to have with the saints in the other world.
When we shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, with all the
saints, and none but saints, and saints made perfect, we shall have
enough of that society, and be quite filled with that company. (3.) What
he expected from God with them, [Rom
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#029). He expected to come in the
fulness of the blessing of the gospel of Christ. Observe, Concerning
what he expected from them he speaks doubtfully: I trust to be brought
on my way, and to be filled with your company. Paul had learnt not to be
too confident of the best. These very men slipped from him afterwards,
when he had occasion to use them ([Ti2
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#016)), At my first answer, no man
stood by me; none of the Christians at Rome. The Lord teach us to cease
from man. But concerning what he expected from God he speaks
confidently. It was uncertain whether he should come or no, but I am
sure when I do come I shall come in the fulness, etc. We cannot expect
too little from man, nor too much from God. Now Paul expected that God
would bring him to them, loaded with blessings, so that he should be an
instrument of doing a great deal of good among them, and fill them with
the blessings of the gospel. Compare [Rom
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#011), That I may impart unto you some
spiritual gift. The blessing of the gospel of Christ is the best and
most desirable blessing. When Paul would raise their expectation of
something great and good in his coming, he directs them to hope for the
blessings of the gospel, spiritual blessings, knowledge, and grace, and
comfort. There is then a happy meeting between people and ministers,
when they are both under the fulness of the blessing. The blessing of
the gospel is the treasure which we have in earthen vessels. When
ministers are fully prepared to give out, and people fully prepared to
receive, this blessing, both are happy. Many have the gospel who have
not the blessing of the gospel, and so they have it in vain. The gospel
will not profit, unless God bless it to us; and it is our duty to wait
upon him for that blessing, and for the fulness of it.

III\. He gives them a good reason why he could not come and see them
now, because he had other business upon his hands, which required his
attendance, upon which he must first make a journey to Jerusalem, [Rom
15:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025). He gives a particular
account of it, to show that the excuse was real. He was going to
Jerusalem, as the messenger of the church's charity to the poor saints
there. Observe what he says,

1\. Concerning this charity itself. And he speaks of that upon this
occasion probably to excite the Roman Christians to do the like,
according to their ability. Examples are moving, and Paul was very
ingenious at begging, not for himself, but for others. Observe, (1.) For
whom it was intended: For the poor saints which are at Jerusalem, [Rom
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#026). It is no strange thing for
saints to be poor. Those whom God favours the world often frowns upon;
therefore riches are not the best things, nor is poverty a curse. It
seems, the saints at Jerusalem were poorer than other saints, either
because the wealth of that people in general was now declining, as their
utter ruin was hastening on (and, to be sure, if any must be kept poor,
the saints must), or because the famine that was over all the world in
the days of Claudius Caesar did in a special manner prevail in Judea, a
dry country; and, God having called the poor of this world, the
Christians smarted most by it. This was the occasion of that
contribution mentioned [Act 11:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028).
Or, because the saints at Jerusalem suffered most by persecution; for of
all people the unbelieving Jews were most inveterate in their rage and
malice against the Christians, wrath having come upon them to the
uttermost, [Th1 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#016). The Christian
Hebrews are particularly noted too as having had their good spoiled
([Heb 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#034)), in consideration of
which this contribution was made for them. Though the saints at
Jerusalem were at a great distance form them, yet they thus extended
their bounty and liberality to them, to teach us as we have ability, and
as there is occasion, to stretch out the hand of our charity to all that
are of the household of faith, though in places distant from us. Though
in personal instances of poverty every church should take care to
maintain their own poor (for such poor we have always with us), yet
sometimes, when more public instances of poverty are presented as
objects of our charity, though a great way off from us, we must extend
our bounty, as the sun his beams; and, with the virtuous woman, stretch
out our hands to the poor, and reach forth our hands to the needy, [Pro
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#020). (2.) By whom it was collected:
By those of Macedonia (the chief of whom were the Philippians) and
Achaia (the chief of whom were the Corinthians), two flourishing
churches, though yet in their infancy, newly converted to Christianity.
And I wish the observation did not hold that people are commonly more
liberal at their first acquaintance with the gospel than they are
afterwards, that, as well as other instances of the first love and the
love of the espousals, being apt to cool and decay after a while. It
seems those of Macedonia and Achaia were rich and wealthy, while those
at Jerusalem were poor and needy, Infinite Wisdom ordering it so that
some should have what others want, and so this mutual dependence of
Christians one upon another might be maintained. - It pleased them. This
intimates how ready they were to it - they were not pressed nor
constrained to it, but they did it of their own accord; and how cheerful
they were in it - they took a pleasure in doing good; and God loves a
cheerful giver. - To make a certain contribution; koinōnian tina - a
communication, in token of the communion of saints, and their
fellow-membership, as in the natural body one member communicates to the
relief, and succour, and preservation of another, as there is occasion.
Every thing that passes between Christians should be a proof and
instance of that common union which they have one with another in Jesus
Christ. Time was when the saints at Jerusalem were on the giving hand,
and very liberal they were, when they laid their estates at the
apostles' feet for charitable uses, and took special care that the
Grecian widows should not be neglected in the daily ministration, [Act
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001), etc. And now that the providence
of God had turned the scale, and made them necessitous, they found the
Grecians kind to them; for the merciful shall obtain mercy. We should
give a portion to seven, and also to eight, because we know not what
evil may be on the earth, which may make us glad to be beholden to
others. (3.) What reason there was for it ([Rom
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#027)): And their debtors they are.
Alms are called righteousness, [Psa
112:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#009). Being but stewards of what we
have, we owe it where our great Master (by the calls of providence,
concurring with the precepts of the word) orders us to dispose of it:
but here there was a special debt owing; the Gentiles were greatly
beholden to the Jews, and were bound in gratitude to be very kind to
them. From the stock of Israel came Christ himself, according to the
flesh, who is the light to enlighten the Gentiles; out of the same stock
came the prophets, and apostles, and first preachers of the gospel. The
Jews, having had the lively oracles committed to them, were the
Christians' library-keepers - out of Zion went forth the law, and the
word of the Lord from Jerusalem; their political church-state was
dissolved, and they were cut off, that the Gentiles might be admitted
in. Thus did the Gentiles partake of their spiritual things, and receive
the gospel of salvation as it were at second-hand from the Jews; and
therefore their duty is, they are bound in gratitude to minister unto
them in carnal things: it is the least they can do: leitourgēsai - to
minister as unto God in holy tings; so the word signifies. A
conscientious regard to God in works of charity and almsgiving makes
them an acceptable service and sacrifice to God, and fruit abounding to
a good account. Paul mentions this, probably, as the argument he had
used with them to persuade them to it, and it is an argument of equal
cogency to other Gentile churches.

2\. Concerning Paul's agency in this business. He could himself
contribute nothing; silver and gold he had none, but lived upon the
kindness of his friends; yet he ministered unto the saints ([Rom
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025)) by stirring up others,
receiving what was gathered, and transmitting it to Jerusalem. Many good
works of that kind stand at a stay for want of some one active person to
lead in them, and to set the wheels a going. Paul's labour in this work
is not to be interpreted as any neglect of his preaching-work, nor did
Paul leave the word of God, to serve tables; for, besides this, Paul had
other business in this journey, to visit and confirm the churches, and
took this by the bye; this was indeed a part of the trust committed to
him, in which he was concerned to approve himself faithful ([Gal
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#010)): They would that we should
remember the poor. Paul was one that laid out himself to do good every
way, like his Master, to the bodies as well as to the souls of people.
Ministering to the saints is good work, and is not below the greatest
apostles. This Paul had undertaken, and therefore he resolves to go
through with it, before he fell upon other work ([Rom
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#028)): When I have sealed to them
this fruit. He calls the alms fruit, for it is one of the fruits of
righteousness; it sprang from a root of grace in the givers, and
redounded to the benefit and comfort of the receivers. And his sealing
it intimates his great care about it, that what was given might be kept
entire, and not embezzled, but disposed of according to the design of
the givers. Paul was very solicitous to approve himself faithful in the
management of this matter: an excellent pattern for ministers to write
after, that the ministry may in nothing be blamed.

[Romans 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">rom 15:30</span></span>

Here we have, I. St. Paul's desire of a share in the prayers of the
Romans for him, expressed very earnestly, [Rom
15:30-32](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#030). Though Paul was a great
apostle, yet he begged the prayers of the meanest Christians, not here
only, but in several other of the epistles. He had prayed much for them,
and this he desires as the return of his kindness. Interchanging prayers
is an excellent token of the interchanging of loves. Paul speaks like
one that knew himself, and would hereby teach us how to value the
effectual fervent prayer of the righteous. How careful should we be lest
we do any thing to forfeit our interest in the love and prayers of god's
praying people!

1\. Observe why they must pray for him. He begs it with the greatest
importunity. He might suspect they would forget him in their prayers,
because they had no personal acquaintance with him, and therefore he
urges it so closely, and begs it with the most affectionate
obtestations, by all that is sacred and valuable: I beseech you, (1.)
"For the Lord Jesus Christ's sake. He is my Master, I am going about his
work, and his glory is interested in the success of it: if you have any
regard to Jesus Christ, and to his cause and kingdom, pray for me. You
love Christ, and own Christ; for his sake then do me this kindness."
(2.) "For the love of the Spirit. As a proof and instance of that love
which the Spirit works in the hearts of believers one to another, pray
for me; as a fruit of that communion which we have one with another by
the Spirit though we never saw one another. If ever you experienced the
Spirit's love to you, and would be found returning your love to the
Spirit, be not wanting in this office of kindness."

2\. How they must pray for him: That you strive together. (1.) That you
strive in prayer. We must put forth all that is within us in that duty;
pray with fixedness, faith, and fervency; wrestle with God, as Jacob
did; pray in praying, as Elias did ([Jam
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017)), and stir up ourselves to take
hold on God ([Isa 64:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#007)); and this is
not only when we are praying for ourselves, but when we are praying for
our friends. True love to our brethren should make us as earnest for
them as sense of our own need makes us for ourselves. (2.) That you
strive together with me. When he begged their prayers for him, he did
not intend thereby to excuse his praying for himself; no, "Strive
together with me, who am wrestling with God daily, upon my own and my
friends' account." He would have them to ply the same oar. Paul and
these Romans were distant in place, and likely to be so, and yet they
might join together in prayer; those who are put far asunder by the
disposal of God's providence may yet meet together at the throne of his
grace. Those who beg the prayers of others must not neglect to pray for
themselves.

3\. What they must beg of God for him. He mentions particulars; for, in
praying both for ourselves and for our friends, it is good to be
particular. What wilt thou that I shall do for thee? So says Christ,
when he holds out the golden sceptre. Though he knows our state and
wants perfectly, he will know them from us. He recommends himself to
their prayers, with reference to three things: - (1.) The dangers which
he was exposed to: That I may be delivered from those that do not
believe in Judea. The unbelieving Jews were the most violent enemies
Paul had and most enraged against him, and some prospect he had of
trouble from them in this journey; and therefore they must pray that God
would deliver him. We may, and must, pray against persecution. This
prayer was answered in several remarkable deliverances of Paul, recorded
Acts 21, 22, 23, and 24. (2.) His services: Pray that my service which I
have for Jerusalem may be accepted of the saints. Why, was there any
danger that it would not be accepted? Can money be otherwise than
acceptable to the poor? Yes, there was some ground of suspicion in this
case; for Paul was the apostle of the Gentiles, and as the unbelieving
Jews looked spitefully at him, which was their wickedness, so those that
believed were shy of him upon that account, which was their weakness. He
does not say, "Let them choose whether they will accept it or no; if
they will not, it shall be better bestowed;" but, "Pray that it may be
accepted." As God must be sought unto for the restraining of the ill
will of our enemies, so also for the preserving and increasing of the
good will of our friends; for God has the hearts both of the one and of
the other in his hands. (3.) His journey to them. To engage their
prayers for him, he interests them in his concerns ([Rom
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#032)): That I may come unto you with
joy. If his present journey to Jerusalem proved unsuccessful, his
intended journey to Rome would be uncomfortable. If he should not do
good, and prosper, in one visit, he thought he should have small joy of
the next: may come with joy, by the will of God. All our joy depends
upon the will of God. The comfort of the creature is in every thing
according to the disposal of the Creator.

II\. Here is another prayer of the apostle for them ([Rom
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#033)): Now the God of peace be with
you all, Amen. The Lord of hosts, the God of battle, is the God of
peace, the author and lover of peace. He describes God under this title
here, because of the divisions among them, to recommend peace to them;
if God be the God of peace, let us be men of peace. The Old Testament
blessing was, Peace be with you; now, The god of peace be with you.
Those who have the fountain cannot want any of the streams. With you
all; both weak and strong. To dispose them to a nearer union, he puts
them altogether in this prayer. Those who are united in the blessing of
God should be united in affection one to another.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 16](rom016)

</div>
