<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom010)  [Next](rom012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 11:0</span></span>

The apostle, having reconciled that great truth of the rejection of the
Jews with the promise made unto the fathers, is, in this chapter,
further labouring to mollify the harshness of it, and to reconcile it to
the divine goodness in general. It might be said, "Hath God then cast
away his people?" The apostles therefore sets himself, in this chapter,
to make a reply to this objection, and that two ways: - I. He shows at
large what the mercy is that is mixed with this wrath (v. 1-32). II. He
infers thence the infinite wisdom and sovereignty of God, with the
adoration of which he concludes this chapter and subject ([Rom
11:33-36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033)).

[Romans 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 11:1</span></span>

The apostle proposes here a plausible objection, which might be urged
against the divine conduct in casting off the Jewish nation ([Rom
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001)): "Hath God cast away his people?
Is the rejection total and final? Are they all abandoned to wrath and
ruin, and that eternal? Is the extent of the sentence so large as to be
without reserve, or the continuance of it so long as to be without
repeal? Will he have no more a peculiar people to himself?" In
opposition to this, he shows that there was a great deal of goodness and
mercy expressed along with this seeming severity, particularly he
insists upon three things: - 1. That, though some of the Jews were cast
off, yet they were not all so. 2. That, though the body of the Jews were
cast off, yet the Gentiles were taken in. And, 3. That, though the Jews
were cast off at present, yet in God's due time they should be taken
into his church again.

I. The Jews, it is true, were many of them cast off, but not all. The
supposition of this he introduces with a God forbid. He will by no means
endure such a suggestions. God had made a distinction between some of
them and others.

1\. There was a chosen remnant of believing Jews, that obtained
righteousness and life by faith in Jesus Christ, [Rom
11:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001). These are said to be such as
he foreknew ([Rom 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#002)), that is, had
thoughts of love to, before the world was; for whom he thus foreknew he
did predestinate. her lies the ground of the difference. They are called
the election ([Rom 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#007)), that is, the
elect, God's chosen ones, whom he calls the election, because that which
first distinguished them from the dignified them above others was God's
electing love. Believers are the election, all those and those only whom
God hath chosen. Now,

(1.) He shows that he himself was one of them: For I also am an
Israelite; as if he had said, "Should I say that all the Jews are
rejected, I should cut off my own claims, and see myself abandoned."
Paul was a chosen vessel ([Act 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015)),
and yet he was of the seed of Abraham, and particularly of the tribe of
Benjamin, the least and youngest of all the tribes of Israel.

(2.) He suggests that as in Elias's time, so now, this chosen remnant
was really more and greater than one would think it was, which intimates
likewise that it is no new nor unusual thing for God's grace and favour
to Israel to be limited and confined to a remnant of that people; for so
it was in Elijah's time. The scripture saith it of Elias, en Hēlia - in
the story of Elias, the great reformer of the Old Testament. Observe,
\[1.\] His mistake concerning Israel; as if their apostasy in the days
of Ahab was so general that he himself was the only faithful servant God
had in the world. He refers to [Kg1
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#014), where (it is here said) he
maketh intercession to God against Israel. A strange kind of
intercession: entunchanei tō Theō kata tou Israēl - He deals with God
against Israel; so it may be read; so entunchanō is translated, [Act
25:24](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#024). The Jews enetuchon moi - have
dealt with me. In prayer we deal with God, commune with him, discourse
with him: it is said of Elijah ([Jam
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017)) that he prayed in praying. We
are then likely to pray in praying, to make a business of that duty,
when we pray as those that are dealing with God in the duty. Now Elijah
in this prayer spoke as if there were one left faithful in Israel but
himself. See to what a low ebb the profession of religion may sometimes
be brought, and how much the face of it may be eclipsed, that the most
wise and observing men may give it up for gone. So it was in Elijah's
time. That which makes the show of a nation is the powers and the
multitude. The powers of Israel were then persecuting powers: They have
killed thy prophets, and digged down thine altars, and they seek my
life. The multitude of Israel were then idolatrous: I am left alone.
Thus those few that were faithful to God were not only lost in the crowd
of idolaters, but crushed and driven into corners by the rage of
persecutors. When the wicked rise, a man is hidden, [Pro
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#012). - Digged down thine altars; not
only neglected them, and let them go out of repair, but digged them
down. When altars were set up for Baal, it is no wonder if God's altars
were pulled down; they could not endure that standing testimony against
their idolatry. This was his intercession against Israel; as if he had
said, "Lord, is not this a people ripe for ruin, worthy to be cast off?
What else canst thou do for thy great name?" It is a very sad thing for
any person or people to have the prayers of God's people against them,
especially of God's prophets, for God espouses, and sooner or later will
visibly own, the cause of his praying people. \[2.\] The rectifying of
this mistake by the answer of God ([Rom
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#004)): I have reserved. Note, First,
Things are often much better with the church of God than wise and good
men think they are. They are ready to conclude hardly, and to give up
all for gone, when it is not so. Secondly, In times of general apostasy,
there is usually a remnant that keep their integrity - some, though but
a few; all do not go one way. Thirdly, That when there is a remnant who
keep their integrity in times of general apostasy it is God that
reserves to himself that remnant. If he had left them to themselves,
they had gone down the stream with the rest. It is his free and almighty
grace that makes the difference between them and others. - Seven
thousand: a competent number to bear their testimony against the
idolatry of Israel, and yet, compared with the many thousands of Israel,
a very small number, one of a city, and two of a tribe, like the
grape-gleanings of the vintage. Christ's flock is but a little flock;
and yet, when they come all together at last, they will be a great and
innumerable multitude, [Rev 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009). Now
the description of this remnant is that they had not bowed the knee to
the image of Baal, which was then the reigning sin of Israel. In court,
city, and country, Baal had the ascendant; and the generality of people,
more or less, paid their respect to Baal. The best evidence of integrity
is a freedom from the present prevailing corruptions of the times and
places that we live in, to swim against the stream when it is strong.
Those God will own for his faithful witnesses that are bold in bearing
their testimony to the present truth, [Pe2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#012). This is thank-worthy, not to bow
to Baal when every body bows. Sober singularity is commonly the badge of
true sincerity. \[3.\] The application of this instance to the case in
hand: Even so at this present time, [Rom
11:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005). God's methods of dispensation
towards his church are as they used to be. As it has been, so it is. In
Elijah's time there was a remnant, and so there is now. If then there
was a remnant left under the Old Testament, when the displays of grace
were less clear and the pourings out of the Spirit less plentiful, much
more now under the gospel, when the grace of God, which bringeth
salvation, appears more illustrious. - A remnant, a few of many, a
remnant of believing Jews when the rest were obstinate in their
unbelief. This is called a remnant according to the election of grace;
they are such as were chosen from eternity in the counsels of divine
love to be vessels of grace and glory. Whom he did predestinate those he
called. If the difference between them and others be made purely by the
grace of God, as certainly it is (I have reserved them, saith he, to
myself), then it must needs be according to the election; for we are
sure that whatever God does he does it according to the counsel of his
own will. Now concerning this remnant we may observe, First, Whence it
takes its rise, from the free grace of God ([Rom
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#006)), that grace which excludes
works. The eternal election, in which the difference between some and
others is first founded, is purely of grace, free grace; not for the
sake of works done or foreseen; if so, it would not be grace. Gratia non
est ullo modo gratia, si non sit omni modo gratuita - It is not grace,
properly so called, if it be not perfectly free. Election is purely
according to the good pleasure of his will, [Eph
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#005). Paul's heart was so full of the
freeness of God's grace that in the midst of his discourse he turns
aside, as it were, to make this remark, If of grace, then not of works.
And some observe that faith itself, which in the matter of justification
if opposed to works, is here included in them; for faith has a peculiar
fitness to receive the free grace of God for our justification, but not
to receive that grace for our election. Secondly, What it obtains: that
which Israel, that is, the body of that people, in van sought for ([Rom
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#007)): Israel hath not obtained that
which he seeketh for, that is, justification, and acceptance with God
(see [Rom 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#031)), but the election have
obtained it. In them the promise of God has its accomplishment, and
God's ancient kindness for that people is remembered. He calls the
remnant of believers, not the elect, but the election, to show that the
sole foundation of all their hopes and happiness is laid in election.
They were the persons whom God had in his eye in the counsels of his
love; they are the election; they are God's choice. Such was the favour
of God to the chosen remnant. But,

2\. The rest were blinded, [Rom 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#007).
Some are chosen and called, and the call is made effectual. But others
are left to perish in their unbelief; nay, they are made worse by that
which should have made them better. The gospel, which to those that
believed was the savour of life unto life, to the unbelieving was the
savour of death unto death. The same sun softens wax and hardens clay.
Good old Simeon foresaw that the child Jesus was set for the fall, as
well as for the rising again, of many in Israel, [Luk
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#034). - Were blinded; epōrōthēsan -
they were hardened; so some. They were seared, and made brawny and
insensible. They could neither see the light, nor feel the touch, of
gospel grace. Blindness and hardness are expressive of the same
senselessness and stupidity of spirit. They shut their eyes, and would
not see; this was their sin: and then God, in a way of righteous
judgment, blinded their eyes, that they could not see; this was their
punishment. This seemed harsh doctrine: to qualify it, therefore, he
vouches two witnesses out of the Old Testament, who speak of such a
thing.

(1.) Isaiah, who spoke of such a judgment in his day, [Isa
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#010); [Isa
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009). The spirit of slumber, that is,
an indisposedness to mind either their duty or interest. They are under
the power of a prevailing unconcernedness, like people that are
slumbering and sleeping; not affected with any thing that is said or
done. They were resolved to continue as they were, and would not stir.
The following words explain what is meant by the spirit of slumber:
Eyes, that they should not see, and ears, that they should not hear.
They had the faculties, but in the things that belonged to their peace
they had not the use of those faculties; they were quite infatuated,
they saw Christ, but they did not believe in him; they heard his word,
but they did not receive it; and so both their hearing and their seeing
were in vain. It was all one as if they had neither seen nor heard. Of
all judgments spiritual judgments are the sorest, and most to be
dreaded, though they make the least noise. - Unto this day. Ever since
Esaias prophesied, this hardening work has been in the doing; some among
them have been blind and senseless. Or, rather, ever since the first
preaching of the gospel: though they have had the most convincing
evidences that could be of the truth of it, the most powerful preaching,
the fairest offers, the clearest calls from Christ himself, and from his
apostles, yet to this day they are blinded. It is still true concerning
multitudes of them, even to this day in which we live; they are hardened
and blinded, the obstinacy and unbelief go by succession from generation
to generation, according to their own fearful imprecation, which
entailed the curse: His blood be upon us and upon our children.

(2.) David ([Rom 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#009), [Rom
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#010)), quoted from [Psa
69:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022), [Psa
69:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#023), where David having in the
Spirit foretold the sufferings of Christ from his own people the Jews,
particularly that of their giving him vinegar to drink ([Rom
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#021), which was literally fulfilled,
[Mat 27:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#048)), an expression of the
greatest contempt and malice that could be, in the next words, under the
form of an imprecation, he foretels the dreadful judgments of God upon
them for it: Let their table become a snare, which the apostle here
applies to the present blindness of the Jews, and the offence they took
at the gospel, which increased their hardness. This teaches us how to
understand other prayers of David against his enemies; they are to be
looked upon as prophetic of the judgments of God upon the public and
obstinate enemies of Christ and his kingdom. His prayer that it might be
so was a prophecy that it should be so, and not the private expression
of his own angry resentments. It was likewise intended to justify God,
and to clear his righteousness in such judgments. He speaks here, \[1.\]
Of the ruin of their comforts: Let their table be made a snare, that is,
as the psalmist explains it, Let that which should be for their welfare
be a trap to them. The curse of God will turn meat into poison. It is a
threatening like that in [Mal 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#002), I
will curse your blessings. Their table a snare, that is, an occasion of
sin and an occasion of misery. Their very food, that should nourish
them, shall choke them. \[2.\] Of the ruin of their powers and faculties
([Rom 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#010)), their eyes darkened,
their backs bowed down, that they can neither find the right way, nor,
if they could, are they able to walk in it. The Jews, after their
national rejection of Christ and his gospel, became infatuated in their
politics, so that their very counsels turned against them, and hastened
their ruin by the Romans. They looked like a people designed for slavery
and contempt, their backs bowed down, to be ridden and trampled upon by
all the nations about them. Or, it may be understood spiritually; their
backs are bowed down in carnality and worldly-mindedness. Curvae in
terris animae - They mind earthly things. This is an exact description
of the state and temper of the present remainder of that people, than
whom, if the accounts we have of them be true, there is not a more
worldly, wilful, blind, selfish, ill-natured, people in the world. They
are manifestly to this day under the power of this curse. Divine curses
will work long. It is a sign we have our eyes darkened if we are bowed
down in worldly-mindedness.

II\. Another thing which qualified this doctrine of the rejection of the
Jews was that though they were cast off and unchurched, yet the Gentiles
were taken in ([Rom 11:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#011)), which
he applies by way of caution to the Gentiles, [Rom
11:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#017).

1\. The rejection of the Jews made room for the reception of the
Gentiles. The Jews' leavings were a feast for the poor Gentiles ([Rom
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#011)): "Have they stumbled that they
should fall? Had God no other end in forsaking and rejecting them than
their destruction?" He startles at this, rejecting the thought with
abhorrence, as usually he does when any thing is suggested which seems
to reflect upon the wisdom, or righteousness, or goodness of God: God
forbid! no, through their fall salvation is come to the Gentiles. Not
but that salvation might have come to the Gentiles if they had stood;
but by the divine appointment it was so ordered that the gospel should
be preached to the Gentiles upon the Jews' refusal of it. Thus in the
parable ([Mat 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#008), [Mat
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#009)), Those that were first bidden
were not worthy - Go ye therefore into the highways, [Luk
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#021). And so it was in the history
([Act 13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046)): It was necessary that
the word of God should first have been spoken to you; but, seeing you
put it from you, lo, we turn to the Gentiles; so [Act
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#006). God will have a church in the
world, will have the wedding furnished with guests; and, if one will not
come, another will, or why was the offer made? The Jews had the refusal,
and so the tender came to the Gentiles. See how Infinite Wisdom brings
light out of darkness, good out of evil, meat out of the eater, and
sweetness out of the strong. To the same purport he says ([Rom
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#012)), The fall of them was the
riches of the world, that is, it hastened the gospel so much the sooner
into the Gentile world. The gospel is the greatest riches of the place
where it is; it is better than thousands of gold and silver. Or, The
riches of the Gentiles was the multitude of converts among them. True
believers are God's jewels. To the same purport ([Rom
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#015)): The casting away of them is
the reconciling of the world. God's displeasure towards them made way
for his favour towards the Gentiles. God was in Christ reconciling the
world, [Co2 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#019). And therefore he
took occasion from the unbelief of the Jews openly to disavow and disown
them, though they had been his peculiar favourites, to show that in
dispensing his favours he would now no longer act in such a way of
peculiarity and restriction, but that in every nation he that feared God
and wrought righteousness should be accepted of him, [Act
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#034), [Act
10:35](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#035).

2\. The use that the apostle makes of this doctrine concerning the
substitution of the Gentiles in the room of the Jews.

(1.) As a kinsman to the Jews, here is a word of excitement and
exhortation to them, to stir them up to receive and embrace the
gospel-offer. This God intended in his favour to the Gentiles, to
provoke the Jews to jealousy ([Rom
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#011)), and Paul endeavours to enforce
it accordingly ([Rom 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#014)): If by any
means I might provoke to emulation those who are my flesh. "Shall the
despised Gentiles run away with all the comforts and privileges of the
gospel, and shall not we repent of our refusal, and now at last put in
for a share? Shall not we believe and obey, and be pardoned and saved,
as well as the Gentiles?" See an instance of such an emulation in Esau,
[Gen 28:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#006). There is a commendable
emulation in the affairs of our souls: why should not we be as holy and
happy as any of our neighbours? In this emulation there needs no
suspicion, undermining or countermining; for the church has room enough,
and the new covenant grace and comfort enough, for us all. The blessings
are not lessened by the multitudes of the sharers. - And might save some
of them. See what was Paul's business, to save souls; and yet the utmost
he promises himself is but to save some. Though he was such a powerful
preacher, spoke and wrote with such evidence and demonstration of the
Spirit, yet of the many he dealt with he could but save some. Ministers
must think their pains well bestowed if they can but be instrumental to
save some.

(2.) As an apostle to the Gentiles, here is a word of caution for them:
"I speak to you Gentiles. You believing Romans, you hear what riches of
salvation are come to you by the fall of the Jews, but take heed lest
you do any thing to forfeit it." Paul takes this, as other occasions, to
apply his discourse to the Gentiles, because he was the apostle of the
Gentiles, appointed for the service of their faith, to plant and water
churches in the Gentile nations. This was the purport of his
extraordinary mission, [Act 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#021), I
will send thee far hence unto the Gentiles; compare [Act
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015). It was likewise the intention of
his ordination, [Gal 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009). Compare [Act
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002). It ought to be our great and
special care to do good to those that are under our charge: we must
particularly mind that which is our own work. It was an instance of
God's great love to the poor Gentiles that he appointed Paul, who in
gifts and graces excelled all the apostles, to be the apostle of the
Gentiles. The Gentile world was a wider province; and the work to be
done in it required a very able, skilful, zealous, courageous workman:
such a one was Paul. God calls those to special work whom he either sees
or makes fit for it. - I magnify my office. There were those that
vilified it, and him because of it. It was because he was the apostle of
the Gentiles that the Jews were so outrageous against him ([Act
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#021), [Act
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#022)), and yet he thought never the
worse of it, though it set him up as the butt of all the Jewish rage and
malice. It is a sign of true love to Jesus Christ to reckon that service
and work for him truly honourable which the world looks upon with scorn,
as mean and contemptible. The office of the ministry is an office to be
magnified. Ministers are ambassadors for Christ, and stewards of the
mysteries of God, and for their work's sake are to be esteemed highly in
love. - My office; tēn diakonian mou - my ministry, my service, not my
lordship and dominion. It was not the dignity and power, but the duty
and work, of an apostle, that Paul was so much in love with. Now two
things he exhorts the Gentiles to, with reference to the rejected Jews:
-

\[1.\] To have a respect for the Jews, notwithstanding, and to desire
their conversion. This is intimated in the prospect he gives them of the
advantage that would accrue to the church by their conversion, [Rom
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#012), [Rom
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#015). It would be as life from the
dead; and therefore they must not insult and triumph over those poor
Jews, but rather pity them, and desire their welfare, and long for the
receiving of them in again.

\[2.\] To take heed to themselves, lest they should stumble and fall, as
they Jews had done, [Rom 11:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#017).
Here observe,

First, The privilege which the Gentiles had by being taken into the
church. They were grafted in ([Rom
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#017)), as a branch of a wild olive
into a good olive, which is contrary to the way and custom of the
husbandman, who grafts the good olive into the bad; but those that God
grafts into the church he finds wild and barren, and good for nothing.
Men graft to mend the tree; but God grafts to mend the branch. 1. The
church of God is an olive-tree, flourishing and fruitful as an olive
([Psa 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008); [Hos
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#006)), the fruit useful for the honour
both of God and man, [Jdg 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#009). 2.
Those that are out of the church are as wild olive-trees, not only
useless, but what they do produce is sour and unsavoury: Wild by nature,
[Rom 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#024). This was the state of the
poor Gentiles, that wanted church privileges, and in respect of real
sanctification; and it is the natural state of every one of us, to be
wild by nature. 3. Conversion is the grafting in of wild branches into
the good olive. We must be cut off from the old stock, and be brought
into union with a new root. 4. Those that are grafted into the good
olive-tree partake of the root and fatness of the olive. It is
applicable to a saving union with Christ; all that are by a lively faith
grafted into Christ partake of him as the branches of the root - receive
from his fulness. But it is here spoken of a visible church-membership,
from which the Jews were as branches broken off; and so the Gentiles
were grafted in, autois - among those that continued, or in the room of
those that were broken off. The Gentiles, being grafted into the church,
partake of the same privileges that the Jews did, the root and fatness.
The olive-tree is the visible church (called so [Jer
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#016)); the root of this tree was
Abraham, not the root of communication, so Christ only is the root, but
the root of administration, he being the first with whom the covenant
was so solemnly made. Now the believing Gentiles partake of this root:
he also is a son of Abraham ([Luk
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#009)), the blessing of Abraham comes
upon the Gentiles ([Gal 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#014)), the
same fatness of the olive-tree, the same for substance, special
protection, lively oracles, means of salvation, a standing ministry,
instituted ordinances; and, among the rest, the visible
church-membership of their infant seed, which was part of the fatness of
the olive-tree that the Jews had, and cannot be imagined to be denied to
the Gentiles.

Secondly, A caution not to abuse these privileges. 1. "Be not proud
([Rom 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#018)): Boast not against the
branches. Do not therefore trample upon the Jews as a reprobate people,
nor insult over those that are broken off, much less over those that do
continue." Grace is given, not to make us proud, but to make us
thankful. The law of faith excludes all boasting either of ourselves or
against others. "Do not say ([Rom
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#019)): They were broken off that I
might be grafted in; that is, do not think that thou didst merit more at
the hand of God than they, or didst stand higher in his favour." "But
remember, thou bearest not the root, but the root thee. Though thou art
grafted in, thou art still but a branch borne by the root; nay, and an
engrafted branch, brought into the good olive contrary to nature ([Rom
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#024)), not free-born, but by an act
of grace enfranchised and naturalized. Abraham, the root of the Jewish
church, is not beholden to thee; but thou art greatly obliged to him, as
the trustee of the covenant and the father of many nations. Therefore,
if thou boast, know (this word must be supplied to clear the sense) thou
bearest not the root but the root thee." 2. "Be not secure ([Rom
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#020)): Be not high-minded, but fear.
Be not too confident of your own strength and standing." A holy fear is
an excellent preservative against high-mindedness: happy is the man that
thus feareth always. We need not fear but God will be true to his word;
all the danger is lest we be false to ours. Let us therefore fear, [Heb
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#001). The church of Rome now boasts of
a patent of perpetual preservation; but the apostle here, in his epistle
to that church when she was in her infancy and integrity, enters an
express caveat against that boast, and all claims of that kind. - Fear
what? "Why fear lest thou commit a forfeiture as they have done, lest
thou lose the privileges thou now enjoyest, as they have lost theirs."
The evils that befall others should be warnings to us. Go (saith God to
Jerusalem [Jer 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#012)), and see what I
did to Shiloh; so now, let all the churches of God go and see what he
did to Jerusalem, and what is become of the day of their visitation,
that we may hear and fear, and take heed of Jerusalem's sin. The patent
which churches have of their privileges is not for a certain term, nor
entailed upon them and their heirs; but it runs as long as they carry
themselves well, and no longer. Consider, (1.) "How they were broken
off. It was not undeservedly, by an act of absolute sovereignty and
prerogative, but because of unbelief." It seems, then, it is possible
for churches that have long stood by faith to fall into such a state of
infidelity as may be their ruin. Their unbelief did not only provoke God
to cut them off, but they did by this cut themselves off; it was not
only the meritorious, but the formal cause of their separation. "Now,
thou art liable to the same infirmity and corruption that they fell by."
Further observe, They were natural branches ([Rom
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#021)), not only interested in
Abraham's covenant, but descending from Abraham's loins, and so born
upon the premises, and thence had a kind of tenant-right: yet, when they
sunk into unbelief, God did not spare them. Prescription, long usage,
the faithfulness of their ancestors, would not secure them. It was in
vain to plead, though they insisted much upon it, that they were
Abraham's seed, [Mat 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009); [Joh
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#033). It is true they were the
husbandmen to whom the vineyard was first let out; but, when they
forfeited it, it was justly taken from them, [Mat
21:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#041), [Mat
21:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#043). This is called here severity,
[Rom 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#022). God laid righteousness to
the line and judgment to the plummet, and dealt with them according to
their sins. Severity is a word that sounds harshly; and I do not
remember that it is any where else in scripture ascribed to God; and it
is here applied to the unchurching of the Jews. God is most severe
towards those that have been in profession nearest to him, if they rebel
against him, [Amo 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#002). Patience and
privileges abused turn to the greatest wrath. Of all judgments,
spiritual judgments are the sorest; for of these he is here speaking,
[Rom 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#008). (2.) "How thou standest,
thou that art engrafted in." He speaks to the Gentile churches in
general, though perhaps tacitly reflecting on some particular person,
who might have expressed some such pride and triumph in the Jews'
rejection. "Consider then," \[1.\] "By what means thou standest: By
faith, which is a depending grace, and fetches in strength from heaven.
Thou dost not stand in any strength of thy own, of which thou mightest
be confident: thou art no more than the free grace of God makes thee,
and his grace is his own, which he gives or withholds at pleasure. That
which ruined them was unbelief, and by faith thou standest; therefore
thou hast no faster hold than they had, thou standest on no firmer
foundation than they did." \[2.\] "On what terms ([Rom
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#022)): Towards thee goodness, if thou
continue in his goodness, that is, continue in a dependence upon and
compliance with the free grace of God, the want of which it was that
ruined the Jews - if thou be careful to keep up thine interest in the
divine favour, by being continually careful to please God and fearful of
offending him." The sum of our duty, the condition of our happiness, is
to keep ourselves in the love of God. Fear the Lord and his goodness.
[Hos 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005).

III\. Another thing that qualified this doctrine of the Jews' rejection
is that, though for the present they are cast off, yet the rejection is
not final; but, when the fulness of time is come, they will be taken in
again. They are not cast off for ever, but mercy is remembered in the
midst of wrath. Let us observe,

1\. How this conversion of the Jews is here described. (1.) It is said
to be their fulness ([Rom 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#012)), that
is, the addition of them to the church, the filling up again of that
place which became vacant by their rejection. This would be the
enriching of the world (that is, the church in the world) with a great
deal of light and strength and beauty. (2.) It is called the receiving
of them. The conversion of a soul is the receiving of that soul, so the
conversion of a nation. They shall be received into favour, into the
church, into the love of Christ, whose arms are stretched out for the
receiving of all those that will come to him. And this will be as life
from the dead - so strange and surprising, and yet withal so welcome and
acceptable. The conversion of the Jews will bring great joy to the
church. See [Luk 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#032), He was dead,
and is alive; and therefore it was meet we should make merry and be
glad. (3.) It is called the grafting of them in again ([Rom
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#023)), into the church, from which
they had been broken off. That which is grafted in receives sap and
virtue from the root; so does a soul that is truly grafted into the
church receive life, and strength, and grace from Christ the quickening
root. They shall be grafted into their own olive-tree ([Rom
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#024)); that is, into the church of
which they had formerly been the most eminent and conspicuous members,
to retrieve those privileges of visible church-membership which they had
so long enjoyed, but have now sinned away and forfeited by their
unbelief. (4.) It is called the saving of all Israel, [Rom
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026). True conversion may well be
called salvation; it is salvation begun. See [Act
2:47](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#047). The adding of them to the church
is the saving of them: tous sōzōmenous, in the present tense, are saved.
When conversion-work goes on, salvation-work goes on.

2\. What it is grounded upon, and what reason we have to look for it.

(1.) Because of the holiness of the first-fruits and the root, [Rom
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#016). Some by the first-fruits
understand those of the Jews that were already converted to the faith of
Christ and received into the church, who were as the first-fruits
dedicated to God, as earnests of a more plentiful and sanctified
harvest. A good beginning promises a good ending. Why may we not suppose
that others may be savingly wrought upon as well as those who are
already brought in? Others by the first-fruits understand the same with
the root, namely, the patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, from whom
the Jews descended, and with whom, as the prime trustees, the covenant
was deposited: and so they were the root of the Jews, not only as a
people, but as a church. Now, if they were holy, which is not meant so
much of inherent as of federal holiness - if they were in the church and
in the covenant - then we have reason to conclude that God hath a
kindness for the lump - the body of that people; and for the branches -
the particular members of it. The Jews are in a sense a holy nation
([Exo 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)), being descended from holy
parents. Now it cannot be imagined that such a holy nation should be
totally and finally cast off. This proves that the seed of believers, as
such, are within the pale of the visible church, and within the verge of
the covenant, till they do, by their unbelief, throw themselves out;
for, if the root be holy, so are the branches. Though real
qualifications are not propagated, yet relative privileges are. Though a
wise man does not beget a wise man, yet a free man begets a free man.
Though grace does not run in the blood, yet external privileges do (till
they are forfeited), even to a thousand generations. Look how they will
answer it another day that cut off the entail, by turning the seed of
the faithful out of the church, and so not allowing the blessing of
Abraham to come upon the Gentiles. The Jewish branches are reckoned
holy, because the root was so. This is expressed more plainly ([Rom
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#028)): They are beloved for the
fathers' sakes. In this love to the fathers the first foundation of
their church-state was laid ([Deu
4:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#037)): Because he loved they fathers,
therefore he chose their seed after them. And the same love would revive
their privileges, for still the ancient loving-kindness is remembered;
they are beloved for the fathers' sakes. It is God's usual method of
grace. Kindness to the children for the father's sake is therefore
called the kindness of God, [Sa2 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#003),
[Sa2 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#007). Though, as concerning the
gospel (namely, in the present dispensation of it), they are enemies to
it for your sakes, that is, for the sake of the Gentiles, against whom
they have such an antipathy; yet, when God's time shall come, this will
wear off, and God's love to their fathers will be remembered. See a
promise that points at this, [Lev
26:42](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#042). The iniquity of the fathers is
visited but to the third and fourth generation; but there is mercy kept
for thousands. Many fare the better for the sake of their godly
ancestors. It is upon this account that the church is called their own
olive-tree. Long it had been their own peculiar, which is some
encouragement to us to hope that there may be room for them in it again,
for old acquaintance-sake. That which hath been may be again. Though
particular persons and generations wear off in unbelief, yet there
having been a national church-membership, though for the present
suspended, we may expect that it will be revived.

(2.) Because of the power of God ([Rom
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#023)): God is able to graft them in
again. The conversion of souls is a work of almighty power; and when
they seem most hardened, and blinded, and obstinate, our comfort is that
God is able to work a change, able to graft those in that have been long
cast out and withered. When the house is kept by the strong man armed,
with all his force, yet God is stronger than he, and is able to
dispossess him. The condition of their restoration is faith: If they
abide not still in unbelief. So that nothing is to be done but to remove
that unbelief that is the great obstacle; and God is able to take that
away, though nothing less than an almighty power will do it, the same
power that raised up Christ from the dead, [Eph
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#019), [Eph
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020). Otherwise, can these dry bones
live?

(3.) Because of the grace of God manifested to the Gentiles. Those that
have themselves experienced the grace of God, preventing, distinguishing
grace, may thence take encouragement to hope well concerning others.
This is his argument ([Rom 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#024)): "If
thou wast grafted into a good olive, that was wild by nature, much more
shall these that were the natural branches, and may therefore be
presumed somewhat nearer to the divine acceptance." This is a suggestion
very proper to check the insolence of those Gentile Christians that
looked with disdain and triumph upon the condition of the rejected Jews,
and trampled upon them; as if he had said, "Their condition, bad as it
is, is not so bad as yours was before your conversion; and therefore why
may it not be made as good as yours is?" This is his argument ([Rom
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#030), [Rom
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#031)): As you in times past have not,
etc. It is good for those that have found mercy with God to be often
thinking what they were in time past, and how they obtained that mercy.
This would help to soften our censures of those that still continue in
unbelief, and quicken our prayers for them. He argues further from the
occasion of the Gentiles' call, that is, the unbelief of the Jews;
thence it took rise: "You have obtained mercy through their unbelief;
much more shall they obtain mercy through your mercy. If the putting out
of their candle was the lighting of yours, by that power of God which
brings good out of evil, much more shall the continued light of your
candle, when God's time shall come, be a means of lighting theirs
again." "That through your mercy they might obtain mercy, that is, that
they may be beholden to you, as you have been to them." He takes it for
granted that the believing Gentiles would do their utmost endeavour to
work upon the Jews - that, when God had persuaded Japhet, Japhet would
be labouring to persuade Shem. True grace hates monopolies. Those that
have found mercy themselves should endeavour that through their mercy
others also may obtain mercy.

(4.) Because of the promises and prophecies of the Old Testament, which
point at this. He quotes a very remarkable one, [Rom
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026), from [Isa
59:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#020), [Isa
59:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#021). Where we may observe, \[1.\]
The coming of Christ promised: There shall come out of Zion the
deliverer. Jesus Christ is the great deliverer, which supposes mankind
in a state of misery and danger. In Isaiah it is, the Redeemer shall
come to Zion. There he is called the Redeemer; here the deliverer; he
delivers in a way of redemption, by a price. There he is said to come to
Zion, because when the prophet prophesied he was yet to come into the
world, and Zion was his first head-quarters. Thither he came, there he
took up his residence: but, when the apostle wrote this, he had come, he
had been in Zion; and he is speaking of the fruits of his appearing,
which shall come out of Zion; thence, as from the spring, issued forth
those streams of living water which in the everlasting gospel watered
the nations. Out of Zion went forth the law, [Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003). Compare [Luk
24:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047). \[2.\] The end and purpose of
this coming: He shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob. Christ's errand
into the world was to turn away ungodliness, to turn away the guilt by
the purchase of pardoning mercy, and to turn away the power by the
pouring out of renewing grace, to save his people from their sins ([Mat
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021)), to separate between us and our
sins, that iniquity might not be our ruin, and that it might not be our
ruler. Especially to turn it away from Jacob, which is that for the sake
of which he quotes the text, as a proof of the great kindness God
intended for the seed of Jacob. What greater kindness could he do them
than to turn away ungodliness from them, to take away that which comes
between them and all happiness, take away sin, and then make way for all
good? This is the blessing that Christ was sent to bestow upon the
world, and to tender it to the Jews in the first place ([Act
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#026)), to turn people from their
iniquities. In Isaiah it is, The Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto
those that turn from transgression in Jacob, which shown who in Zion
were to have a share in and to reap benefit by the deliverance promised,
those and those only that leave their sins and turn to God; to them
Christ comes as a Redeemer, but as an avenger to those that persist in
impenitence. See [Deu 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#002), [Deu
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#003). Those that turn from sin will be
owned as the true citizens of Zion ([Eph
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#019)), the right Jacob, [Psa
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#004), [Psa
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#006). Putting both these readings
together, we learn that none have an interest in Christ but those that
turn from their sins, nor can any turn from their sins but by the
strength of the grace of Christ. - For this is my covenant with them -
this, that the deliverer shall come to them - this, that my Spirit shall
not depart from them, as it follows, [Isa
59:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#021). God's gracious intentions
concerning Israel were made the matter of a covenant, which the God that
cannot lie could not but be true and faithful to. They were the children
of the covenant, [Act 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#025). The
apostle adds, When I shall take away their sins, which some think refers
to [Isa 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#009), or only to the foregoing
words, to turn away ungodliness. Pardon of sin is laid as the foundation
of all the blessings of the new covenant ([Heb
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#012)): For I will be merciful. Now
from all this he infers that certainly God had great mercy in store for
that people, something answerable to the extent of these rich promises:
and he proves his inference ([Rom
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029)) by this truth: For the gifts
and callings of God are without repentance. Repentance is sometimes
taken for a change of mind, and so God never repents, for he is in one
mind and who can turn him? Sometimes for a change of way, and that is
here understood, intimating the constancy and unchangeableness of that
love of God which is founded in election. Those gifts and callings are
immutable; whom he so loves, he loves to the end. We find God repenting
that he had given man a being ([Gen
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#006), It repented the Lord that he had
made man), and repenting that he had given a man honour and power ([Sa1
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#011), It repenteth me that I have set
up Saul to be king); but we never find God repenting that he had given a
man grace, or effectually called him; those gifts and callings are
without repentance.

[Romans 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">rom 11:33</span></span>

The apostle having insisted so largely, through the greatest part of
this chapter, upon reconciling the rejection of the Jews with the divine
goodness, he concludes here with the acknowledgment and admiration of
the divine wisdom and sovereignty in all this. Here the apostle does
with great affection and awe adore,

I. The secrecy of the divine counsels: O the depth! in these proceedings
towards the Jews and Gentiles; or, in general, the whole mystery of the
gospel, which we cannot fully comprehend. - The riches of the wisdom and
knowledge of God, the abundant instances of his wisdom and knowledge in
contriving and carrying on the work of our redemption by Christ, a depth
which the angels pry into, [Pe1 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012).
Much more may it puzzle any human understanding to give an account of
the methods, and reasons, and designs, and compass of it. Paul was as
well acquainted with the mysteries of the kingdom of God as ever any
mere man was; and yet he confesses himself at a loss in the
contemplation, and, despairing to find the bottom, he humbly sits down
at the brink, and adores the depth. Those that know most in this state
of imperfection cannot but be most sensible of their own weakness and
short-sightedness, and that after all their researches, and all their
attainments in those researches, while they are here they cannot order
their speech by reason of darkness. Praise is silent to thee, [Psa
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001). - The depth of the riches. Men's
riches of all kinds are shallow, you may soon see the bottom; but God's
riches are deep ([Psa 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006)): Thy
judgments are a great deep. There is not only depth in the divine
counsels, but riches too, which denotes an abundance of that which is
precious and valuable, so complete are the dimensions of the divine
counsels; they have not only depth and height, but breadth and length
([Eph 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#018)), and that passing
knowledge, v. 19. - Riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God. His
seeing all things by one clear, and certain, and infallible view - all
things that are, or ever were, or ever shall be, - that all is naked and
open before him: there is his knowledge. His ruling and ordering all
things, directing and disposing them to his own glory, and bringing
about his own purposes and counsels in all; this is his wisdom. And the
vast extent of both these is such a depth as is past our fathoming, and
we may soon lose ourselves in the contemplation of them. Such knowledge
is too wonderful for me, [Psa 139:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#006).
Compare [Psa 139:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#017), [Psa
139:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#018). - How unsearchable are his
judgments! that is, his counsels and purposes: and his ways, that is,
the execution of these counsels and purposes. We know not what he
designs. When the wheels are set in motion, and Providence has begun to
work, yet we know not what he has in view; it is past finding out. This
does not only overturn all our positive conclusions about the divine
counsels, but it also checks all our curious enquiries. Secret things
belong not to us, [Deu 29:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#029). God's
way is in the sea, [Psa 77:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#019). Compare
[Job 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#008), [Job
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#009); [Psa
97:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#002). What he does we know not now,
[Joh 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#007). We cannot give a reason of
God's proceedings, nor by searching find out God. See [Job
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#009); [Job
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#010). The judgments of his mouth, and
the way of our duty, blessed be God, are plain and easy, it is a
high-way; but the judgments of his hands, and the ways of his
providence, are dark and mysterious, which therefore we must not pry
into, but silently adore and acquiesce in. The apostle speaks this
especially with reference to that strange turn, the casting off of the
Jews and the entertainment of the Gentiles, with a purpose to take in
the Jews again in due time; these were strange proceedings, the choosing
of some, the refusing of others, and neither according to the
probabilities of human conjecture. Even so, Father, because it seemed
good in thing eyes. These are methods unaccountable, concerning which we
must say, O the depth! - Past finding out, anexichniastoi - cannot be
traced. God leaves no prints nor footsteps behind him, does not make a
path to shine after him; but his paths of providence are new every
morning. He does not go the same way so often as to make a track of it.
How little a portion is heard of him! [Job
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#014). It follows ([Rom
11:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#034)), For who hath known the mind of
the Lord? Is there any creature made of his cabinet-council, or laid, as
Christ was, in the bosom of the Father? Is there any to whom he has
imparted his counsels, or that is able, upon the view of his
providences, to know the way that he takes? There is so vast a distance
and disproportion between God and man, between the Creator and the
creature, as for ever excludes the thought of such an intimacy and
familiarity. The apostle makes the same challenge ([Co1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#016)): For who hath known the mind of
the Lord? And yet there he adds, But we have the mind of Christ, which
intimates that through Christ true believers, who have his Spirit, know
so much of the mind of God as is necessary to their happiness. He that
knew the mind of the Lord has declared him, [Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018). And so, though we know not the
mind of the Lord, yet, if we have the mind of Christ, we have enough.
The secret of the Lord is with those that fear him, [Psa
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#014). Shall I hide from Abraham the
thing which I do? See [Joh 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015). - Or
who has been his counsellor? He needs no counsellor, for he is
infinitely wise; nor is any creature capable of being his counsellor;
this would be like lighting a candle to the sun. This seems to refer to
that scripture ([Isa 40:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#013), [Isa
40:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#014)), Who hath directed the Spirit
of the Lord, or, being his counsellor, hath taught him? With whom took
he counsel? etc. It is the substance of God's challenge to Job
concerning the work of creation (Job 38), and is applicable to all the
methods of his providence. It is nonsense for any man to prescribe to
God, or to teach him how to govern the world.

II\. The sovereignty of the divine counsels. In all these things God
acts as a free agent, does what he will, because he will, and gives not
account of any of his matters ([Job
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#013); [Job
33:13](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#013)), and yet there is no
unrighteousness with him. To clear which,

1\. He challenges any to prove God a debtor to him ([Rom
11:35](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#035)): Who hath first given to him?
Who is there of all the creatures that can prove God is beholden to him?
Whatever we do for him, or devote to him, it must be with that
acknowledgment, which is for ever a bar to such demands ([Ch1
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#014)): Of thine own we have given
thee. All the duties we can perform are not requitals, but rather
restitutions. If any can prove that God is his debtor, the apostle here
stands bound for the payment, and proclaims, in God's name, that payment
is ready: It shall be recompensed to him again. It is certain God will
let nobody lose by him; but never any one yet durst make a demand of
this kind, or attempt to prove it. This is here suggested, (1.) To
silence the clamours of the Jews. When God took away their visible
church-privileges from them, he did but take his own: and may he not do
what he will with his own - give or withhold his grace where and when he
pleases? (2.) To silence the insultings of the Gentiles. When God sent
the gospel among them, and gave so many of them grace and wisdom to
accept of it, it was not because he owed them so much favour, or that
they could challenge it as a debt, but of his own good pleasure.

2\. He resolves all into the sovereignty of God ([Rom
11:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036)): For of him, and through him,
and to him, are all things, that is, God is all in all. All things in
heaven and earth (especially those things which relate to our salvation,
the things which belong to our peace) are of him by way of creation,
through him by way of providential influence, that they may be to him in
their final tendency and result. Of God as the spring and fountain of
all, through Christ, God - man, as the conveyance, to God as the
ultimate end. These three include, in general, all God's causal
relations to his creatures: of him as the first efficient cause, through
him as the supreme directing cause, to him as the ultimate final cause;
for the Lord hath made all for himself, [Rev
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#011). If all be of him and through
him, there is all the reason in the world that all should be to him and
for him. It is a necessary circulation; if the rivers received their
waters from the sea, they return them to the sea again, [Ecc
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#007). To do all to the glory of God is
to make a virtue of necessity; for all shall in the end be to him,
whether we will or no. And so he concludes with a short doxology: To
whom be glory for ever, Amen. God's universal agency as the first cause,
the sovereign ruler, and the last end, ought to be the matter of our
adoration. Thus all his works do praise him objectively; but his saints
do bless him actively; they hand that praise to him which all the
creatures do minister matter for, [Psa
145:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#010). Paul had been discoursing at
large of the counsels of God concerning man, sifting the point with a
great deal of accuracy; but, after all, he concludes with the
acknowledgment of the divine sovereignty, as that into which all these
things must be ultimately resolved, and in which alone the mind can
safely and sweetly rest. This is, if not the scholastic way, yet the
Christian way, of disputation. Whatever are the premises, let god's
glory be the conclusion; especially when we come to talk of the divine
counsels and actings, it is best for us to turn our arguments into awful
and serious adorations. The glorified saints, that see furthest into
these mysteries, never dispute, but praise to eternity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 12](rom012)

</div>
