<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom008)  [Next](rom010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 9:0</span></span>

The apostle, having plainly asserted and largely proved that
justification and salvation are to had by faith only, and not by the
works of the law, by Christ and not by Moses, comes in this and the
following chapters to anticipate an objection which might be made
against this. If this be so, then what becomes of the Jews, of them all
as a complex body, especially those of them that do not embrace Christ,
nor believe the gospel? By this rule they must needs come short of
happiness; and then what becomes of the promise made to the fathers,
which entailed salvation upon the Jews? Is not that promise nullified
and made of none effect? Which is not a thing to be imagined concerning
any word of God. That doctrine therefore, might they say, is not to be
embraced, from which flows such a consequence as this. That the
consequence of the rejection of the unbelieving Jews follows from Paul's
doctrine he grants, but endeavours to soften and mollify ([Rom
9:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001)). But that from this it follows
that the word of God takes no effect he denies ([Rom
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006)), and proves the denial in the
rest of the chapter, which serves likewise to illustrate the great
doctrine of predestination, which he had spoken of ([Rom
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028)) as the first wheel which in the
business of salvation sets all the other wheels a-going.

[Romans 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 9:1</span></span>

We have here the apostle's solemn profession of a great concern for the
nation and people of the Jews - that he was heartily troubled that so
many of them were enemies to the gospel, and out of the way of
salvation. For this he had great heaviness and continual sorrow. Such a
profession as this was requisite to take off the odium which otherwise
he might have contracted by asserting and proving their rejection. It is
wisdom as much as may be to mollify those truths which sound harshly and
seem unpleasant: dip the nail in oil, it will drive the better. The Jews
had a particular pique at Paul above any of the apostles, as appears by
the history of the Acts, and therefore were the more apt to take things
amiss of him, to prevent which he introduces his discourse with this
tender and affectionate profession, that they might not think he
triumphed or insulted over the rejected Jews or was pleased with the
calamities that were coming upon them. Thus Jeremiah appeals to God
concerning the Jews of his day, whose ruin was hastening on ([Jer
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#016)), Neither have I desired the
woeful day, thou knowest. Nay, Paul was so far from desiring it that he
most pathetically deprecates it. And lest this should be thought only a
copy of his countenance, to flatter and please them,

I. He asserts it with a solemn protestation ([Rom
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001)): I say the truth in Christ, "I
speak it as a Christian, one of God's people, children that will not
lie, as one that knows not how to give flattering title." Or, "I appeal
to Christ, who searches the heart, concerning it." He appeals likewise
to his own conscience, which was instead of a thousand witnesses. That
which he was going to assert was not only a great and weighty thing
(such solemn protestations are not to be thrown away upon trifles), but
it was likewise a secret; it was concerning a sorrow in his heart to
which none was a capable competent witness but God and his own
conscience. - That I have great heaviness, [Rom
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#002). He does not say for what; the
very mention of it was unpleasant and invidious; but it is plain that he
means for the rejection of the Jews.

II\. He backs it with a very serious imprecation, which he was ready to
make, out of love to the Jews. I could wish; he does not say, I do wish,
for it was no proper means appointed for such an end; but, if it were, I
could wish that myself were accursed from Christ for my brethren - a
very high pang of zeal and affection for his countrymen. He would be
willing to undergo the greatest misery to do them good. Love is apt to
be thus bold, and venturous, and self-denying. Because the glory of
God's grace in the salvation of many is to be preferred before the
welfare and happiness of a single person, Paul, if they were put in
competition, would be content to forego all his own happiness to
purchase theirs. 1. He would be content to be cut off from the land of
the living, in the most shameful and ignominious manner, as an anathema,
or a devoted person. They thirsted for his blood, persecuted him as the
most obnoxious person in the world, the curse and plague of his
generation, [Co1 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#013); [Act
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#022). "Now," says Paul, "I am willing
to bear all this, and a great deal more, for your good. Abuse me as much
as you will, count and call me at your pleasure; your unbelief and
rejection create in my heart a heaviness so much greater than all these
troubles can that I could look upon them not only as tolerable, but as
desirable, rather than this rejection." 2. He would be content to be
excommunicated from the society of the faithful, to be separated from
the church, and from the communion of saints, as a heathen man and a
publican, if that would do them any good. he could wish himself no more
remembered among the saints, his name blotted out of the church-records;
though he had been so great a planter of churches, and the spiritual
father of so many thousands, yet he would be content to be disowned by
the church, cut off from all communion with it, and have his name buried
in oblivion or reproach, for the good of the Jews. It may be, some of
the Jews had a prejudice against Christianity for Paul's sake; such a
spleen they had at him that they hated the religion he was of: "If this
stumble you," says Paul, "I could wish I might be cast out, not embraced
as a Christian, so you might but be taken in." Thus Moses ([Exo
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#033)), in a like holy passion of
concern, Blot me, I pray thee, out of the book which thou hast written.
3. Nay, some think that the expression goes further, and that he could
be content to be cut off from all his share of happiness in Christ, if
that might be a means of their salvation. It is a common charity that
begins at home; this is something higher, and more noble and generous.

III\. He gives us the reason of this affection and concern.

1\. Because of their relation to them: My brethren, my kinsmen,
according to the flesh. Though they were very bitter against him upon
all occasions, and gave him the most unnatural and barbarous usage, yet
thus respectfully does he speak of them. It shows him to be a man of a
forgiving spirit. Not that I had aught to accuse my nation of, [Act
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#019). My kinsmen. Paul was a Hebrew
of the Hebrews. We ought to be in a special manner concerned for the
spiritual good of our relations, our brethren and kinsmen. To them we
lie under special engagements, and we have more opportunity of doing
good to them; and concerning them, and our usefulness to them, we must
in a special manner give account.

2\. Especially because of their relation to God ([Rom
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004), [Rom
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)): Who are Israelites, the seed of
Abraham, God's friend, and of Jacob his chosen, taken into the covenant
of peculiarity, dignified and distinguished by visible
church-privileges, many of which are here mentioned: - (1.) The
adoption; not that which is saving, and which entitled to eternal
happiness, but that which was external and typical, and entitled them to
the land of Canaan. Israel is my son, [Exo
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022). (2.) And the glory; the ark with
the mercy-seat, over which God dwelt between the cherubim - this was the
glory of Israel, [Sa1 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#021). The many
symbols and tokens of the divine presence and guidance, the cloud, the
Shechinah, the distinguishing favours conferred upon them - these were
the glory. (3.) And the covenants - the covenant made with Abraham, and
often renewed with his seed upon divers occasions. There was a covenant
at Sinai (Ex. 24), in the plains of Moab (Deu. 29), at Shechem (Jos.
24), and often afterwards; and still these pertained to Israel. Or, the
covenant of peculiarity, and in that, as in the type, the covenant of
grace. (4.) And the giving of the law. It was to them that the
ceremonial and judicial law were given, and the moral law in writing
pertained to them. It is a great privilege to have the law of God among
us, and it is to be accounted so, [Psa
147:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#019), [Psa
147:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#020). This was the grandeur of
Israel, [Deu 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007), [Deu
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#008). (5.) And the service of God. They
had the ordinances of God's worship among them - the temple, the altars,
the priests, the sacrifices, the feasts, and the institutions relating
to them. They were in this respect greatly honoured, that, while other
nations were worshipping and serving stocks, and stones, and devils, and
they knew not what other idols of their own invention, the Israelites
were serving the true God in the way of his own appointment. (6.) And
the promises - particular promises added to the general covenant,
promises relating to the Messiah and the gospel state. Observe, The
promises accompany the giving of the law, and the service of God; for
the comfort of the promises is to be had in obedience to that law and
attendance upon that service. (7.) Whose are the fathers ([Rom
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)), Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, those
men of renown, that stood so high in the favour of God. The Jews stand
in relation to them, are their children, and proud enough they are of
it: We have Abraham to our father. It was for the father's sake that
they were taken into covenant, [Rom
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#028). (8.) But the greatest honour of
all was that of them as concerning the flesh (that is, as to his human
nature) Christ came; for he took on him the seed of Abraham, [Heb
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#016). As to his divine nature, he is
the Lord from heaven; but, as to his human nature, he is of the seed of
Abraham. This was the great privilege of the Jews, that Christ was of
kin to them. Mentioning Christ, he interposes a very great word
concerning him, that he is over all, God blessed for ever. Lest the Jews
should think meanly of him, because he was of their alliance, he here
speaks thus honourably concerning him: and it is a very full proof of
the Godhead of Christ; he is not only over all, as Mediator, but he is
God blessed for ever. Therefore, how much sorer punishment were they
worthy of that rejected him! It was likewise the honour of the Jews, and
one reason why Paul had a kindness for them, that, seeing God blessed
for ever would be a man, he would be a Jew; and, considering the posture
and character of that people at that time, it may well be looked upon as
a part of his humiliation.

[Romans 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 9:6</span></span>

The apostle, having made his way to that which he had to say, concerning
the rejection of the body of his countrymen, with a protestation of his
own affection for them and a concession of their undoubted privileges,
comes in these verses, and the following part of the chapter, to prove
that the rejection of the Jews, by the establishment of the gospel
dispensation, did not at all invalidate the word of God's promise to the
patriarchs: Not as though the word of God hath taken no effect ([Rom
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006)), which, considering the present
state of the Jews, which created to Paul so much heaviness and continual
sorrow ([Rom 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#002)), might be suspected.
We are not to ascribe inefficacy to any word of God: nothing that he has
spoken does or can fall to the ground; see [Isa
55:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#010), [Isa
55:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#011). The promises and threatenings
shall have their accomplishment; and, one way or other, he will magnify
the law and make it honourable. This is to be understood especially of
the promise of God, which by subsequent providences may be to a wavering
faith very doubtful; but it is not, it cannot be, made of no effect; at
the end it will speak and not lie.

Now the difficulty is to reconcile the rejection of the unbelieving Jews
with the word of God's promise, and the external tokens of the divine
favour, which had been conferred upon them. This he does in four ways: -
1. By explaining the true meaning and intention of the promise, [Rom
9:6-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006). 2. By asserting and proving
the absolute sovereignty of God, in disposing of the children of men,
[Rom 9:14-24](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#014). 3. By showing how this
rejection of the Jews, and the taking in of the Gentiles, were foretold
in the Old Testament, [Rom 9:25-29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025). 4.
By fixing the true reason of the Jews' rejection, [Rom
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030), to the end.

In this paragraph the apostle explains the true meaning and intention of
the promise. When we mistake the word, and misunderstand the promise, no
marvel if we are ready to quarrel with God about the accomplishment; and
therefore the sense of this must first be duly stated. Now he here makes
it out that, when God said he would be a God to Abraham, and to his seed
(which was the famous promise made unto the fathers), he did not mean it
of all his seed according to the flesh, as if it were a necessary
concomitant of the blood of Abraham; but that he intended it with a
limitation only to such and such. And as from the beginning it was
appropriated to Isaac and not to Ishmael, to Jacob and not to Esau, and
yet for all this the word of God was not made of no effect; so now the
same promise is appropriated to believing Jews that embrace Christ and
Christianity, and, though it throws off multitudes that refuse Christ,
yet the promise is not therefore defeated and invalidated, any more than
it was by the typical rejection of Ishmael and Esau.

I. He lays down this proposition - that they are not all Israel who are
of Israel ([Rom 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006)), neither because
they are, etc., [Rom 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#007). Many that
descended from the loins of Abraham and Jacob, and were of that people
who were surnamed by the name of Israel, yet were very far from being
Israelites indeed, interested in the saving benefits of the new
covenant. They are not all really Israel that are so in name and
profession. It does not follow that, because they are the seed of
Abraham, therefore they must needs be the children of God, though they
themselves fancied so, boasted much of, and built much upon, their
relation to Abraham, [Mat 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009); [Joh
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#038), [Joh
8:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#039). But it does not follow. Grace
does not run in the blood; nor are saving benefits inseparably annexed
to external church privileges, though it is common for people thus to
stretch the meaning of God's promise, to bolster themselves up in a vain
hope.

II\. He proves this by instances; and therein shows not only that some
of Abraham's seed were chosen, and others not, but that God therein
wrought according to the counsel of his own will; and not with regard to
that law of commandments to which the present unbelieving Jews were so
strangely wedded.

1\. He specifies the case of Isaac and Ishmael, both of them the seed of
Abraham; and yet Isaac only taken into covenant with God, and Ishmael
rejected and cast out. For this he quotes [Gen
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#012), In Isaac shall thy seed be
called, which comes in there as a reason why Abraham must be willing to
cast out the bond-woman and her son, because the covenant was to be
established with Isaac, [Gen 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#019).
And yet the word which God had spoken, that he would be a God to Abraham
and to his seed, did not therefore fall to the ground; for the blessings
wrapt up in that great word, being communicated by God as a benefactor,
he was free to determine on what head they should rest, and accordingly
entailed them upon Isaac, and rejected Ishmael. This he explains further
([Rom 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#008), [Rom
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#009)), and shows what God intended to
teach us by this dispensation. (1.) That the children of the flesh, as
such, by virtue of their relation to Abraham according to the flesh, are
not therefore the children of God, for then Ishmael had put in a good
claim. This remark comes home to the unbelieving Jews, who boasted of
their relation to Abraham according to the flesh, and looked for
justification in a fleshly way, by those carnal ordinances which Christ
had abolished. They had confidence in the flesh, and looked for
justification in a fleshly way, by those carnal ordinances which Christ
had abolished. They had confidence in the flesh, [Phi
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#003). Ishmael was a child of the flesh,
conceived by Hagar, who was young and fresh, and likely enough to have
children. There was nothing extraordinary or supernatural in his
conception, as there was in Isaac's; he was born after the flesh ([Gal
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#029)), representing those that expect
justification and salvation by their own strength and righteousness.
(2.) That the children of the promise are counted for the seed. Those
that have the honour and happiness of being counted for the seed have it
not for the sake of any merit or desert of their own, but purely by
virtue of the promise, in which God hath obliged himself of his own good
pleasure to grant the promised favour. Isaac was a child of promise;
this his proves, [Rom 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#009), quoted from
[Gen 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#010). he was a child promised
(so were many others), and he was also conceived and born by force and
virtue of the promise, and so a proper type and figure of those who are
now counted for the seed, even true believers, who are born, not of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God - of the
incorruptible seed, even the word of promise, by virtue of the special
promise of a new heart: see [Gal 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#028).
It was through faith that Isaac was conceived, [Heb
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#011). Thus were the great mysteries
of salvation taught under the Old Testament, not in express words, but
by significant types and dispensations of providence, which to them then
were not so clear as they are to us now, when the veil is taken away,
and the types are expounded by the antitypes.

2\. The case of Jacob and Esau ([Rom
9:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#010)), which is much stronger, to
show that the carnal seed of Abraham were not, as such, interested in
the promise, but only such of them as God in sovereignty had appointed.
There was a previous difference between Ishmael and Isaac, before
Ishmael was cast out: Ishmael was the son of the bond-woman, born long
before Isaac, was of a fierce and rugged disposition, and had mocked or
persecuted Isaac, to all which it might be supposed God had regard when
he appointed Abraham to cast him out. But, in the case of Jacob and
Esau, it was neither so nor so, they were both the sons of Isaac by one
mother; they were conceived hex henos - by one conception; hex henos
koitou, so some copies read it. The difference was made between them by
the divine counsel before they were born, or had done any good or evil.
Both lay struggling alike in their mother's womb, when it was said, The
elder shall serve the younger, without respect to good or bad works done
or foreseen, that the purpose of God according to election might stand -
that this great truth may be established, that God chooses some and
refuses others as a free agent, by his own absolute and sovereign will,
dispensing his favours or withholding them as he pleases. This
difference that was put between Jacob and Esau he further illustrates by
a quotation from [Mal 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#002), [Mal
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003), where it is said, not of Jacob
and Esau the person, but the Edomites and Israelites their posterity,
Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated. The people of Israel were
taken into the covenant of peculiarity, had the land of Canaan given
them, were blessed with the more signal appearances of God for them in
special protections, supplies, and deliverances, while the Edomites were
rejected, had no temple, altar, priests, nor prophets - no such
particular care taken of them nor kindness shown to them. Such a
difference did God put between those two nations, that both descended
from the loins of Abraham and Isaac, as at first there was a difference
put between Jacob and Esau, the distinguishing heads of those two
nations. So that all this choosing and refusing was typical, and
intended to shadow forth some other election and rejection. (1.) Some
understand it of the election and rejection of conditions or
qualifications. As God chose Isaac and Jacob, and rejected Ishmael and
Esau, so he might and did choose faith to be the condition of salvation
and reject the works of the law. Thus Arminius understands it, De
rejectis et assumptis talibus, certa qualitate notatis - Concerning such
as are rejected and such as are chosen, being distinguished by
appropriate qualities; so John Goodwin. But this very much strains the
scripture; for the apostle speaks all along of persons, he has mercy on
whom (he does not say on what kind of people) he will have mercy,
besides that against this sense those two objections ([Rom
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#014), [Rom
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#019)) do not at all arise, and his
answer to them concerning God's absolute sovereignty over the children
of men is not at all pertinent if no more be meant than his appointing
the conditions of salvation. (2.) Others understand it of the election
and rejection of particular person - some loved, and others hated, from
eternity. But the apostle speaks of Jacob and Esau, not in their own
persons, but as ancestors - Jacob the people, and Esau the people; nor
does God condemn any, or decree so to do, merely because he will do it,
without any reason taken from their own deserts. (3.) Others therefore
understand it of the election and rejection of people considered
complexly. His design is to justify God, and his mercy and truth, in
calling the Gentiles, and taking them into the church, and into covenant
with himself, while he suffered the obstinate part of the Jews to
persist in unbelief, and so to unchurch themselves - thus hiding from
their eyes the things that belonged to their peace. The apostle's
reasoning for the explication and proof of this is, however, very
applicable to, and, no doubt (as is usual in scripture) was intended for
the clearing of the methods of God's grace towards particular person,
for the communication of saving benefits bears some analogy to the
communication of church-privileges. The choosing of Jacob the younger,
and preferring him before Esau the elder (so crossing hands), were to
intimate that the Jews, though the natural seed of Abraham, and the
first-born of the church, should be laid aside; and the Gentiles, who
were as the younger brother, should be taken in in their stead, and have
the birthright and blessing. The Jews, considered as a body politic, a
nation and people, knit together by the bond and cement of the
ceremonial law, the temple and priesthood, the centre of their unity,
had for many ages been the darlings and favourites of heaven, a kingdom
of priests, a holy nation, dignified and distinguished by God's
miraculous appearances among them and for them. Now that the gospel was
preached, and Christian churches were planted, this national body was
thereby abandoned, their church-polity dissolved; and Christian churches
(and in process of time Christian nations), embodied in like manner,
become their successors in the divine favour, and those special
privileges and protections which were the products of that favour. To
clear up the justice of God in this great dispensation is the scope of
the apostle here.

[Romans 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 9:14</span></span>

The apostle, having asserted the true meaning of the promise, comes here
to maintain and prove the absolute sovereignty of God, in disposing of
the children of men, with reference to their eternal state. And herein
God is to be considered, not as a rector and governor, distributing
rewards and punishments according to his revealed laws and covenants,
but as an owner and benefactor, giving to the children of men such grace
and favour as he has determined in and by his secret and eternal will
and counsel: both the favour of visible church-membership and
privileges, which is given to some people and denied to others, and the
favour of effectual grace, which is given to some particular persons and
denied to others.

Now this part of his discourse is in answer to two objections.

I. It might be objected, Is there unrighteousness with God? If God, in
dealing with the children of men, do thus, in an arbitrary manner,
choose some and refuse others, may it not be suspected that there is
unrighteousness with him? This the apostle startles at the thought of:
God forbid! Far be it from us to think such a thing; shall not the judge
of all the earth do right? [Gen 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#025);
[Rom 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#005), [Rom
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#006). He denies the consequences, and
proves the denial.

1\. In respect of those to whom he shows mercy, [Rom
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#015), [Rom
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#016). He quotes that scripture to show
God's sovereignty in dispensing his favours ([Exo
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#019)): I will be gracious to whom I
will be gracious. All God's reasons of mercy are taken from within
himself. All the children of men being plunged alike into a state of sin
and misery, equally under guilt and wrath, God, in a way of sovereignty,
picks out some from this fallen apostatized race, to be vessels of grace
and glory. He dispenses his gifts to whom he will, without giving us any
reason: according to his own good pleasure he pitches upon some to be
monuments of mercy and grace, preventing grace, effectual grace, while
he passes by others. The expression is very emphatic, and the repetition
makes it more so: I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy. It
imports a perfect absoluteness in God's will; he will do what he will,
and giveth not account of any of his matters, nor is it fit he should.
As these great words, I am that I am ([Exo
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014)) do abundantly express the
absolute independency of his being, so these words, I will have mercy on
whom I will have mercy, do as fully express the absolute prerogative and
sovereignty of his will. To vindicate the righteousness of God, in
showing mercy to whom he will, the apostle appeals to that which God
himself had spoken, wherein he claims this sovereign power and liberty.
God is a competent judge, even in his own case. Whatsoever God does, or
is resolved to do, is both by the one and the other proved to be just.
Eleēsō on han heleō - I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy. When
I begin, I will make an end. Therefore God's mercy endures for ever,
because the reason of it is fetched from within himself; therefore his
gifts and callings are without repentance. Hence he infers ([Rom
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#016)), It is not of him that willeth.
Whatever good comes from God to man, the glory of it is not to be
ascribed to the most generous desire, nor to the most industrious
endeavour, of man, but only and purely to the free grace and mercy of
God. In Jacob's case it was not of him that willeth, nor of him that
runneth; it was not the earnest will and desire of Rebecca that Jacob
might have the blessing; it was not Jacob's haste to get it (for he was
compelled to run for it) that procured him the blessing, but only the
mercy and grace of God. Wherein the holy happy people of God differ from
other people, it is God and his grace that make them differ. Applying
this general rule to the particular case that Paul has before him, the
reason why the unworthy, undeserving, ill-deserving Gentiles are called,
and grafted into the church, while the greatest part of the Jews are
left to perish in unbelief, is not because those Gentiles were better
deserving or better disposed for such a favour, but because of God's
free grace that made that difference. The Gentiles did neither will it,
nor run for it, for they sat in darkness, [Mat
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#016). In darkness, therefore not
willing what they knew not; sitting in darkness, a contented posture,
therefore not running to meet it, but anticipated with these invaluable
blessings of goodness. Such is the method of God's grace towards all
that partake of it, for he is found of those that sought him not ([Isa
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001)); in this preventing, effectual,
distinguishing grace, he acts as a benefactor, whose grace is his own.
Our eye therefore must not be evil because his is good; but, of all the
grace that we or others have, he must have the glory: Not unto us, [Psa
115:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#001).

2\. In respect of those who perish, [Rom
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#017). God's sovereignty, manifested in
the ruin of sinners, is here discovered in the instance of Pharaoh; it
is quoted from [Exo 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#016). Observe,

(1.) What God did with Pharaoh. He raised him up, brought him into the
world, made him famous, gave him the kingdom and power, - set him up as
a beacon upon a hill, as the mark of all his plagues (compare [Exo
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#014)) - hardened his heart, as he had
said he would ([Exo 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#021)): I will
harden his heart, that is, withdraw softening grace, leave him to
himself, let Satan loose against him, and lay hardening providences
before him. Or, by raising him up may be meant the intermission of the
plagues which gave Pharaoh respite, and the reprieve of Pharaoh in those
plagues. In the Hebrew, I have made thee stand, continued thee yet in
the land of the living. Thus doth God raise up sinners, make them for
himself, even for the day of evil ([Pro
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#004)), raise them up in outward
prosperity, external privileges ([Mat
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#023)), sparing mercies.

(2.) What he designed in it: That I might show my power in thee. God
would, by all this, serve the honour of his name, and manifest his power
in baffling the pride and insolence of that great and daring tyrant, who
bade defiance to Heaven itself, and trampled upon all that was just and
sacred. If Pharaoh had not been so high and might, so bold and hardy,
the power of God had not been so illustrious in the ruining of him; but
the taking off of the spirit of such a prince, who hectored at that
rate, did indeed proclaim God glorious in holiness, fearful in praises,
doing wonders, [Exo 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011). This is
Pharaoh, and all his multitude.

(3.) His conclusion concerning both these we have, [Rom
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#018). He hath mercy on whom he will
have mercy, and whom he will he hardeneth. The various dealings of God,
by which he makes some to differ from others, must be resolved into his
absolute sovereignty. He is debtor to no man, his grace is his own, and
he may give it or withhold it as it pleaseth him; we have none of us
deserved it, nay, we have all justly forfeited it a thousand times, so
that herein the work of our salvation is admirably well ordered that
those who are saved must thank God only, and those who perish must thank
themselves only, [Hos 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#009). We are
bound, as God hath bound us, to do our utmost for the salvation of all
we have to do with; but God is bound no further than he has been pleased
to bind himself by his own covenant and promise, which is his revealed
will; and that is that he will receive, and not cast out, those that
come to Christ; but the drawing of souls in order to that coming is a
preventing distinguishing favour to whom he will. Had he mercy on the
Gentiles? It was because he would have mercy on them. Were the Jews
hardened? It was because it was his own pleasure to deny them softening
grace, and to give them up to their chosen affected unbelief. Even so,
Father, because it seemed good unto thee. That scripture excellently
explains this, [Luk 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#021), and, as
this, shows the sovereign will of God in giving or withholding both the
means of grace and the effectual blessing upon those means.

II\. It might be objected, Why doth he yet find fault? For who hath
resisted his will? [Rom 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#019). Had the
apostle been arguing only for God's sovereignty in appointing and
ordering the terms and conditions of acceptance and salvation, there had
not been the least colour for this objection; for he might well find
fault if people refused to come up to the terms on which such a
salvation is offered; the salvation being so great, the terms could not
be hard. But there might be colour for the objection against his arguing
for the sovereignty of God in giving and withholding differencing and
preventing grace; and the objection is commonly and readily advanced
against the doctrine of distinguishing grace. If God, while he gives
effectual grace to some, denies it to others, why doth he find fault
with those to whom he denies it? If he hath rejected the Jews, and hid
from their eyes the things that belong to their peace, why doth he find
fault with them for their blindness? If it be his pleasure to discard
them as not a people, and not obtaining mercy, their knocking off
themselves was no resistance of his will. This objection he answers at
large,

1\. By reproving the objector ([Rom
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020)): Nay but, O man. This is not an
objection fit to be made by the creature against his Creator, by man
against God. The truth, as it is in Jesus, is that which abases man as
nothing, less than nothing, and advances God as sovereign Lord of all.
Observe how contemptibly he speaks of man, when he comes to argue with
God his Maker: "Who art thou, thou that art so foolish, so feeble, so
short-sighted, so incompetent a judge of the divine counsels? Art thou
able to fathom such a depth, dispute such a case, to trace that way of
God which is in the sea, his path in the great waters?" That repliest
against God. It becomes us to submit to him, not to reply against him;
to lie down under his hand, not to fly in his face, nor to charge him
with folly. Ho antapokrinomenos - That answerest again. God is our
master, and we are his servants; and it does not become servants to
answer again, [Tit 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#009).

2\. By resolving all into the divine sovereignty. We are the thing
formed, and he is the former; and it does not become us to challenge or
arraign his wisdom in ordering and disposing of us into this or that
shape of figure. The rude and unformed mass of matter hath no right to
this or that form, but is shaped at the pleasure of him that formeth it.
God's sovereignty over us is fitly illustrated by the power that the
potter hath over the clay; compare [Jer
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#006), where, by a like comparison, God
asserts his dominion over the nation of the Jews, when he was about to
magnify his justice in their destruction by Nebuchadnezzar.

(1.) He gives us the comparison, [Rom
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021). The potter, out of the same
lump, may make either a fashionable vessel, and a vessel fit for
creditable and honourable uses, or a contemptible vessel, and a vessel
in which is no pleasure; and herein he acts arbitrarily, as he might
have chosen whether he would make any vessel of it at all, or whether he
would leave it in the hole of the pit, out of which it was dug.

(2.) The application of the comparison, [Rom
9:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022). Two sorts of vessels God
forms out of the great lump of fallen mankind: - \[1.\] Vessels of wrath
- vessels filled with wrath, as a vessel of wine is a vessel filled with
wine; full of the fury of the Lord, [Isa
51:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#020). In these God is willing to show
his wrath, that is, his punishing justice, and his enmity to sin. This
must be shown to all the world, God will make it appear that he hates
sin. He will likewise make his power known, to dumaton autou. It is a
power of strength and energy, an inflicting power, which works and
effects the destruction of those that perish; it is a destruction that
proceeds from the glory of his power, [Th2
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#009). The eternal damnation of sinners
will be an abundant demonstration of the power of God; for he will act
in it himself immediately, his wrath preying as it were upon guilty
consciences, and his arm stretched out totally to destroy their
well-being, and yet at the same instant wonderfully to preserve the
being of the creature. In order to this, God endured them with much
long-suffering - exercised a great deal of patience towards them, let
them alone to fill up the measure of sin, to grow till they were ripe
for ruin, and so they became fitted for destruction, fitted by their own
sin and self-hardening. The reigning corruptions and wickedness of the
soul are its preparedness and disposedness for hell: a soul is hereby
made combustible matter, fit for the flames of hell. When Christ said to
the Jews ([Mat 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#032)), Fill you up
then the measure of your father, that upon you may come all the
righteous blood ([Mat 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035)), he did,
as it were, endure them with much long-suffering, that they might, by
their own obstinacy and wilfulness in sin, fit themselves for
destruction. \[2.\] Vessels of mercy - filled with mercy. The happiness
bestowed upon the saved remnant is the fruit, not of their merit, but of
God's mercy. The spring of all the joy and glory of heaven is that mercy
of God which endures for ever. Vessels of honour must to eternity own
themselves vessels of mercy. Observe, First, What he designs in them: To
make known the riches of his glory, that is, of his goodness; for God's
goodness is his greatest glory, especially when it is communicated with
the greatest sovereignty. I beseech thee show me thy glory, says Moses,
[Exo 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#018). I will make all my
goodness to pass before thee, says God ([Exo
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#019)), and that given out freely: I
will be gracious to whom I will be gracious. God makes known his glory,
this goodness of his, in the preservation and supply of all the
creatures: the earth is full of his goodness, and the year crowned with
it; but when he would demonstrate the riches of his goodness,
unsearchable riches, he does it in the salvation of the saints, that
will be to eternity glorious monuments of divine grace. Secondly, What
he does for them he does before prepare them to glory. Sanctification is
the preparation of the soul for glory, making it meet to partake of the
inheritance of the saints in light. This is God's work. We can destroy
ourselves fast enough, but we cannot save ourselves. Sinners fit
themselves for hell, but it is God that prepares saints for heaven; and
all those that God designs for heaven hereafter he prepares and fits for
heaven now: he works them to the self-same thing, [Co2
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#005). And would you know who these
vessels of mercy are? Those whom he hath called ([Rom
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#024)); for whom he did predestinate
those he also called with an effectual call: and these not of the Jews
only, but of the Gentiles; for, the partition-wall being taken down, the
world was laid in common, and not (as it had been) God's favour
appropriated to the Jews, and they put a degree nearer his acceptance
than the rest of the world. They now stood upon the same level with the
Gentiles; and the question is not now whether of the seed of Abraham or
no, that is neither here nor there, but whether or no called according
to his purpose.

[Romans 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rom 9:25</span></span>

Having explained the promise, and proved the divine sovereignty, the
apostle here shows how the rejection of the Jews, and the taking in of
the Gentiles, were foretold in the Old Testament, and therefore must
needs be very well consistent with the promise made to the fathers under
the Old Testament. It tends very much to the clearing of a truth to
observe how the scripture is fulfilled in it. The Jews would, no doubt,
willingly refer it to the Old Testament, the scriptures of which were
committed to them. Now he shows how this, which was so uneasy to them,
was there spoken of.

I. By the prophet Hosea, who speaks of the taking in of a great many of
the Gentiles, [Hos 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023) and [Hos
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010). The Gentiles had not been the
people of God, not owning him, nor being owned by him in that relation:
"But," says he, "I will call them my people, make them such and own them
as such, notwithstanding all their unworthiness." A blessed change!
Former badness is no bar to God's present grace and mercy. - And her
beloved which was not beloved. Those whom God calls his people he calls
beloved: he loves those that are his own. And lest it might be supposed
that they should become God's people only by being proselyted to the
Jewish religion, and made members of that nation, he adds, from [Hos
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010), In the place where it was said,
etc., there shall they be called. They need not be embodied with the
Jews, nor go up to Jerusalem to worship; but, wherever they are
scattered over the face of the earth, there will God own them. Observe
the great dignity and honour of the saints, that they are called the
children of the living God; and his calling them so makes them so.
Behold, what manner of love! This honour have all his saints.

II\. By the prophet Isaiah, who speaks of the casting off of many of the
Jews, in two places.

1\. One is [Isa 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022), [Isa
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#023), which speaks of the saving of a
remnant, that is, but a remnant, which, though in the prophecy it seems
to refer to the preservation of a remnant from the destruction and
desolation that were coming upon them by Sennacherib and his army, yet
is to be understood as looking further, and sufficiently proves that it
is no strange thing for God to abandon to ruin a great many of the seed
of Abraham, and yet maintain his word of promise to Abraham in full
force and virtue. This is intimated in the supposition that the number
of children of Israel was as the sand of the sea, which was part of the
promise made to Abraham, [Gen 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017).
And yet only a remnant shall be saved; for many are called, but few are
chosen. In this salvation of the remnant we are told ([Rom
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#028)) from the prophet, (1.) That he
will complete the work: He will finish the work. When God begins he will
make an end, whether in ways of judgment or of mercy. The rejection of
the unbelieving Jews god would finish in their utter ruin by the Romans,
who soon after this quite took away their place and nation. The assuming
of Christian churches into the divine favour, and the spreading of the
gospel in other nations, was a work which God would likewise finish, and
be known by his name JEHOVAH. As for God, his work is perfect. Margin,
He will finish the account. God, in his eternal counsels, has taken an
account of the children of men, allotted them to such or such a
condition, to such a share of privileges; and, as they come into being,
his dealings with them are pursuant to these counsels: and he will
finish the account, complete the mystical body, call in as many as
belong to the election of grace, and then the account will be finished.
(2.) That he will contract it; not only finish it, but finish it
quickly. Under the Old Testament he seemed to tarry, and to make a
longer and more tedious work of it. The wheels moved but slowly towards
the extent of the church; but now he will cut it short, and make a short
work upon the earth. Gentile converts were now flying as a cloud. But he
will cut it short in righteousness, both in wisdom and in justice. Men,
when they cut short, do amiss; they do indeed despatch causes; but, when
God cuts short, it is always in righteousness. So the fathers generally
apply it. Some understand it of the evangelical law and covenant, which
Christ has introduced and established in the world: he has in that
finished the work, put an end to the types and ceremonies of the Old
Testament. Christ said, It is finished, and then the veil was rent,
echoing as it were to the word that Christ said upon the cross. And he
will cut it short. The work (it is logos - the word, the law) was under
the Old Testament very long; a long train of institutions, ceremonies,
conditions: but now it is cut short. Our duty is now, under the gospel,
summed up in much less room than it was under the law; the covenant was
abridged and contracted; religion is brought into a less compass. And it
is in righteousness, in favour to us, in justice to his own design and
counsel. With us contractions are apt to darken things: -

\- Brevis esse laboro, Obscurus fio -

I strive to be concise, but prove obscure.

but it is not so in this case. Though it be cut short, it is clear and
plain; and, because short, the more easy.

2\. Another is quoted from [Isa 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009),
where the prophet is showing how in a time of general calamity and
destruction God would preserve a seed. This is to the same purport with
the former; and the scope of it is to show that it was no strange thing
for God to leave the greatest part of the people of the Jews to ruin,
and to reserve to himself only a small remnant: so he had done formerly,
as appears by their own prophets; and they must not wonder if he did so
now. Observe, (1.) What God is. He is the Lord of sabaoth, that is, the
Lord of hosts - a Hebrew word retained in the Greek, as [Jam
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#004). All the host of heaven and earth
are at his beck and disposal. When God secures a seed to himself out of
a degenerate apostate world, he acts as Lord of sabaoth. It is an act of
almighty power and infinite sovereignty. (2.) What his people are; they
are a seed, a small number. The corn reserved for next year's seedings
is but little, compared with that which is spent and eaten. But they are
a useful number - the seed, the substance, of the next generation, [Isa
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#013). It is so far from being an
impeachment of the justice and righteousness of God that so many perish
and are destroyed, that it is a wonder of divine power and mercy that
all are not destroyed, that there are any saved; for even those that are
left to be a seed, if God had dealt with them according to their sins,
had perished with the rest. This is the great truth which this scripture
teacheth us.

[Romans 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">rom 9:30</span></span>

The apostle comes here at last to fix the true reason of the reception
of the Gentiles, and the rejection of the Jews. There was a difference
in the way of their seeking, and therefore there was that different
success, though still it was the free grace of God that made them
differ. He concludes like an orator, What shall we say then? What is the
conclusion of the whole dispute?

I. Concerning the Gentiles observe, 1. How they had been alienated from
righteousness: the followed not after it; they knew not their guilt and
misery, and therefore were not at all solicitous to procure a remedy. In
their conversion preventing grace was greatly magnified: God was found
of those that sought him not, [Isa
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001). There was nothing in them to
dispose them for such a favour more than what free grace wrought in
them. Thus doth God delight to dispense grace in a way of sovereignty
and absolute dominion. 2. How they attained to righteousness,
notwithstanding: By faith; not by being proselyted to the Jewish
religion, and submitting to the ceremonial law, but by embracing Christ,
and believing in Christ, and submitting to the gospel. They attained to
that by the short cut of believing sincerely in Christ for which the
Jews had been long in vain beating about the bush.

II\. Concerning the Jews observe, 1. How they missed their end: they
followed after the law of righteousness ([Rom
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#031)) - they talked much of
justification and holiness, seemed very ambitious of being the people of
God and the favourites of heaven, but they did not attain to it, that
is, the greatest part of them did not; as many as stuck to their old
Jewish principles and ceremonies, and pursued a happiness in those
observances, embracing the shadows now that the substance was come,
these fell short of acceptance with God, were not owned as his people,
nor went to their house justified. 2. How they mistook their way, which
was the cause of their missing the end, [Rom
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#032), [Rom
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033). They sought, but not in the
right way, not in the humbling way, not in the instituted appointed way.
Not by faith, not by embracing the Christian religion, and depending
upon the merit of Christ, and submitting to the terms of the gospel,
which were the very life and end of the law. But they sought by the
works of the law; as if they were to expect justification by their
observance of the precepts and ceremonies of the law of Moses. This was
the stumbling-stone at which they stumbled. They could not get over this
corrupt principle which they had espoused, That the law was given them
for no end but that merely by their observance of it, and obedience to
it, they might be justified before God: and so they could by no means be
reconciled to the doctrine of Christ, which brought them off from that
to expect justification through the merit and satisfaction of another.
Christ himself is to some a stone of stumbling, for which he quotes [Isa
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014); [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016). It is sad that Christ should be
set for the fall of any, and yet it is so ([Luk
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#034)), that ever poison should be
sucked out of the balm of Gilead, that the foundation-stone should be to
any a stone of stumbling, and the rock of salvation a rock of offence;
so he is to multitudes; so he was to the unbelieving Jews, who rejected
him, because he put an end to the ceremonial law. But still there is a
remnant that do believe on him; and they shall not be ashamed, that is,
their hopes and expectations of justification by him shall not be
disappointed, as theirs are who expect it by the law. So that, upon the
whole, the unbelieving Jews have no reason to quarrel with God for
rejecting them; they had a fair offer of righteousness, and life, and
salvation, made to them upon gospel terms, which they did not like, and
would not come up to; and therefore, if they perish, they may thank
themselves - their blood is upon their own heads.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 10](rom010)

</div>
