<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1011)  [Next](sa1013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 12:0</span></span>

We left the general assembly of the states together, in the close of the
foregoing chapter; in this chapter we have Samuel's speech to them, when
he resigned the government into the hands of Saul, in which, I. He
clears himself from all suspicion or imputation of mismanagement, while
the administration was in his hands ([Sa1
12:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#001)). II. He reminds them of the
great things God had done for them and for their fathers ([Sa1
12:6-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#006)). III. He sets before them
good and evil, the blessing and the curse ([Sa1
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#014), [Sa1
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#015)). IV. He awakens them to regard
what he said to them, by calling to God for thunder ([Sa1
12:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#016)). V. He encourages them with
hopes that all should be well ([Sa1
12:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#020)). This is his farewell sermon
to that august assembly and Saul's coronation sermon.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 12:1</span></span>

Here, I. Samuel gives them a short account of the late revolution, and
of the present posture of their government, by way of preface to what he
had further to say to them, [Sa1 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#001),
[Sa1 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#002). 1. For his own part, he had
spent his days in their service; he began betimes to be useful among
them, and had continued long so: "I have walked before you, as a guide
to direct you, as a shepherd that leads his flock ([Psa
80:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001)), from my childhood unto this
day." As soon as he was illuminated with the light of prophecy, in his
early days, he began to be a burning and shining light to Israel; "and
now my best days are done: I am old and gray-headed;" therefore they
were the more unkind to cast him off, yet therefore he was the more
willing to resign, finding the weight of government heavy upon his
stooping shoulders. He was old, and therefore the more able to advise
them, and the more observant they should have been of what he said, for
days shall speak and the multitude of years shall teach wisdom; and
there is a particular reverence due to the aged, especially aged
magistrates and aged ministers. "I am old, and therefore not likely to
live long, perhaps may never have an opportunity of speaking to you
again, and therefore take notice of what I say." 2. As for his sons,
"Behold" (says he), "they are with you, you may, if you please, call
them to an account for any thing they have done amiss. They are present
with you, and have not, upon this revolution, fled from their country.
They are upon the level with you, subjects to the new king as well as
you; if you can prove them guilty of any wrong, you may prosecute them
now by a due course of law, punish them, and oblige them to make
restitution." 3. As for their new king, Samuel had gratified them in
setting him over them ([Sa1 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#001)): "I
have hearkened to your voice in all that you said to me, being desirous
to please you, if possible, and make you easy, though to the discarding
of myself and family; and now will you hearken to me, and take my
advice?" The change was now perfected: "Behold, the king walketh before
you" ([Sa1 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#002)); he appears in
public, ready to serve you in public business. Now that you have made
yourselves like the nations in your civil government, and have cast off
the divine administration in that, take heed lest you make yourselves
like the nations in religion and cast off the worship of God.

II\. He solemnly appeals to them concerning his own integrity in the
administration of the government ([Sa1
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#003)): Witness against me, whose ox
have I taken? Observe,

1\. His design in this appeal. By this he intended, (1.) To convince
them of the injury they had done him in setting him aside, when they had
nothing amiss to charge him with (his government had no fault but that
it was too cheap, too easy, too gentle), and also of the injury they had
done themselves in turning off one that did not so much as take an ox or
an ass from them, to put themselves under the power of one that would
take from them their fields and vineyards, nay, and their very sons and
daughters ([Sa1 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#011)), so unlike would
the manner of the king be from Samuel's manner. (2.) To preserve his own
reputation. Those that heard of Samuel's being rejected as he was would
be ready to suspect that certainly he had done some evil thing, or he
would never have been so ill treated; so that it was necessary for him
to make this challenge, that it might appear upon record that it was not
for any iniquity in his hands that he was laid aside, but to gratify the
humour of a giddy people, who owned they could not have a better man to
rule them, only they desired a bigger man. There is a just debt which
every man owes to his own good name, especially men in public stations,
which is to guard it against unjust aspersions and suspicions, that we
may finish our course with honour as well as joy. (3.) As he designed
hereby to leave a good name behind him, so he designed to leave his
successor a good example before him; let him write after his copy, and
he will write fair. (4.) He designed, in the close of his discourse, to
reprove the people, and therefore he begins with a vindication of
himself; for he that will, with confidence, tell another of his sin,
must see to it that he himself be clear.

2\. In the appeal itself observe,

(1.) What it is that Samuel here acquits himself from. \[1.\] He had
never, under any pretence whatsoever, taken that which was not his own,
ox or ass, had never distrained their cattle for tribute, fines, or
forfeitures, nor used their service without paying for it. \[2.\] He had
never defrauded those with whom he dealt, nor oppressed those that were
under his power. \[3.\] He had never taken bribes to pervert justice,
nor was ever biassed by favour for affection to give judgment in a cause
against his conscience.

(2.) How he calls upon those that had slighted him to bear witness
concerning his conduct: "Here I am; witness against me. If you have any
thing to lay to my charge, do it before the Lord and the king, the
proper judges." He puts honour upon Saul, by owning himself accountable
to him if guilty of any wrong.

III\. Upon this appeal he is honourably acquitted. He did not expect
that they would do him honour at parting, though he well deserved it,
and therefore mentioned not any of the good services he had done them,
for which they ought to have applauded him, and returned him the thanks
of the house; all he desired was that they should do him justice, and
that they did ([Sa1 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#004)) readily
owning, 1. That he had not made his government oppressive to them, nor
used his power to their wrong. 2. That he had not made it expensive to
them: Neither hast thou taken aught of any man's hand for the support of
thy dignity. Like Nehemiah, he did not require the bread of the governor
([Neh 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#018)), had not only been
righteous, but generous, had coveted no man's silver, or gold, or
apparel, [Act 20:33](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#033).

IV\. This honourable testimony borne to Samuel's integrity is left upon
record to his honour ([Sa1 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#005)): "The
Lord is witness, who searcheth the heart, and his anointed is witness,
who trieth overt acts;" and the people agree to it: "He is witness."
Note, The testimony of our neighbours, and especially the testimony of
our own consciences for us, that we have in our places lived honestly,
will be our comfort under the slights and contempts that are put upon
us. Demetrius is a happy man, that has a good report of all men and of
the truth itself, [Jo3 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#012).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 12:6</span></span>

Samuel, having sufficiently secured his own reputation, instead of
upbraiding the people upon it with their unkindness to him, sets himself
to instruct them, and keep them in the way of their duty, and then the
change of the government would be the less damage to them.

I. He reminds them of the great goodness of God to them and to their
fathers, gives them an abstract of the history of their nation, that, by
the consideration of the great things God had done for them, they might
be for ever engaged to love him and serve him. "Come," says he ([Sa1
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#007)), "stand still, stand in token of
reverence when God is speaking to you, stand still in token of attention
and composedness of mind, and give me leave to reason with you."
Religion has reason on its side, [Isa
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018). The work of ministers is to
reason with people, not only to exhort and direct, but to persuade, to
convince men's judgments, and so to gain their wills and affections. Let
reason rule men, and they will be good. He reasons of the righteous acts
of the Lord, that is, "both the benefits he hath bestowed upon you, in
performance of his promises, and the punishments he has inflicted on you
for your sins." His favours are called his righteous acts ([Jdg
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#011)), because in them he is just to
his own honour. He not only puts them in mind of what God had done for
them in their days, but of what he had done of old, in the days of their
fathers, because the present age had the benefit of God's former
favours. We may suppose that his discourse was much larger than as here
related. 1. he reminds them of their deliverance out of Egypt. Into that
house of bondage Jacob and his family came down poor and little; when
they were oppressed they cried unto God, who advanced Moses and Aaron,
from mean beginnings, to be their deliverers, and the founders of their
state and settlement in Canaan, [Sa1
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#006), [Sa1
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#008). 2. He reminds them of the
miseries and calamities which their fathers brought themselves into by
forgetting God and serving other gods, [Sa1
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#009). They enslaved themselves, for
they were sold as criminals and captives into the hand of oppressors.
They exposed themselves to the desolation of war, and their neighbours
fought against them. 3. He reminds them of their fathers' repentance and
humiliation before God for their idolatries: They said, We have sinned,
[Sa1 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#010). Let not them imitate the
sins of their fathers, for what they had done amiss they had many a time
wished undone again. In the day of their distress they had sought unto
God, and had promised to serve him; let their children then reckon that
good at all times which they found good in bad times. 4. He reminds them
of the glorious deliverances God had wrought for them, the victories he
had blessed them with, and their happy settlements, many a time, after
days of trouble and distress, [Sa1
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#011). He specifies some of their
judges, Gideon and Jephthah, great conquerors in their time; among the
rest he mentions Bedan, whom we read not of any where else: he might be
some eminent person, that was instrumental of salvation to them, though
not recorded in the book of Judges, such a one as Shamgar, of whom it is
said that he delivered Israel, but not that he judged them, [Jdg
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#031). Perhaps this Bedan guarded and
delivered them on one side, at the same time when some other of the
judges appeared and acted for them on another side. Some think it was
the same with Jair (so the learned Mr. Poole), others the same with
Samson, who was Ben Dan, a son of Dan, of that tribe, and the Spirit of
the Lord came upon him Be-Dan, inn Dan, in the camp of Can. Samuel
mentions himself, not to his own praise, but to the honour of God, who
had made him an instrument of subduing the Philistines. 5. At last he
puts them in mind of God's late favour to the present generation, in
gratifying them with a king, when they would prescribe to God by such a
one to save them out of the hand of Nahash king of Ammon, [Sa1
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#012), [Sa1
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#013). Now it appears that this was
the immediate occasion of their desiring a king: Nahash threatened them;
they desired Samuel to nominate a general; he told them that God was
commander-in-chief in all their wars and they needed no other, that what
was wanting in them should be made up by his power: The Lord is your
king. But they insisted on it, Nay, but a king shall reign over us. "And
now," said he, "you have a king, a king of your own asking - let that be
spoken to your shame; but a king of God's making - let that be spoken to
his honour and the glory of his grace." God did not cast them off, even
when they in effect cast him off.

II\. He shows them that they are now upon their good behaviour, they and
their king. Let them not think that they had now cut themselves off from
all dependence upon God, and that now, having a king of their own, the
making of their own fortunes (as men foolishly call it) was in their own
hands; no, still their judgment must proceed from the Lord. He tells
them plainly,

1\. That their obedience to God would certainly be their happiness, [Sa1
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#014). If they would not revolt from
God to idols, nor rebel against him by breaking his commandments, but
would persevere in their allegiance to him, would fear his wrath, serve
his interests, and obey his will, then they and their king should
certainly be happy; but observe how the promise is expressed: Then you
shall continue following the Lord your God; that is, (1.) "You shall
continue in the way of your duty to God, which will be your honour and
comfort." Note, To those that are sincere in their religion God will
give grace to persevere in it: those that follow God faithfully will be
divinely strengthened to continue following him. And observe, Following
God is a work that is its own wages. It is the matter of a promise as
well as of a precept. (2.) "You shall continue under the divine guidance
and protection:" You shall be after the Lord, so it is in the original,
that is, "he will go before you to lead and prosper you, and make your
way plain. The Lord is with you while you are with him."

2\. That their disobedience would as certainly be their ruin ([Sa1
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#015)): "If you rebel, think not that
your having a king will secure you against God's judgments, and that
having in this instance made yourselves like the nations you may sin at
as cheap a rate as they can. No, the hand of the Lord will be against
you, as it was against your fathers when they offended him, in the days
of the judges." We mistake if we think that we can evade God's justice
by shaking off his dominion. If God shall not rule us, yet he will judge
us.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 12:16</span></span>

Two things Samuel here aims at: -

I. To convince the people of their sin in desiring a king. They were now
rejoicing before God in and with their king ([Sa1
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#015)), and offering to God the
sacrifices of praise, which they hoped God would accept; and this
perhaps made them think that there was no harm in their asking a king,
but really they had done well in it. Therefore Samuel here charges it
upon them as their sin, as wickedness, great wickedness in the sight of
the Lord. Note, Though we meet with prosperity and success in a way of
sin, yet we must not therefore think the more favourably of it. They
have a king, and if they conduct themselves well their king may be a
very great blessing to them, and yet Samuel will have them perceive and
see that their wickedness was great in asking a king. We must never
think well of that which God in his law frowns upon, though in his
providence he may seem to smile upon it. Observe,

1\. The expressions of God's displeasure against them for asking a king.
At Samuel's word, God sent prodigious thunder and rain upon them, at a
season of the year when, in that country, the like was never seen or
known before, [Sa1 12:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#016). Thunder
and rain have natural causes and sometimes terrible effects. But Samuel
made it to appear that this was designed by the almighty power of God on
purpose to convince them that they had done very wickedly in asking a
king; not only by its coming in an unusual time, in wheat-harvest, and
this on a fair clear day, when there appeared not to the eye any signs
of a storm, but by his giving notice of it before. Had there happened to
be thunder and rain at the time when he was speaking to them, he might
have improved it for their awakening and conviction, as we may in a like
case; but, to make it no less than a miracle, before it came, (1.) He
spoke to them of it ([Sa1 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#016), [Sa1
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#017)): Stand and see this great
thing. He had before told them to stand and hear ([Sa1
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#007)); but, because he did not see
that his reasoning with them affected them (so stupid were they and
unthinking), now he bids them stand and see. If what he said in a still
small voice did not reach their hearts, nor his doctrine which dropped
as the dew, they shall hear God speaking to them in dreadful claps of
thunder and the great rain of his strength. He appealed to this as a
sign: "I will call upon the Lord, and he will send thunder, will send it
just now, to confirm the word of his servant, and to make you see that I
spoke truly when I told you that God was angry with you for asking a
king." And the event proved him a true prophet; the sign and wonder came
to pass. (2.) He spoke to God for it. Samuel called unto the Lord, and,
in answer to his prayer, even while he was yet speaking, the Lord sent
thunder and rain. By this Samuel made it to appear, not only what a
powerful influence God has upon this earth, that he could, of a sudden,
when natural causes did not work towards it, produce this dreadful rain
and thunder, and bring them out of his treasures ([Psa
135:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#007)), but also what a powerful
interest he had in heaven, that God would thus hearken to the voice of a
man ([Jos 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#014)) and answer him in the
secret place of thunder, [Psa 81:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#007).
Samuel, that son of prayer, was still famous for success in prayer. Now
by this extraordinary thunder and rain sent on this occasion, \[1.\] God
testified his displeasure against them in the same way in which he had
formerly testified it, and at the prayer of Samuel too, against the
Philistines. The Lord discomfited them with a great thunder, [Sa1
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#010). Now that Israel rebelled, and
vexed his Holy Spirit, he turned to be their enemy, and fought against
them with the same weapons which, not long before, had been employed
against their adversaries, [Isa 63:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#010).
\[2.\] He showed them their folly in desiring a king to save them,
rather than God or Samuel, promising themselves more from an arm of
flesh than from the arm of God or from the power of prayer. Could their
king thunder with a voice like God? [Job
40:9](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#009). Could their prince command such
forces as the prophet could by his prayers? \[3.\] He intimated to them
that how serene and prosperous soever their condition seemed to be now
that they had a king, like the weather in wheat-harvest, yet, if God
pleased, he could soon change the face of their heavens, and persecute
them with his tempest, as the Psalmist speaks.

2\. The impressions which this made upon the people. It startled them
very much, as well it might. (1.) They greatly feared the Lord and
Samuel. Though when they had a king they were ready to think they must
fear him only, God made them know that he is greatly to be feared and
his prophets for his sake. Now they were rejoicing in their king, God
taught them to rejoice with trembling. (2.) They owned their sin and
folly in desiring a king: We have added to all our sins this evil, [Sa1
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#019). Some people will not be brought
to a sight of their sins by any gentler methods than storms and
thunders. Samuel did not extort this confession from them till the
matter was settled and the king confirmed, lest it should look as if he
designed by it rather to establish himself in the government than to
bring them to repentance. Now that they were flattering themselves in
their own eyes, their iniquity was found to be hateful, [Psa
36:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#002). (3.) They earnestly begged
Samuel's prayers ([Sa1 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#019)): Pray
for thy servants, that we die not. They were apprehensive of their
danger from the wrath of God, and could not expect that he should hear
their prayers for themselves, and therefore they entreat Samuel to pray
for them. Now they see their need of him whom awhile ago they slighted.
Thus many that will not have Christ to reign over them would yet be glad
to have him intercede for them, to turn away the wrath of God. And the
time may come when those that have despised and ridiculed praying people
will value their prayers, and desire a share in them. "Pray" (say they)
"to the Lord thy God; we know not how to call him ours, but, if thou
hast any interest in him, improve it for us."

II\. He aims to confirm the people in their religion, and engage them
for ever to cleave unto the Lord. The design of his discourse is much
the same with Joshua's, [Jos 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#001) and
[Jos 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#001).

1\. He would not that the terrors of the Lord should frighten them from
him, for they were intended to frighten them to him ([Sa1
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#020)): "Fear not; though you have
done all this wickedness, and though God is angry with you for it, yet
do not therefore abandon his service, nor turn from following him." Fear
not, that is, "despair not, fear not with amazement, the weather will
clear up after the storm. Fear not; for, though God will frown upon his
people, yet he will not forsake them ([Sa1
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#022)) for his great name's sake; do
not you forsake him then." Every transgression in the covenant, though
it displease the Lord, yet does not throw us out of covenant, and
therefore God's just rebukes must not drive us from our hope in his
mercy. The fixedness of God's choice is owing to the freeness of it; we
may therefore hope he will not forsake his people, because it has
pleased him to make them his people. Had he chosen them for their good
merits, we might fear he would cast them off for their bad merits; but,
choosing them for his name's sake, for his name's sake he will not leave
them.

2\. He cautions them against idolatry: "Turn not aside from God and the
worship of him" ([Sa1 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#020), and again
[Sa1 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#021)); "for if you turn aside
from God, whatever you turn aside to, you will find it is a vain thing,
that can never answer your expectations, but will certainly deceive you
if you trust to it; it is a broken reed, a broken cistern." Idols could
not profit those that sought to them in their wants, nor deliver those
that sought to them in their straits, for they were vain, and not what
they pretended to be. An idol is nothing in the world, [Co1
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#004).

3\. He comforts them with an assurance that he would continue his care
and concern for them, [Sa1 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#023). They
desired him to pray for them, [Sa1
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#019). He might have said, "Go to
Saul, the king that you have put in my room," and get him to pray for
you; but so far is he from upbraiding them with their disrespect to him
that he promised them much more than they asked. (1.) They asked it of
him as a favour; he promised it as a duty, and startles at the thought
of neglecting it. Pray for you! says he, God forbid that I should sin
against the Lord in not doing it. Note, It is a sin against God not to
pray for the Israel of God, especially for those of them that are under
our charge: and good men are afraid of the guilt of omissions. (2.) They
asked him to pray for them at this time, and upon this occasion, but he
promised to continue his prayers for them and to cease as long as he
lived. Our rule is to pray without ceasing; we sin if we restrain prayer
in general, and in particular if we cease praying for the church. (3.)
They asked him only to pray for them, but he promised to do more for
them, not only to pray for them, but to teach them; though they were not
willing to be under his government as a judge, he would not therefore
deny them his instructions as a prophet. And they might be sure he would
teach them no other than the good and the right way: and the right way
is certainly the good way: the way of duty is the way of pleasure and
profit.

4\. He concludes with an earnest exhortation to practical religion and
serious godliness, [Sa1 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#024), [Sa1
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#025). The great duty here pressed
upon us is to fear the Lord. He had said ([Sa1
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#020)), "Fear not with a slavish
fear," but here, "Fear the Lord, with a filial fear." As the fruit and
evidence of this, serve him in the duties of religious worship and of a
godly conversation, in truth and sincerity, and not in show and
profession only, with your heart, and with all your heart, not
dissembling, not dividing. And two things he urges by way of motive: -
(1.) That they were bound in gratitude to serve God, considering what
great things he had done for them, to engage them for ever to his
service. (2.) That they were bound in interest to serve him, considering
what great things he would do against them if they should still do
wickedly: "You shall be destroyed by the judgments of God, both you and
your king whom you are so proud of and expect so much from, and who will
be a blessing to you if you keep in with God." Thus, as a faithful
watchman, he gave them warning, and so delivered his own soul.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 13](sa1013)

</div>
