<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2015)  [Next](sa2017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 16:0</span></span>

In the close of the foregoing chapter we left David flying from
Jerusalem, and Absalom entering into it; in this chapter, I. We are to
follow David in his melancholy flight; and there we find him, 1. Cheated
by Ziba ([Sa2 16:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#001)). 2. Cursed by
Shimei, which he bears with wonderful patience ([Sa2
16:5-14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#005)). II. We are to meet Absalom
in his triumphant entry; and there we find him, 1. Cheated by Hushai
([Sa2 16:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#015)). 2. Counselled by
Ahithophel to go in unto his father's concubines ([Sa2
16:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#020)).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 16:1</span></span>

We read before how kind David was to Mephibosheth the son of Jonathan,
how he prudently entrusted his servant Ziba with the management of his
estate, while he generously entertained him at his own table, [Sa2
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#010). This matter was well settled;
but, it seems, Ziba is not content to be manager, he longs to be master,
of Mephibosheth's estate. Now, he thinks, is his time to make himself
so; if he can procure a grant of it from the crown, whether David or
Absalom get the better it is all one to him, he hopes he shall secure
his prey, which he promises himself by fishing in troubled waters. In
order hereunto, 1. He made David a handsome present of provisions, which
was the more welcome because it came seasonably ([Sa2
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#001)), and with this he designed to
incline him to himself; for a man's gift maketh room for him, and
bringeth him before great men, [Pro
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#016). Nay, Whithersoever it turneth,
it prospereth, [Pro 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#008). David
inferred from this that Ziba was a very discreet and generous man, and
well affected to him, when, in all, he designed nothing but to make his
own market and to get Mephibosheth's estate settled upon himself. Shall
the prospect of advantage in this world make men generous to the rich?
and shall not the belief of an abundant recompence in the resurrection
of the just make us charitable to the poor? [Luk
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#014). Ziba was very considerate in
the present he brought to David; it was what would do him some good in
his present distress, [Sa2 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#002).
Observe, The wine was intended for those that were faint, not for the
king's own drinking, or the courtiers; it seems, they did not commonly
use it, but it was for cordials for those that were ready to perish,
[Pro 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#006). Blessed art thou, O land!
when thy princes use wine for strength, as David did, and not for
drunkenness, as Absalom did, ch. 13:28. See [Ecc
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#017). Whatever Ziba intended in this
present, God's providence sent it to David for his support very
graciously. God makes use of bad men for good purposes to his people,
and sends them meat by ravens. Having by his present insinuated himself
into David's affection, and gained credit with him, the next thing he
has to do for the compassing of his end is to incense him against
Mephibosheth, which he does by a false accusation, representing him as
ungratefully designing to raise himself by the present broils, and to
recover the crown to his own head, now that David and his son were
contending for it. David enquires for him as one of his family, which
gives Ziba occasion to tell this false story of him, [Sa2
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#003). What immense damages do masters
often sustain by the lying tongues of their servants! David knew
Mephibosheth not to be an ambitious man, but easy in his place, and
well-affected to him and his government; nor could he be so weak as to
expect with his lame legs to climb the ladder of preferment; yet David
gives credit to the calumny, and, without further enquiry or
consideration, convicts Mephibosheth of treason, seizes his lands as
forfeited, and grants them to Ziba: Behold, thine are all that pertained
to Mephibosheth ([Sa2 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#004)), a rash
judgment, and which afterwards he was ashamed of, when the truth came to
light, [Sa2 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#029). Princes cannot help
it, but they will be sometimes (as our law speaks) deceived in their
grants; but they ought to use all means possible to discover the truth
and to guard against malicious designing men, who would impose upon
them, as Ziba did upon David. Having by his wiles gained his point, Ziba
secretly laughed at the king's credulity, congratulated himself on his
success, and departed, with a great compliment upon the king, that he
valued his favour more than Mephibosheth's estate: "Let me find grace in
thy sight, O king! and I have enough." Great men ought always to be
jealous of flatterers, and remember that nature has given them two ears,
that they may hear both sides.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 16:5</span></span>

We here find how David bore Shimei's curses much better than he had
borne Ziba's flatteries. By the latter he was brought to pass a wrong
judgment on another, by the former to pass a right judgment on himself.
The world's smiles are more dangerous than its frowns. Observe here,

I. How insolent and furious Shimei was, and how his malice took occasion
from David's present distress to be so much the more outrageous. David,
in his flight, had come to Bahurim, a city of Benjamin in or near which
this Shimei lived, who, being of the house of Saul (with the fall of
which all his hopes of preferment fell), had an implacable enmity to
David, unjustly looking upon him as the ruin of Saul and his family only
because, by the divine appointment, he succeeded Saul. While David was
in prosperity and power, Shimei hated him as much as he did now, but he
durst not then say anything against him. God knows what is in the hearts
of those that are disaffected to him and his government, but earthly
princes do not. Now he came forth, and cursed David with all the bad
words and wishes he could invent, [Sa2
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#005). Observe,

1\. Why he took this opportunity to give vent to his malice. (1.)
Because now he thought he might do it safely; yet, if David had thought
proper to resent the provocation, it would have cost Shimei his life.
(2.) Because now it would be most grievous to David, would add
affliction to his grief, and pour vinegar into his wounds. He complains
of those as most barbarous who talk to the grief of those whom God has
wounded, [Psa 69:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#026). So Shimei did,
loading him with curses whom no generous eye could look upon without
compassion. (3.) Because now he thought that Providence justified his
reproaches, and that David's present afflictions proved him to be as bad
a man as he was willing to represent him. Job's friends condemned him
upon this false principle. Those that are under the rebukes of a
gracious God must not think it strange if these bring upon them the
reproaches of evil men. If once it be said, God hath forsaken him,
presently it follows, Persecute and take him, [Psa
71:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#011). But it is the character of a
base spirit thus to trample upon those that are down, and insult over
them.

2\. How his malice was expressed. See, (1.) What this wretched man did:
He cast stones at David ([Sa2 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#006)),
as if his king had been a dog, or the worst of criminals, whom all
Israel must stone with stones till he die. Perhaps he kept at such a
distance that the stones he threw could not reach David, nor any of his
attendants, yet he showed what he would have done if it had been in his
power. He cast dust ([Sa2 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#013)),
which, probably, would blow into his own eyes, like the curses he threw,
which, being causeless, would return upon his own head. Thus, while his
malice made him odious, the impotency of it made him ridiculous and
contemptible. Those that fight against God cannot hurt him, though they
hate him. If thou sinnest, what doest thou against him? [Job
35:6](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#006). It was an aggravation of his
wickedness that David was attended with his mighty men on his right hand
and on his left, so that he was not in so forlorn a condition as he
thought (persecuted but not forsaken), and that he continued to do it,
and did it the more passionately, for David's bearing it patiently. (2.)
What he said. With the stones he shot his arrows, even bitter words
([Sa2 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#007), [Sa2
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#008)), in contempt of that law, Thou
shalt not curse the gods, [Exo 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#028).
David was a man of honour and conscience, and in great reputation for
every thing that was just and good; what could this foul mouth say
against him? Why, truly, what was done long since to the house of Saul
was the only thing which he could recollect, and with this he upbraided
David because it was the thing that he himself was a loser by. See how
apt we are to judge of men and their character by what they are to us,
and to conclude that those are certainly evil men that have ever so
justly been, or that we ever so unjustly think have been, instruments of
evil to us. So partial are we to ourselves that no rule can be more
fallacious than this. No man could be more innocent of the blood of the
house of Saul than David was. Once and again he spared Saul's life,
while Saul sought his. When Saul and his sons were slain by the
Philistines, David and his men were many miles off; and, when they heard
it, they lamented it. From the murder of Abner and Ish-bosheth he had
sufficiently cleared himself; and yet all the blood of the house of Saul
must be laid at his door. Innocency is no fence against malice and
falsehood; nor are we to think it strange if we be charged with that
from which we have been most careful to keep ourselves. It is well for
us that men are not to be our judges, but he whose judgment is according
to truth. The blood of the house of Saul is here most unjustly charged
upon David, \[1.\] As that which gave him his character, and denominated
him a bloody man and a man of Belial, [Sa2
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#007). And, if a man of blood, no doubt
a man of Belial, that is, a child of the devil, who is called Belial
([Co2 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#015)), and who was a murderer
from the beginning. Bloody men are the worst of men. \[2.\] As that
which brought the present trouble upon him: "Now that thou art
dethroned, and driven out to the wilderness, the Lord has returned upon
thee the blood of the house of Saul." See how forward malicious men are
to press God's judgments into the service of their own passion and
revenge. If any who have, as they think, wronged them, should come into
trouble, the injury done to them must be made the cause of the trouble.
But we must take heed lest we wrong God by making his providence thus to
patronise our foolish and unjust resentments. As the wrath of man works
not the righteousness of God, so the righteousness of God serves not the
wrath of man. \[3.\] As that which would now be his utter ruin; for he
endeavours to make him despair of ever recovering his throne again. Now
they said, There is no help for him in God ([Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002)), the Lord hath delivered the
kingdom into the hand of Absalom (not Mephibosheth - the house of Saul
never dreamed of making him king, as Ziba suggested), and thou art taken
in thy mischief, that is, "the mischief that will be thy destruction,
and all because thou art a bloody man." Thus Shimei cursed.

II\. See how patient and submissive David was under this abuse. The sons
of Zeruiah, Abishai particularly, were forward to maintain David's
honour with their swords; they resented the affront keenly, as well they
might: Why should this dead dog be suffered to curse the king? [Sa2
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#009). If David will but give them
leave, they will put these lying cursing lips to silence, and take off
his head; for his throwing stones at the king was an overt act, which
abundantly proved that he compassed and imagined his death. But the king
would by no means suffer it: What have I to do with you? So let him
curse. Thus Christ rebuked the disciples, who, in zeal for his honour,
would have commanded fire from heaven on the town that affronted him,
[Luk 9:55](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#055). Let us see with what
considerations David quieted himself. 1. The chief thing that silenced
him was that he had deserved this affliction. This is not mentioned
indeed; for a man may truly repent, and yet needs not, upon all
occasions, proclaim his penitent reflections. Shimei unjustly upbraided
him with the blood of Saul: from that his conscience acquitted him, but,
at the same time, it charged him with the blood of Uriah. "The reproach
is too true" (thinks David), "though false as he means it." Note, A
humble tender spirit will turn reproaches into reproofs, and so get good
by them, instead of being provoked by them. 2. He observes the hand of
God in it: The Lord hath said unto him, Curse David ([Sa2
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#010)), and again, So let him curse,
for the Lord hath bidden him, [Sa2
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#011). As it was Shimei's sin, it was
not from God, but from the devil and his own wicked heart, nor did God's
hand in it excuse or extenuate it, much less justify it, any more than
it did the sin of those who put Christ to death, [Act
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023), [Act
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#028). But, as it was David's
affliction, it was from the Lord, one of the evils which he raised up
against him. David looked above the instrument of his trouble to the
supreme director, as Job, when the plunderers had stripped him,
acknowledged, The Lord hath taken away. Nothing more proper to quiet a
gracious soul under affliction than an eye to the hand of God in it. I
opened not my mouth, because thou didst it. The scourge of the tongue is
God's rod. 3. He quiets himself under the less affliction with the
consideration of the greater ([Sa2
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#011)): My son seeks my life, much
more may this Benjamite. Note, Tribulation works patience in those that
are sanctified. The more we bear the better able we should be to bear
still more; what tries our patience should improve it. The more we are
inured to trouble the less we should be surprised at it, and not think
it strange. Marvel not that enemies are injurious, when even friends are
unkind; nor that friends are unkind, when even children are undutiful.
4. He comforts himself with hopes that God would, in some way or other,
bring good to him out of his affliction, would balance the trouble
itself, and recompense his patience under it: "The Lord will requite me
good for his cursing. If God bid Shimei grieve me, it is that he himself
may the more sensibly comfort me; surely he has mercy in store for me,
which he is preparing me for by this trial." We may depend upon God as
our pay-master, not only for our services, but for our sufferings. Let
them curse, but bless thou. David, at length, is housed at Bahurim ([Sa2
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#014)), where he meets with
refreshment, and is hidden from this strife of tongues.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 16:15</span></span>

Absalom had notice sent him speedily by some of his friends at Jerusalem
that David had withdrawn, and with what a small retinue he had gone; so
that the coasts were clear, Absalom might take possession of Jerusalem
when he pleased. The gates were open, and there was none to oppose him.
Accordingly he came without delay ([Sa2
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#015)), extremely elevated, no doubt,
with this success at first, and that that in which, when he formed his
design, he probably apprehended the greatest difficulty, was so easily
and effectually done. Now that he is master of Jerusalem he concludes
all his own, the country will follow of course. God suffers wicked men
to prosper awhile in their wicked plots, even beyond their expectation,
that their disappointment may be the more grievous and disgraceful. The
most celebrated politicians of that age were Ahithophel and Hushai. The
former Absalom brings with him to Jerusalem ([Sa2
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#015)), the other meets him there
([Sa2 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#016)), so that he cannot but
think himself sure of success, when he has both these to be his
counsellors; on them he relies, and consults not the ark, though he has
that with him. But miserable counsellors were they both; for,

I. Hushai would never counsel him to do wisely. He was really his enemy,
and designed to betray him, while he pretended to be in his interest; so
that Absalom could not have a more dangerous man about him. 1. Hushai
complimented him upon his accession to the throne, as if he had been
abundantly satisfied in this title, and well pleased that he had come to
the possession, [Sa2 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#016). What arts
of dissimulation are those tempted to use who govern themselves by
fleshly wisdom! and how happy are those who have not known these depths
of Satan, but have their conversation in the world with simplicity and
godly sincerity! 2. Absalom was surprised to find him for him who was
known to be David's intimate friend and confidant. He asks him, Is this
thy kindness to thy friend? ([Sa2
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#017)), pleasing himself with this
thought, that all would be his, since Hushai was. He doubts not of his
sincerity, but easily believes what he wishes to be true, that David's
best friends are so in love with himself as to take the first
opportunity to declare for him, though the pride of his heart deceived
him, [Oba 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#003). Hushai confirmed him in
the belief that he was hearty for him. For, though David is his friend,
yet he is for the king in possession, [Sa2
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#018). Whom the people choose, and
Providence smiles upon, he will be faithful to; and he is for the king
in succession ([Sa2 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#019)), the rising
sun. It was true, he loved his father; but he had had his day, and it
was over; and why should he not love his successor as well? Thus he
pretended to give reasons for a resolution he abhorred the thought of.

II\. Ahithophel counselled him to do wickedly, and so did as effectually
betray him as he did who was designedly false to him; for those that
advise men to sin certainly advise them to their hurt; and that
government which is founded in sin is founded in the sand.

1\. It seems, Ahithophel was noted as a deep politician; his counsel was
as if a man had enquired at the oracle of God, [Sa2
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#023). Such reputation was he in for
subtlety and sagacity in public affairs, such reaches had he beyond
other privy-counselors, such reasons would he give for his advice, and
such success generally his projects had, that all people, good and bad,
both David and Absalom, had a profound regard for his sentiments, too
much by far, when they regarded him as an oracle of God; shall the
prudence of any mortal compare with him who only is wise? Let us observe
from this account of Ahithophel's fame for policy, (1.) That many excel
in worldly wisdom who are utterly destitute of heavenly grace, because
those who set up for oracles themselves are apt to despise the oracles
of God. God has chosen the foolish things of the world; and the greatest
statesmen are seldom the greatest saints. (2.) That frequently the
greatest politicians act most foolishly for themselves. Ahithophel was
cried up for an oracle, and yet very unwisely took part with Absalom,
who was not only a usurper, but a rash youth, never likely to come to
good, whose fall, and the fall of all that adhered to him, any one, with
the tenth part of the policy that Ahithophel pretended to, might
foresee. Well, after all, honesty is the best policy, and will be found
so in the long run. But,

2\. His policy in this case defeated its own aim. Observe,

(1.) The wicked counsel Ahithophel gave to Absalom. Finding that David
had left his concubines to keep the house, he advised him to lie with
them ([Sa2 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#021)), a very wicked
thing. The divine law had made it a capital crime, [Lev
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#011). The apostle speaks of it as a
piece of villany not so much as named among the Gentiles, [Co1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001). Reuben lost his birthright for
it. But Ahithophel advised Absalom to it as a public thing, because it
would give assurance to all Israel, \[1.\] That he was in good earnest
in his pretensions. No doubt he resolved to make himself master of all
that belonged to his predecessor when he began with his concubines.
\[2.\] That he was resolved never to make peace with his father upon any
terms; for by this he would render himself so odious to his father that
he would never be reconciled to him, which perhaps the people were
jealous of and that they must be sacrificed to the reconciliation.
Having drawn the sword, he did, by this provocation, throw away the
scabbard, which would strengthen the hands of his party and keep them
firmly to him. This was Ahithophel's cursed policy, which bespoke him
rather an oracle of devil than of God.

(2.) Absalom's compliance with this counsel. It entirely suited his lewd
and wicked mind, and he delayed not to put it in execution, [Sa2
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#022). When an unnatural rebellion was
the opera, what fitter prologue could there be to it than such unnatural
lust? Thus was his wickedness all of a piece, and such as a conscience
not quite seared could not entertain the thoughts of without the utmost
horror. Nay, the client outdoes what his counsel advises. Ahithophel
advised him to do it, that all Israel shall see it. A tent is
accordingly spread on the top of the house for the purpose; so
impudently does he declare his sin as Sodom. Yet, in this, the word of
God was fulfilled in the letter of it: God had threatened, by Nathan,
that, for defiling Bath-sheba, David should have his own wives publicly
debauched ([Sa2 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#011), [Sa2
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#012)), and some think that
Ahithophel, in advising it, designed to be revenged on David for the
injury done to Bath-sheba, who was his grand-daughter: for she was the
daughter of Eliam ([Sa2 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#003)), who was
the son of Ahithophel, [Sa2 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#034). Job
speaks of this as the just punishment of adultery (Let my wife grind to
another, [Job 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#009), [Job
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#010)), and the prophet, [Hos
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#013), [Hos
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#014). What to think of these
concubines, who submitted to this wickedness, I know not; but how
unrighteous soever Absalom and they were, we must say, The Lord is
righteous: nor shall any word of his fall to the ground.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 17](sa2017)

</div>
