<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2011)  [Next](sa2013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 12:0</span></span>

The foregoing chapter gave us the account of David's sin; this gives us
the account of his repentance. Though he fell, he was not utterly cast
down, but, by the grace of God, recovered himself, and found mercy with
God. Here is, I. His conviction, by a message Nathan brought him from
God, which was a parable that obliged him to condemn himself ([Sa2
12:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#001)), and the application of the
parable, in which Nathan charged him with the sin ([Sa2
12:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#007)) and pronounced sentence upon
him, ([Sa2 12:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#010)). II. His
repentance and remission, with a proviso ([Sa2
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#013), [Sa2
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#014)). III. The sickness and death of
the child, and his behaviour while it was sick and when it was dead
([Sa2 12:15-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#015)), in both which David
gave evidence of his repentance. IV. The birth of Solomon, and God's
gracious message concerning him, in which God gave an evidence of his
reconciliation to David ([Sa2 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#024),
[Sa2 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#025)). V. The taking of Rabbah
([Sa2 12:26-31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#026)), which is mentioned as
a further instance that God did not deal with David according to his
sins.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 12:1</span></span>

It seems to have been a great while after David had been guilty of
adultery with Bath-sheba before he was brought to repentance for it.
For, when Nathan was sent to him, the child was born ([Sa2
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#014)), so that it was about nine
months that David lay under the guilt of that sin, and, for aught that
appears, unrepented of. What shall we think of David's state all this
while? Can we imagine that his heart never smote him for it, or that he
never lamented it in secret before God? I would willingly hope that he
did, and that Nathan was sent to him, immediately upon the birth of the
child, when the thing by that means came to be publicly known and talked
of, to draw from him an open confession of the sin, to the glory of God,
the admonition of others, and that he might receive, by Nathan,
absolution with certain limitations. But, during these nine months, we
may well suppose his comforts and the exercises of his graces suspended,
and his communion with God interrupted; during all that time, it is
certain, he penned no psalms, his harp was out of tune, and his soul
like a tree in winter, that has life in the root only. Therefore, after
Nathan had been with him, he prays, Restore unto me the joy of thy
salvation, and open thou my lips, [Psa
51:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012), [Psa
51:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#015). Let us observe,

I. The messenger God sent to him. We were told by the last words of the
foregoing chapter that the thing David had done displeased the Lord,
upon which, one would think, it should have followed that the Lord sent
enemies to invade him, terrors to take hold on him, and the messengers
of death to arrest him. No, he sent a prophet to him - Nathan, his
faithful friend and confidant, to instruct and counsel him, [Sa2
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#001). David did not send for Nathan
(though he had never had so much occasion as he had now for his
confessor), but God sent Nathan to David. Note, Though God may suffer
his people to fall into sin, he will not suffer them to lie still in it.
He went on frowardly in the way of his heart, and if left to himself,
would have wandered endlessly, but (saith God) I have seen his ways, and
will heal him, [Isa 57:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#017), [Isa
57:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#018). He sends after us before we
seek after him, else we should certainly be lost. Nathan was the prophet
by whom God had sent him notice of his kind intentions towards him ([Sa2
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#004)), and now, by the same hand, he
sends him this message of wrath. God's word in the mouth of his
ministers must be received, whether it speak terror or comfort. Nathan
was obedient to the heavenly vision, and went on God's errand to David.
He did not say, "David has sinned, I will not come near him." No; count
him not an enemy, but admonish him as a brother, [Th2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#015). He did not say, "David is a
king, I dare not reprove him." No; if God sends him, he sets his face
like a flint, [Isa 50:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#007).

II\. The message Nathan delivered to him, in order to his conviction.

1\. He fetched a compass with a parable, which seemed to David as a
complaint made to him by Nathan against one of his subjects that had
wronged his poor neighbour, in order to his redressing the injury and
punishing the injurious. Nathan, it is likely, used to come to him upon
such errands, which made this the less suspected. It becomes those who
have interest in princes, and have free access to them, to intercede for
those that are wronged, that they may have justice done them. (1.)
Nathan represented to David a grievous injury which a rich man had done
to an honest neighbour that was not able to contend with him: The rich
man had many flocks and herds ([Sa2
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#002)); the poor man had one lamb only;
so unequally is the world divided; and yet infinite wisdom,
righteousness, and goodness, make the distribution, that the rich may
learn charity and the poor contentment. This poor man had but one lamb,
a ewe-lamb, a little ewe-lamb, having not wherewithal to buy or keep
more. But it was a cade-lamb (as we call it); it grew up with his
children, [Sa2 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#003). He was fond of
it, and it was familiar with him at all times. The rich man, having
occasion for a lamb to entertain a friend with, took the poor man's lamb
from him by violence and made use of that ([Sa2
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#004)), either out of covetousness,
because he grudged to make use of his own, or rather out of luxury,
because he fancied the lamb that was thus tenderly kept, and ate and
drank like a child, must needs be more delicate food than any of his own
and have a better relish. (2.) In this he showed him the evil of the sin
he had been guilty of in defiling Bath-sheba. He had many wives and
concubines, whom he kept at a distance, as rich men keep their flocks in
their fields. Had he had but one, and had she been dear to him, as the
ewe-lamb was to its owner, had she been dear to him as the loving hind
and the pleasant roe, her breasts would have satisfied him at all times,
and he would have looked no further, [Pro
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#019). Marriage is a remedy against
fornication, but marrying many is not; for, when once the law of unity
is transgressed, the indulged lust will hardly stint itself. Uriah, like
the poor man, had only one wife, who was to him as his own soul, and
always lay in his bosom, for he had no other, he desired no other, to
lie there. The traveller or wayfaring man was, as bishop Patrick
explains it from the Jewish writers, the evil imagination, disposition,
or desire, which came into David's heart, which he might have satisfied
with some of his own, yet nothing would serve but Uriah's darling. They
observe that this evil disposition is called a traveller, for in the
beginning it is only so, but, in time, it becomes a guest, and, in
conclusion, is master of the house. For he that is called a traveller in
the beginning of the verse is called a man (ish - a husband) in the
close of it. Yet some observe that in David's breast lust was but as a
wayfaring man that tarries only for a night; it did not constantly dwell
and rule there. (3.) By this parable he drew from David a sentence
against himself. For David supposing it to be a case in fact, and not
doubting the truth of it when he had it from Nathan himself, gave
judgment immediately against the offender, and confirmed it with an
oath, [Sa2 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#005), [Sa2
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#006). \[1.\] That, for his injustice
in taking away the lamb, he should restore four-fold, according to the
law ([Exo 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001)), four sheep for a
sheep. \[2.\] That for his tyranny and cruelty, and the pleasure he took
in abusing a poor man, he should be put to death. If a poor man steal
from a rich man, to satisfy his soul when he is hungry, he shall make
restitution, though it cost him all the substance of his house, [Pro
6:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#030), [Pro
6:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#031) (and Solomon there compares the
sin of adultery with that, [Pro 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#032));
but if a rich man steal for stealing sake, not for want but wantonness,
merely that he may be imperious and vexatious, he deserves to die for
it, for to him the making of restitution is no punishment, or next to
none. If the sentence be thought too severe, it must be imputed to the
present roughness of David's temper, being under guilt, and not having
himself as yet received mercy.

2\. He closed in with him, at length, in the application of the parable.
In beginning with a parable he showed his prudence, and great need there
is of prudence in giving reproofs. It is well managed if, as here, the
offender can be brought ere he is aware, to convict and condemn himself.
But here, in his application, he shows his faithfulness, and deals as
plainly and roundly with king David himself as if he had been a common
person. In plain terms, "Thou art the man who hast done this wrong, and
a much greater, to thy neighbour; and therefore, by thy own sentence,
thou deservest to die, and shalt be judged out of thy own mouth. Did he
deserve to die who took his neighbour's lamb? and dost not thou who hast
taken thy neighbour's wife? Though he took the lamb, he did not cause
the owner thereof to lose his life, as thou hast done, and therefore
much more art thou worthy to die." Now he speaks immediately from God,
and in his name. He begins with, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, a
name sacred and venerable to David, and which commanded his attention.
Nathan now speaks, not as a petitioner for a poor man, but as an
ambassador from the great God, with whom is no respect of persons.

(1.) God, by Nathan, reminds David of the great things he had done and
designed for him, anointing him to be king, and preserving him to the
kingdom ([Pro 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#007)), giving him power
over the house and household of his predecessor, and of others that had
been his masters, Nabal for one. He had given him the house of Israel
and Judah. The wealth of the kingdom was at his service and every body
was willing to oblige him. Nay, he was ready to bestow any thing upon
him to make him easy: I would have given thee such and such things, [Pro
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#008). See how liberal God is in his
gifts; we are not straitened in him. Where he has given much, yet he
gives more. And God's bounty to us is a great aggravation of our
discontent and desire of forbidden fruit. It is ungrateful to covet what
God has prohibited, while we have liberty to pray for what God has
promised, and that is enough.

(2.) He charges him with a high contempt of the divine authority, in the
sins he had been guilty of: Wherefore hast thou (presuming upon thy
royal dignity and power) despised the commandment of the Lord? [Pro
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#009). This is the spring and this is
the malignity of sin, that it is making light of the divine law and the
law-maker; as if the obligation of it were weak, the precepts of it
trifling, and the threats not at all formidable. Though no man ever
wrote more honourably of the law of God than David did, yet, in this
instance, he is justly charged with a contempt of it. His adultery with
Bath-sheba, which began the mischief, is not mentioned, perhaps because
he was already convinced of that, but, \[1.\] The murder of Uriah is
twice mentioned: "Thou hast killed Uriah with the sword, though not with
thy sword, yet, which is equally heinous, with thy pen, by ordering him
to be set in the forefront of the battle." Those that contrive
wickedness and command it are as truly guilty of it as those that
execute it. It is repeated with an aggravation: Thou hast slain him with
the sword of the children of Ammon, those uncircumcised enemies of God
and Israel. \[2.\] The marrying of Bath-sheba is likewise twice
mentioned, because he thought there was no harm in that ([Pro
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#009)): Thou hast taken his wife to be
thy wife, and again, [Pro 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#010). To
marry her whom he had before defiled, and whose husband he had slain,
was an affront upon the ordinance of marriage, making that not only to
palliate, but in a manner to consecrate, such villanies. In all this he
despised the word of the Lord (so it is in the Hebrew), not only his
commandment in general which forbade such things, but the particular
word of promise which God had, by Nathan, sent to him some time before,
that he would build him a house. If he had had a due value and
veneration for this sacred promise, he would not thus have polluted his
house with lust and blood.

(3.) He threatens an entail of judgements upon his family for this sin
([Pro 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#010)): "The sword shall never
depart from thy house, not in thy time nor afterwards, but, for the most
part, thou and thy posterity shall be engaged in war." Or it points at
the slaughters that should be among his children, Amnon, Absalom, and
Adonijah, all falling by the sword. God had promised that his mercy
should not depart from him and his house ([Pro
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#015)), yet here threatens that the
sword should not depart. Can the mercy and the sword consist with each
other? Yes, those may lie under great and long afflictions who yet shall
not be excluded from the grace of the covenant. The reason given is,
Because thou hast despised me. Note, Those who despise the word and law
of God despise God himself and shall be lightly esteemed. It is
particularly threatened, \[1.\] That his children should be his grief: I
will raise up evil against thee out of thy own house. Sin brings trouble
into a family, and one sin is often made the punishment of another.
\[2.\] That his wives should be his shame, that by an unparalleled piece
of villany they should be publicly debauched before all Israel, [Pro
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#011), [Pro
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#012). It is not said that this should
be done by his own son, lest the accomplishment should have been
hindered by the prediction being too plain; but it was done by Absalom,
at the counsel of Ahithophel, [Pro
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#021), [Pro
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#022). He that defiled his neighbour's
wife should have his own defiled, for thus that sin used to be punished,
as appears by Job's imprecation, [Job
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#010), Then let my wife grind unto
another, and that threatening, [Hos
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#014). The sin was secret, and
industriously concealed, but the punishment should be open, and
industriously proclaimed, to the shame of David, whose sin in the matter
of Uriah, though committed many years before, would then be called to
mind and commonly talked of upon that occasion. As face answers to face
in a glass, so does the punishment often answer to the sin; here is
blood for blood and uncleanness for uncleanness. And thus God would show
how much he hates sin, even in his own people, and that, wherever he
find it, he will not let it go unpunished.

3\. David's penitent confession of his sin hereupon. He says not a word
to excuse himself or extenuate his sin, but freely owns it: I have
sinned against the Lord, [Sa2 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#013).
It is probable that he said more to this purport; but this is enough to
show that he was truly humbled by what Nathan said, and submitted to the
conviction. He owns his guilt - I have sinned, and aggravates it - It
was against the Lord: on this string he harps in the psalm he penned on
this occasion. [Psa 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001), Against
thee, thee only, have I sinned.

4\. His pardon declared, upon this penitent confession, but with a
proviso. When David said I have sinned, and Nathan perceived that he was
a true penitent,

(1.) He did, in God's name, assure him that his sin was forgiven: "The
Lord also has put away thy sin out of the sight of his avenging eye;
thou shalt not die," that is, "not die eternally, nor be for ever put
away from God, as thou wouldest have been if he had not put away the
sin." The obligation to punishment is hereby cancelled and vacated. He
shall not come into condemnation: that is the nature of forgiveness.
"Thy iniquity shall not be thy everlasting ruin. The sword shall not
depart from thy house, but, \[1.\] It shall not cut thee off, thou shalt
come to thy grave in peace." David deserved to die as an adulterer and
murderer, but God would not cut him off as he might justly have done.
\[2.\] "Though thou shalt all thy days be chastened of the Lord, yet
thou shalt not be condemned with the world." See how ready God is to
forgive sin. To this instance, perhaps, David refers, [Psa
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#005), I said, I will confess, and thou
forgavest. Let not great sinners despair of finding mercy with God if
they truly repent; for who is a God like unto him, pardoning iniquity?

(2.) Yet he pronounces a sentence of death upon the child, [Sa2
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#014). Behold the sovereignty of God!
The guilty parent lives, and the guiltless infant dies; but all souls
are his, and he may, in what way he pleases, glorify himself in his
creatures. \[1.\] David had, by his sin, wronged God in his honour; he
had given occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme. The wicked
people of that generation, the infidels, idolaters, and profane, would
triumph in David's fall, and speak ill of God and of his law, when they
saw one guilty of such foul enormities that professed such an honour
both for him and it. "These are your professors! This is he that prays
and sings psalms, and is so very devout! What good can there be in such
exercises, if they will not restrain men from adultery and murder?" They
would say, "Was not Saul rejected for a less matter? why then must David
live and reign still?" not considering that God sees not as man sees,
but searches the heart. To this day there are those who reproach God,
and are hardened in sin, through the example of David. Now, though it is
true that none have any just reason to speak ill of God, or of his word
and ways, for David's sake, and it is their sin that do so, yet he shall
be reckoned with that laid the stumbling-block in their way, and gave,
though not cause, yet colour, for the reproach. Note, There is this
great evil in the scandalous sins of those that profess religion, and
relation to God, that they furnish the enemies of God and religion with
matter for reproach and blasphemy, [Rom
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#024). \[2.\] God will therefore
vindicate his honour by showing his displeasure against David for this
sin, and letting the world see that though he loves David he hates his
sin; and he chooses to do it by the death of the child. The landlord may
distrain on any part of the premises where he pleases. Perhaps the
diseases and deaths of infants were not so common in those days as they
are now, which might make this, as an unusual thing, the more evident
token of God's displeasure; according to the word he had often said,
that he would visit the sins of the fathers upon the children.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 12:15</span></span>

Nathan, having delivered his message, staid not at court, but went home,
probably to pray for David, to whom he had been preaching. God, in
making use of him as an instrument to bring David to repentance, and as
the herald both of mercy and judgment, put an honour upon the ministry,
and magnified his word above all his name. David named one of his sons
by Bath-sheba Nathan, in honour of this prophet ([Ch1
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#005)), and it was that son of whom
Christ, the great prophet, lineally descended, [Luk
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#031). When Nathan retired, David, it
is probable, retired likewise, and penned the 51st Psalm, in which
(though he had been assured that his sin was pardoned) he prays
earnestly for pardon, and greatly laments his sin; for then will true
penitents be ashamed of what they have done when God is pacified towards
them, [Eze 16:63](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#063).

Here is, I. The child's illness: The Lord struck it, and it was very
sick, perhaps with convulsions, or some other dreadful distemper, [Sa2
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#015). The diseases and death of
infants that have not sinned after the similitude of Adam's
transgression, especially as they are sometimes sadly circumstanced, are
sensible proofs of the original sin in which they are conceived.

II\. David's humiliation under this token of God's displeasure, and the
intercession he made with God for the life of the child ([Sa2
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#016), [Sa2
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#017)): He fasted, and lay all night
upon the earth, and would not suffer any of his attendants either to
feed him or help him up. This was an evidence of the truth of his
repentance. For, 1. Hereby it appeared that he was willing to bear the
shame of his sin, to have it ever before him, and to be continually
upbraided with it; for this child would be a continual memorandum of it,
both to himself and others, if he lived: and therefore he was so far
from desiring its death, as most in such circumstances do, that he
prayed earnestly for its life. True penitents patiently bear the
reproach of their youth, and of their youthful lusts, [Jer
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#019). 2. A very tender compassionate
spirit appeared in this, and great humanity, above what is commonly
found in men, especially men of war, towards little children, even their
own; and this was another sign of a broken contrite spirit. Those that
are penitent will be pitiful. 3. He discovered, in this, a great concern
for another world, which is an evidence of repentance. Nathan had told
him that certainly the child should die; yet, while it is in the reach
of prayer, he earnestly intercedes with God for it, chiefly (as we may
suppose) that its soul might be safe and happy in another world, and
that his sin might not come against the child, and that it might not
fare the worse for that in the future state. 4. He discovered, in this,
a holy dread of God and of his displeasure. He deprecated the death of
the child chiefly as it was a token of God's anger against him and his
house, and was inflicted in performance of a threatening; therefore he
prayed thus earnestly that, if it were the will of God, the child might
live, because that would be to him a token of God's being reconciled to
him. Lord, chasten me not in thy hot displeasure. [Psa
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001).

III\. The death of the child: It died on the seventh day ([Sa2
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#018)), when it was seven days old,
and therefore not circumcised, which David might perhaps interpret as a
further token of God's displeasure, that it died before it was brought
under the seal of the covenant; yet he does not therefore doubt of its
being happy for the benefits of the covenant do not depend upon the
seals. David's servants, judging of him by themselves, were afraid to
tell him that the child was dead, concluding that then he would disquiet
himself most of all; so that he knew not till he asked, [Sa2
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#019).

IV\. David's wonderful calmness and composure of mind when he understood
the child was dead. Observe,

1\. What he did. (1.) He laid aside the expressions of his sorrow,
washed and anointed himself, and called for clean linen, that he might
decently appear before God in his house. (2.) He went up to the
tabernacle and worshipped, like Job when he heard of the death of his
children. He went to acknowledge the hand of God in the affliction, and
to humble himself under it, and to submit to his holy will in it, to
thank God that he himself was spared and his sin pardoned, and to pray
that God would not proceed in his controversy with him, nor stir up all
his wrath. Is any afflicted? Let him pray. Weeping must never hinder
worshipping. (3.) Then he went to his own house and refreshed himself,
as one who found benefit by his religion in the day of his affliction;
for, having worshipped, he did eat, and his countenance was no more sad.

2\. The reason he gave for what he did. His servants thought it strange
that he should afflict himself so for the sickness of the child and yet
take the death of it so easily, and asked him the reason of it ([Sa2
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#021)), in answer to which he gives
this plain account of his conduct, (1.) That while the child was alive
he thought it his duty to importune the divine favour towards it, [Sa2
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#022). Nathan had indeed said the
child should die, but, for aught that he knew, the threatening might be
conditional, as that concerning Hezekiah: upon his great humiliation and
earnest prayer, he that had so often heard the voice of his weeping
might be pleased to reverse the sentence, and spare the child: Who can
tell whether God will yet be gracious to me? God gives us leave to be
earnest with him in prayer for particular blessings, from a confidence
in his power and general mercy, though we have no particular promise to
build upon: we cannot be sure, yet let us pray, for who can tell but God
will be gracious to us, in this or that particular? When our relations
and friends have fallen sick, the prayer of faith has prevailed much;
while there is life there is hope, and, while there is hope, there is
room for prayer. (2.) That now the child was dead he thought it as much
his duty to be satisfied in the divine disposal concerning it ([Sa2
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#023)): Now, wherefore should I fast?
Two things checked his grief: - \[1.\] I cannot bring him back again;
and again, He shall not return to me. Those that are dead are out of the
reach of prayer; nor can our tears profit them. We can neither weep nor
pray them back to this life. Wherefore then should we fast? To what
purpose is this waste? Yet David fasted and wept for Jonathan when he
was dead, in honour to him. \[2.\] I shall go to him. First, To him to
the grave. Note, The consideration of our own death should moderate our
sorrow at the death of our relations. It is the common lot; instead of
mourning for their death, we should think of our own: and, whatever loss
we have of them now, we shall die shortly, and go to them. Secondly, To
him to heaven, to a state of blessedness, which even the Old Testament
saints had some expectation of. Godly parents have great reason to hope
concerning their children that die in infancy that it is well with their
souls in the other world; for the promise is to us and to our seed,
which shall be performed to those that do not put a bar in their own
door, as infants do not. Favores sunt ampliandi - Favours received
should produce the hope of more. God calls those his children that are
born unto him; and, if they be his, he will save them. This may comfort
us when our children are removed from us by death, they are better
provided for, both in work and wealth, than they could have been in this
world. We shall be with them shortly, to part no more.

V. The birth of Solomon. Though David's marrying Bath-sheba had
displeased the Lord, yet he was not therefore commanded to divorce her;
so far from this that God gave him that son by her on whom the covenant
of royalty should be entailed. Bath-sheba, no doubt, was greatly
afflicted with the sense of her sin and the tokens of God's displeasure.
But, God having restored to David the joys of his salvation, he
comforted her with the same comforts with which he himself was comforted
of God ([Sa2 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#024)): He comforted
Bath-sheba. And both he and she had reason to be comforted in the tokens
of God's reconciliation to them, 1. Inasmuch as, by his providence, he
gave them a son, not as the former, who was given in anger and taken
away in wrath, but a child graciously given, and written among the
living in Jerusalem. They called him Solomon - peaceful, because his
birth was a token of God's being at peace with them, because of the
prosperity which was entailed upon him, and because he was to be a type
of Christ, the prince of peace. God had removed one son from them, but
now gave them another instead of him, like Seth instead of Abel, [Gen
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#025). Thus God often balances the
griefs of his people with comforts in the same thing wherein he hath
afflicted them, setting the one over-against the other. David had very
patiently submitted to the will of God in the death of the other child,
and now God made up the loss of that, abundantly to his advantage, in
the birth of this. The way to have our creature-comforts either
continued or restored, or the loss of them made up some other way, is
cheerfully to resign them to God. 2. Inasmuch as, by his grace, he
particularly owned and favoured that son: The Lord loved him ([Sa2
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#024) and [Sa2
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#025)), ordered him, by the prophet
Nathan, to be called Jedidiah - Beloved of the Lord: though a seed of
evil-doers (for such David and Bath-sheba were), yet so well ordered was
the covenant, and the crown entailed by it, that it took away all
attainders and corruption of blood, signifying that those who were by
nature children of wrath and disobedience should, by the covenant of
grace, not only be reconciled, but made favourites. And, in this name,
he typified Jesus Christ, that blessed Jedidiah, the son of God's love,
concerning whom God declared again and again, This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa2 12:26</span></span>

We have here an account of the conquest of Rabbah, and other cities of
the Ammonites. Though this comes in here after the birth of David's
child, yet it is most probable that it was effected a good while before,
and soon after the death of Uriah, perhaps during the days of
Bath-sheba's mourning for him. Observe, 1. That God was very gracious in
giving David this great success against his enemies, notwithstanding the
sin he had been guilty of just at that time when he was engaged in this
war, and the wicked use he had made of the sword of the children of
Ammon in the murder of Uriah. Justly might he have made that sword,
thenceforward, a plague to David and his kingdom; yet he breaks it, and
makes David's sword victorious, even before he repents, that this
goodness of God might lead him to repentance. Good reason had David to
own that God dealt not with him according to his sins, [Psa
103:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#010). 2. That Joab acted very
honestly and honourably; for when he had taken the city of waters, the
royal city, where the palace was, and from which the rest of the city
was supplied with water (and therefore, upon the cutting off of that,
would be obliged speedily to surrender), he sent to David to come in
person to complete this great action, that he might have the praise of
it, [Sa2 12:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#026). Herein he showed
himself a faithful servant, that sought his master's honour, and his own
only in subordination to his, and left an example to the servants of the
Lord Jesus, in every thing they do, to consult his honour. Not unto us,
but to thy name, give glory. 3. That David was both too haughty and too
severe upon this occasion, and neither so humble nor so tender as he
should have been. (1.) He seems to have been too fond of the crown of
the king of Ammon, [Sa2 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#030). Because
it was of extraordinary value, by reason of the precious stones with
which it was set, David would have it set upon his head, though it would
have been better to have cast it at God's feet, and at this time to have
put his own mouth in the dust, under guilt. The heart that is truly
humbled for sin is dead to worldly glory and looks upon it with a holy
contempt. (2.) He seems to have been too harsh with his prisoners of
war, [Sa2 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#031). Taking the city by
storm, after it had obstinately held out against a long and expensive
siege, if he had put all whom he found in arms to the sword in the heat
of battle, it would have been severe enough; but to kill them afterwards
in cold blood, and by cruel tortures, with saws and harrows, tearing
them to pieces, did not become him who, when he entered upon the
government, promised to sing of mercy as well as judgment, [Psa
101:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001). Had he made examples of those
only who had abused his ambassadors, or advised or assisted in it, that
being a violation of the law of nations, it might have been looked upon
as a piece of necessary justice for terror to other nations; but to be
thus severe with all the cities of the children of Ammon (that is, the
garrisons or soldiers of the cities) was extremely rigorous, and a sign
that David's heart was not yet made soft by repentance, else the bowels
of his compassion would not have been thus shut up - a sign that he had
not yet found mercy, else he would have been more ready to show mercy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 13](sa2013)

</div>
