<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2010)  [Next](sa2012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 11:0</span></span>

What David said of the mournful report of Saul's death may more fitly be
applied to the sad story of this chapter, the adultery and murder David
was guilty of. - "Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of
Ashkelon." We wish we could draw a veil over it, and that it might never
be known, might never be said, that David did such things as are here
recorded of him. But it cannot, it must not, be concealed. The scripture
is faithful in relating the faults even of those whom it most applauds,
which is an instance of the sincerity of the penmen, and an evidence
that it was not written to serve any party: and even such stories as
these "were written for our learning," that "he that thinks he stands
may take heed lest he fall," and that others' harms may be our warnings.
Many, no doubt, have been emboldened to sin, and hardened in it, by this
story, and to them it is a "savour of death unto death;" but many have
by it been awakened to a holy jealousy over themselves, and constant
watchfulness against sin, and to them it is a "savour of life unto
life." Those are very great sins, and greatly aggravated, which here we
find David guilty of. I. He committed adultery with Bath-sheba, the wife
of Uriah ([Sa2 11:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#001)). II. He
endeavoured to father the spurious brood upon Uriah ([Sa2
11:6-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#006)). III. When that project
failed, he plotted the death of Uriah by the sword of the children of
Ammon, and effected it ([Sa2
11:14-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#014)). IV. He married Bath-sheba
([Sa2 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#026), [Sa2
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#027)). Is this David? Is this the man
after God's own heart? How is his behaviour changed, worse than it was
before Ahimelech! How has this gold become dim! Let him that readeth
understand what the best of men are when God leaves them to themselves.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 11:1</span></span>

Here is, I. David's glory, in pursuing the war against the Ammonites,
[Sa2 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#001). We cannot take that
pleasure in viewing this great action which hitherto we have taken in
observing David's achievements, because the beauty of it was stained and
sullied by sin; otherwise we might take notice of David's wisdom and
bravery in following his blow. Having routed the army of the Ammonites
in the field, as soon as ever the season of the year permitted he sent
more forces to waste the country and further to avenge the quarrel of
his ambassadors. Rabbah, their metropolis, made a stand, and held out a
great while. To this city Joab laid close siege, and it was at the time
of this siege that David fell into this sin.

II\. David's shame, in being himself conquered, and led captive by his
own lust. The sin he was guilty of was adultery, against the letter of
the seventh commandment, and (in the judgment of the patriarchal age) a
heinous crime, and an iniquity to be punished by the judges ([Job
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#011)), a sin which takes away the
heart, and gets a man a wound and dishonour, more than any other, and
the reproach of which is not wiped away.

1\. Observe the occasions which led to this sin. (1.) Neglect of his
business. When he should have been abroad with his army in the field,
fighting the battles of the Lord, he devolved the care upon others, and
he himself tarried still at Jerusalem, [Sa2
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#001). To the war with the Syrians
David went in person, [Sa2 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#017). Had
he been now at his post at the head of his forces, he would have been
out of the way of this temptation. When we are out of the way of our
duty we are in the way of temptation. (2.) Love of ease, and the
indulgence of a slothful temper: He came off his bed at evening-tide,
[Sa2 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#002). There he had dozed away the
afternoon in idleness, which he should have spent in some exercise for
his own improvement or the good of others. He used to pray, not only
morning and evening, but at noon, in the day of his trouble: it is to be
feared he had, this noon, omitted to do so. Idleness gives great
advantage to the tempter. Standing waters gather filth. The bed of sloth
often proves the bed of lust. (3.) A wandering eye: He saw a woman
washing herself, probably from some ceremonial pollution, according to
the law. The sin came in at the eye, as Eve's did. Perhaps he sought to
see her, at least he did not practise according to his own prayer, Turn
away my eyes from beholding vanity, and his son's caution in a like
case, Look not thou on the wine it is red. Either he had not, like Job,
made a covenant with his eyes, or, at this time, he had forgotten it.

2\. The steps of the sin. When he saw her, lust immediately conceived,
and, (1.) He enquired who she was ([Sa2
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#003)), perhaps intending only, if she
were unmarried, to take her to wife, as he had taken several; but, if
she were a wife, having no design upon her. (2.) The corrupt desire
growing more violent, though he was told she was a wife, and whose wife
she was, yet he sent messengers for her, and then, it may be, intended
only to please himself with her company and conversation. But, (3.) When
she came he lay with her, she too easily consenting, because he was a
great man, and famed for his goodness too. Surely (thinks she) that can
be no sin which such a man as David is the mover of. See how the way of
sin is down-hill; when men begin to do evil they cannot soon stop
themselves. The beginning of lust, as of strife, is like the letting
forth of water; it is therefore wisdom to leave it off before it be
meddled with. The foolish fly fires her wings, and fools away her life
at last, by playing about the candle.

3\. The aggravations of the sin. (1.) He was now in years, fifty at
least, some think more, when those lusts which are more properly
youthful, one would think, should not have been violent in him, (2.) He
had many wives and concubines of his own; this is insisted on, [Sa2
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#008). (3.) Uriah, whom he wronged, was
one of his own worthies, a person of honour and virtue, one that was now
abroad in his service, hazarding his life in the high places of the
field for the honour and safety of him and his kingdom, where he himself
should have been. (4.) Bath-sheba, whom he debauched, was a lady of good
reputation, and, till she was drawn by him and his influence into this
wickedness, had no doubt preserved her purity. Little did she think that
ever she could have done so bad a thing as to forsake the guide of her
youth, and forget the covenant of her God; nor perhaps could any one in
the world but David have prevailed against her. The adulterer not only
wrongs and ruins his own soul, but, as much as he can, another's soul
too. (5.) David was a king, whom God had entrusted with the sword of
justice and the execution of the law upon other criminals, particularly
upon adulterers, who were, by the law, to be put to death; for him
therefore to be guilty of those crimes himself was to make himself a
pattern, when he should have been a terror, to evil doers. With what
face could he rebuke or punish that in others which he was conscious to
himself of being guilty of? See [Rom
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#022). Much more might be said to
aggravate the sin; and I can think but of one excuse for it, which is
that it was done but once; it was far from being his practice; it was by
the surprise of a temptation that he was drawn into it. He was not one
of those of whom the prophet complains that they were as fed horses,
neighing every one after his neighbour's wife ([Jer
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#008)); but this once God left him to
himself, as he did Hezekiah, that he might know what was in his heart,
[Ch2 32:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#031). Had he been told of it
before, he would have said, as Hazael, What! is thy servant a dog? But
by this instance we are taught what need we have to pray every day,
Father, in heaven, lead us not into temptation, and to watch, that we
enter not into it.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa2 11:6</span></span>

Uriah, we may suppose, had now been absent from his wife some weeks,
making the campaign in the country of the Ammonites, and not intending
to return till the end of it. The situation of his wife would bring to
light the hidden works of darkness; and when Uriah, at his return,
should find how he had been abused, and by whom, it might well be
expected, 1. That he would prosecute his wife, according to law, and
have her stoned to death; for jealousy is the rage of a man, especially
a man of honour, and he that is thus injured will not spare in the day
of vengeance, [Pro 6:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#034). This
Bath-sheba was apprehensive of when she sent to let David know she was
with child, intimating that he was concerned to protect her, and, it is
likely, if he had not promised her so to do (so wretchedly abusing his
royal power), she would not have consented to him. Hope of impunity is a
great encouragement to iniquity. 2. It might also be expected that since
he could not prosecute David by law for an offence of this nature he
would take his revenge another way, and raise a rebellion against him.
There have been instances of kings who by provocations of this nature,
given to some of their powerful subjects, have lost their crowns. To
prevent this double mischief, David endeavours to father the child which
should be born upon Uriah himself, and therefore sends for him home to
stay a night or two with his wife. Observe,

I. How the plot was laid. Uriah must come home from the army under
pretence of bringing David an account how the war prospered, and how
they went on with the siege of Rabbah, [Sa2
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#007). Thus does he pretend a more than
ordinary concern for his army when that was the least thing in his
thoughts; if he had not had another turn to serve, an express of much
less figure than Uriah might have sufficed to bring him a report of the
state of the war. David, having had as much conference with Uriah as he
thought requisite to cover the design, sent him to his house, and, that
he might be the more pleasant there with the wife of his youth, sent a
dish of meat after him for their supper, [Sa2
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#008). When that project failed the
first night, and Uriah, being weary of his journey and more desirous of
sleep than meat, lay all night in the guard-chamber, the next night he
made him drunk ([Sa2 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#013)), or made
him merry, tempted him to drink more than was fit, that he might forget
his vow ([Sa2 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#011)), and might be
disposed to go home to his own bed, to which perhaps, if David could
have made him dead drunk, he would have ordered him to be carried. It is
a very wicked thing, upon any design whatsoever, to make a person drunk.
Woe to him that does so, [Hab 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#015),
[Hab 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#016). God will put a cup of
trembling into the hands of those who put into the hands of others the
cup of drunkenness. Robbing a man of his reason is worse than robbing
him of his money, and drawing him into sin worse than drawing him into
any trouble whatsoever. Every good man, especially every magistrate,
should endeavour to prevent this sin, by admonishing, restraining, and
denying the glass to those whom they see falling into excess; but to
further it is to do the devil's work, to officiate as factor for him.

II\. How this plot was defeated by Uriah's firm resolution not to lie in
his own bed. Both nights he slept with the life-guard, and went not down
to his house, though, it is probable, his wife pressed him to do it as
much as David, [Sa2 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#009), [Sa2
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#012). Now, 1. Some think he suspected
what was done, being informed of his wife's attendance at court, and
therefore he would not go near her. But if he had had any suspicion of
that kind, surely he would have opened the letter that David sent by him
to Joab. 2. Whether he suspected any thing or no, Providence put this
resolution into his heart, and kept him to it, for the discovering of
David's sin, and that the baffling of his design to conceal it might
awaken David's conscience to confess it and repent of it. 3. The reason
he gave to David for this strange instance of self-denial and
mortification was very noble, [Sa2
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#011). While the army was encamped in
the field, he would not lie at ease in his own house. "The ark is in a
tent," whether at home, in the tent David had pitched for it, or abroad,
with Joab in the camp, is not certain. "Joab, and all the mighty men of
Israel, lie hard and uneasy, and much exposed to the weather and to the
enemy; and shall I go and take my ease and pleasure at my own house?"
No, he protests he will not do it. Now, (1.) This was in itself a
generous resolution, and showed Uriah to be a man of a public spirit,
bold and hardy, and mortified to the delights of sense. In times of
public difficulty and danger it does not become us to repose ourselves
in security, or roll ourselves in pleasure, or, with the king and Haman,
to sit down to drink when the city Shushan was perplexed, [Est
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#015). We should voluntarily endure
hardness when the church of God is constrained to endure it. (2.) It
might have been of use to awaken David's conscience, and make his heart
to smite him for what he had done. \[1.\] That he had basely abused so
brave a man as Uriah was, a man so heartily concerned for him and his
kingdom, and that acted for him and it with so much vigour. \[2.\] That
he was himself so unlike him. The consideration of the public hardships
and hazards kept Uriah from lawful pleasures, yet could not keep David,
though more nearly interested, from unlawful ones. Uriah's severity to
himself should have shamed David for his indulgence of himself. The law
was, When the host goeth forth against the enemy then, in a special
manner, keep thyself from every wicked thing, [Deu
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#009). Uriah outdid that law, but David
violated it.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 11:14</span></span>

When David's project of fathering the child upon Uriah himself failed,
so that, in process of time, Uriah would certainly know the wrong that
had been done him, to prevent the fruits of his revenge, the devil put
it into David's heart to take him off, and then neither he nor
Bath-sheba would be in any danger (what prosecution could there be when
there was no prosecutor?), suggesting further that, when Uriah was out
of the way, Bath-sheba might, if he pleased, be his own for ever.
Adulteries have often occasioned murders, and one wickedness must be
covered and secured with another. The beginnings of sin are therefore to
be dreaded; for who knows where they will end? It is resolved in David's
breast (which one would think could never possibly have harboured so
vile a thought) that Uriah must die. That innocent, valiant, gallant
man, who was ready to die for his prince's honour, must die by his
prince's hand. David has sinned, and Bath-sheba has sinned, and both
against him, and therefore he must die; David determines he must. Is
this the man whose heart smote him because he had cut off Saul's skirt?
Quantum mutatus ab illo! - But ah, how changed! Is this he that executed
judgment and justice to all his people? How can he now do so unjust a
thing? See how fleshly lusts war against the soul, and what devastations
they make in that war; how they blink the eyes, harden the heart, sear
the conscience, and deprive men of all sense of honour and justice.
Whoso committeth adultery with a woman lacketh understanding and quite
loses it; he that doth it destroys his own soul, [Pro
6:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#032). But, as the eye of the
adulterer, so the hand of the murderer seeks concealment, [Job
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#014), [Job
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#015). Works of darkness hate the
light. When David bravely slew Goliath it was done publicly, and he
gloried in it; but, when he basely slew Uriah, it must be done
clandestinely, for he is ashamed of it, and well he may. Who would do a
thing that he dare not own? The devil, having as a poisonous serpent,
put it into David's heart to murder Uriah, as a subtle serpent he puts
it into his head how to do it. Not as Absalom slew Amnon, by commanding
his servants to assassinate him, nor as Ahab slew Naboth by suborning
witnesses to accuse him, but by exposing him to the enemy, a way of
doing it which, perhaps, would not seem so odious to conscience and the
world, because soldiers expose themselves of course. If Uriah had not
been in that dangerous post, another must; he has (as we say) a chance
for his life; if he fight stoutly, he may perhaps come off; and, if he
die, it is in the field of honour, where a soldier would choose to die;
and yet all this will not save it from being a wilful murder, of malice
prepense.

I. Orders are sent to Joab to set Uriah in the front of the hottest
battle, and then to desert him, and abandon him to the enemy, [Sa2
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#014), [Sa2
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#015). This was David's project to
take off Uriah, and it succeeded, as he designed. Many were the
aggravations of this murder. 1. It was deliberate. He took time to
consider of it; and though he had time to consider of it, for he wrote a
letter about it, and though he had time to have countermanded the order
afterwards before it could be put in execution, yet he persisted in it.
2. He sent the letter by Uriah himself, than which nothing could be more
base and barbarous, to make him accessory to his own death. And what a
paradox was it that he could bear such a malice against him in whom yet
he could repose such a confidence as that he would carry letters which
he must not know the purport of. 3. Advantage must be taken of Uriah's
own courage and zeal for his king and country, which deserve the
greatest praise and recompence, to betray him the more easily to his
fate. If he had not been forward to expose himself, perhaps he was a man
of such importance that Joab could not have exposed him; and that this
noble fire should be designedly turned upon himself was a most
detestable instance of ingratitude. 4. Many must be involved in the
guilt. Joab, the general, to whom the blood of his soldiers, especially
the worthies, ought to be precious, must do it; he, and all that retire
from Uriah when they ought in conscience to support and second him,
become guilty of his death. 5. Uriah cannot thus die alone: the party he
commands is in danger of being cut off with him; and it proved so: some
of the people, even the servants of David (so they are called, to
aggravate David's sin in being so prodigal of their lives), fell with
him, [Sa2 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#017). Nay, this wilful
misconduct by which Uriah must be betrayed might be of fatal consequence
to the whole army, and might oblige them to raise the siege. 6. It will
be the triumph and joy of the Ammonites, the sworn enemies of God and
Israel; it will gratify them exceedingly. David prayed for himself, that
he might not fall into the hands of man, nor flee from his enemies ([Sa2
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#013), [Sa2
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#014)); yet he sells his servant Uriah
to the Ammonites, and not for any iniquity in his hand.

II\. Joab executes these orders. In the next assault that is made upon
the city Uriah has the most dangerous post assigned him, is encouraged
to hope that if he be repulsed by the besieged he shall be relieved by
Joab, in dependence on which he marches on with resolution, but,
succours not coming on, the service proves too hot, and he is slain in
it, [Sa2 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#016), [Sa2
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#017). It was strange that Joab would
do such a thing merely upon a letter, without knowing the reason. But,
1. Perhaps he supposed Uriah had been guilty of some great crime, to
enquire into which David had sent for him, and that, because he would
not punish him openly, he took this course with him to put him to death.
2. Joab had been guilty of blood, and we may suppose it pleased him very
well to see David himself falling into the same guilt, and he was
willing enough to serve him in it, that he might continue to be
favourable to him. It is common for those who have done ill themselves
to desire to be countenanced therein by others doing ill likewise,
especially by the sins of those that are eminent in the profession of
religion. Or, perhaps, David knew that Joab had a pique against Uriah,
and would gladly be avenged on him; otherwise Joab, when he saw cause,
knew how to dispute the king's orders, as [Sa2
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#005); [Sa2
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#003).

III\. He sends an account of it to David. An express is despatched away
immediately with a report of this last disgrace and loss which they had
sustained, [Sa2 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#018). And, to
disguise the affair, 1. He supposes that David would appear to be angry
at his bad conduct, would ask why they came so near the wall ([Sa2
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#020)), did they not know that
Abimelech lost his life by doing do? [Sa2
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#021). We had the story ([Jdg
9:53](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#053)), which book, it is likely, was
published as a part of the sacred history in Samuel's time; and (be it
noted to their praise, and for imitation) even the soldiers were
conversant with their bibles, and could readily quote the
scripture-story, and make use of it for admonition to themselves not to
run upon the same attempts which they found had been fatal. 2. He slyly
orders the messenger to soothe it with telling him that Uriah the
Hittite was dead also, which gave too broad an intimation to the
messenger, and by him to others, that David would be secretly pleased to
hear that; for murder will out. And, when men do such base things, they
must expect to be bantered and upbraided with them, even by their
inferiors. The messenger delivered his message agreeably to orders, [Sa2
11:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#022). He makes the besieged to
sally out first upon the besiegers (they came out unto us into the
field), represents the besiegers as doing their part with great bravery
(we were upon them even to the entering of the gate - we forced them to
retire into the city with precipitation), and so concludes with a slight
mention of the slaughter made among them by some shot from the wall:
Some of the king's servants are dead, and particularly Uriah the
Hittite, an officer of note, stood first in the list of the slain.

IV\. David receives the account with a secret satisfaction, [Sa2
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#025). Let not Joab be displeased, for
David is not. He blames not his conduct, nor thinks they did wrong in
approaching so near the wall; all is well now that Uriah is put out of
the way. This point being gained, he can make light of the loss, and
turn it off easily with an excuse: The sword devours one as well as
another; it was a chance of war, nothing more common. He orders Joab to
make the battle more strong next time, while he, by his sin, was
weakening it, and provoking God to blast the undertaking.

V. He marries the widow in a little time. She submitted to the ceremony
of mourning for her husband as short a time as custom would admit ([Sa2
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#026)), and then David took her to his
house as his wife, and she bore him a son. Uriah's revenge was prevented
by his death, but the birth of the child so soon after the marriage
published the crime. Sin will have shame. Yet that was not the worst of
it: The thing that David had done displeased the Lord. The whole matter
of Uriah (as it is called, [Kg1 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#005)),
the adultery, falsehood, murder, and this marriage at last, it was all
displeasing to the Lord. He had pleased himself, but displeased God.
Note, God sees and hates sin in his own people. Nay, the nearer any are
to God in profession the more displeasing to him their sins are; for in
them there is more ingratitude, treachery, and reproach, than in the
sins of others. Let none therefore encourage themselves in sin by the
example of David; for those that sin as he did will fall under the
displeasure of God as he did. Let us therefore stand in awe and sin not,
not sin after the similitude of his transgression.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 12](sa2012)

</div>
