<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2017)  [Next](sa2019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 18:0</span></span>

This chapter puts a period to Absalom's rebellion and life, and so makes
way for David to his throne again, whither the next chapter brings him
back in peace and triumph. We have here, I. David's preparations to
engage the rebels ([Sa2 18:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#001)). II.
The total defeat of Absalom's party and their dispersion ([Sa2
18:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#006)). III. The death of Absalom,
and his burial ([Sa2 18:9-18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#009)). IV. The
bringing of the tidings to David, who tarried at Mahanaim ([Sa2
18:19-32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#019)). V. His bitter lamentation
for Absalom ([Sa2 18:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#033)).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 18:1</span></span>

Which way David raised an army here, and what reinforcements were sent
him, we are not told; many, it is likely, from all the coasts of Israel,
at least from the neighbouring tribes, came in to his assistance, so
that, by degrees, he was able to make head against Absalom, as
Ahithophel foresaw. Now here we have,

I. His army numbered and marshalled, [Sa2
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#001), [Sa2
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#002). He had, no doubt, committed his
cause to God by prayer, for that was his relief in all his afflictions;
and then he took an account of his forces. Josephus says they were, in
all, but about 4000. These he divided into regiments and companies, to
each of which he appointed proper officers, and then disposed them, as
is usual, into the right wing, the left wing, and the centre, two of
which he committed to his two old experienced generals, Joab and
Abishai, and the third to his new friend Ittai. Good order and good
conduct may sometimes be as serviceable in an army as great numbers.
Wisdom teaches us to make the best of the strength we have, and let it
reach to the utmost.

II\. Himself over-persuaded not to go in person to the battle. He was
Absalom's false friend that persuaded him to go, and served his pride
more than his prudence; David's true friends would not let him go,
remembering what they had been told of Ahithophel's design to smite the
king only. David showed his affection to them by being willing to
venture with them ([Sa2 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#002)), and
they showed theirs to him by opposing it. We must never reckon it an
affront to be gain-said for our good, and by those that therein consult
our interest. 1. They would by no means have him to expose himself, for
(say they) thou art worth 10,000 of us. Thus ought princes to be valued
by their subjects, who, for their safety, must be willing to expose
themselves. 2. They would not so far gratify the enemy, who would
rejoice more in his fall than in the defeat of the whole army. 3. He
might be more serviceable to them by tarrying in the city, with a
reserve of his forces there, whence he might send them recruits. That
may be a post of real service which yet is not a post of danger. The
king acquiesced in their reasons, and changed his purpose ([Sa2
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#004)): What seemeth to you best I will
do. It is no piece of wisdom to be stiff in our resolutions, but to be
willing to hear reason, even from our inferiors, and to be overruled by
their advice when it appears to be for our own good. Whether the
people's prudence had an eye to it or no, God's providence wisely
ordered it, that David should not be in the field of battle; for then
his tenderness would certainly have interposed to save the life of
Absalom, whom God had determined to destroy.

III\. The charge he gave concerning Absalom, [Sa2
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#005). When the army was drawn out,
rank and file, Josephus says, he encouraged them, and prayed for them,
but withal bade them all take heed of doing Absalom any hurt. How does
he render good for evil! Absalom would have David only smitten. David
would have Absalom only spared. What foils are these to each other!
Never was unnatural hatred to a father more strong than in Absalom; nor
was ever natural affection to a child more strong than in David. Each
did his utmost, and showed what man is capable of doing, how bad it is
possible for a child to be to the best of fathers and how good it is
possible for a father to be to the worst of children; as if it were
designed to be a resemblance of man's wickedness towards God and God's
mercy towards man, of which it is hard to say which is more amazing.
"Deal gently," says David, "by all means, with the young man, even with
Absalom, for my sake; he is a young man, rash and heady, and his age
must excuse him; he is mine, whom I love; if you love me, be not severe
with him." This charge supposes David's strong expectation of success.
Having a good cause and a good God, he doubts not but Absalom would lie
at their mercy, and therefore bids them deal gently with him, spare his
life and reserve him for his judgment.

Bishop Hall thus descants on this: "What means this ill-placed love?
This unjust mercy? Deal gently with a traitor? Of all traitors, with a
son? Of all sons, with an Absalom? That graceless darling of so good a
father? And all this, for thy sake, whose crown, whose blood, he hunts
after? For whose sake must he be pursued, if forborne for thine? Must
the cause of the quarrel be the motive of mercy? Even in the holiest
parents, nature may be guilty of an injurious tenderness, of a bloody
indulgence. But was not this done in type of that immeasurable mercy of
the true King and Redeemer of Israel, who prayed for his persecutors,
for his murderers, Father, forgive them? Deal gently with them for my
sake." When God sends and affliction to correct his children, it is with
this charge, "Deal gently with them for my sake;" for he knows our
frame.

IV\. A complete victory gained over Absalom's forces. The battle was
fought in the wood of Ephraim ([Sa2
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#006)), so called from some memorable
action of the Ephraimites there, though it lay in the tribe of Gad.
David thought fit to meet the enemy with his forces at some distance,
before they came up to Mahanaim, lest he should bring that city into
trouble which had so kindly sheltered him. The cause shall be decided by
a pitched battle. Josephus represents the fight as very obstinate, but
the rebels were at length totally routed and 20,000 of them slain, [Sa2
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#007). Now they smarted justly for
their treason against their lawful prince, their uneasiness under so
good a government, and their base ingratitude to so good a governor; and
they found what it was to take up arms for a usurper, who with his
kisses and caresses had wheedled them into their own ruin. Now where are
the rewards, the preferments, the golden days, they promised themselves
from him? Now they see what it is to take counsel against the Lord and
his anointed, and to think of breaking his bands asunder. And that they
might see that God fought against them, 1. They are conquered by a few,
an army, in all probability, much inferior to theirs in number. 2. By
that flight with which they hoped to save themselves they destroyed
themselves. The wood, which they sought to for shelter, devoured more
than the sword, that they might see how, when they thought themselves
safe from David's men, and said, Surely the bitterness of death is past,
yet the justice of God pursued them and suffered them not to live. What
refuge can rebels find from divine vengeance? The pits and bogs, the
stumps and thickets, and, as the Chaldee paraphrase understands it, the
wild beasts of the wood, were probably the death of multitudes of the
dispersed distracted Israelites, besides the 20,000 that were slain with
the sword. God herein fought for David, and yet fought against him; for
all these that were slain were his own subjects, and the common interest
of his kingdom was weakened by the slaughter. The Romans allowed no
triumph for a victory in a civil war.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 18:9</span></span>

Here is Absalom quite at a loss, at his wit's end first, and then at his
life's end. He that began the fight, big with the expectation of
triumphing over David himself, with whom, if he had had him in his
power, he would not have dealt gently, is now in the greatest
consternation, when he meets the servants of David, [Sa2
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#009). Though they were forbidden to
meddle with him, he durst not look them in the face; but, finding they
were near him, he clapped spurs to his mule and made the best of his
way, through thick and thin, and so rode headlong upon his own
destruction. Thus he that fleeth from the fear shall fall into the pit,
and he that getteth up out of the pit shall be taken in the snare, [Jer
48:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#044). David is inclined to spare him,
but divine justice passes sentence upon him as a traitor, and sees it
executed - that he hang by the neck, be caught alive, be embowelled, and
his body dispose of disgracefully.

I. He is hanged by the neck. Riding furiously, neck or nothing, under
the thick boughs of a great oak which hung low and had never been
cropped, either the twisted branches, or some one forked bough of the
oak, caught hold of his head, either by his neck, or, as some think, by
his long hair, which had been so much his pride, and was now justly made
a halter for him, and there he hung, so astonished that he could not use
his hands to help himself or so entangled that his hands could not help
him, but the more he struggled the more he was embarrassed. This set him
up for a fair mark to the servants of David, and he had the terror and
shame of seeing himself thus exposed, while he could do nothing for his
own relief, neither fight nor fly. Observe concerning this, 1. That his
mule went away from under him, as if glad to get clear of such a burden,
and resign it to the ignominious tree. Thus the whole creation groans
under the burden of man's corruption, but shall shortly be delivered
from its load, [Rom 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021), [Rom
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#022). 2. The he hung between heaven
and earth, as unworthy of either, as abandoned of both; earth would not
keep him, heaven would not take him, hell therefore opens her mouth to
receive him. 3. That this was a very surprising unusual thing. It was
fit that it should be so, his crime being so monstrous: if, in his
flight, his mule had thrown him, and left him half-dead upon the ground,
till the servants of David had come up and dispatched him, the same
thing would have been done as effectually; but that would have been too
common a fate for so uncommon a criminal. God will here, as in the case
of those other rebels, Dathan and Abiram, create a new thing, that it
may be understood how much this man has provoked the Lord, [Num
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#029), [Num
16:30](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#030). Absalom is here hung up, in
terrorem - to frighten children from disobedience to their parents. See
[Pro 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#017).

II\. He is caught alive by one of the servants of David, who goes
directly and tells Joab in what posture he found that archrebel, [Sa2
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#010). Thus was he set up for a
spectacle, as well as a mark, that the righteous might see him and laugh
at him ([Psa 52:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#006)), while he had this
further vexation in his breast, that of all the friends he had courted
and confided in, and thought he had sure in his interest, though he hung
long enough to have been relieved, yet he had none at hand to
disentangle him. Joab chides the man for not dispatching him ([Sa2
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#011)), telling him, if he had given
that bold stroke, he would have rewarded him with ten half-crowns and a
girdle, that is, a captain's commission, which perhaps was signified by
the delivery of a belt or girdle; see [Isa
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#021). But the man, though zealous
enough against Absalom, justified himself in not doing it: "Dispatch
him!" says he, "not for all the world: it would have cost my head: and
thou thyself wast witness to the king's charge concerning him ([Sa2
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#012)), and, for all thy talk, wouldst
have been my prosecutor if I had done it," [Sa2
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#013). Those that love the treason
hate the traitor. Joab could not deny this, nor blame the man for his
caution, and therefore makes him no answer, but breaks off the
discourse, under colour of haste ([Sa2
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#014)): I may not tarry thus with
thee. Superiors should consider a reproof before they give it, lest they
be ashamed of it afterwards, and find themselves unable to make it good.

III\. He is (as I may say) embowelled and quartered, as traitors are, so
pitifully mangled is he as he hangs there, and receives his death in
such a manner as to see all its terrors and feel all its pain. 1. Joab
throws three darts into his body, which put him, no doubt, to exquisite
torment, while he is yet alive in the midst of the oak, [Sa2
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#014). I know not whether Joab can be
justified in this direct disobedience to the command of his sovereign;
was this to deal gently with the young man? Would David have suffered
him to do it if he had been upon the spot? Yet this may be said for him,
that, while he broke the order of a too indulgent father, he did real
service both to his king and country, and would have endangered welfare
of both if he had not done it. Salus populi suprema lex - The safety of
the people is the supreme law. 2. Joab's young men, ten of them, smite
him, before he is dispatched, [Sa2
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#015). They surrounded him, made a
ring about him in triumph, and then smote him and slew him. So let all
they enemies perish, O Lord! Joab hereupon sounds a retreat, [Sa2
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#016). The danger is over, now that
Absalom is slain; the people will soon return to their allegiance to
David, and therefore no more blood shall be spilt; no prisoners are
taken, to be tried as traitors and made examples; let every man return
to his tent; they are all the king's subjects, all his good subjects
again.

IV\. His body is disposed of disgracefully ([Sa2
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#017), [Sa2
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#018)): They cast it into a great pit
in the wood; they would not bring it to his father (for that
circumstance would but have added to his grief), nor would they preserve
it to be buried, according to his order, but threw it into the next pit
with indignation. Now where is the beauty he had been so proud of and
for which he had been so much admired? Where are his aspiring projects,
and the castles he had built in the air? His thoughts perish, and he
with them. And, to signify how heavy his iniquity lay upon his bones, as
the prophet speaks ([Eze 32:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#027)), they
raised a great heap of stones upon him, to be a monument of his villany,
and to signify that he ought to have been stoned as a rebellious son,
[Deu 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#021). Travelers say that the
place is taken note of to this day, and that it is common for passengers
to throw a stone to this heap, with words to this purport: Cursed be the
memory of rebellious Absalom, and cursed for ever be all wicked children
that rise up in rebellion against their parents. To aggravate the
ignominy of Absalom's burial, the historian takes notice of a pillar he
had erected in the valley of Kidron, near Jerusalem, to be a monument
for himself, and keep his name in remembrance ([Sa2
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#018)), at the foot of which, it is
probable, he designed to be buried. What foolish insignificant projects
do proud men fill their heads with! And what care do many people take
about the disposal of their bodies, when they are dead, that have no
care at all what shall become of their precious souls! Absalom had three
sons ([Sa2 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#027)), but, it seems, now
he had none; God had taken them away by death; and justly is a
rebellious son written childless. To make up the want, he erects this
pillar for a memorial; yet in this also Providence crosses him, and a
rude heap of stones shall be his monument, instead of this marble
pillar. Thus those that exalt themselves shall be abased. His care was
to have his name kept in remembrance, and it is so, to his everlasting
dishonour. He could not be content in the obscurity of the rest of
David's sons, of whom nothing is recorded but their names, but would be
famous, and is therefore justly made for ever infamous. The pillar shall
bear his name, but not to his credit; it was designed for Absalom's
glory, but proved Absalom's folly.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa2 18:19</span></span>

Absalom's business is done; and we are now told,

I. How David was informed of it. He staid behind at the city of
Mahanaim, some miles from the wood where the battle was, and in the
utmost border of the land. Absalom's scattered forces all made homeward
toward Jordan, which was the contrary way from Mahanaim, so that his
watchmen could not perceive how the battle went, till an express came on
purpose to bring advice of the issue, which the king sat in the gate
expecting to hear, [Sa2 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#024).

1\. Cushi was the man Joab ordered to carry the tidings ([Sa2
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#021)), an Ethiopian, so his name
signifies, and some think that he was so by birth, a black that waited
on Joab, probably one of the ten that had helped to dispatch Absalom
([Sa2 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#015)) as some think, though it
was dangerous for one of those to bring the news to David, lest his fate
should be the same with theirs that reported to him Saul's death, and
Ish-bosheth's.

2\. Ahimaaz, the young priest (one of those who brought David
intelligence of Absalom's motions, [Sa2
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#017)), was very forward to be the
messenger of these tidings, so transported was he with joy that this
cloud was blown over; let him go and tell the king that the Lord hath
avenged him of his enemies, [Sa2
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#019). This he desired, not so much in
hope of a reward (he was above that) as that he might have the pleasure
and satisfaction of bringing the king, whom he loved, this good news.
Joab knew David better than Ahimaaz did, and that the tidings of
Absalom's death, which must conclude the story, would spoil the
acceptableness of all the rest; and he loves Ahimaaz too well to let him
be the messenger of those tidings ([Sa2
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#020)); they are fitter to be brought
by a footman than by a priest. However, when Cushi was gone, Ahimaaz
begged hard for leave to run after him, and with great importunity
obtained it, [Sa2 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#022), [Sa2
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#023). One would wonder why he should
be so fond of this office, when another was employed in it. (1.) Perhaps
it was to show his swiftness; observing how heavily Cushi ran, and that
he took the worse way, though the nearest, he had a mind to show how
fast he could run, and that he could go the furthest way about and yet
beat Cushi. No great praise for a priest to be swift of foot, yet
perhaps Ahimaaz was proud of it. (2.) Perhaps it was in prudence and
tenderness to the king that he desired it. He knew he could get before
Cushi, and therefore was willing to prepare the king, by a vague and
general report, for the plain truth which Cushi was ordered to tell him.
If bad news must come, it is best that it come gradually, and will be
the better borne.

3\. They are both discovered by the watchman on the gate of Mahanaim,
Ahimaaz first ([Sa2 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#024)), for,
though Cushi had the lead, Ahimaaz soon outran him; but presently after
Cushi appeared, [Sa2 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#026). (1.) When
the king hears of one running alone he concludes he is an express ([Sa2
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#025)): If he be alone, there are
tidings in his mouth; for if they had been beaten, and were flying back
from the enemy, there would have been many. (2.) When he hears it is
Ahimaaz he concludes he brings good news, [Sa2
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#027). Ahimaaz, it seems, was so
famous for running that he was known by it at a distance, and so
eminently good that it is taken for granted, if he be the messenger, the
news must needs be good: He is a good man, zealously affected to the
king's interest, and would not bring bad news. It is pity but the good
tidings of the gospel should always be brought by good men; and how
welcome should the messengers be to us for their message sake!

4\. Ahimaaz is very forward to proclaim the victory ([Sa2
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#028)), cries at a distance, "Peace,
there is peace;" peace after war, which is doubly welcome. "All is well,
my lord O king! the danger is over, and we may return, when the king
pleases, to Jerusalem." And, when he comes near, he tells him the news
more particularly. "They are all cut off that lifted up their hands
against the king;" and, as became a priest, while he gives the king the
joy of it, he gives God the glory of it, the God of peace and war, the
God of salvation and victory: "Blessed be the Lord thy God, that has
done this for thee, as thy God, pursuant to the promises made to uphold
thy throne," ch, [Sa2 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#016). When he
said this, he fell down upon his face, not only in reverence to the
king, but in humble adoration of God, whose name he praised for this
success. By directing David thus to give God thanks for his victory, he
prepared him for the approaching news of its allay. The more our hearts
are fixed and enlarged in thanksgiving to God for our mercies the better
disposed we shall be to bear with patience the afflictions mixed with
them. Poor David is so much a father that he forgets he is a king, and
therefore cannot rejoice in the news of a victory, till he know whether
the young man Absalom be safe, for whom his heart seems to tremble,
almost as Eli's, in a similar case, for the ark of God. Ahimaaz soon
discerned, what Joab intimated to him, that the death of the king's son
would make the tidings of the day very unwelcome, and therefore in his
report left that matter doubtful; and, though he gave occasion to
suspect how it was, yet, that the thunderclap might not come too
suddenly upon the poor perplexed king, he refers him to the next
messenger, whom they saw coming, for a more particular account of it.
"When Joab sent the king's servant (namely, Cushi) and me thy servant,
to bring the news, I saw a great tumult, occasioned by something
extraordinary, as you will hear by and by; but I have nothing to say
about it. I have delivered that which was my message. Cushi is better
able to inform you than I am. I will not be the messenger of evil
tidings; nor will I pretend to know that which I cannot give a perfect
account of." He is therefore told to stand by till Cushi come ([Sa2
18:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#030)), and now, we may suppose, he
gives the king a more particular account of the victory, which was the
thing he came to bring the news of.

5\. Cushi, the slow post, proves the sure one, and besides the
confirmation of the news of the victory which Ahimaaz had brought - The
Lord has avenged thee of all those that rose up against thee ([Sa2
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#031)) - he satisfied the king's
enquiry concerning Absalom, [Sa2
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#032). Is he safe? says David. "Yes,"
says Cushi, "he is safe in his grave;" but he tells the news so
discreetly that, how unwelcome soever the message is, the messenger can
have no blame. He did not tell him plainly that Absalom was hanged, and
run through and buried under a heap of stones; but only that his fate
was what he desired might be the fate of all that were traitors against
the king, his crown and dignity: "The enemies of my lord the king,
whoever they are, and all that rise against thee to do thee hurt, be as
that young man is; I need wish them no worse."

II\. How David received the intelligence. He forgets all the joy of his
deliverance, and is quite overwhelmed with the sorrowful tidings of
Absalom's death, [Sa2 18:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#033). As soon
as he perceived by Cushi's reply that Absalom was dead, he asked no more
questions, but fell into a passion of weeping, retired from company, and
abandoned himself to sorrow; as he was going up to his chamber he was
overheard to say "O my son Absalom! my son, my son Absalom! alas for
thee! I lament thee. How hast thou fallen! Would God I had died for
thee, and that thou hadst remained alive this day" (so the Chaldee adds)
"O Absalom! my son, my son!" I wish I could see reason to think that
this arose from a concern about Absalom's everlasting state, and that
the reason why he wished he had died for him was because he had good
hopes of his own salvation, and of Absalom's repentance if he had lived.
It rather seems to have been spoken inconsiderately, and in a passion,
and it was his infirmity. He is to be blamed, 1. For showing so great a
fondness for a graceless son only because he was handsome and witty,
while he was justly abandoned both of God and man. 2. For quarrelling,
not only with divine providence, in the disposals of which he ought
silently to have acquiesced, but with divine justice, the judgments of
which he ought to have adored and subscribed to. See how Bildad argues
([Job 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#003), [Job
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#004)), If thy children have sinned
against him, and he have cast them away in their transgression, thou
shouldst submit, for doth God pervert judgment? See [Lev
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#003). 3. For opposing the justice of
the nation, which, as king, he was entrusted with the administration of,
and which, with other public interests, he ought to have preferred
before nay natural affection. 4. For despising the mercy of his
deliverance, and the deliverance of his family and kingdom, from
Absalom's wicked designs, as if this were no mercy, nor worth giving
thanks for, because it cost the life of Absalom. 5. For indulging in a
strong passion, and speaking unadvisedly with his lips. He now forgot
his own reasonings upon the death of another child (Can I bring him back
again?) and his own resolution to keep his mouth as with a bridle when
his heart was hot within him, as well as his own practice at other
times, when he quieted himself as a child that was weaned from his
mother. The best men are not always in an equally good frame. What we
over-loved we are apt to over-grieve for: in each affection, therefore,
it is wisdom to have rule over our own spirits and to keep a strict
guard upon ourselves when that is removed from us which was very dear to
us. Losers think they may have leave to speak; but little said is soon
amended. The penitent patient sufferer sitteth alone and keepeth silence
([Lam 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#028)), or rather, with Job,
says, Blessed be the name of the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 19](sa2019)

</div>
