<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](ecc012)  [Next](sol001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles)](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sol 0:0</span></span>

An Exposition, with Practical Observations, of The Song of Solomon

All scripture, we are sure, is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for the support and advancement of the interests of his
kingdom among men, and it is never the less so for there being found in
it some things dark and hard to be understood, which those that are
unlearned and unstable wrest to their own destruction. In our belief
both of the divine extraction and of the spiritual exposition of this
book we are confirmed by the ancient, constant, and concurring testimony
both of the church of the Jews, to whom were committed the oracles of
God, and who never made any doubt of the authority of this book, and of
the Christian church, which happily succeeds them in that trust and
honour. I. It must be confessed, on the one hand, that if he who barely
reads this book be asked, as the eunuch was Understandest thou what thou
readest? he will have more reason than he had to say, How can I, except
some man shall guide me? The books of scripture-history and prophecy are
very much like one another, but this Song of Solomon's is very much
unlike the songs of his father David; here is not the name of God in it;
it is never quoted in the New Testament; we find not in it any
expressions of natural religion or pious devotion, no, nor is it
introduced by vision, or any of the marks of immediate revelation. It
seems as hard as any part of scripture to be made a savour of life unto
life, nay, and to those who come to the reading of it with carnal minds
and corrupt affections, it is in danger of being made a savour of death
unto death; it is a flower out of which they extract poison; and
therefore the Jewish doctors advised their young people not to read it
till they were thirty years old, lest by the abuse of that which is most
pure and sacred (horrendum dictu - horrible to say!) the flames of lust
should be kindled with fire from heaven, which is intended for the altar
only. But, II. It must be confessed, on the other hand, that with the
help of the many faithful guides we have for the understanding of this
book it appears to be a very bright and powerful ray of heavenly light,
admirable fitted to excite pious and devout affections in holy souls, to
draw out their desires towards God, to increase their delight in him,
and improve their acquaintance and communion with him. It is an
allegory, the letter of which kills those who rest in that and look no
further, but the spirit of which gives life, [Co2
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006); [Joh
6:63](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#063). It is a parable, which makes
divine things more difficult to those who do not love them, but more
plain and pleasant to those who do, [Mat
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#014), [Mat
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#016). Experienced Christians here
find a counterpart of their experiences, and to them it is intelligible,
while those neither understand it nor relish it who have no part nor lot
in the matter. It is a song, an Epithalamium, or nuptial song, wherein,
by the expressions of love between a bridegroom and his bride, are set
forth and illustrated the mutual affections that pass between God and a
distinguished remnant of mankind. It is a pastoral; the bride and
bridegroom, for the more lively representation of humility and
innocence, are brought in as a shepherd and his shepherdess. Now, 1.
This song might easily be taken in a spiritual sense by the Jewish
church, for whose use it was first composed, and was so taken, as
appears by the Chaldee-Paraphrase and the most ancient Jewish
expositors. God betrothed the people of Israel to himself; he entered
into covenant with them, and it was a marriage-covenant. He had given
abundant proofs of his love to them, and required of them that they
should love him with all their heart and soul. Idolatry was often spoken
of as spiritual adultery, and doting upon idols, to prevent which this
song was penned, representing the complacency which God took in Israel
and which Israel ought to take in God, and encouraging them to continue
faithful to him, though he might seem sometimes to withdraw and hide
himself from them, and to wait for the further manifestation of himself
in the promised Messiah. 2. It may more easily be taken in a spiritual
sense by the Christian church, because the condescensions and
communications of divine love appear more rich and free under the gospel
than they did under the law, and the communion between heaven and earth
more familiar. God sometimes spoke of himself as the husband of the
Jewish church ([Isa 64:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#005), [Hos
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#016), [Hos
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#019)), and rejoiced in it as his
bride, [Isa 62:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#004), [Isa
62:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#005). But more frequently is Christ
represented as the bridegroom of his church ([Mat
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#001); [Rom
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#004); [Co2
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002); [Eph
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#032)), and the church as the bride,
the Lamb's wife, [Rev 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#007); [Rev
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002), [Rev
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009). Pursuant to this metaphor Christ
and the church in general, Christ and particular believers, are here
discoursing with abundance of mutual esteem and endearment. The best key
to this book is the 45th Psalm, which we find applied to Christ in the
New Testament, and therefore this ought to be so too. It requires some
pains to find out what may, probably, be the meaning of the Holy Spirit
in the several parts of this book; as David's songs are many of them
level to the capacity of the meanest, and there are shallows in them
learned, and there are depths in it in which an elephant may swim. But,
when the meaning is found out, it will be of admirable use to excite
pious and devout affections in us; and the same truths which are plainly
laid down in other scriptures when they are extracted out of this come
to the soul with a more pleasing power. When we apply ourselves to the
study of this book we must not only, with Moses and Joshua, put off our
shoe from off our foot, and even forget that we have bodies, because the
place where we stand is holy ground, but we must, with John, come up
hither, must spread our wings, take a noble flight, and soar upwards,
till by faith and holy love we enter into the holiest, for this is no
other than the house of God and this is the gate of heaven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 1](sol001)

</div>
