<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac000)  [Next](zac002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

In this chapter, after the introduction ([Zac
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)), we have, I. An awakening call to
a sinful people to repent of their sins and return to God ([Zac
1:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#002)). II. Great encouragement given
to hope for mercy. 1. By the vision of the horses ([Zac
1:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#007)). 2. By the prayer of the angel
for Jerusalem, and the answer to that prayer ([Zac
1:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#012)). 3. By the vision of the four
carpenters that were employed to cut off the four horns with which Judah
and Jerusalem were scattered ([Zac
1:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#018)).

[Zechariah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 1:1</span></span>

Here is, I. The foundation of Zechariah's ministry; it is laid in a
divine authority: The word of the Lord came to him. He received a divine
commission to be God's mouth to the people and with it instructions what
to say. He received of the Lord that which also he delivered unto them.
The word of the Lord was to him; it came in the evidence and
demonstration of the Spirit, as a real thing, and not a fancy. For the
ascertaining of this, we have here, 1. The time when the word of the
Lord came first to him, or when the word that next follows came to him:
it was in the second year of Darius. Before the captivity the prophets
dated their writings by the reigns of the kings of Judah and Israel; but
now by the reigns of the kings of Persia, to whom they were subjects.
Such a melancholy change had sin made of their circumstances. Zerubbabel
took not so much state upon him as to have public acts dated by the
years of his government, and in things of this nature the prophets, as
is fit, complied with the usage of the time, and scrupled not to reckon
by the years of the heathen kings, as [Dan
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001); [Dan
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#001). Zechariah preached his first
sermon in the eighth month of this second year of Darius; Haggai
preached his in the sixth month of the same year, [Hag
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001). The people being readily obedient
to the word of the Lord in the mouth of Haggai, God blessed them with
another prophet; for to him that has, and uses well what he has, more
shall be given. 2. The name and family of the prophet to whom the word
of the Lord came; He was Zechariah, the son of Barachiah, the son of
Iddo, and he was the prophet, as Haggai is called the prophet, [Hag
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001). For, though in former ages there
was one Iddo a prophet ([Ch2 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#015)),
yet we have no reason to think that Zechariah was of his progeny, or
should be denominated from him. The learned Mr. Pemble is decidedly of
opinion that this Zechariah, the son of Barachiah, is the same that our
Saviour says was slain between the temple and the altar, perhaps many
years after the rebuilding of the temple ([Mat
23:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035)), and that our Saviour does not
mean (as is commonly thought) Zechariah the son of Jehoiada, for why
should Jehoiada be called Barachiah? And he thinks the manner of
Christ's account persuades us to think so; for, reckoning up the
innocent blood shed by the Jews, he begins at Abel, and ends even in the
last of the holy prophets. Whereas, after Zechariah the son of Jehoiada,
many prophets and righteous men were put to death by them. It is true
there is no mention made in any history of their slaying this Zechariah,
but Josephus might industriously conceal that shame of his nation.
Perhaps what Zechariah spoke in his prophesying concerning Christ of his
being sold, his being wounded in the house of his friends, and the
shepherd being smitten, was verified in the prophet himself, and so he
became a type of Christ. Probably, being assaulted by his persecutors,
he took sanctuary in the court of the priests (and some think he was
himself a priest), and so was slain between the porch and the altar.

II\. The first-fruits of Zechariah's ministry. Before he came to visions
and revelations, and delivered his prophetic discourses, he preached
that which was plain and practical; for it is best to begin with that.
Before he published the promises of mercy, he published calls to
repentance, for thus the way of the Lord must be prepared. Law must be
first preached, and then gospel. Now,

1\. The prophet here puts them in mind of the controversy God had had
with their fathers ([Zac 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#002)): "The
Lord has been sorely displeased with your fathers, and has laid them
under the tokens of his displeasure. You have heard with your ears, and
your fathers have told you of it; you have seen with your eyes the
woeful remains of it. God's quarrel with you has been of long standing,
and therefore it is time for you to think of taking it up." Note, The
judgments of God, which those that went before us were under, should be
taken as warnings to us not to tread in their steps, and calls to
repentance, that we may cut off the entail of the curse and get it
turned into a blessing.

2\. He calls them, in God's name, to return to him, and make their peace
with him, [Zac 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#003). God by him says
that to this backsliding people which he had often said by his servants
the prophets: "Turn you to me in a way of faith and repentance, duty and
obedience, and I will turn to you in a way of favour and mercy, peace
and reconciliation." Let the rebels return to their allegiance, and they
shall be taken under the protection of the government and enjoy all the
privileges of good subjects. Let them change their way, and God will
change his. See [Mal 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#007). But that
which is most observable here is that God is called here the Lord of
hosts three times: "Thus saith the Lord of hosts. It is he that speaks,
and therefore you are bound to regard what he says." Turn you to me,
saith the Lord of hosts (this intimates the authority and obligation of
the command), and I will turn to you, saith the Lord of hosts - this
intimates the validity and value of the promise; so that it is no vain
repetition. Note, The consideration of God's almighty power and
sovereign dominion should both engage and encourage sinners to repent
and turn to him. It is very desirable to have the Lord of hosts our
friend and very dreadful to have him our enemy.

3\. He warns them not to persist in their impenitence, as their fathers
had done ([Zac 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#004)): Be you not as
your fathers. Instead of being hardened in their evil courses by the
example of their fathers' sins, let them rather be deterred from them by
the example of their fathers' punishment. We are apt to be governed very
much by precedent, and we are well or ill governed according to the use
we make of the precedents before us. The same examples to some are a
savour of life unto life, to others a savour of death unto death. Some
argued, "Shall we be wiser than our fathers? They never minded the
prophets, and why then should we mind them? They made laws against them,
and why should we tolerate them?" But they are here taught how they
should argue: "Our fathers slighted the prophets, and God was sorely
displeased with them for it; therefore let us the more carefully regard
what God says to us by his prophets." "Review what is past, and
observe,"

(1.) "What was the message that God sent by his servants the prophets to
your fathers: The former prophets cried to your fathers. cried aloud,
and did not spare, not spare themselves, not spare your fathers; they
cried as men in earnest, as men that would be heard; they spoke not as
from themselves, but in the name of the Lord of hosts; and this was the
substance of what they said, the burden of every song, the application
of every sermon - Turn you now from your evil ways, and from your evil
doings; the very same that we now preach to you. Be persuaded to leave
your sins; resolve to have no more to do with them. A speedy reformation
is the only way to prevent an approaching ruin: Turn you now from sin to
God without delay."

(2.) "How little this message was regarded by your fathers: But they did
not hear, they did not heed. They turned a deaf ear to these calls: They
would not hearken unto me, saith the Lord. They would not be reclaimed,
would not be ruled, by the word I sent them; say not then that you will
do as your fathers did, for they did amiss;" see [Jer
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#017). Note, We must not follow the
examples of our dear fathers unless they were God's dear children, nor
any further than they were dutiful and obedient to him.

(3.) "What has become both of your fathers and of the prophets that
preached to them? They are all dead and gone," [Zac
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#005). \[1.\] Your fathers, where are
they? The whole generation of them is swept away, and their place knows
them no more. Note, When we think of our ancestors, that have gone
through the world and gone out of it before us, we should think, Where
are they? Here they were, in the towns and countries where we live,
passing and repassing in the same streets, dwelling in the same houses,
trading in the same shops and exchanges, worshipping God in the same
churches. But where are they? They are somewhere still; when they died
there was not an end of them. They are in eternity, in the world of
spirits, the unchangeable world, to which we are hastening apace. Where
are they? Those of them that lived and died in sin are in torment, and
we are warned by Moses and the prophets, Christ and his apostles, to
look to it that we come not to that place of torment, [Luk
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#028), [Luk
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#029). Those of them that lived and
died in Christ are in paradise; and, if we live and die as they did, we
shall be with them shortly, with them eternally. \[2.\] The prophets
also, did they live for ever? No, they are gone too. The treasure is put
into earthen vessels, the water of life into earthen pitchers, often
cracked, and brought home broken at last. Christ is a prophet that lives
for ever, but all other prophets have a period put to their office.
Note, Ministers are dying men, and live not for ever in this world. They
are to look upon themselves as such, and to preach accordingly, as those
that must be silenced shortly, and know not which sermon may be the
last. People are to look upon them as such, and to hear accordingly, as
those that yet a little while have the light with them, that they may
walk and work while they have the light. Oh that this weighty
consideration had its due weight given it, that we are dying ministers
dealing with dying people about the concerns of immortal souls and an
awful eternity, which both they and we are standing upon the brink of!
It concerns us to think of the prophets that are gone, that were before
us of old, [Jer 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#008). Those that were
the glory of men withered and fell; but the word of the Lord endures for
ever, [Pe1 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#024), [Pe1
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#025). The prophets that are now, do we
live for ever? (so some read it); no, Haggai and Zechariah will not be
long with you, and prophecy itself shall shortly cease. In another world
both we and our prophets shall live for ever; and to prepare for that
world ought to be our great care and business in this.

(4.) "What were the effects of the word which God spoke to them by his
prophets, [Zac 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#006). The preachers
died, and the hearers died, but the word of God died not; that took
effect, and not one iota or tittle of it fell to the ground." As the
rain and snow from heaven, it shall not return void, [Isa
55:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#011). He appealed to themselves; they
knew very well, \[1.\] That the judgments God had threatened were
executed upon their fathers, and they were made to feel what they would
not believe and fear: "My statutes which I commanded my servants the
prophets, the precepts with the penalties annexed, which I charged them
with the delivery of, did they not take hold of your fathers?" Though
God's prophets could not fasten convictions upon them, the calamities
threatened overtook them, and they could not escape them, nor get out of
the reach of them. God's words took hold of them as the bailiff arrests
the debtor, and takes him in execution for contempt. Note, The unbelief
of man cannot make the threatenings of God's word of no effect, but,
sooner or later, they will take place, if the prescribed course be not
taken to prevent the execution of them. God's anger will certainly take
hold of those that will not be taken hold of by his authority; for when
he judges he will overcome. \[2.\] That they themselves could not but
own the accomplishment of the word of God in the judgments of God that
were upon them, and that therein he was righteous, and had done them no
wrong: They returned, and said (they changed their mind, and when it was
too late to prevent the ruin of their nation they acknowledged), Like as
the Lord of hosts thought to do unto us according to our ways and
doings, to reckon with us for them, so has he dealt with us, and we must
acknowledge both his truth and his justice, must blame ourselves only,
and have no blame to lay to him. Sero sapiunt Phryges - It is late
before the Phrygians become wise. This after-wit, as it is a proof of
the truth of God, so it is a proof of the folly of men, who will look no
further than they can see. They would never be persuaded to say in time,
"God will be as good as his word, for he is faithful; he will deal with
us according to our deserts, for he is righteous." But now they see both
plainly enough when the sentence is executed; now he that runs may read,
and publish the exact agreement that appears between the present
providences and the former predictions which then were slighted, between
the present punishments and the former sins which then were persisted
in. Now they cannot but say, The Lord is righteous, [Dan
9:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#011).

[Zechariah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 1:7</span></span>

We not come to visions and revelations of the Lord; for in that way God
chose to speak by Zechariah, to awaken the people's attention, and to
engage their humble reverence of the word and their humble enquiries
into it, and to fix it the more in their minds and memories. Most of the
following visions seem designed for the comfort of the Jews, now newly
returned out of captivity, and their encouragement to go on with the
building of the temple. The scope of this vision (which is as an
introduction to the rest) is to assure the Jews of the care God took of
them, and the eye of his providence that was upon them for good, now in
their present state, when they seem to be deserted, and their case
deplorable. The vision is dated ([Zac
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#007)) the twenty-fourth day of the
eleventh month, three months after he preached that sermon ([Zac
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)), in which he calls them to
repentance from the consideration of God's judgments. Finding that that
sermon had a good effect, and that they returned to God in a way of
duty, the assurances he had given them are confirmed, that God would
return to them in a way of mercy. Now observe here,

I. What the prophet saw, and the explication of that. 1. He saw a grove
of myrtle-trees, a dark shady grove, down in a bottom, hidden by the
adjacent hills, so that you were not aware of it till you were just upon
it. This represented the low, dark, solitary, melancholy condition of
the Jewish church at this time. They were over-topped by all their
neighbours, buried in obscurity; what friends they had were hidden, and
there appeared no way of relief and succour for them. Note, The church
has not been always visible, but sometimes hidden, as the woman in the
wilderness, [Rev 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#006). 2. He saw a man
mounted upon a red horse, standing in the midst of this shady
myrtle-grove. This man is no other than the man Christ Jesus, the same
that appeared to Joshua with his sword drawn in his hand as captain of
the host of the Lord ([Jos 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#013), [Jos
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#014)) and to John with his bow and his
crown, [Rev 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#002). Though the church was
in a low condition, yet Christ was present in the midst of it. Was it
hidden by the hills? He was much more hidden in the myrtle-grove, yet
hidden as in an ambush, ready to appear for the seasonable relief of his
people, to their happy surprise. Compare [Isa
45:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#015), Verily thou art a God that
hidest thyself, and yet Israel's God and Saviour at the same time, their
Holy One in the midst of them. He was riding, as a man of war, as a man
in haste, riding on the heavens for the help of his people, [Deu
33:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026). He rode on a red horse, either
naturally so or dyed red with the blood of war, as this same victorious
prince appeared red in his apparel, [Isa
63:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001), [Isa
63:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#002). Red is a fiery colour, denoting
that he is jealous for Jerusalem ([Zac
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#014)) and very angry at her enemies.
Christ, under the law, appeared on a red horse, denoting the terror of
that dispensation, and that he had yet his conflict before him, when he
was to resist unto blood. But, under the gospel, he appears on a white
horse ([Rev 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#002). and again [Rev
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011)), denoting that he has now
gained the victory, and rides in triumph, and hangs out the white, not
the bloody flag. 3. He saw a troop of horse attending him, ready to
receive and obey his orders: Behind him there were some red horses, and
some speckled, and some white, angels attending the Lord Jesus, ready to
be employed by him for the service of his church, some in acts of
judgment, others of mercy, others in mixed events. Note, The King of the
church has angels at command, not only to do him honour, but to minister
for the good of those that are his. 4. He enquired into the
signification of this vision. He had an angel talking with him, as his
instructor, besides those he saw in the vision; so had Ezekiel ([Eze
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#003)), and Daniel, [Dan
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#016). Zechariah asked him ([Zac
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#009)), O my Lord! what are these? And,
it should seem this angel that talked with him was Christ himself, the
man on the red horse, whom the rest were attendants on; to him
immediately Zechariah addresses himself. Would we be acquainted with the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, we must make our application, not to
angels (they are themselves learners), but to Christ himself, who is
alone able to take the book, and open the seals, [Rev
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#007). The prophet's question implies a
humble acknowledgment of his own ignorance and an earnest desire to be
informed. O let me know what these are! This he desired, not for the
satisfying of his curiosity, but that he might be furnished with
something proper for the comfort and encouragement of the people of God,
in their present distress. 5. He received from the angel that talked
with him ([Zac 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#009)), and from the man
that stood among the myrtle-trees ([Zac
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#010)), the interpretation of this
vision. Note, Jesus Christ is ready to instruct those that are humbly
desirous to be taught the things of God. He immediately said, I will
show thee what these are. What knowledge we have, or may have,
concerning the world of spirits, we are indebted to Christ for. The
account given him was, These are those whom the Lord has sent: they are
his messengers, his envoys, appointed (as his eyes are said to do, [Ch2
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#009)) to walk, to run, to fly swiftly
through the earth, to observe what is done in it and to execute the
divine commands. God needs them not, but he is pleased to employ them,
and we need the comfort arising from the doctrine of their
administration.

II\. What the prophet heard, and what instructions were thereby given
him. Faith comes by hearing, and, generally, in visions there was
something said.

1\. He heard the report or representation which the angels made to
Christ of the present state of the world, [Zac
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#011). They had been out abroad, as
flying posts (being hastened by the King of kings' commandment, [Est
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#015)), and, having returned, they give
this account to the Angel that stood among the myrtle-trees (for to the
Lord Jesus angels themselves are accountable): We have walked to and fro
through the earth, and, behold all the earth sits still and is at rest.
We are taught to pray that the will of God may be done by men on earth
as it is done by the angels in heaven; and here we see what need we have
to pray so, for it is far from being so. For, (1.) We find the world of
angels here very busy. Those that are employed in the court above rest
not day nor night from praising God, which is their business there; and
those that are employed in the camp below are never idle, nor lose time;
they are still ascending and descending upon the Son of man ([Joh
1:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#051), as on Jacob's ladder, [Gen
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#012)); they are still walking to and
fro through the earth. Thus active, thus industrious, Satan owns himself
to be in doing mischief, [Job 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#007). It
is well for us that good angels bestir themselves as much to do good,
and that here in this earth we have guardians going about continually
seeking to do us a kindness, as we have adversaries which, as roaring
lions, go about continually, seeking to devour us. Though holy angels in
this earth meet with a great deal that is disagreeable, yet, while they
are going on God's errands, they hesitate not to walk to and fro through
it. Their own habitation, which those that fell liked not, they will
like the better when they return. (2.) We find the world of mankind here
very careless: All the earth sits still, and is at rest, while all the
church is made uneasy, tossed with tempests and not comforted. Those
that are strangers to the church are secure; those that are enemies to
it are successful. The Chaldeans and Persians dwell at ease, while the
poor Jews are continually alarmed; as when the king and Haman sat down
to drink, but the city Shushan was perplexed. The children of men are
merry and jovial, but none grieve for the affliction of God's children.
Note, It is sad to think what a deep sleep the world is cast into, what
a spirit of slumber has seized the generality of mankind, that are under
God's wrath and Satan's power, and yet secure and unconcerned! They sit
still and are at rest, [Luk 17:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#026),
etc.

2\. He heard Christ's intercession with the Father for his afflicted
church, [Zac 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#012). The angels related
the posture of affairs in this lower world, but we read not of any
prayers they made for the redress of the grievances they had made a
remonstrance of. No; it is the Angel among the myrtle-trees that is the
great intercessor. Upon the report of the angels he immediately turned
heavenward, and said, Lord, wilt thou not have mercy on thy church? (1.)
The thing he intercedes for is mercy; as [Psa
85:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#007), Show us thy mercy, O Lord! Note,
God's mercy is all in all to the church's comfort; and all his mercy
must be hoped for through Christ's mediation. (2.) The thing he
complains of is the delay of this mercy: How long wilt thou not have
mercy! He knows that mercies through him shall be built up for ever
([Psa 89:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#002)), but thinks it long that
the building is deferred. (3.) The objects of compassion recommended to
the divine mercies are, Jerusalem, the holy city, and the other cities
of Judah that were now in ruins; for God had had indignation against
them now threescore and ten years. He mentions seventy years because
that was the time fixed in the divine councils for the continuance of
the captivity; so long the indignation lasted, and though now for a
little space grace had been shown them from the Lord their God, to give
them some reviving ([Ezr 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#008)), yet the
scars of those seventy years' captivity still remained so deep, so
painful, that this is the melancholy string they still harp upon - the
divine indignation during those seventy years. Dr. Lightfoot thinks that
whereas the seventy years of the captivity were reckoned from
Jehoiakim's fourth year, and ended in the first of Cyrus, these seventy
years are to be computed from the eleventh of Zedekiah, when Jerusalem
and the temple were burnt, about nineteen years after the first
captivity, and which ended in this second year of Darius Hystaspes,
about seventeen years after Cyrus's proclamation, as that seventy years
mentioned [Zac 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#005) was about nineteen
years after; the captivity went off, as it came on, gradually. "Lord, we
are still under the burden of the seventy years' wrath, and wilt thou be
angry with us for ever?"

3\. He heard a gracious reply given to this intercession of Christ's for
his church; for it is a prevailing intercession, always acceptable, and
him the Father heareth always ([Zac
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#013)): The Lord answered the angel,
this angel of the covenant, with good words and comfortable words, with
promises of mercy and deliverance, and the perfecting of what he had
begun in favour to them. These were comfortable words to Christ, who is
grieved in the grievances of his church, and comfortable to all that
mourn with Zion. God often answers prayer with good words, when he does
not immediately appear in great works; and those good words are real
answers to prayer. Men's good words will not feed the body ([Jam
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#016)), but God's good words will feed
the faith, for saying and doing with him are not two things, though they
are with us.

4\. He heard that reply which was given to the angel repeated to
himself, with a commission to publish it to the children of his people,
for their comfort. The revelation of Jesus Christ which God gave to him
he signified to his servant John, and by him to the churches, [Rev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001), [Rev
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004). Thus all the good words and
comfortable words of the gospel we receive from Jesus Christ, as he
received them from the Father, in answer to the prayer of his blood, and
his ministers are appointed to preach them to all the world. Now that
God would speak comfortably to Jerusalem, Zechariah is the voice of one
crying in the wilderness, Prepare you the way of the Lord. The voice
said, Cry. Cry then. The prophets must now cry as loudly to show God's
people their comforts as ever they did formerly to show them their
transgressions, [Isa 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002), [Isa
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003), [Isa
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006). And if he ask, What shall I cry?
he is here instructed. (1.) He must proclaim the wrath God has in store
for the enemies of Jerusalem. He is jealous for Zion with great
jealousy, [Zac 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#014). He takes himself
to be highly affronted by the injuries and indignities that are done to
his church, as he had been formerly by the iniquities found in his
church. The earth sat still and was at rest ([Zac
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#011)), not relenting at all, nor
showing the least remorse, for all the mischief they had done to
Jerusalem, as Joseph's brethren, who, when they had sold him, sat down
to eat bread; and this God took very ill ([Zac
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#015)): I am very sorely displeased
with the heathen, that are at ease, and have no concern for the
afflicted church. Much more will he be displeased with those that are at
ease in Zion ([Amo 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#001)), with Zion's
own sons, that sympathize not with her in her sorrows. But this was not
all; they were not only not concerned for her, but they were concerned
against her: I was but a little displeased with my people, and designed
to correct them moderately, but those that were employed as instruments
of the correction cast off all pity, and with the greatest rage and
malice helped forward the affliction and added to it, persecuting those
whom God had smitten ([Psa 69:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#026)) and
insulting over those whom he had troubled. See [Isa
47:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#006); [Isa
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005); [Eze
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#012), [Eze
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#015). Note, God is displeased with
those who help forward the affliction even of such as suffer justly; for
true humanity, in such a case, is good divinity. (2.) He must proclaim
the mercy God has in store for Jerusalem and the cities of Judah, [Zac
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#016). He must cry, "Thus saith the
Lord, I have returned to Jerusalem with mercies. I was going away in
wrath, but I am now returning in love. Cry yet to the same purport,"
[Zac 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#017). There must now be line upon
line for consolation, as formerly there had been for conviction. The
Lord, even the Lord of hosts, assures them, \[1.\] That the temple shall
be built that is now but in the building. This good work which they are
now about, though it meet with much discouragement, shall be perfected,
and they shall have the tokens of God's presence, and opportunities of
conversing with him, and worshipping him, as formerly. Note, It is good
news indeed to any place to hear that God will build his house in it.
\[2.\] That Jerusalem shall again be built as a city compact together,
which had formerly been its glory, [Psa
122:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#003). A line shall be stretched forth
upon Jerusalem, in order to the rebuilding of it with great exactness
and uniformity. \[3.\] That the nation shall again become populous and
rich, though now diminished and impoverished. Not only Jerusalem, but
other cities that are reduced and lie in a little compass, shall yet
spread abroad, or be diffused; their suburbs shall extend far, and
colonies shall be transplanted from them; and this through prosperity:
they shall be so numerous, and so wealthy, that there shall not be room
for them; they shall complain that the place is too strait, [Isa
49:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#020). As they had been scattered and
spread abroad, through their calamities, so they should now be through
their prosperity. Let thy fountains be dispersed, [Pro
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#016). The cities that should thus
increase God calls his cities; they are blessed by him, and they are
fruitful and multiply, and replenish the land. \[4.\] That all their
present sorrows should not only be balanced, but for ever silenced, by
divine consolations: The Lord shall yet comfort Zion. Yet at length,
though her griefs and grievances may continue long, God has comforts in
reserve for Zion and all her mourners. \[5.\] That all this will be the
fruit of God's preventing distinguishing favour: He shall yet choose
Jerusalem, shall renew his choice, renew his covenant, shall make it
appear that he has chosen Jerusalem. As he first built them up into a
people when he brought them out of Egypt, so he will now rebuild them,
when he brings them out of Babylon, not for any worthiness of theirs,
but in pursuance of his own choice, [Deu
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#007), [Deu
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#008). Jerusalem is the city he has
chosen, and he will not cast it off.

[Zechariah 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">zac 1:18</span></span>

It is the comfort and triumph of the church ([Isa
59:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#019)) that when the enemy shall come
in like a flood, with mighty force and fury, then the Spirit of the Lord
shall lift up a standard against him. Now, in this vision (the second
which this prophet had), we have an illustration of that, God's Spirit
making a stand, and making head, against the formidable power of the
church's adversaries.

I. We have here the enemies of the church bold and daring, and
threatening to be its death, to cut off the name of Israel; such the
people of God had lately been insulted by: I looked and behold four
horns ([Zac 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#018)), which are explained
[Zac 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#019). They are the horns which
have scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem, that is, the Jews both in
the country and in the city, because they were the Israel of God. They
have tossed them (so some read it), as furious bulls with their horns
toss that which they are enraged at. They have scattered them, so that
no man did lift up his head, [Zac
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#021). No man durst show his face for
fear of them, much less give them any opposition, or make head against
them. They are horns, denoting their dignity and dominion - horns
exalted, denoting also their strength, and power, and violence. They are
four horns, for the Jews are surrounded with them on every side; when
they avoid one horn that pushes at them they run upon another. The men
of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and many of Israel that
joined themselves to them, set about the building of the temple; but the
enemies of that work from all sides pushed at them, and drove them from
it. Rehum, and Shimshai, and the other Samaritans that opposed the
building of the temple, were these horns, [Ezr
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#008). So were Sanballat and Tobiah, and
the Ammonites and Arabians, that opposed the building of the wall, [Neh
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#007). Note, The church's enemies have
horns, and use them to the hindrance of every good work. The great enemy
of the New Testament church has seven heads and ten horns ([Rev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003)), so that those who endeavour to
do the church any service must expect to be pushed at.

II\. We have here the friends of the church active and prevailing. The
prophet did himself lift up his eyes and see the four horns, and saw
them so formidable that he began to despair of the safety of every good
man, and the success of every good work; but the Lord then showed him
four carpenters, or smiths, who were empowered to cut off these horns,
[Zac 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#020), [Zac
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#021). With an eye of sense we see the
power of the enemies of the church; look which way we will, the world
shows us that. But it is with an eye of faith that we see it safe,
notwithstanding; it is the Lord that shows us that, as he opened the
eyes of the prophet's servant to see the angelic guards round about his
master, [Kg2 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#017). Observe, Those that
were to fray or break the horns of the Gentiles, and to cast them out,
were, 1. Carpenters or smiths (for they are supposed by some to have
been horns of iron), men who had skill and ability to do it, whose
proper business it was, and who understood their business and had tools
at hand to do it with. Note, God calls those to serve the interests of
his church whom he either finds, or makes, fit for it. If there be horns
(which denote the force and fury of beasts) against the church, there
are carpenters (which denote the wisdom and forecast of men) for the
church, by which they find ways to master the strongest beasts, for
every kind of beasts is tamed, and has been tamed, of mankind, [Jam
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#007). 2. They were four carpenters, as
many horns so many hands to saw them off. Note, Which way soever the
church is threatened with mischief, and opposition given to its
interests, God can find out ways and means to check the force, to
restrain the wrath, and make it turn to his praise. Some by these four
carpenters understand Zerubbabel and Joshua, Ezra and Nehemiah, who
carried on the work of God in spite of the opposition given to it. Those
horned beasts broke into God's vineyard to tread it down; but the good
magistrates and the good ministers whom God raised up, though they had
not power to cut off the horns of the wicked (as David did, [Psa
75:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#005), [Psa
75:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#010)), yet frightened them and cast
them out. Note, When God has work to do he will raise up some to do it
and others to defend it and protect those that are employed in the doing
of it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 2](zac002)

</div>
