<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac013)  [Next](mal000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#001)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 14:0</span></span>

Divers things were foretold, in the two foregoing chapters, which should
come to pass "in that day;" this chapter speaks of a "day of the Lord
that cometh," a day of his judgment, and ten times in the foregoing
chapters, and seven times in this, it is repeated, "in that day;" but
what that day is that is here meant is uncertain, and perhaps will be so
(as the Jews speak) till Elias comes; whether it refer to the whole
period of time from the prophet's days to the days of the Messiah, or to
some particular events in that time, or to Christ's coming, and the
setting up of his kingdom upon the ruins of the Jewish polity, we cannot
determine, but divers passages here seem to look as far forward as
gospel-times. Now the "day of the Lord" brings with it both judgment and
mercy, mercy to his church, judgment to her enemies and persecutors. I.
The gates of hell are here threatening the church ([Zac
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#001), [Zac
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#002)) and yet not prevailing. II. The
power of Heaven appears here for the church and against the enemies of
it ([Zac 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#003), [Zac
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#005)). III. The events concerning the
church are here represented as mixed ([Zac
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#006), [Zac
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#007)), but issuing well at last. IV.
The spreading of the means of knowledge is here foretold, and the
setting up of the gospel-kingdom in the world ([Zac
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#008), [Zac
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#009)), which shall be the enlargement
and establishment of another Jerusalem ([Zac
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010), [Zac
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#011)). V. Those shall be reckoned
with that fought against Jerusalem ([Zac
14:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#012)) and those that neglect his
worship there ([Zac 14:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#017)). VI. It
is promised that there shall be great resort to the church, and great
purity and piety in it ([Zac 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#016),
[Zac 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#020), [Zac
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#021)).

[Zechariah 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 14:1</span></span>

God's providences concerning his church are here represented as
strangely changing and strangely mixed.

I. As strangely changing. Sometimes the tide runs high and strong
against them, but presently it turns, and comes to be in favour of them;
and God has, for wise and holy ends, set the one over against the other.

1\. God here appears against Jerusalem; judgment begins at the house of
God. When the day of the Lord comes ([Zac
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#001)) Jerusalem must pass through the
fire to be refined. God himself gathers all nations against Jerusalem to
battle ([Zac 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#002)); he gives them a
charge, as he did Sennacherib, to take the spoil and to take the prey
([Isa 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#006)), for the people of
Jerusalem have now become the people of his wrath. And who can stand
before him or before nations gathered by him? Where he gives commission
he will give success. The city shall be taken by the Romans, who have
nations at command; the houses shall be rifled, and all the riches of
them taken away, by the enemy; and, to gratify an insatiable lust of
uncleanness as well as avarice, the women shall be ravished, as if
victory were a license to the worst of villanies, jusque datum sceleri -
and crimes were sanctioned by law. One-half of the city shall then be
carried into captivity, to be sold or enslaved, and shall not be able to
help itself, such is the destruction that shall be made in the great and
terrible day of the Lord.

2\. He presently changes his way, and appears for Jerusalem; for, though
judgment begin at the house of God, yet, as it shall not end there, so
it shall not make a full end there, [Jer
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#027); [Jer
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011).

(1.) A remnant shall be spared, the same with that third part spoken of,
[Zac 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#008). One-half shall go into
captivity, whence they may hereafter be fetched back, and the residue of
the people shall not be cut off, as one would have feared, from the
city. Many of the Jews shall receive the gospel, and so shall prevent
their being cut off from the city of God, his church upon earth. In it
shall be a tenth, [Isa 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#013); See [Eze
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#003).

(2.) Their cause shall be pleaded against their enemies ([Zac
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#003)): Then, when God has made use of
these nations as a scourge to his people, he shall go forth and fight
against them by his judgments, as when he fought against the enemies of
his church formerly in the day of battle, with the Egyptians,
Canaanites, and others. Note, The instruments of God's wrath will
themselves be made the objects of it; for it will come to their turn to
drink of the cup of trembling; and whom God fights against he will be
sure to overcome and be too hard for. And every former day of battle,
which God has made to his people a day of triumph, as it is an
engagement to God to appear for his people, because he is the same, so
it is an encouragement to them to trust in him. It is observable that
the Roman empire never flourished, after the destruction of Jerusalem as
it had done before, but in many instances God fought against it.

(3.) Though Jerusalem and the temple be destroyed, yet God will have a
church in the world, into which Gentiles shall be admitted, and with
whom the believing Jews shall be incorporated, [Zac
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#004), [Zac
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#005). These verses are dark and hard
to be understood; but divers good expositors take this to be the meaning
of them. \[1.\] God will carefully inspect Jerusalem, even then when the
enemies of it are laying it waste: His feet shall stand in that day upon
the mount of Olives, whence he may take a full view of the city and
temple, [Mar 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#003). When the refiner
puts his gold into the furnace he stands by it, and has his eye upon it,
to see that it receive no damage; so when Jerusalem, God's gold, is to
be refined, he will have the oversight of it. He will stand by upon the
mount of Olives; this was literally fulfilled when our Lord Jesus was
often upon this mountain, especially when thence he ascended up into
heaven, [Act 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#012). It was the last
place on which his feet stood on this earth, the place from which he
took rise. \[2.\] The partition-wall between Jews and Gentiles shall be
taken away. The mountains about Jerusalem, and particularly this,
signified it to be an enclosure, and that it stood in the way of those
who would approach to it. Between the Gentiles and Jerusalem this
mountain of Bether, of division, stood, [Sol
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#017). But by the destruction of
Jerusalem this mountain shall be made to cleave in the midst, and so the
Jewish pale shall be taken down, and the church laid in common with the
Gentiles, who were made one with the Jews by the breaking down of this
middle wall of partition, [Eph 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014).
Who art thou, O great mountain? And a great mountain the ceremonial law
was in the way of the Jews' conversion, which, one would think, could
never have been got over; yet before Christ and his gospel it was made
plain. This mountain departs, this hill removes, but the covenant of
peace cannot be broken; for peace is still preached to him that is afar
off and to those that are nigh. \[3.\] A new and living way shall be
opened to the new Jerusalem, both to see it and to come into it. The
mountain being divided, one-half towards the north and the other half
towards the south, there shall be a very great valley, that is, a broad
way of communication opened between Jerusalem and the Gentile world, by
which the Gentiles shall have free admission into the gospel-Jerusalem,
and the word of the Lord, that goes forth from Jerusalem, shall have a
free course into the Gentile world. Thus the way of the Lord is
prepared, for every mountain and hill shall be brought low, and plain
and pleasant valleys shall come in the room of them, [Isa
40:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#004). \[4.\] Those of the Jews that
believe shall come in, and join themselves to the Gentiles, and
incorporate with them in the gospel-church: You shall flee to the valley
of the mountains, that valley that is opened between the divided halves
of the mount of Olives; they shall hasten into the church with the
Gentiles, as formerly the Gentiles with them, [Zac
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#023). The valley of the mountains is
the gospel-church, to which there were added of the Jews daily such as
should be saved, who fled to that valley as to their refuge. This valley
of the mountains is said to reach unto Azal, or to the separate place,
that is, to all those whom God has set apart for himself. When God makes
his mountains a way ([Isa 49:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#011)), by
making them a valley, the way shall be opened to all the way-faring men
([Isa 35:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#008)), and, though fools, they
shall not err therein. Or, to those that are now separated from God this
valley shall reach; for the Gentiles, who are afar off, shall be made
nigh, with the Jews, who are a people near unto him, and both have an
access, a mutual access to each other and a joint access to God as a
Father by one Spirit, [Eph 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#018).
\[5.\] They shall flee to the valley of the mountains, to the
gospel-church, under dreadful apprehensions of their danger from the
curse of the law. They shall flee from the wrath to come, from the
avenger of blood, who is in pursuit of them, to the church as to a city
of refuge, or as doves to their windows, as they fled from before the
earthquake in the days of Uzziah, [Amo
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001). Therefore the gospel reveals the
wrath of God from heaven ([Rom 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018))
that we might be awakened to escape for our lives, to flee as from an
earthquake, for we feel the earth ready to sink under us, and we can
find no firm footing in it, and therefore must flee to Christ, in whom
alone we can stand fast and be easy.

(4.) God shall appear in his glory for the accomplishing of all this:
The Lord my God shall come, and all the saints with thee, which may
refer to his coming to destroy Jerusalem, or to destroy the enemies of
Jerusalem, or his coming to set up his kingdom in the world, which is
called the coming of the Son of man ([Mat
24:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#037)), or to his last coming, at the
end of time; however, it teaches us, \[1.\] That the Lord will come; it
has been the faith of all the saints, Behold, the Lord comes to fulfil
every word that he has spoken in its season. \[2.\] When he comes all
his saints come with him; they attend his motions and are ready to serve
his interests. Christ will come at the end of time with ten thousands of
his saints, as when he came to give the law upon Mount Sinai. \[3.\]
Every particular believer, being related to God as his God, may triumph
in the expectation of his coming and speak of it with pleasure, The Lord
my God shall come, shall come to the comfort of all that are his; for,
"Blessed Lord, all the saints shall be with thee, and it shall be their
everlasting happiness to dwell in thy presence; and therefore come, Lord
Jesus." And some think that this may be read as a prayer, Yet, O Lord my
God! come, and bring all the saints with thee.

II\. God's providences appear here strangely mixed ([Zac
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#006), [Zac
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#007)): In that day of the Lord the
light shall not be clear nor dark, not day nor night; but at evening
time it shall be light. Some refer this to all the time from hence to
the coming of the Messiah; the Jewish church had neither perfect peace
nor constant trouble, but a cloudy day, neither rain nor sunshine. But
it may be taken more generally, as designed to represent the method God
usually takes in the administration of the kingdom both of providence
and grace. Here is, 1. An idea of the usual course and tenour of God's
dispensations; the day of his grace and the day of his providence are
neither clear nor dark, not day nor night. It is so with the church of
God in this world; where the Sun of righteousness has risen it cannot be
dark night, and yet short of heaven it will not be clear day. It is so
with particular saints; they are not darkness, but light in the Lord,
and yet, while there is so much error and corruption remaining in them,
it is not perfect day. So it is as to the providences of God that relate
to his church; in general the affairs of the church are neither good nor
bad in any extremity, but there is a mixture of both; we are singing
both of mercy and judgment, and are uncertain which will prevail,
whether it be an evening or a morning twilight. We are between hope and
fear, not knowing what to make of things. 2. An intimation of comfort
with reference hereunto: It shall be one day which shall be known to the
Lord. This intimates, (1.) The beauty and harmony of such mixed events;
there is one and the same design and tendency in all; all the wheels
make but one wheel, all the revolutions but one day. (2.) The brevity of
them; it is, as it were, but for one day, for a little moment; the cloud
that darkens the light will soon blow over. (3.) The eye God has upon
all these events, and the hand he has in them all; they are known to the
Lord; he takes notice of them, and orders and disposes of all for the
best, according to the counsel of his will. 3. An issue very joyful
secured at last: At evening-time it shall be light: it shall be clear
light, and no longer dark; we are sure of it in the other world, and we
hope for it in this world - at evening-time, when our hopes are quite
spent with waiting all day to no purpose, nay, when we fear it will be
quite dark, when things are at the worst and the case of the church is
most deplorable. As to the church's enemies the sun goes down at noon,
so to the church it rises at night; unto the upright springs light out
of darkness ([Psa 112:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#004)); deliverance
comes when the tale of bricks is doubled, and when God's people have
done looking for it, and so it comes with a pleasing surprise.

[Zechariah 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 14:8</span></span>

Here are, I. Blessings promised to Jerusalem, the gospel-Jerusalem, in
the day of the Messiah, and to all the earth, by virtue of the blessings
poured out on Jerusalem, especially to the land of Israel.

1\. Jerusalem shall be a spring of living waters to the world; it was
made so when there the Spirit was poured out upon the apostles, and
thence the word of the Lord diffused itself to the nations about ([Zac
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#008)): Living waters shall go out from
Jerusalem; for there they began, and thence those set out who were to
preach repentance and remission of sins unto all nations, [Luk
24:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047). Note, Where the gospel goes,
and the graces of God's Spirit go along with it, there living waters go;
those streams that make glad the city of our God make glad the country
also, and make it like paradise, like the garden of the Lord, which was
well watered. It was the honour of Jerusalem that thence the word of the
Lord went forth ([Isa 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003)); and thus
far, even in its worst and most degenerate age, for old
acquaintance-sake, it was made a blessing, and to be so is to be
blessed. Half of these waters shall go towards the former sea and half
towards the hinder sea, as all rivers bend their course towards some sea
or other, some eastward, others westward. The gospel shall spread into
all parts of the world, into some that lie remote from Jerusalem one way
and others that lie as far off another way; for the dominion of the
Redeemer, which was thereby to be set up, must be from sea to sea ([Psa
72:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#008)), and the earth must be full of
the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea, and as the
waters that in various channels run to the sea. The knowledge of God
shall diffuse itself, (1.) Every way. These living waters shall produce
both eastern churches and western churches, that shall each of them in
its turn be illustrious. (2.) Every day: In summer and in winter it
shall be. Note, Those who are employed in spreading the gospel may find
themselves work both winter and summer, and are to serve the Lord
therein at all seasons, [Act 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#018).
And such a divine power goes along with these living waters that they
shall not be dried up, nor the course of them be obstructed, either by
the droughts in summer or by the frosts in winter.

2\. The kingdom of God among men shall be a universal and united
kingdom, [Zac 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#009). (1.) It shall be a
universal kingdom: The Lord shall be King over all the earth. He is, and
ever was, so of right, and in the sovereign disposals of his providence
his kingdom does rule over all and none are exempt from his
jurisdiction; but it is here promised that he shall be so by actual
possession of the hearts of his subjects; he shall be acknowledged King
by all in all places; his authority shall be owned and submitted to, and
allegiance sworn to him. This will have its accomplishment with that
word ([Rev 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015)), The kingdoms of
this world have become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ. (2.)
It shall be a united kingdom: There shall be one Lord, and his name one.
All shall worship one God only, and not idols, and shall be unanimous in
the worship of him. All false gods shall be abandoned, and all false
ways of worship abolished; and as God shall be the centre of their
unity, in whom they shall all meet, so the scripture shall be the rule
of their unity, by which they shall all walk.

3\. The land of Judea, and Jerusalem, its mother-city, shall be repaired
and replenished, and taken under the special protection of Heaven, [Zac
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010), [Zac
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#011). Some think this denotes
particular favour to the people of the Jews, and points at their
conversion and restoration in the latter days; but it is rather to be
understood figuratively of the gospel-church, typified by Judah and
Jerusalem, and it signifies the abundant graces with which the church
shall be crowned, and the fruitfulness of its members, and the vast
numbers of them. (1.) The church shall be like a fruitful country,
abounding in all the rich products of the soil. The whole land of Judea,
which is naturally uneven and hilly, shall be turned as a plain; it
shall become a smooth level valley, from Geba, or Gibeah, its utmost
border north, to Rimmon, which lay south of Jerusalem and was the utmost
southern limit of Judea. The gospel of Christ, where it comes in its
power, levels the ground; mountains and hills are brought low by it,
that the Lord alone may be exalted. (2.) It shall be like a populous
city. As the holy land shall be levelled, so the holy city shall be
peopled, shall be rebuilt and replenished. Jerusalem shall be lifted up
out of its low estate, shall be raised out of its ruins; when the land
is turned as a plain, and not only the mount of Olives removed ([Zac
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#004)), but other mountains too, then
Jerusalem shall be lifted up, that is, shall appear the more
conspicuous; she shall be inhabited in her place, even in Jerusalem,
[Zac 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#006). The whole city shall be
inhabited in the utmost extent of it, and no part of it left to lie
waste. The utmost limits of it are here mentioned, between which there
shall be no ground lost, but all built upon, from Benjamin's-gate
north-east to the corner-gate north-west, and from the tower of Hananeel
in the south to the king's wine-presses in the north; when the churches
of Christ in all places are replenished with great numbers of holy,
humble, serious Christians, and many such are daily added to it, then
this promise is fulfilled. (3.) This country and this city shall both be
safe, both the meat in the country and the mouths in the city: Those
that dwell in it shall dwell securely, and there shall be none to make
them afraid; there shall be no more of that utter destruction that has
laid both town and country waste, no more anathema (as some read it), no
more cutting off, no more curse, or separation from God to evil, no more
such desolating judgments as you have been groaning under, but Jerusalem
shall be safely inhabited; there shall be no danger, nor any
apprehension of it; neither shall its friends be fearful to disquiet
themselves nor its enemies formidable to disquiet them. That promise of
Christ explains this - that the gates of hell shall not prevail against
the church; and so do the holy security and serenity of mind which
believers enjoy in relying on the divine protection.

II\. Here are judgments threatened against the enemies of the church,
that have fought, or do fight, against Jerusalem; and the threatening of
these judgments is in order to the preservation of the church in safety.
Men that read and hear of these plagues will be afraid of fighting
against Jerusalem, much more when these threatenings are fulfilled in
some will others hear and fear. Those that fight against the city of
God, and his people, will be found fighting against God, against whom
none ever hardened his heart and prospered ([Zac
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#012)): This shall be the plague
wherewith the Lord will smite all the people that have fought against
Jerusalem; whoever they are, God will punish them for the affront done
to him, and avenge Jerusalem upon them. 1. They shall waste away under
grievous and languishing diseases: Their flesh shall consume away, and
they shall be miserably emaciated, even while they stand on their feet,
so that they shall be walking skeletons; nothing shall remain but skin
and bones. The flesh which they pampered and indulged, and made
provision for, when they were fed to the full with the spoils of God's
people, shall now consume away, that it cannot be seen, and the bones
that were not seen shall stick out, [Job
33:21](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#021). They keep their feet, and hope
to keep their ground, crawling about as long as they can; but they must
yield at last. The organs of sight, the outlets of sin, their eyes,
shall consume away in their holes, shall sink into their heads or
perhaps start out of them; their envious malicious, adulterous eyes, the
eyes they had so often fed with spectacles of misery, these shall
consume, which shall make not only their countenances ghastly, but their
lives wretched. The organs of speech, the outlets of sin, their tongue,
shall consume away in their mouth, whereby God will reckon with them for
all their blasphemies against himself and invectives against his people.
Thus their own tongues shall fall upon them, and their punishment shall
be legible in their sin, as his was whose tongue was tormented in
hell-flames. Thus Antiochus and Herod consumed away. 2. They shall be
dashed in pieces one against another ([Zac
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#013)): A great tumult from the Lord
shall be among them. But are tumults from the Lord, who is the God of
order, and not of confusion? As they are the sin of those that raise
them they are not from the Lord, but from the wicked one, and from men's
own lusts; but, as they are the punishment of those that suffer by them,
they are from the Lord, who serves his own purposes, and carries on his
intentions, by the sins, and follies, and restless spirits, of men. It
is of themselves that they bite and devour one another, but it is of the
Lord, the righteous Judge, that thus they are consumed one of another
([Gal 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#015)); as Ahab was deceived by a
lying spirit from the Lord, so Abimelech and the men of Shechem were
divided, and so destroyed, by an evil spirit from the Lord, [Jdg
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#023). Note, Those that are confederate
and combined against the church will justly be separated, and set
against one another; and their tumults raised against God will be
avenged in tumults among themselves. And they shall lay hold every one
on the hand of his neighbour, to hold him from striking, or to bind him
as his prisoner; nay, his hand shall rise up against the hand of his
neighbour, to strike and wound him. Note, Those that aim to destroy the
church are often made to destroy one another; and every man's sword is
sometimes set against his fellow, by him whose sword they all are. Some
think this was fulfilled in the factions and dissensions that were among
the Jews, when the Romans were destroying them all; for they had fought
against the spiritual Jerusalem, the gospel-church; and to that well
enough agrees [Zac 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#014), Thou also, O
Judah! shalt fight against Jerusalem; the Jewish nation shall be ruined
by itself, shall die by its own hands; the city and country shall be at
war with each other, and so both shall be destroyed. Suis et ipsa Roma
viribus ruit - Rome was urged into ruin by its very strength. 3. The
plunder of their camp shall greatly enrich the people of God, or the
spoils of their country ([Zac 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#014)):
Judah also shall eat at Jerusalem (so one learned interpreter reads it);
people shall come from all parts to share in the prey; as when
Sennacherib's army was routed before Jerusalem there was the prey of a
great spoil divided ([Isa 33:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#023)), so
it shall be now; the wealth of all the heathen round about, that had
spoiled Jerusalem, shall be gathered together, gold, and silver, and
apparel, in great abundance, that an equal dividend may be made among
all the parties entitled to a share of the prize. Note, The wealth of
the sinner is often laid up for the just, and the Israel of God enriched
with the spoil of the Egyptians. 4. The very cattle shall share in the
plague with which the enemies of God's church shall be cut off, as they
did in divers of the plagues of Egypt ([Zac
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#015)): All the beasts that shall be
in the tents of these wicked men, when God comes to contend with them,
shall perish with them, not only beasts used in war, as the horse, but
those used for travel, or in the plough, as the mule, the camel, and the
ass. Note, The inferior creatures often suffer for the sin of man and in
his plagues. Thus God will show his indignation against sin, and will
make the creature that is thus subject to vanity groan to be delivered
into the glorious liberty of the children of God, [Rom
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021), [Rom
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#022).

[Zechariah 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">zac 14:16</span></span>

Three things are here foretold: -

I. That a gospel-way of worship being set up in the church there shall
be a great resort to it and a general attendance upon it. Those that
were left of the enemies of religion shall be so sensible of the mercy
of God to them in their narrow escape that they shall apply themselves
to the worship of the God of Israel, and pay their homage to him, [Zac
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#016). Those that were not consumed
shall be converted, and this makes their deliverance a mercy indeed, a
double mercy. It is a great change that the grace of God makes upon
them; those that had come against Jerusalem, finding their attempts vain
and fruitless, shall become as much her admirers as ever they had been
her adversaries, and shall come to Jerusalem to worship there, and go in
concurrence with those whom they had gone contrary to. Note, As some of
Christ's foes shall be made his footstool, so others of them shall be
made his friends; and, when the principle of enmity is slain in them,
their former acts of hostility are pardoned to them, and their services
are admitted and accepted, as though they had never fought against
Jerusalem. They shall go up to worship at Jerusalem, because that was
the place which God had chosen, and there the temple was, which was a
type of Christ and his mediation. Converting grace sets us right, 1. In
the object of our worship. They shall no longer worship the Molochs and
Baals, the kings and lords, that the Gentiles worship, the creatures of
their own imagination, but the King, the Lord of hosts, the everlasting
King, the King of kings, the sovereign Lord of all. 2. In the ordinances
of worship, those which God himself has appointed. Gospel-worship is
here represented by the keeping of the feast of tabernacles, for the
sake of those two great graces which were in a special manner acted and
signified in that feast - contempt of the world, and joy in God, [Neh
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#017). The life of a good Christian is
a constant feast of tabernacles, and, in all acts of devotion, we must
retire from the world and rejoice in the Lord, must worship as in that
feast. 3. In the Mediator of our worship; we must go to Christ our
temple with all our offerings, for in him only our spiritual sacrifices
are acceptable to God, [Pe1 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005). If we
rest in ourselves, we come short of pleasing God; we must go up to him,
and mention his righteousness only. 4. In the time of it; we must be
constant. They shall go up from year to year, at the times appointed for
this solemn feast. Every day of a Christian's life is a day of the feast
of tabernacles, and every Lord's day especially (that is the great day
of the feast); and therefore every day we must worship the Lord of hosts
and every Lord's day with a peculiar solemnity.

II\. That those who neglect the duties of gospel-worship shall be
reckoned with for their neglect. God will compel them to come and
worship before him, by suspending his favours from those that keep not
his ordinances: Upon them there shall be no rain, [Zac
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#017). Some understand it
figuratively; the rain of heavenly doctrine shall be withheld, and of
the heavenly grace, which should accompany that doctrine. God will
command the clouds that they rain no rain upon them. Note, It is a
righteous thing with God to withhold the blessings of grace from those
that do not attend the means of grace, to deny the green pastures to
those that attend not the shepherd's tents. Or we may take it literally:
On them there shall be no rain, to make their ground fruitful. Note, The
gifts of common providence are justly denied to those that neglect and
despise instituted ordinances. Those that neglected to build the temple
were punished with the want of rain ([Hag
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#017)), and so were those that
neglected to attend there when it was built. If we be barren and
unfruitful towards God, justly is the earth made so to us. Many are
crossed, and go backward, in their affairs, and this is at the bottom of
it - they do not keep close to the worship of God as they should; they
go off from God, and then he walks contrary to them. If we omit or
postpone the duties he expects from us, it is just with him to deny the
favours we expect from him. But what shall be done to the defaulters of
the land of Egypt, to whom the threatening of the want of rain is no
threatening, for they have no rain at any time; they need none; they
desire none; the river Nilus is to them instead of the clouds of heaven,
waters their land, and makes it fruitful, so that what is a punishment
to others is none to them? [Zac 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#018),
[Zac 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#019). It is threatened that if
the family of Egypt go not up, that have no rain, yet God will find out
a way to meet with them, for there shall be, in effect, the same plague
wherewith other nations are smitten for their neglect. God can, and
often did, restrain the overflowing of the river, which was equivalent
to the shutting up of the clouds; or if the river did its part, and rose
as high as it used to do, God had other ways of bringing famine upon
them, and destroying the fruits of their ground, as he did by several of
the ten plagues of Egypt, so that this (that is, the same) shall be the
punishment of Egypt that is the punishment of other nations who come not
up to keep the feast of tabernacles. Note, Those who think themselves
least indebted to, and depending on, the mercy of heaven, cannot
therefore think themselves guarded against the justice of Heaven. It
does not follow that those who can live without rain can therefore live
without God; for not the heavens only, but all other creatures, are that
to us that God makes them to be, and no more; nor can any man's way of
living enable him to set light by the judgments of God. This shall be
the punishment - margin, This shall be the sin of Egypt, and the sin of
all nations, that come not up to keep the feast of tabernacles. The same
word signifies both sin and the punishment of sin, so close and
inseparable is the connexion between them (as [Gen
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#007)), and sin is often its own
punishment. Note, Omissions are sins, and we must come into judgment for
them; those contract guilt that go not up to worship at the times
appointed, as they have opportunity; and it is a sin that is its own
punishment, for those who forsake the duty forfeit the privilege of
communion with God.

III\. That those who perform the duties of gospel-worship shall have
grace to adorn their profession by the duties of a gospel-conversation
too. This is promised ([Zac 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#020),
[Zac 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#021)), and it is necessary to
the completing of the beauty and happiness of the church. In general,
all shall be holiness to the Lord.

1\. The name and character of holiness shall not be so confined as
formerly. Holiness to the Lord had been written only upon the high
priest's forehead, but now it shall not be so appropriated. All
Christians shall be living temples, and spiritual priests, dedicated to
the honour of God and employed in his service.

2\. Real holiness shall be more diffused than it had been, because there
shall be more powerful means of sanctification, more excellent rules,
more cogent arguments, and brighter patterns of holiness, and because
there shall be a more plentiful effusion of the Spirit of holiness and
sanctification, after Christ's ascension than ever before.

(1.) There shall be holiness introduced into common things; and those
things shall be devoted to God that seemed very foreign. \[1.\] The
furniture of their horses shall be consecrated to God. "Upon the bells
of the horses shall be engraven Holiness to the Lord, or upon the
bridles of the horses (so the margin) or the trappings. The horses used
in war shall no longer be used against God and his people, as they have
been, but for him and them. Even their wars shall be holy wars, their
troopers serving under God's banner. Their great men, who ride in state
with a pompous retinue, shall reckon it their greatest ornament to
honour God with their honours. Holiness to the Lord shall be written on
the harness of their chariot-horses, as great men have sometimes their
coat of arms with their motto painted on their coaches; every gentleman
shall take the high priest's motto for his, and glory in it, and make it
a memento to himself not to do any thing unworthy of it. Travellers
shall have it upon their bridles, with which they guide their horses, as
those who desire always to be put in mind of it, by having it
continually before them, and to guide themselves in all their motions by
this rule. The bells of the horses, which are designed to quicken them
in their journey and to give notice of their approach, shall have
Holiness to the Lord upon them," to signify that this is that which we
ought to be influenced by ourselves, and make profession of to others,
wherever we go. \[2.\] The furniture of their houses too shall be
consecrated to God, to be employed in his service. First, The furniture
of the priests' houses, or apartments adjoining to the house of the
Lord. The common drinking cups they used shall be like the bowls before
the altar, that were used either to receive the blood of the sacrifices
or to present the wine and oil in, which were for the drink-offerings.
The vessels which they used for their own tables shall be used in such a
religious manner, with such sobriety and temperance, such devotedness to
the glory of God, and such a mixture of pious thoughts and expressions,
that their meals shall look like sacrifices; they shall eat and drink,
not to themselves, but to him that spreads their tables and fills their
cups. And thus, in ministers' families especially, should common actions
be done after a godly sort, however they are done in other families.
Secondly, The furniture of other houses, those of the common people:
"Every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah shall be holiness to the Lord. The
pots in which they boil their meat, the cups out of which they drink
their wine ([Jer 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#005)), in these God's
good creatures shall never be abused to excess, nor that made the food
and fuel of lust which should be oil to the wheels of obedience," as had
formerly been, when all tables were full of vomit and filthiness, [Isa
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#008). "What they eat and drink out of
these shall nourish their bodies for the service of God; and out of
these they shall give liberally for the relief of the poor;" then are
they Holiness to the Lord, as the merchandise and the hire of the
converted Tyrians are said to be ([Isa
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#018)); for both in our gettings and
in our spendings we must have an eye to the will of God as our rule and
the glory of God as our end. Thirdly, When there shall be such an
abundance of real holiness people shall not be nice and curious about
ceremonial holiness: "Those that sacrifice shall come and take of these
common vessels, and seethe their sacrifices therein, making no
distinction between them and the bowls before the altar." In
gospel-times the true worshippers shall worship God in spirit and in
truth, and neither in this mountain nor yet at Jerusalem, [Joh
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#021). One place shall be as acceptable
to God as another (I will that men pray every where); and one vessel
shall be as acceptable as another. Little regard shall be had to the
circumstance, provided there be nothing indecent or disorderly, while
the substance is religiously preserved and adhered to. Some think it
intimates that there should be greater numbers of sacrifices offered
than the vessels of the sanctuary would serve for; but, rather than any
should be turned back or deferred. they shall make no difficulty at all
of using common vessels, as the Levites in a case of necessity helped
the priests to kill the sacrifices, [Ch2
29:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#034).

(2.) There shall be no unholiness introduced into their sacred things,
to corrupt them: In that day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the
house of the Lord of hosts. Some read it, There shall be no more the
merchant, for so a Canaanite sometimes signifies; and they think it was
fulfilled when Christ once and again drove the buyers and sellers out of
the temple. Or though those that were Canaanites, strangers and
foreigners, shall be brought into the house of the Lord, yet they shall
cease to be Canaanites; they shall have nothing of the spirit or
disposition of Canaanites in them. Or it intimates that though in
gospel-times people should grow indifferent as to holy vessels, yet they
should be very strict in church-discipline, and careful not to admit the
profane to special ordinances, but to separate between the precious and
the vile, between Israelites and Canaanites. Yet this will not have its
full accomplishment short of the heavenly Jerusalem, that house of the
Lord of hosts, into which no unclean thing shall enter; for at the end
of time, and not before, Christ shall gather out of his kingdom every
thing that offends, and the tares and wheat shall be perfectly and
eternally separated.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Malachi Introduction](mal000)

</div>
