<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zephaniah Index](zep)  
  [Previous](zep000)  [Next](zep002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zephaniah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001)

After the title of the book ([Zep 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001))
here is, I. A threatening of the destruction of Judah and Jerusalem, an
utter destruction, by the Chaldeans ([Zep
1:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#002)). II. A charge against them for
their gross sin, which provoked God to bring that destruction upon them
([Zep 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#005), [Zep
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#006)); and so he goes on in the rest of
the chapter, setting both the judgments before them, that they might
prevent them or prepare for them, and the sins that destroy them, that
they might judge themselves, and justify God in what was brought upon
them. 1. They must hold their peace because they had greatly sinned
([Zep 1:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#007)). But, 2, They shall howl
because the trouble will be great. The day of the Lord is near, and it
will be a terrible day ([Zep 1:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#010)).
Such fair and timely warning as this did God give to the Jews of the
approaching captivity; but they hardened their neck, which made their
destruction remediless.

[Zephaniah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zep 1:1</span></span>

Here is, I. The title-page of this book ([Zep
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001)), in which we observe, 1. What
authority it has, and who gave it that authority; it is from heaven, and
not of men: It is the word of the Lord. 2. Who was the instrument of
conveying it to the church. His name was Zephaniah, which signifies the
servant of the Lord, for God revealed his secrets to his servants the
prophets. The pedigree of other prophets, whose extraction we have an
account of, goes no further back than their father, except Zecharias,
whose grandfather also is named. But this of Zephaniah goes back four
generations, and the highest mentioned is Hizkiah; it is the very same
name in the original with that of Hezekiah king of Judah ([Kg2
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#001)), and refers probably to him; if
so, our prophet, being lineally descended from that pious prince, and
being of the royal family, could with the better grace reprove the folly
of the king's children as he does, [Zep
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#008). 3. When this prophet prophesied -
in the days of Josiah king of Judah, who reigned well, and in the
twelfth year of his reign began vigorously, and carried on a work of
reformation, in which he destroyed idols and idolatry. Now it does not
appear whether Zephaniah prophesied in the beginning of his reign; if
so, we may suppose his prophesying had a great and good influence on
that reformation. When he, as God's messenger, reproved the idolatries
of Jerusalem, Josiah, as God's vice-regent, removed them; and
reformation is likely to go on and prosper when both magistrates and
ministers do their part towards it. If it were towards the latter end of
his reign that he prophesied, we sadly see how a corrupt people relapse
into their former distempers. The idolatries Josiah had abolished, it
should seem, returned in his own time, when the heat of the reformation
began a little to abate and wear off. What good can the best reformers
do with a people that hate to be reformed, as if they longed to be
ruined?

II\. The summary, or contents, of this book. The general proposition
contained in it is, That utter destruction is coming apace upon Judah
and Jerusalem for sin. Without preamble, or apology, he begins abruptly
([Zep 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#002)): By taking away I will make
an end of all things from off the face of the land, Saith the Lord. Ruin
is coming, utter ruin, destruction from the Almighty. He has said it who
can, and will, make good what he has said: "I will utterly consume all
things. I will gather all things" (so some); "I will recall all the
blessings I have bestowed, because they have abused them and so
forfeited them." The consumption determined shall take away, 1. The
inferior creatures: I will consume the beasts, the fowls of the heaven,
and the fishes of the sea ([Zep 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#003)),
as, in the deluge, every living substance was destroyed that was upon
the face of the ground, [Gen 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#023). The
creatures were made for man's use, and therefore when he has perverted
the use of them, and made them subject to vanity, God, to show the
greatness of his displeasure against the sin of man, involves them in
his punishment. The expressions are figurative, denoting universal
desolation. Those that fly ever so high, as the fowls of heaven, and
think themselves out of the reach of the enemies' hand - those that hide
ever so close, as the fishes of the sea, and think themselves out of the
reach of the enemies' eye - shall yet become a prey to them, and be
utterly consumed. 2. The children of men: "I will consume man; I will
cut off man from the land. The land shall be dispeopled and left
uninhabited; I will destroy, not only Israel, but man. The land shall
enjoy her sabbaths. I will cut off, not only the wicked men, but all
men; even the few among them that are good shall be involved in this
common calamity. Though they shall not be cut off from the Lord, yet
they shall be cut off from the land." It is with Judah and Jerusalem
that God has this quarrel, both city and country, and upon them he will
stretch out his hand, the hand of his power, the hand of his wrath; and
who knows the power of his anger? [Zep
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#004). Those that will not humble
themselves under God's mighty hand shall be humbled and brought down by
it. Note, Even Judah, where God is known, and Jerusalem, where his
dwelling-place is, if they revolt from him and rebel against him, shall
have his hand stretched out against them. 3. All wicked people, and all
those things that are the matter of their wickedness ([Zep
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#003)): "I will consume the
stumbling-blocks with the wicked, the idols with the idolaters, the
offences with the offenders." Josiah had taken away the
stumbling-blocks, and, as far as he could, had purged the land of the
monuments of idolatry, hoping that there would be no more idolatry; but
the wicked will do wickedly, the dog will return to his vomit, and
therefore, since the sin will not otherwise be cured, the sinners must
themselves be consumed, even the wicked with the stumbling-blocks of
their iniquity, [Eze 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#003). Since it
was not done by the sword of justice, it shall be done by the sword of
war. See who the sinners are that shall be consumed. (1.) The professed
idolaters, who avowed idolatry, and were wedded to it. The remnant of
Baal shall be cut off, the images of Baal, and the worshippers of those
images. Josiah cut off a great deal of Baal; but that which was so close
as to escape the eye, or so bold as to escape the hand, of his justice,
God will cut off, even all the remains of it. The Chaldeans would spare
none of the images of Baal, or the worshippers of those images. The
Chemarim shall be cut off; we read of them in the history of Josiah's
reformation. [Kg2 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#005), He put down
the idolatrous priests: the word is the Chemarim. The word signifies
black men, some think because they wore black clothes, affecting to
appear grave, others because their faces were black with attending the
altars, or the fires in which they burnt their children to Moloch. They
seem to have been immediate attendants upon the service of Baal. They
shall be cut off with the priests, the regulars with the seculars. The
very name of them shall be cut off; the order shall be quite abolished,
so as to be forgotten, or remembered with detestation. And, among other
idolaters, the worshippers of the host of heaven upon the house-tops
shall be cut off ([Zep 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#005)), who
justified themselves in their idolatry with those that did not worship
images, the work of their own hands, but offered their sacrifices and
burnt their incense to the sun, moon, and stars, immediately upon the
tops of their houses. But God will let them know that he is a jealous
God, and will not endure any rival; and, though some have thought that
the most specious and plausible idolatry, yet it will appear as great an
offence to God to give divine honours to a star as to give them to a
stone or a stock. Even the worshippers of the host of heaven shall be
consumed as well as the worshippers of the beasts of the earth or the
fiends of hell. The sin of the adulteress is not the less sinful for the
gaiety of the adulterer. (2.) Those also shall be consumed that think to
compound the matter between God and idols, and keep an even hand between
them, that halt between God and Baal, and worship between Jehovah and
Moloch, and swear by both; or, as it might better be read, swear to the
Lord and to Malcham. They bind themselves by oath and covenant to the
service both of God and idols. They have a good opinion of the worship
of the God of Israel; it is the religion of their country, and has been
long so, and therefore they will by no means quit it; but they think it
will be very much improved and beautified if they join with it the
worship of Moloch, for that also is much used in other countries, and
travellers admire it; there is a great deal of good fancy and strong
flame in it. They cannot keep always to the worship of a God whom they
have no visible representation of, and therefore they must have an
image; and what better than the image of Moloch - a king? They think
they shall effectually atone for their sin if they swear to Moloch, and,
pursuant to that oath, burn their children in sacrifice to that idol;
and yet, if they do amiss in that, they hope to atone for it in
worshipping the God of Israel too. Note, Those that think to divide
their affections and adorations between God and idols will not only come
short of acceptance with God, but will have their doom with the worst of
idolaters; for what communion can there be between light and darkness,
Christ and Belial, God and mammon? She whose own the child is not pleads
for the dividing of it, for, if Satan have half, he will have all; but
the true mother says, Divide it not, for, if God have but half, he will
have none. Such waters will not be long sweet, if they come from a
fountain that sends forth bitter water too; what have those to do to
swear by the Lord that swear by Malcham? (3.) Those also shall be
consumed that have apostatized from God, together with those that never
gave up their names to him, [Zep 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#006).
I will cut off, \[1.\] Those that are turned back from the Lord, that
were well taught, and began well, that had given up their names to him,
and set out at first in the worship of him, but have flown off, and
turned aside, and fallen in with idolaters, and deserted those good ways
of God which they were brought up in, and despised them. Those God will
be sure to reckon with who are renegadoes from his service, who began in
the Spirit and ended in the flesh; they shall be treated as deserters,
to whom no mercy is shown. \[2.\] Those that have not sought the Lord,
nor ever enquired for him, never made any profession of religion, and
think to excuse themselves with that, shall find that this will not
excuse them; nay, this is the thing laid to their charge; they are
atheistical careless people, that live without God in the world; and
those that do so are certainly unworthy to live upon God in the world.

[Zephaniah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zep 1:7</span></span>

Notice is here given to Judah and Jerusalem that God is coming forth
against them, and will be with them shortly; his presence, as a just
avenger, his day, the day of his judgment and his wrath, are not far
off, [Zep 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#007). Those that improve not
the presence of God with them as a Father, but sin away that presence,
may expect his presence with them as a Judge, to call them to an account
for the contempt put upon his grace. The day of the Lord will come. Men
have their day now, when they take a liberty to do what they please; but
God's day is at hand; it is here called his sacrifice, a sacrifice of
his preparing, for the punishing of presumptuous sinners is a sacrifice
to the justice of God, some reparation to his injured honour. Those that
brought their offerings to other gods were themselves justly made
victims to the true God. On a day of sacrifice great slaughter was made;
so shall there be in Jerusalem; men shall be killed up as fast as lambs
for the altar, with as little regret, with as much pleasure: The slain
of the Lord shall be many. On a day of sacrifice great feasts were made
upon the sacrifices; so the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem shall be
feasted upon by their enemies the Chaldeans; these are the guests God
has prepared and invited to come and glut themselves - their revenge
with slaughter and their covetousness with plunder. Now observe,

I. Who those are that are marked to be sacrificed, that shall be visited
and punished in this day of reckoning, and what it is they shall be
called to an account for. 1. The royal family, because of the dignity of
their place, shall be first reckoned with for their pride, and vanity,
and affectation ([Zep 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#008)): I will
punish the princes, and the king's children, who think themselves
accountable to God, and that, high as they are, he is above them. They
shall be punished, and all such as, like them, are clothed with strange
apparel, such as, in contempt of their own country (where, probably, it
was the custom to go in a very plain dress, as became the seed of Jacob
that plain man), affected to appear in the fashion of other nations and
introduced their modes in apparel, studying to resemble those from whom
God had appointed them, even in their clothes, industriously to
distinguish themselves. The princes and the king's children scorned to
wear any home-made stuffs, though God had provided them fine linen and
silks ([Eze 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#010)), but they must send
abroad to strange countries for their clothes, which would not please
unless they were far-fetched and dear-bought; and even those of inferior
rank affected to imitate the princes and the king's children. Pride in
apparel is displeasing to God, and a symptom of the degeneracy of a
people. 2. The noblemen, and their stewards and servants, come next to
be reckoned with ([Zep 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#009)): In the
same day will I punish those that leap on the threshold, a phrase, no
doubt, well understood then, and which probably signified the invading
of their neighbour's rights. Entering their houses by force and
violence, and seizing their possessions, they leap on the threshold, as
much as to say that the house is their own and they will keep their hold
of it; and, accordingly, they make all in it their own that they can lay
their hands on, and so fill their masters' houses with goods gotten by
violence and deceit and with all the guilt thereby contracted. Nor shall
it suffice them to say that the ill-gotten gains were not for themselves
but for their masters, and that what they did was by their order; for
the obligations we lie under to keep God's commandments are prior and
superior to the obligations we lie under to serve the interests of any
master on earth. 3. The trading people, and the rich merchants, are next
called to account. Iniquity is found in their end of the town, among the
inhabitants of Maktesh, a low part of Jerusalem, deep like a mortar (for
so the word signifies); the goldsmiths lived there ([Neh
3:32](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#032)) and the merchants; and they are
now cut down (they are broken, and have shut up their shops, and become
bankrupts); nay, All those that bear silver are cut off, in the first
place, by the invaders, for the sake of the silver they carry, which is
so far from being a protection to them that it will expose and betray
them. The conquerors aimed at the wealthy men, and carried them off
first, while the poor of the land escaped. Or it may be meant of a
general decay of trade, which was a preface and introduction to the
general destruction of the land. It is the token of a declining state
when great dealers are cut down, and great bankers are cut off and
become bankrupts, who cannot fall alone, but with themselves ruin many.
4. All the secure and careless people, the sons of pleasure, that live a
loose idle life, are next reckoned with ([Zep
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#012)); they come from all parts of the
country, to take up their quarters in the head-quarters of the kingdom,
where they take private lodgings, and indulge themselves in ease and
luxury; but God will find them out, and punish them: At that time I will
search Jerusalem with candles, to discover them, that they may be
brought out to condign punishment. This intimates that they conceal
themselves, as being either ashamed of the sin or afraid of the
punishment of it; when the judgments of God are abroad they hope to
escape by absconding and getting out of the way, but God will search
Jerusalem, as search is made for a malefactor in disguise, that is
harboured by his accomplices. God's hand will find out all his enemies,
wherever they lie hid, and will punish not only the secret idolaters,
but the secret epicures and profane; and those are the persons that are
here described, and marks are given by which they will be discovered
when strict search is made for them. (1.) Their dispositions are
sensual: They are settled on their lees, intoxicated with their
pleasures, strengthening themselves in their wealth and wickedness; they
are secure and easy, and, because they have had no changes, they fear
none, as Moab, [Jer 48:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#011). They have
not been emptied from vessel to vessel. They fill themselves with wine
and strong drink, and banish all thought, saying, Tomorrow shall be as
this day, [Isa 56:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#012). Their being
settled on their lees signifies the same with being enclosed in their
own fat, [Psa 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#010). (2.) Their
notions are atheistical. They could not live such loose lives but that
they say in their heart, The Lord will not do good, neither will he do
evil; that is, He will do nothing. They deny his providential government
of the world: "What good and evil there is in the world comes by the
wheel of fortune, and not by the disposal of a wise and supreme
director." They deny his moral government, and his dispensing rewards
and punishments: "The Lord will not do good to those that serve him, nor
do evil to those that rebel against him; and therefore there is nothing
got by religion, nor lost by sin." This was the effect of their
sensuality; if they were not drowned in sense, they could not be thus
senseless, nor could they be so stupid if they had not stupefied
themselves with the love of pleasure. It was also the cause of their
sensuality; men would not make a god of their belly if they had not at
first become so vain, so vile, in their imaginations, as to think the
God that made them altogether such a one as themselves. But God will
punish them; their end is destruction, [Phi
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019).

II\. What the destruction will be with which God will punish these
sinners, and what course he will take with them. 1. He will silence them
([Zep 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#007)): Hold thy peace at the
presence of the Lord. He will force them to hold their peace, will
strike them dumb with horror and amazement. They shall be speechless.
All the excuses of their sin, and exceptions against the sentence, will
be overruled, and they shall not have a word to say for themselves. 2.
He will sacrifice them, for it is the day of the Lord's sacrifice ([Zep
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#008)); he will give them into the hands
of their enemies, and glorify himself thereby. 3. He will fill both city
and country with lamentation ([Zep
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#010)): In that day there shall be a
noise of a cry from the fish-gate, so called because near either to the
fish-ponds or to the fish-market. It belonged to the city of David ([Ch2
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#014); [Neh
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#003)); perhaps the same with that which
is called the first gate ([Zac 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010)),
and, if so, it will explain what follows here, And a howling from the
second, that is, the second gate, which was next to that fish-gate. The
alarm shall go round the walls of Jerusalem from gate to gate; and there
shall be a great crashing from the hills, a mighty noise from the
mountains round about Jerusalem, from the acclamations of the victorious
invaders, or from the lamentations of the timorous invaded, or from
both. The inhabitants of the city, even of the closest safest part of
the city, shall howl ([Zep 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#011)), so
clamorous shall the grief be. 4. They shall be stripped of all they
have; it shall be a prey to the enemy ([Zep
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#013)): Their household goods, and
shop-goods, shall become a booty, and a rich booty they shall be; their
houses shall be levelled with the ground and be a desolation; those of
them that have built new houses shall not inherit them, but the invaders
shall get and keep possession of them. And the vineyards they have
planted they shall not drink the wine of, but, instead of having it for
the relief of their friends that faint among them, they shall part with
it for the animating of their foes that fight against them, [Deu
28:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#030).

[Zephaniah 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zep 1:14</span></span>

Nothing could be expressed with more spirit and life, nor in words more
proper to startle and awaken a secure and careless people, than the
warning here given to Judah and Jerusalem of the approaching destruction
by the Chaldeans. That is enough to make the sinners in Zion tremble -
that it is the day of the Lord, the day in which he will manifest
himself by taking vengeance on them. It is the great day of the Lord, a
specimen of the day of judgment, a kind of doom's-day, as the last
destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans is represented to be in our
Saviour's prediction concerning it, [Mat
24:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#027).

I. This day of the Lord is here spoken of as very near. The vision is
not for a great while to come, as those imagine who put the evil day far
from them. Those deceive themselves who look upon it as a thing at a
distance, for it is near - it is near - it hastens greatly. The prophet
gives the alarm like one that is in earnest, like one that awakens a
family with the cry of Fire! fire! when it is at the next door that the
danger is: "It is near! it is near! and therefore it is high time to
bestir yourselves, and do what you can for your own safety before it be
too late." It is madness for those to slumber whose damnation slumbers
not, and to linger when it hastens.

II\. It is spoken of as a very dreadful day. The very voice of this day
of the Lord, the noise of it, when it is coming, shall be so terrible as
to make the mighty men cry there bitterly, cry for fear as children do.
It shall be a vexation to hear the report of it. In the last great day
of the Lord the mighty men shall cry bitterly to rocks and mountains to
shelter them; but in vain. Observe how emphatically the prophet speaks
of this day approaching ([Zep 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#015)):
It is a day of wrath, God's wrath, wrath in perfection, wrath to the
utmost. It will be a day of trouble and distress to the sinners; they
shall be in pain, and shall see no ways of easing or helping themselves.
The miseries of the damned are summed up (perhaps with reference to
this) in the indignation and wrath of God, which are the cause, and the
tribulation and anguish of the sinner's soul, which are the effect, [Rom
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#008), [Rom
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#009). It will be a day of trouble and
distress to the inhabitants, and a day of wasteness and desolation to
the whole land; that fruitful land shall be turned into a wilderness. It
shall be a day of darkness and gloominess; every thing shall look
dismal, and there shall not be the least gleam of comfort, or glimpse of
hope; look round, and it is all black. It is a day of clouds and thick
darkness; there is not only nothing encouraging, but every thing
threatening; the thick clouds are big with storms and tempests.

III\. It is spoken of as a destroying day, [Zep
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#016), [Zep
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#017). It shall be destroying, 1. To
places, even the strongest and best fortified: A day of the trumpet and
alarm against the fenced cities, to break into them, and against the
high towers, to bring them down; for what forts, what fences, can hold
out against the wrath of God? 2. To persons ([Zep
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#017)): "I will bring distress upon
men, the strongest and stoutest of men; their hearts and hands shall
fail them; they shall walk like blind men, wandering endlessly, because
they have sinned against the Lord." Note, Those that walk as bad men
will justly be left to walk as blind men, always in the dark, in doubt
and danger, without any guide or comfort, and falling at length into the
ditch. Because they have sinned against the Lord he will deliver them
into the hands of cruel enemies, that shall pour out their blood as
dust, so profusely, and with as little regret, and their flesh shall be
thrown as dung upon the dunghill.

IV\. The destruction of that day will be unavoidable and universal, [Zep
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#018). 1. There shall be no escaping it
by ransom: Neither their silver nor their gold, which they have hoarded
up so covetously against the evil day, or which they have spent so
prodigally to make friends for such a time, shall be able to deliver
them in the day of the Lord's wrath. Another prophet borrowed these
words from this, with reference to the same event, [Eze
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#019). Note, Riches profit not in the
day of wrath, [Pro 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#004). Nay, riches
expose to the wrath of men ([Ecc
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#013).), and riches abused to the wrath
of God. 2. There shall be no escaping it by flight or concealment; for
the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy, and where
then can a hiding-place be found? See what the fire of God's jealousy
is, and what the force of it; it will devour whole lands; how then can
particular persons stand before it? He shall make riddance, a speedy
riddance, of all those that dwell in the land, as the husbandman, when
he rids his ground, cuts up all the briers and thorns for the fire.
Note, Sometimes the judgments of God make riddance, even utter riddance,
with sinful nations, a speedy riddance; their destruction is effected,
is completed, in a little time. Let not sinners be laid asleep by the
patience of God, for when the measure of their iniquity is full his
justice will both overtake and overcome, will make quick work and
thorough work.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zephaniah Chapter 2](zep002)

</div>
