<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mind14)  [Next](mind16) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*At the Back of the Black Man's Mind*, by Richard Edward Dennett,
\[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XV

# SACRED ANIMALS.

The Leopard. -Witchcraft, -Story of Ngo as an Old Woman. -Xina. -Classes
of Bina.-Tabu Animals.-The Formula.-Bavili Laws and Lessons.

## XINA.

THE King as NTINU LUKENE or the one who advises his people to fly from
the custom of the Leopard.

NGO the leopard is the XINA of the people of KONGO (including the
provinces south of the Kongo, as well as KAKONGO and LUANGO) and as such
it is NKICICI It is the only animal having the title of Fumu. All
palavers are commenced with the words NGONGONGO NGETE NZAMBI. NGO is the
name by which a woman who is capable of bearing royal children is known;
the wife of the first KONGO. The leopard's skin is used as a charm
against smallpox, and the MANKAKA'S (captain executioner) hat of office
is also made of it.

In Jan. 1902, the writer was standing near to his house when a crowd of
natives passed him carrying the body of a dead leopard\[1\] to Luango
for sale. The head of the beast was covered with a cloth so that its
eyes should not be seen. And a lady called NGO who was standing near to
him began to cry.

"Why do you cry?" the writer asked.

"Ah," she answered," the brutes would not have treated

\[1. *In Seven Years among the Fjort* I give part of the custom
attending the killing of NGO, and in notes on the *Folklore of the
Fjort* I supplement this. Many of the stories also throw some light on
the character of this animal. The skins of the leopard are sent to BUNZI
when rain is wanted by the King for his people. See ante, p. 45.\]

my namesake in this rough way in the olden days with impunity."

The BAVILI call the leopard XIKUMBUA, which might be translated as the
calumniator, but the BATEKE still call it KENE, which might be
translated, the one opposed to nobility.

As this animal is looked upon as the mother of all animals, we cannot be
wrong in saying that she is descended from ZAMHI through XIKAMACI and
her offspring XIKANGA and NXILUKA, who are said to be the parents of an
animal and a wooden figure.

That the leopard is connected with witchcraft is certain, even if the
words "NDONGO" and NDOXI did not so clearly point to the fact, for we
were warned by MAMBUKU\[1\] at

\[1. While at my frugal meal, MAMBUKU, who had been squatting on the
ground near to me, got up and left me. I lit a cigarette and walked up
and down in the moonlight by the side of the bananas MAMBUKU had planted
as a kind of fence around a cleared space, within which his dwellings
and outhouses were, built. At last I retired to rest upon the bed of
boards prepared for me, but just as I was falling to sleep the midnight
silence was suddenly broken by a shout. I recognised the voice of
MAMBUKU immediately, and thought at first that he must have met with
some accident. Another grunt-like shout, and I knew that MAMBUKU was
simply calling the attention of his people to something he had to say to
them. And this is what he -said:

"Ur! ur (to wake his people up).

"Nuvula (Listen!)

"Ngonde moci u bakana kubella, mukulu, abu mimibakana ku bella mu
luzala." (Last month my mother had a bad leg, now she is sick in her
finger.) "Manwela Ngoma! Manwela Ngomo! Anjea, unkruntu u kela ku
ngandu.' (Manwela Ngoma! you are head man of the village.) "Mani ngombo!
Anjea uzabici ma awso." (Mani ngombo, the name of his suffering mother,
you know all about it). "Bene Bawso! Nu keba mbizi Xikumbu una untambala
befi inu manga 'ntu ntese." (All of you! Beware that when the leopard
comes you don't receive him, as we shall divine who be may be.) "Beno!
Mundela naka kunxitula lau!" (All of you! The white man is sleeping in
town, and if I make a noise he will think me a fool.)

There was a pause and a great silence; then MANWELA NGOMA from his
corner of the village replied:

"Minu unkruntu, anjea veka Mani Puati, anjea veka bakaci libamba liaku,
anjea veka ubakamba, minu bawso i bakambila baci kumpe, nsamu au ba
veka." (I am the head man, you yourself are Mani Puati, you own us all,
you have called upon me, I called upon all, they do not hear, it is
their palaver.)

Then came another pause; after which up spoke the sick mother, Mani
ngombe.

"Bobo ntubila xibene xiaku tata, ntuba minu muntu yaka kalilanga enxenzo
mu nitu." (The father has just now told the truth, I tell you that I
keep on suffering pain in my body.)\]

XIMOKO that someone with "NDONGO" in his stomach, had willed the leopard
to come to their town, or someone in that very town, perhaps, was ready
to use the leopard as a means of destroying his neighbour's life. And
someone also with evil thoughts was causing the mother to keep on
suffering.

The BAVILI fully believe that certain BANTU A NDONGO have this power
over leopards and crocodiles, and that others who have not the power
themselves, knowing their brother NDONGO, ask them a favour of the loan
of the wer-beast. The MUNTU A NDONGO, or wizard as you perhaps would
call him, does not in this case change himself into the leopard or the
crocodile, for he may be talking to you in one place while the beast is
doing his will in another. Neither need he die first, so that what some
people like to call his "soul" may enter and possess the animal.

The man who has NDONGO in his stomach will search out an NGANGA, or
doctor, who has the medicine XIKUMBU XIMANPANDU, and ask him to sell him
some. The NGANGA will ask him if he is really desirous to obtain it, and
the MUNTU A NDONGO answers yes. The NGANGA sells him the medicine. The
MUNTU A NDONGO says he cannot see the leopard or crocodile. Then the
NGANGA takes the medicine and gives the MUNTU A NDONGO some, and rubs
some into his eyes, and asks him if he can now see the leopard. The
MUNTU A NDONGO answers yes, and goes his way conscious that he owns a
leopard or crocodile to do his will.

All leopards do not lend themselves to these horrible practices, and
such as do not are said to belong to the BAKICI BACI, or the people who
are owners of sacred ground.

Since my visit to XIMOKO I have noticed the following sad cases of the
ravages said to have been worked by the wicked class of leopards:

1\. XIKAWMO is a man who has lived with white men all his life, can read
and write, and wears European clothes. He was with his master in Somboa,
quite near to Luango, and it was here that the following sad event
occurred. Three boys, one of them the son of XIKAWMO, were sleeping in
an outhouse serving as a kitchen. One night a leopard entered this
place, and passing over one of the boys, deliberately attacked and
killed the son of XIKAWMO, only wounding the boy nearest the door in his
flight.

XIKAWMO went to MALUANGO, and after relating the whole affair to him
said, "How is this? I want to know who had this leopard?" Then they set
the NGANGAS to work, and it was divined that it was a man of the village
of NTANDA BILALA who owned this particular leopard. Then XIKAWMO said,"
Very well; now I want to know who ate the flesh of this man of BILALA,"
for if one of his boy's family had not eaten the flesh \[1\] of the
BILALA man, XIKAWMO reasoned that it was impossible that the BILALA man
should have sent the leopard to "chop" his son. And here this palaver
rests for the time being.

2\. The Wife of XIKÄIA was in her house sleeping with another woman when
a leopard burst open the door, passed over the other woman, and carrying
XIKÄIA'S wife away, ate her up, leaving only her head. XIK)LIA called in
the ZINGANGA, and they divined that MAXIENZI was the owner of that
leopard. So XIKÄIA went to MAXIENZI'S town and destroyed his house and
plantations, and then went to MALUANGO to complain about MAXIENZI.
MALUANGO arrested MAXIENZI, and advised him to take *nkasa* at once.
MAXIENZI said, "Let us first hold a palaver."

In the palaver it was proved that MAXIENZI had asked the acknowledged
owner of the leopard to lend it to him. MAXIENZI protested, and declared
that in this case he was innocent. MALUANGO then said that no one would
believe him under the circumstances, and that the decision was in the
hands of God, not his. Let him take *nkasa*. MAXIENZI went to MAMBUKU'S
town, and demanded to be given the *nkasa*. It was given to him and he
vomited, thus proving that he was innocent.

XIKÄIA and his people, however, said that MAXIENZI used his knowledge as
a MUNTU A NDONGO to avoid the proper

\[1. Eaten the flesh, *i.e.*, done him an injury, perhaps by sending a
leopard to kill some one of his family.\]

and just effects of the *nkasa*. XIKÄIA and his other wife and family
then left their town and went to live in the Mayombe, or bush-country.

3\. A poor old man and his little grandchildren went into the woods to
cut the fronds of the bamboo palm (*ntombe*), from the leaves of which
he meant to make thatch to cover his house. Having finished their work,
they picked up their bundles and were about to start homewards, when a
leopard sprang out of the bush upon the old man. The children cried out,
not being able to run away. The leopard. left the old man, and the party
then took up their burdens and ran away in the direction of their
village. At last the old man threw his bundle of leaves into the grass,
and said he could go no further; he would rest and then come home.
Shortly after he had stopped the leopard set upon him again. The little
ones saw it, shouted to it to go away, and then ran home as fast as they
could. The people of the village set out to look for the old man, but
only found his head. How this palaver was settled I do not know.

These four cases in this district, then, have come to my knowledge
within six months, and I give you the facts as related to me, and
therefore with their native colouring and as they are looked upon by
disinterested native third parties.

## NGO AS THE OLD WOMAN IN A HAMMOCK.

The story of how Xidiela exposed the witches.

(Xidiela means in XIVILI a man who humbugs people.)

Xidiela was not well treated at home, and was finally told by his people
that he was not worth anything, and had better go away and earn his
living as best he could; they were tired of supporting him. This rather
sobered Xidiela, and as he was already a bearded man, he knew he would
have some difficulty in getting his living in a decent way, and he
dreaded the thought of having to turn his hands to any hard work. He
approached a rich man and offered him his services as "boy" or cook.

"You are too old," said the rich man.

"Never mind that, try me. I will do my best for you."

And so he was engaged to clean plates, cook food, and cut wood. He
continued to clean plates, and cook food, and cut wood for a long, long
time. During all this time sundry Zi Nganga kept on telling him that he
was serving a MUNTU A NDONGO, and Xidiela at last felt that there must
be some truth in what he was told.

"Every Nganga that comes here says the same thing. What am I to do? How
can I get the better of him?"

He once more cooks his master's chop, and then goes to him and says:

"Senhor!"

"What? I am a witch."

"No!" says his master. Yes, I am."

"Why, how do you know? " asks the master.

"Yes, I am a witch, but am ashamed, and take off my clothes only behind
the shimbec."

"Never mind," says the master, "I am one too, and perhaps after all you
are one, for it is to-day that we are going to kill the prince of the
country, and it is to-day that you tell me you are a witch. We will go
together; but go to sleep and wait until the evening."

Xidiela sleeps, wakes early in the evening, and goes to his master and
wakes him.

"You are no witch," says Xidiela, "or you would not sleep like this,"

"Nay," says his master, "it is not time yet; you may sleep a little
longer."

Xidiela goes to sleep again. Then they wake up, and start for the
meeting-place of the witches. Xidiela goes ahead to show that he is not
afraid. They come to a place where a great number of cloths and
bracelets and leg-rings lie strewn about.

The master tells Xidiela to take off his clothes.

"No," says Xidiela; "when I do that people in town will dream that I am
a witch, but when they see that I am dressed they will say, ' No, he
cannot be a witch, because he dressed.'"

"Very well, then," says his master, as he takes off his own clothes; "go
as you are, but take care of the others."

Then they walk and walk and walk, until they arrive at a place where all
the ZINDOXI were in the grass.

"Mamboma Xinkanda"\[1\] says the old woman with sores, Nfumu Ngo (in her
hammock), when she sees the boy. "Mamboma! Xidiela kalokaka mino mabola
maka ku sungomina." (Mamboma! he is not a witch; he comes only to look
on. As sure as I'm a nganga I divine it.)

And Mamboma replies, "Zibika munu aku anjea natanga mu xipoia." (Shut
your mouth. It is because you are in a hammock that you say so.)

The old w man replies; "Maxi ku natua batu ku anganga." (It is not
because I have a hammock, but because I am a nganga that I say this.)

Mamboma then says: "How could he enter here if he were not a witch? Give
him a matchet,\[2\] that he may dance."

They give him a matchet. Xidiela takes the matchet, and dances away and
dances back again, And the young women are very pleased, and cry out,
"Tuala ntulu, return here."

And Xidiela goes to them and returns twice; but the third time he runs
away, taking the machet with him. And the old woman with the sores cried
out from her hammock to Mamboma, "You now see that I was right."

They all waited, and then exclaimed, "She is right."

They then set upon the master and thrashed him. (They did not kill the
prince.) They then knocked their fetish,

\[1. heard a little story of the Xinkanda (lemur). This little animal is
looked upon to-day as the "Mamboma" of the princely 'Ngo, and was
elected a prince of Luango in the following manner:

Ngondo (a long-tailed monkey) was very proud of the power his tail gave
him in his hurried movements here and there, and upon this power he laid
claim to the chief office in Luango, *i.e.*, that of Mamboma. Now, the
Xinkanda objected to this claim on the part of the Ngondo. The Xinkanda
is a close-fisted little animal, and the Bavili say sticks hard to
anything he clings to. They say it takes hours to get anything out of
its hands, once they are closed on any object. The Xinkanda is said to
have made some bitter remarks about the ngondo and his tail, and
challenged him to call a meeting of all the animals to get at the
general opinion of their world upon their merits. At this meeting the
slow-moving but sure Xinkanda was unanimously elected Mamboma.

2\. A kind of cutlass.\]

crying out to Xidiela's Master, "You brought the boy here If you come
back here you will die."

And Xidiela gathered up all the clothes and bracelets and leg-rings, and
took them to his home. He made a fire outside his shimbec and waited for
his master, but he did not sleep. The Zi-Ndoxi searched for their
clothes, and thrashed the master again when they could not be found, and
then they departed to their towns, dispersing in different directions.

And next day Xidiela remarked to all about him, "How is it that so many
are wearing clean clothes to-day?"

And the master called Xidiela aside, and whispered to him that they had
thrashed him.

"Who dared to thrash you?" shouted Xidiela.

"Don't shout," cried the master,

"Why?" shouted Xidiela.

"If you are a ndoxi, why do you act like this and get me thrashed?"

"I went simply to humbug you," replied Xidiela.

And each ndoxi brought fifty longs (125 yards) of cloth, or sheep, or
presents, to get their clothes from Xidiela and to bribe him to say
nothing about the affair. Thus he became very rich, and went back to his
town and built a nice shimbec, and looked down upon his poorer
relations.

Some time afterwards he went back in a hammock to see his master. His
master called him a ndoxi, and dared him to take nkasa.

"Let us take it together," said Xidiela. And they both went far away,
where they were not known, and took the bark

and the master died, and Xidiela escaped.

The above, of course, is merely a story; the following, however,
occurred not so long ago, which proves how near fiction is to fact in
the Bavili's mind.

Buite had been out fishing, and on his way home met the drunkard
Mavungu, who asked him for some fish. Buite refuspd to give it, and
Mavungu threatened to " do for him." Buite fell sick and died. Mavungu
took nkasa and died. And it then turned out that the drunkard Mavungu
had gone to his town in a rage and told his brother, who was also no
friend of Buite's, that the latter had refused to give him fish. So they
sought out one or two other Zi-Ndoxi, and they had determined to kill
Buite. Buite, falling sick, called in an Nganga, who divined that he was
bewitched, and that nothing could save him. When Buite died, Mavungu,
who had thus been heard to threaten Buite, was accused of having been
the cause of his death, and had to take nkasa, and died.

The Bavili say that supposing that Mavungu's brother had refused to join
him in wishing the death of Buite, but on the contrary had said, "No!
Buite is not bad fellow, and I do not wish him to die," Buite might have
fallen sick, but would have soon got better.

ZAMBICI in some of the stories\[1\] is spoken of as the mother of all
animals, as if she were the immediate mother rather than the Creator.
This confusion is natural to degenerate people, who are apt to mistake
the intermediate causes for the first cause. In the story that describes
an old lady arriving at the town of SONANSENZI and asking for
hospitality we have an example of this. NZENZ1 is the cricket, and the
story therefore is an animal one; and the old lady so full of sores who
chastised the people of the town for not giving her hospitality should
perhaps be NGO, the leopard, and not NZAMBI Cl.

## XINA.

Mesu Mazenzi Mavili Matuninini say the BAVILI for a crooked palaver in
which one is able to see the truth. You can cook the grasshopper or
cricket, but its eyes remain, or, in other words, "The truth will out."

The cricket is XINA to SONJO.\[2\]

ZOMBO-BAWCI or BOCI,\[3\] the eel, is the XINA, or sacred animal of
Kakongo.

An old lady is said to have been on a journey in Kakongo behind a place
called FUTILA. She carried a child on her back, and asked some women who
were planting in the fields for water. The women said that they only had
enough for themselves, and that water had to be brought from a long
distance. The lady eventually got a drink of palm wine

\[1. See *Folklore of the Fjort*, p. 127.

2\. SONANZENZI, *Folklore of the Fjort*, p. 122.\]

3\. These three words, Meci, Bawci, and Awci, all mean one-the seeing
one, the instinctive one and the hearing one; Meci is equivalent to Mesu
ma zenzi.\]

from a young man who was tapping a palm tree. She rewarded the young
man, and punished the women for their want of motherly instinct by
turning the field they had been in into a lake (BAWCI), the fish of
which is XINA to the women of NTUMPU to this day.

The third one\[1\] (AWCI or OCI) is MPAKASA AWCI, the wild ox or
buffalo, the XINA of LUANGO.

When Maluango \[2\] first came from Kongo he brought this XINI which is
NKICI'Cl with him. He is said to have asked some men for water and they
refused to give it to him; hence he made the flesh of the MPAKASA XINA
to their family BAKULu. These four,\[3\] great ones then are the XINA of
the whole tribe and the three sub-tribes composing it, and the three are
not only the sacred animals of the sub-tribes, but also the forbidden
food of certain families in those sub-tribes. As we are treating only of
LUANGO, we must restrict ourselves to its sacred animals.

MPAKASA AWCI is called the XINA XI BIKA MUANA BUKULU, or the four left
by the offspring of the spirit of the ancient.

2nd Class. Each province under the rule of its Fumu has two XINA, as in
the case of the province of XIBANGA, the SUSU or fowl, and the SEXI
(duiker); these are called BINA FUMICI.

3rd Class. Then each district under its KONGO Zovo has its XINA, as in
the chief district of the above province, the NZIKU, the chimpanzee.
This kind is called XINA XICI, and is the sacred animal of the sacred
grove of the district. Thus MPUKU, the rat, is XINA XICI of a family as
well as the animal connected with the grove MPUKU NYAMBI as an omen.

\[1. See note 3, p. 152.

2\. The route of Maluango and Makongo from San Salvador to Luango and
Kakongo is marked out by the ground where they rested becoming "xinkici
a'nci," *i.e.*, sacred ground. There are no altars made with tools, but
as you wander through the woods you will at certain places come across a
mound of earth and leaves. And as your servants pass this mound they
will add their tribute to it. They say these mounds are marks which
divide the frontiers (*ndilu*) of two provinces, and that in passing
them they pick up earth and leaves and heap them up, so that they may
not be accused, as they say, of bringing anything evil into the next
prince's country. These mounds are called Lombi.

3\. Including ngo.\]

4th Class. Each person living under his KONGO ZOVO (head of family) with
any pretensions to birth should have four BINA.

The XINA of each of his ancestors *i.e.*, two XINA XIXINKAKA:

XI'XITATA, the XINA of his father's family.

XI'XIFUMBA, the XINA of his mother's family.

In connection with this class it is astonishing how few can trace their
pedigrees back to their grandfathers. Take, for instance, the following
examples:

TATI of BENGUELA says his father's XINA was NGULUBU, the pig; his
mother's NGWALI, the partridge; and that he is

of the family of NZIKU.

BAYONA of NTUMPU

|           |                |             |
|-----------|----------------|-------------|
| Father    | KABI           | Antelope.   |
| Mother    | NZIKU          | Chimpanzee. |
| Ancestors | NGULUBU        | Pig.        |
|           | NYUNDU XIBANGA | Otter.      |

ENGO of FUTILA (Kakongo)

<table data-border="0" width="638">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Father</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>KABI</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Antelope.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Mother</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>NGWALI</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Partridge</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Grandparents<br />
or ancestors</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>NGULUBU</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Pig.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

MAKAMBA Of XILENDI NKOMBI

|        |                                    |       |
|--------|------------------------------------|-------|
| Father | NKOMBO                             | Goat. |
| Mother | A slave brought from the interior. |       |

SUNGU of XIENJI

|        |         |          |
|--------|---------|----------|
| Father | NKOMBO  | Goat.    |
| Mother | MPAKASA | Buffalo. |

LUIZ

|        |                   |            |
|--------|-------------------|------------|
| Father | NGWALI            | Partridge. |
| Mother | He does not know. |            |

In the case of BAYONA NGULUBu and NYUNDU XIBANGA show the districts of
his grandparents, while his father's XINA is KABI and his mother's
NZIKU. Through his ancestors he is related to TATI, whose father had the
pig as his XINA. Then TATI is of the family of Nzixu, the XINA of
Bayona's mother, therefore their families may not intermarry.

5th Class. Certain offices or situations carry certain XINA with them.

The office of FUMU ZINKONDI or ZINKATA; the pig, NGULUBU.

The office of BADUNGU; the NZIKU.

The office of PUNZI; food cooked by an unmarried woman.

This class is called XINA XISALU.

6th Class. Each XIBILA has its XINA.

BUNZI hates unmarried women; XIKUMBI, the maiden, is therefore its XINA.

XIKANGA NXILUKA hate a noise; the goat NKOMBO is their XINA.

This class is called XINA XINKICICL

7th Class. When natives are sick and are undergoing treatment certain
foods are XINA, and as often as not the patient is ordered henceforth
not to allow a companion to eat certain flesh together with him.

This is called XINA XI BILONGO.

8th Class. Certain household fetishes, bracelets, etc., carry with their
ownership certain restrictions as to food. The wearer of the NGOFO
bracelet may not eat the fish MPULI with another person; he may not kill
and eat an animal on the same day.

This is XINA BAKICI.

9th Class. Now, parts of some animals are found in the sacred grove.
This summed-up class is called XINA XI BIFUMBA.

These BINA of the BAVILI are as follows:

The skin of the leopard finds its way into the XIBILA only as part of
the dress of the individual. Neither the eel nor the cricket are found
there, but the MPAKASA is the greatest of all the symbols entering the
XIBILA of the BAVILI and so we will commence with it.

The wild ox in the stories of the Bavili is generally found acting as
the servant or ambassador of either the Leopard or some princely animal.
As often as not it is sacrificed while in the discharge of some duty.
Thus when NZAMBI (NGO?) sent him for the wagtail's drum he was killed by
the followers of that bird.

The tail of the ox called MAWSO is the sign of office of all the
Kongozovo among the Bavili, thus the idea of obedience to the voice of
one in authority is implied.

The wild ox is always on the alert for the slightest noise, it is
peculiarly sensitive to sound. The horns and head of this animal are
found in the XIBILA.

BAFU = the saw fish, the snout of which the BADUNGU carry as their sign
of office. This snout is found in the XIBILA.

NKAKA = a kind of crocodile (opposed to the NGANDU or crocodile in the
Kongo). This reptile is eaten by the BAKUNI or woodmen of the MAYOMBE
district to the east of Malango's composite kingdom. It digs out its
home underground in the banks of rivers. The hole is of the shape of the
letter <span id="img_15-001"></span> ![](img/15-001.jpg)and great danger
is encountered by the BAKUNI in hunting and killing it. The hunter by
lighting a fire at the entrance (1) drives the reptile into the bend (2,
3). He then carries stones into the hole and blocks up entrance NO. 2,
and lights another fire at the entrance NO. 3, and so suffocates his
prey. Should the hunter venture beyond NO. 2 without having blocked it
up the NKAKA is apt to slip through it and block up the main entrance
with his body so that the hunter becomes captive and certain prey. One
of the scales (MAKU) of this reptile is to be found in the XIBI LA.

BECI is what the Portuguese call silver fish. It causes great havoc with
the fishing nets as it is a great struggler. The saying KUBELA NKANU, to
lose right in a palaver, is connected with it. Its scales are found in
the XIBILA.

SUSU = the fowl. White fowls are used as offerings by those going to the
XIBILA to ask a favour. A fowl is generally found tied by a string to a
peg in the ground in front of;a sick man the Nganga is trying to cure.
It is a sign of good faith and is supposed to die if the Nganga in the
presence of his fetish does not act fairly. It is killed and its blood
used in certain medicines (XIMENGA). They call it MAFUKA the messenger
among the animals, and there is a saying MUANA Susu KULEMBA KUCIATA
KULALA NZALA.

A chicken goes to sleep hungry if its mother does not scratch for food
for it. Its feathers are found in the XIBILA.

MAKUNKULA are the cockle shells that together with the oyster shells the
people of Mamboma cast at the people of BUALI who have carried the
coffin of NTAWTELA as far as the NUMBU tree. The saying MAKUKU MATATU
XICI Ku BUNDUBUKU PE gives us to understand that it takes three ant
hills for a pot properly to be balanced for cooking purposes. Many women
and children are drowned each year by forgetting that when the tide
begins to rise it is time to cease digging for cockles. A mound of these
shells is found in the XIBILA.

NGWALI or NGUMBI or XILAWLOLO = the partridge, also a MAFUKA. The story
goes that a Mr. Partridge fell in love with a Mrs. Fowl and went home
with her, but passed a very wretched night in the coop owing to his fear
of Mr. Fowl, and to the fact that the owner of the village gave loud
orders at midnight to his people to kill a fowl in the morning before
letting the fowls out, as he expected some friends the next day. The
partridge got away. It is the bird that is killed by sons for their
mothers when their husbands have neglected them for strange women. The
head and feet of this bird are found in the XIBILA.

MAILI = oysters. The saying YAU MISAMU Y1 MATI MAILI gives us to
understand that the palaver to be talked out is no small matter, and
that it is as hard as an oyster to open. A mound of these shells is
found in the XIBILA.

MBOMA the boa constrictor. Its skin is found in the XIBILA.

TELE the whale. Its vertebra (KALA KALA MBUSA) is in the XIBILA and is
said to point out that people come there from all parts.

NKAWMBO the goat. When a member of a village has committed some crime
worthy of death, a town's meeting is called and if there be one
dissenting voice against his being put to death, his family supply a
goat in his place. This is killed and every member of the community must
eat a little of it. This custom is called MUNTU FUNDU NKAWMBO FUNDU.
Thus both the goats and the fowl are XIMENGA (of blood).

The goat's skin is used in the XIBILA to sit upon instead of the usual
grass mat. The animal itself is looked upon as noisy and lascivious.

SUNGU is a large antelope and the saying is (SUNGU MBAKALA MUNTU KE
KULILA MU BINANGA) that the Sunga always feeds on the tops of hills and
is therefore always ready to catch sight of his enemy. To look out
becomes a habit of mind (SUNGA) with it. Its head and horns are in the
XIBILA.

NZAU, the elephant. The chief of all the world the great giver of food
(KULAWMBO NDUNDU KU MITEKA) for when it is killed people come with
matets (baskets) and seem to be for ever coming and carrying its flesh
away. It stands for the ideas of animal love and knowledge, and the
story goes that it was led from Kakongo by a single string of piassava
(NKAWXI BA KAWKILA NZAU Mu Luvusu). NZAU is pet name given to little
babies. The hairs of its tail are found in the XIBILA round the necks of
people.

MPILI. The spitting viper. This snake is said to object very much to
noise or to being disturbed in any way. The people of the town of MPILI
hold this viper in great respect, and will not allow the grass around
the town to be burnt for fear of disturbing it. (LI very often takes the
place of CI primeval) and PI means hush! silence! so that the word can
be translated primeval silence. Its skin is found in the XIBILA.

NKALA (VUMA XIVANJI MANIA in full) the crab. After having held their
breath with fright, the danger over, the BAVILI give vent to a sigh or
groan of relief, this action they call Ku VUMINA and the word has thus
come to mean to fear or respect. They liken this sigh to a rest, hence
the word VUVUMA or VUVAMA, to be safe, or at rest. But the impression of
fear remains, hence the saying, "KUFWA NKALA XIFUNDU MIZI," the claws of
the crab nip even after it is dead. The crab, the sea, and sun, are
opposed to NGO, the earth, and moon, that is to say "spirit," opposed to
"matter." (KALA = to be eternally.) The claws of the crab are found in
the basket of Bilongo, in the XIBILA.

NOUIMBI KE KU VUKA. The shark that devours. Thus we learn that the word
VUKAI has the sense of devouring as well as that of copulating. The word
QUIMBUKA is to fear (relating to that cringing fear caused by a guilty
conscience). The KUBU or fin of the shark is found in the basket of
Bilongo in the XIBILA. KUBU also means the curtain or partition that
screens the bedstead (or the NKAKA NDILU).

NKUFU, the turtle. NUNI NKUFU U I NATINA MUANZA the husband turtle who
carries the roof (of his shimbec) on his back. This animal has a very
bad character; he is noted for his treachery and deceit, taking a mean
advantage over those he has promised to reward. For instance, "he" is
said to have made a trading compact with a man. They formed two traps to
catch game. He chose the best one, the man agreed as they were partners,
and he said it did not matter where the "game" was trapped as it would
be shared between them. An antelope is caught by the turtle's trap.
Instead of calling his partner to share the spoil he engages the ox to
carry it to his town, promising him a share for his trouble. When the
antelope has been cut up he sent the ox away to clean the plates, etc.
Then he hid away the food in his strong shimbec. When the ox came back
the meat could not be found, and he was much annoyed. He resolved to
destroy the turtle's trap. Unfortunately he was caught in it. The turtle
then called the leopard to help him, and played the same dirty trick
upon him. The leopard swore vengeance, and went to the trap and so
arranged it that it appeared that he also was caught in it. The turtle
came along and gloated over his friend's apparent misery, but when he
put his head out of his shell to have a look and smell at his victim,
the leopard snapped it off. The leopard then went to the turtle's town
and ate up all the food there, and then told the partner what he had
done. The man recognised that the turtle deserved his fate. NKUFI means
short in stature. The shell of the turtle is found in the XIBILA.

NVUBU (or NGUVU, the hippopotamus) UNILLA NGOLO, the hippopotamus that
eats very much. There are many amphibious animals, but only four of
which these words are used: NXELO KU BAKOKO NSAKTJSO KU VIA MBAZU. As

\[1. See p. 71.\]

a protection for the mouth of his bellows the blacksmith places an
earthenware nozzle over it, so must men protect themselves against the
fires which burn (ZINDOXI). These four are KIMBOLO, Nile crocodile;
NGANDU, Indian crocodile (another way of calling a man a wizard); BAMBI,
Monitor lizard; and the NGUVU or NVUBU. The word VUBA is to take
altogether too much for one's self. The head of the hippopotamus is
found in the XIBILA.

NKABI (the saddle-back antelope) Ku KABIKA NCITU MUNTU LI MONIO KU
KABIKA BUALA BUANDI KUTUNGA (as) the antelope leaves the woods to die,
(so) when the man leaves his town stockade he also dies. The word KABA
is to divide. The horns of this antelope form the symbol of the parting
of the ways. "We are all from one stock, and agree together along one
road until we come to the parting of the way," says the sign.

MBAMBI NGOMBI (monitor lizard). They say that this lizard came along a
road carrying a long basket or matet of salt. He noticed the little
cricket NKAWLA resting in the leaf of the LICISA (string plant).

"Get off that *tree*" (*sic*), says the Mbambi, "and allow me to rest
this load of mine against its trunk." "Why," answered the NKAWLA, "use
such a false picture to deceive me; you know that this is not a tree,
and you know that you simply wish to kill and eat me. I am here; kill
me!" And the MBAMBI snapped at the NKAWLA and devoured it.

The skin of this lizard is found in the basket of bilongo in the XIBILA.

NSEXI (SECI or SACI), a kind of antelope that is also known by the name
KINKUBA, an axe, and KIMPITI, half a matchet. What a beautiful yet
deceitful and undutiful animal this is is well shown in the stories Nos.
4 and 19 in *Notes on the Folklore of the Fjort*.

NSEXI KU SEKA, say the Bavili, meaning the dust of corruption. Its head
and horns are found in the XIBILA.

NVULI (the water buck). NVULI OBO, listen to what another says. Like the
NKUTI antelope, the NVULI listens to the false cry of the hunter, and so
often falls an easy prey to his destroyer. Its head and horns are found
in the XIBILA.

NGULUBU NGULU MBAKALA KE KU MANA MAYAKA. It is the pig that steals the
manioc (in the market). After certain palavers, certain household
fetishes like MPUMBU are washed in the blood of the pig. Its dried blood
also enters into many bilongo. It is the head of the pig that enters the
XIBILA.

XINGOLO XINYUNDU (the otter) XIBANGo NGOLA MACI.

The strength (resistance) of the anvil (NYUNDU) demolishes the firmness
of the waters, or the otter eats the fish called NGOLA.

The saying above is a figurative way of implying that the wife should
satisfy the desire of her husband. The skin of the otter is used in the
place of the proverbial figleaf as a dress. All princes in their visit
to the XIBILA wear this skin.

There are five kinds of fish forming the class MBIZI XIBALA, the spikes
of which enter into bilongo; they are XIENDO, MPUDI, NKOKO, NGOLA, and
XIBUELA. MPUDI and NGOLA are the cat fish, the others are rays.

NZIKU (=the chimpanzee). XZIKU NKONDO, as the saying goes, "Be careful
how you choose your friends."

NZIKA KE KU ZIKA MINA MUNTU, "an apparently friendly man may get one
into a big palaver."

NZIKU is the XINA of mankind generally. It is not only that there is a
certain resemblance between man and the chimpanzee in their outward
form, but they have many habits in common. It carries its young on its
back, and walks about the woods upon its hind legs with the help of a
stick. It fights with a stick. But above all, it is very gallant, and
treats its pregnant wife with the greatest respect, running away from
her when she is annoyed instead of beating her. Unlike other animals, he
is never caught in the act of copulation. But in spite of all this the
Bavili say that man must not be led to believe that the chimpanzee is an
animal that he can make a real friend of. Its skin is found in the
XIBILA.

When a person wishes to refuse a request he has simply to mention his
XINA. Thus, supposing his XINA to be NGWALI, the person says NGWALI, the
words MINU I CIABAKOKO, I have it not," being understood. The word
KAZILA (no road) is often used for the word XINA.

There is a class of people called MAVUMBU\[1\] (VUMBA to leak) living in
different districts of Kakongo and just on the southern borders of
LUANGO, who are not allowed to eat out of the same dish as the Bavili or
people of Kakongo. Should one ask for food he must tell the people that
he is MAVUMBU, but as it is a great disgrace to admit this, such a one
seldom does ask another for it. I know one or two very rich and
important men in the country, whose names I will not mention, who are
MAVUMBU. But where these people come from I cannot find out, neither can
I make out why they should be so cursed. MAVU=dirt, and so MAVUMBU may
mean the essence of dirt.

We may now, I think, conclude that this remarkable word XINA means law,
a thing forbidden, an abomination, and a totem.

It is said that the King Maluango has no XINA, but I think that this
merely means that as NKICI CI he is in the place of God, and therefore
above the law, for as Fumu his XINA is pig, and he must have his family
BINA also.

<table data-border="0" width="638">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><em></em>
<p>Sacred Animals.</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>MPAKASA.</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>MBAMBINGOMBI.</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>BAFU.<br />
NKAKA.</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>MPILI.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>NSEXI.</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>BECI.<br />
SUSU.</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>NKALA.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>NVULI.</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>MAKUNKULA.<br />
NGUALI.</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>NQUIMBI.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>NGULUBU.</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>MAILI.<br />
MBOMA.</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>NKUFU.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>XINGOLOXINYUNDU.</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>TELE.<br />
NKOMBO.</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>NVUBU.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>NZIKUNKONDO.</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>SUNGU.<br />
NZAU.</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>NKABI.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>NDUMA.</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

\[1. Father T. Derouet informs me that the tribe the Bavili call BAKUTU
call themselves BAVUMBU Or BAHUMBU, and that their greatest fetish (sic)
is NGO.

2\. My linguister Bayonna who has lived among these people adds that
when the father or prince Of the tribe dies his head (Father Derouet
savs his hands also) is allowed to remain in the water until all the
flesh comes away from it, when it is kept in a hut apart, and carried
with the family should it remove to some other part. His penis is also
cut off and smoked and then worn as a charm by his first wife's eldest
son.

Can these people be the family or tribe from which the MAVUMBU have
descended? And can NGO then be the sacred animal of not only the Kongo
people but of all the Bantu?\]

This formula differs from those which have preceded it. In connecting
the animals. with the categories we must take account of the fivefold
division of the laws; two families in the formula-the third and
fourth-are classed together by them for this purpose; and the six
families of the formula are harmonised with the five divisions of the
law, which may in fact be regarded as prohibitions of the opposite of
the categories; thus theft is associated with the idea of running away,
and this is the opposite of love and union, two of the ideas associated
with fire.

## THE PROHIBITIONS.

My friends have found no difficulty in placing these families in their
order under the five great divisions into which their laws are divided.
I give them exactly as they were given to me:-

1\. XINA XIVANGA NZAMBI-against God and rulers.

2\. XINA VA XIFUMBA -against parents.

3\. XINA NKAKA -against neighbours.

4\. XINA NSOKI or NSEXI -against covetousness.

5\. XINA MVILA -against illegal marriages.

Xina Xivanga Nzambi.

As the KONGOZOVO armed with a tail of the ox (Mawso) punish offenders so
does God-

The Badungu armed with the snout of the saw fish (bafu) are ready to
avenge the abused authority of their king by punishing those who like
the Mbambingombi would lead the people astray by false pictures (KUSALA
Fumu, the magic mirror by which Nganga Nyambi is alone allowed to see
the true picture of the prince to be elected in the place of the
Ntawtela).

The Nkaka or executioner is ever ready to punish those who by their
foolish talk disturb that silence (MPILI) ordered by the king concerning
his name and that of God-Xibika Bakolu.

The above three commandments refer to God but also to Xifumba or the
class that cannot be separated from God, in that God is man's father.

Xina Va Xifumba.

The Susu reminds the prince that on the fourth day (Sona) he must rest
(Ku Kala vaci) and the people of the country (Beci) know that if they do
not uphold the authority of parents and refuse to act as the Nsexi they
will become corrupt.

Xina Nkaka.

The cockle shells (Makunkula) remind the people of the death of their
king and how through loss of balance of mind they are led through vice
to become murderers and the prey of that fear associated with the shark
Nquimbi.

Desire is like the messenger (Nguali, partridge) that leads them to ask
married women questions which lead to adultery and death if like the
water buck (Nvuli), the woman listens to them.

Hard as it may be to open your mind (Maili) and tell the truth, it is
better to say nothing than to bear false witness in a palaver like the
turtle (Nkufu).

Don't let the snake Mboma usurp the place of your conscience and tempt
you to act like the thieving pig (Ngulubu) that steals the mandioca.

Xina Nsoki.

Remember the size of the whale (tele) and the small size of the fish he
swallows and don't be a glutton like the Nvubu and don't become a slave
(Nkombo) through playing the goat but let your wife be all in all to you
(Xingolo Xinyundu).

Xina Mvila.

Keep a sharp look out (as the Sungu) lest you fall into sin, and keep
within the stockade of the law (Nkabi) of your own free will. Be loving
and knowing as the elephant (Nzau) and as full of abundance, but take
care how you choose your wife or companion and don't marry your Xina
(Nziku Nkondo).

Be noble and serve and respect your God and those who are put in
authority over you, and do not allow yourselves to come under the
domination of fear (Nduma for Mboma).

This is the sum total of your duty towards God and man.

This XINA XIVANGA ZAMBI is connected with the category of water, through
immorality and abuse of speech.

XINA VA XI fumba is connected with the category of earth through
corruption (SEXI dust), which is looked upon as the opposite of
solidity.

XINA NKAKA is connected with marriage and desire, through fear caused by
their opposites, adultery and abuse of desire; and with motion and
procreation, through the fear of punishment which causes the evil doer
to run away.

XINA SOXI is connected with the category of plenty through the abuse of
appetite and lust.

XINA Mvila is connected with life and birth, through the product of
legal marriage.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16. Nzambi (God), the Word Nkici, and the Bakici
Baci](mind16)

</div>
