<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mind00)  [Next](mind02) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*At the Back of the Black Man's Mind*, by Richard Edward Dennett,
\[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# AT THE BACK OF THE BLACK MAN'S MIND

# CHAPTER I

# LUANGO AND THE BAVILI

Discovery of the Kongo. -Subsequent History.-The Bavili. -Phonetics.-
King of Luango.

## A FEW NOTES ON THE HISTORY OF LUANGO (NORTHERN PORTION OF KONGO COAST).\[1\]

WE owe the discovery of the Kongo\[2\] to the enterprise of Prince Henry
the Navigator, fourth son of John I., King of Portugal, and grandson of
Edward HL, King of England.

Diego Cão, by royal edict dated 14th April, 1484, was commissioned to
extend the explorations on the coast of Africa, and he discovered the
Kongo River in 1484. The native name for this river is Zaili, Zairi, or
Zaidi, and it was so called as being the way of the spirit, or
personality of love and knowledge. The name, of course, was given to it
long before it was discovered by Diego Cão, and as part of the Fiote
religious system, as we shall learn later on. It must not be supposed
that the river was called by this name because the missionaries of old
came that way and taught the natives certain trades. The spirits of all
rivers in this part of Africa are supposed to teach the Fiote some
lesson.

\[1. By permission of the African Society.

2\. The proper spelling is Kongo; and this will be adhered to, save in
such expressions as Congo Free State, &c., which are fixed by usage.\]

The first expedition arrived at San Salvador in 1491. One hundred years
later we have a list of the provinces of the King of Kongo's immediate
kingdom, given to us by Pisafetta on the authority of the hermit, Duarte
Lopez.

The first mention of Luango is of a comparately late date, *i.e.*, 1663,
when Christianity was first brought there by Father Ungaro. The stay of
this missionary was quite a short one.

Father Jerome Merolla da Sorrento, 1682, says that he never heard there
was any Christian Prince in the kingdom of Angoyo (Kabinda), that
country having been always inhabited by a people extremely given to
sorcery and magic. But Barbot, who must have touched at Luango about the
year 1700, says English was spoken in Kabinda at that time and that the
blacks were all Christians.

When the history of Luango and Kakongo by the Abbé Proyart (Paris,
1776), is brought up to date, much use should be made of the old trade
books with their accounts of the sale of slaves and trade with the
captains of sailing vessels who were in the habit of giving the princes
credit and making remarks in these books. Father T. Derouet has
collected a great number of facts in this way, and I hope may soon
follow up the work of his famous predecessor, thus filling up the
interval between the time of the "tree climbing" missionary age and the
present-shall we say-intellectual one?

Then the old books of copies of correspondence of the firms of the
British African Merchants, Taylor and Laughland, and those of Messrs.
Hatton and Cookson, would throw light on the following period, when
merchants had settled establishments.

But while missionaries and explorers have come and gone, it is an
interesting fact that the only constant associates of the inhabitants of
the country during the last century were the traders, so that when Mr.
Stanley and M. de Brazza rediscovered and brought these parts once more
within history, they found the traders long established.

The history of European political influence on the Kongo does not go
back half a century. The most important dates are the following.

In 1873 the German West African Expedition settled in Chinchonso, a
place in the county of Samanu, in the kingdom of Luango.

In spite of the work of Du Chaillu, Bruce Walker, the Marquis de
Compiegne, and Monsieur Marche, the Ogowe River remained unknown until
in 1874, when M. de Brazza began his interesting labour in that part of
Africa.

1875.-In 1875 De Brazza expressed his anxiety to open up the Ogowe.

1877.-In 1877 Stanley arrived in Boma.

1878.-The Comité d'Etudes du Haut Congo was formed in Brussels.

1879-1882-De Brazza's voyage to the Kongo viá the Ogowe to Brazzaville
was carried out, and treaties were made with the chiefs of Alima and
Ntamo. In 1882 De Brazza declared the only practical route between the
coast and Brazzaville to be viá the *Kuilu* River.

1882, November 30th.-The famous Makoko treaty was ratified by the French
Parliament.

1883, January 10th.-De Brazza was appointed Commissionnaire du
Gouvernement de la République Française in West Africa.

1883.-Return of missionaries to Luango.

1884, April 23rd.-Colonel Strauch, on behalf of the African
International Association, gave France the famous "droit du préférence"
on the Congo State.

1885, February 5th.-France, by a treaty with the African International
Association (nascent Congo State), gave up its pretensions to the left
bank of the Lower Kongo, and obtained the cession of the territories
Niari Kuilu. February 14th.Portugal, with the mediation of France,
concluded a treaty with the African International Association.

1885, February 26th.-Berlin Act was signed by which the district of
"Congo Français" was acknowledged as French.

Since which time this part of Luango under French rule, and no longer
managed by its native rulers, has passed through a somewhat troublous
time.

The Bavili, or inhabitants of Luango, occupy the coast of Africa between
the Mayumba river north and that of the Chiluango river south, that is
the land about latitude 5°11'30". So far as we know these people have
not been subject to any great raids, like those of the Bayaka, or the
people of the Congo south of that river. This may be owing to the
protection given to them by the belt of forest that divides their
country on the east from the country of the Bakunia and Bayaka. There
are traditions of wars between the Bavili and Bacoxi, the people of
Kakongo, when, the), say, the Bavili went in such crowds to Kakongo as
to have dried up its rivers in the crossing.

It is only by their Bakici baci (dealt with in Chapter XI.) that traces
can be found of the provinces having once been under one King, but the
King of Kongo is still looked upon as their spiritual head in a far-off
kind of way, and their system of government is the same. Even when the
first missionaries made their appearance in Africa, both Kakongo and
Luango acted as if they were independent kingdoms.

The BAVILI are part of the FJORT, FIOTI, or FIOTE tribe, which in its
turn is a section of the great BANTU race. Although FJORT is the name by
which these people of Kongo are undoubtedly known to-day, Consul Roger
Casement informs me that that is not the name by which they are called
by the people of other tribes in the interior, and the distinguished
African trader, Mr. C. Sanders, tells me that the older Portuguese
traders informed him some twenty years ago that the word FJORT or FIOTI
was simply a corruption of the Portuguese word FILHOTE meaning, as
nearly as I can translate the word' in English, "young rascal," that is
to say the termination OTE gives the word FILHO or son a disparaging
sense. If Mr. Sanders is correct then Monseigneur A. H. Carrie's FIOTE
is the nearest approach to FILHOTE, the O in the Portuguese alphabet
having much the same sound given to it by Mr. Bentley in his KONGO
alphabet, *i.e.*, as the O in the French word corps. If on the other
hand the word is a KONGO one (and undoubtedly it is used for the English
word "little "), then it might be derived from the words FIA or VIA, to
plant, and UTA, to bear, meaning the propagator in opposition to VIANGA,
the creator.

In the following pages, to enable the reader to catch the native sounds
as nearly as possible the writer will use the vowels as in the Italian,
and the consonants as in English, with two exceptions, -AW, i.e. for the
O sound, as in "corps," and X for the sound TCHI, or Monseigneur
Carrie's K. This X or TCHI sound must not be confused with the SH or X
sound of Mr. Bentley. For instance, Mr. Bentley spells ZINA, a name,
XINA, but XINA or TCHINA in the BAVILI dialect has the signification of
law, a thing forbidden, totem, abomination, while XINA the verb, is to
dance. The prefix KI in the Kongo, finds its counterpart in XI (TCHI) in
the XIVILI, and this I presume is why Monseigneur Carrie has
manufactured the sign K. We have this TCHI sound very nearly in the
English word "church" (XURX) which the Scotch call KIRK, and there being
no EKS sound in the XIVILI, and a sign being wanted for the TCHI sound,
I think I am right in using the letter X for it rather than the new sign
K.

With these brief introductory remarks we may pass to matters more
closely akin to the subject of the book-the kingly office in Luango.

Battell visited Luango in about the year 1603, and for the short time
that he was in the province, gathered much information about the King
and native customs which stands good even to this day. Among other
interesting facts he mentions the -name of the last King, ie., "Gembe"
(now written NJIMBI).

MANILUEMBA, the present Maluango elect, about whom we shall have much to
say, took the place of MANIPRATI, who was deposed by the people for
having killed his own daughter for refusing to cohabit with him.
Maniprati had succeeded Mani MAKIWSO, who was the Maluango elect, and
Nganga NVUMBA, when the French first took possession of the country in
1883. The title NGANGA NVUMBA is a priestly one, given to the Maluango
elect upon his accession, and one that he retains until the coronation
ceremony completes the burial rites of the NTAWTELA or deceased
MALUANGO, when he becomes the crowned MALUANGO.

NIANIPRATI was the last crowned Maluango, and the ZINGANGA NVUMBA
preceding him were MANI MAKAWSO MASONGA, MANIMAKAWSO MANAWMBO,
MANIMAKAWSO MATUKILA of KONDI, and MAN'ANAWMBO, none of whom were
crowned. MANI YAMBI became MALUANGO, as did his predecessors, MANIPUATI
Of XIBANGA and Maluango TATI of KONDI, who they say succeeded Maluango
NJIMBI.

Maluango PRATI is said to have died some fifty-five years ago, so that
if this list of rulers be complete, eight of them filled in the time
intervening between 1603 and, say, 1860, giving them each an average
reign of thirty-two years, and this appears to the writer too great an
average, though some native princes reign for a very long time. He is
inclined to think that either the list is incomplete or that the NJIMBI
referred to by the natives is not the same as the one mentioned by
Battell.

The French took Luango in 1883, in MANIMAKAWSO'S time, but they
naturally enough, not knowing much of the history of the country, never
considered it well to crown him officially. Had they done so and aided
him to assert his kingly authority over his provinces and vassals the
French to-day would have been in possession of a well-ordered province.
As it happened, at the Berlin Conference, 1884, Maluango's rights were
ignored, and part of his kingdom added to Portugal, just as part of
Kakongo's province was given to the Congo Free State. Then the
Government seemed too busy in developing its Upper Ubanghi and Sangha
provinces in the direction of the Nile and Lake Chad to devote any
serious attention to this part of their rich colony, so that Luango and
the Lower Kongo provinces of their enormous possessions have been
neglected. After some time they caused MANILUEMBA to be elected, and
appeared anxious to administer the country through native channels. In
the meantime, however, they had created a class of natives who might be
termed "atheist," or who at any rate were "unfaithed," and they, and the
general state of anarchy in which the country finds itself, will
certainly make the task of the Government no easy one.

Early in 1898, the Administrator summoned Mamboma and the other princes
of Luango to the residence, and informed them that it was their desire
that a Maluango should be crowned, and the native *régime*, under the
Government's protection, be restored. The choice of the people fell upon
Maniluemba, nephew of Maluango Prati; and- Mamboma and the princes went
to him to ask him if he would accept the throne. Hearing of this, I
determined, in the interest of Folklore, to go and interview the
king-elect.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2. Election of a King in the Kongo](mind02)

</div>
