<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mind07)  [Next](mind09) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*At the Back of the Black Man's Mind*, by Richard Edward Dennett,
\[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VIII

# NDONGOISM

Fetishism and Religion.-The Zinkici. -Putting Life into the Image.-The
Mpumbu. -Rites.-Ximbuka and other Zinkici. -Amulets. -Nail Fetishes. -
How they are made.

IT is commonly assumed by writers on Africa that fetishism (the worship
of tutelary images) is the religion of the African. It is true that
images (so-called gods of Africa) of this description are very common in
the Kongo, and if religion be defined as the relation conceived to exist
between man and an invisible world, the term religion may perhaps be
applied without inaccuracy to this cult, which is essentially not unlike
the occultism of more civilised regions with its familiar bottle imps
and witches' sabbaths.

Whether this fetishism (or NDONGOISM) is, properly speaking, religion or
not is of small importance. There is at any rate side by side with this
cult what few observers appear to have noticed, a higher religion, which
I call NKICI-ISM, connected with NZAMBI and the powers which as his
attributes symbolise him under the name of BAKICI BACI.

The ZINKICI are of two classes, ZINKICI ZINZO or ZINKONDI
(home-protecting figures, charms, and talismans), and ZINKICI ZIMBOWU
(figures into which nails are driven). Specimens of both kinds are to be
found in the British Museum and also in the Museum in Exeter, and
illustrations of some of these can be seen in Plates V and VII from an
article in the *Quiver* entitled "The Gods of Africa,"\[1\] by Mr. F. M.
Holmes.

\[1. Many people talk of the gods of the BAVILI, as they call the
"powers" and fetishes, but the BAVILI themselves say NZAMBI U VANGA
BANTU I U VANGA BAKICI BACI, or God made man and he made the "powers" on
earth also.\]

In this article there is an interesting passage referring to the late
Rev. Thomas Comber, a missionary in the Congo, whom all loved very much,
which, if correct, points to a difference in the way these fetishes are
supposed to act in the Congo and in Luango.

"Could this image hurt me?" asked Mr. Comber.

"Oh, yes; it would strike you dead."

Mr. Comber took it in his hand, and turned it about and looked at it
meditatively. It was a funny little object, an image of wood, with a
large protuberance on its back and a similar protuberance on its chest,
looking as though it were both hump-backed and pigeon-breasted at the
same time.

"What would happen if I were to cut it?" asked Mr. Comber.

"Oh, it would strike you dead!" they exclaimed in alarm.

"May I try?" he asked.

"Oh, it will kill white man," they asserted.

But as he pressed for permission, they at last agreed.

So in breathless silence Mr. Comber drew his knife from his pocket and
slowly cut off the pigeon-breast of the little figure. Scrap after scrap
fell from the image, but still it made no sign. At length he desisted;
the operation was complete.

"Behold," he exclaimed in triumph, "your god has no power. See what I
have done, and yet I am not hurt. It is but a senseless piece of carved
wood."

Then he proceeded to point the moral of his action by showing the
difference between such "gods" and the God of the Christian.

From the description of the fetish given, it was one into which nails
might be driven, and was perhaps the NKAWCI (two-hearted figure) NTIMA
WALI and of the ZINKICI ZIMBOWU class; their names are legion.

Whatever its name, and if of the ZINKICI ZIMBOWU the figure had been
named, it had cost the life of one person. When any injury has been done
to one of these fetishes in Luango, its "KULU," or spirit, goes back to
the owner of the fetish, and keeps on afflicting him until he has given
it a new figure, but it has no power in itself to injure the person who
has damaged it. If a native has done the damage he must pay for the
renewal of the figure; if a white man-well, he is only a white man after
all, and may be forgiven for his ignorance.

Many figures are sold to Europeans that are simply figures. A fetish
that is sold has had its "KULU" withdrawn. The only genuine fetishes
owned by strangers are those taken by force, but even in this case the
"KULU" comes back to the NGANGA, or owner. The Luango boy might be very
much alarmed and annoyed at such an action as that of Mr. Comber's, but
he might, if he were a rich man, laugh and enjoy the joke, concluding
that it was no use trying to frighten a white man by telling him that
his fetish, as a figure, had powers which he knows it has not. Natives
forgive much in a white man, especially if he chances to be beloved, as
the late Mr. Comber certainly was, but if he wished to be revenged for
the damage done, his course would be to have the figure renewed, and
then to have a nail driven into it with the express purpose of injuring
his enemy. Then the "KULU" would set about its duty.

On one occasion the Writer asked a native if the BAVILI made no images
of NZAMBI. "Who would be such a fool?" the man promptly answered, and
the writer said no more.

I will now proceed to deal with the Zinkici, and with some of the more
important amulets of the Bavili. We have seen that one class of images
is called ZINKICI ZINKONDI.

The ZINKONDI or fetishes brought by the winds, are also known as
BANKONDI in LUANGO. The only images of this class seem to be the MPUMBU.
These are wooden figures of a man and a woman standing about eighteen
inches in height. When these figures have been carved, it is necessary
to enroll them among the ZINKICI of the BAVILI. They must be set apart
from common figures (NKAWCI), and dedicated to their sacred use as
Nxici. This is done by the NGANGA in the following way:-

A small shed having been built, he encloses it with the fronds of the
palm tree. He goes into the bush to gather the leaves of certain trees
and herbs to make the necessary medicines. He picks out a man from the
family for whom the Bankondi is made, who shall act as the spokesman of
the figure, and then proceeds to put the spirit into him by pouring a
decoction or infusion of herbs he has gathered into his nostrils and
eyes. The man thus treated lies down upon an empty box within the shed,
surrounded by the fronds of the palm-tree, until the spirit enters his
head. He gives evidence of this by beginning to shake violently, so that
his body makes a noise on the box like the beating of a drum. He then
gets up and tries to run away, but he is forced back into the hut until
the attack has passed, when he is given the name of "NGULI BWANGA."

The wooden figures are charged with the proper medicines, and as
"Mpumbu" are then given into the custody of their spokesman, NGULI
BWANGA.\[1\] And when NGULI BWANGA has received the MPUMBU, he buries
medicines in the ground and plants a MBOTA-tree.

When a native is sick and has gone through all the necessary formalities
in connection with the rites of Mpumbu (rites in which the plant
MSAKASAKA plays an important part), a pig is killed, and its blood is
poured over the wooden figures of Mpumbu, as if they were supposed to
glory in that which the ZIFUMU ZINDONDI (kings) abhor.

The MPUMBU are said to have been brought by the EAST WIND (MABILI).

Other Zinkici are not in human form. *Ximbuka* has the form of a round
native basket made of the Mfubu leaves, and is used as the deposit of
the household remedies.

Its guardian does not throw kernels at this basket, but he shakes a
small gourd (filled with hard seeds that rattle) at it, as he requests
it to cure one of the family or to slay an enemy of the petitioner. It
has two guardians and voices that speak for it, Nguli Bwanga, a woman,
and Ngulu Bwite, a man. They are not a married couple, and are not
necessarily

\[1. See "Burial of the Fjort." My cook MAKAWSO was NGUM BWANGA Of the
Mpumbu.

2\. This guardian does not drive nails into the Mpumbu. He simply throws
palm-kernels and dust at them, as he asks them to kill the hidden enemy
who is secretly destroying the petitioner. And NGULI BWANGA causes the
MPUMBU to kiss mother-earth as a sign that the petition is heard, by
taking it in his hand and making its head touch the earth.\]

associated with one another. The ceremony of putting the voices into
them is the same as that connected with Mpumbu, but each personage has a
hut apart, in which he or she has to live two months.

NZACI is also a basket, and the same ceremonies are gone through in
putting the voices into its guardians. Both take the name of Suami until
the ceremony is over, when the woman takes a small fetish, NKUTU (a
small net), which she wears between her arm and body near the armpit,
and becomes Xicimbo, while the man takes the name of Xitembo. The above
two ZINKICI are said to have been brought by BUNZI, the south wind.

NGOFO. The ceremonies connected with this basket, which is round and
open like a coaling basket, are the same, but the maiden only is placed
in the hut. After this, which in this case is a marriage ceremony, both
man and woman wear a certain kind of iron bracelet. The maiden when
first she enters the hut is called Kayi's wife, or Nkaci Kayi;
afterwards she is known as Nkaci Ngofo.

LEMBE is a bracelet connected with a marriage-rite. The wife married in
this way is called Nkaci Lembe, and is the one who acts as the guardian
of all her husband's Zinkici, and should she commit adultery, the
husband, on his return home, upon opening the basket containing the
medicines connected with the marriage would find them wet. A Nkaci Lembe
is kept very strictly within her hut and the fence, LUMBU (Pl. IV, *b*),
surrounding it. LIBUKU, a large kind of rat, is said by Tati to be XINA
to NKACI LEMBE.

NGOFO and LEMBE are said to have been brought by the south-west wind,
NGONZOLA.

The following are some of the principal NKICIKICI, or personal
protective charms:-

CIBA, a charm worn by women to ensure safety in childbirth, consisting
of a horn of the little antelope (*sese*) filled with "medicines."

TANTA, a string bearing a strip of the skin of the Xinkanda (lemur),
tied tightly round the head as a charm to protect the wearer from harm
and pain. *Tanta* is also worn as a sign of mourning, and is then
supposed to have the effect of helping the wearer to bear his troubles.

(The *sese* and *xinkanda* are two of the most difficult animals to
catch; hence the charms are proportionately valuable.)

NTEO, a charm for a woman.

NDUDA, a charm for a man (Pl. V, viii).

BETUNGA, the charm which women wear to guard the life of the baby yet
unborn. It is made of a piece of the skin of the Xicimu, a kind of lemur
which is a very fast breeder.

NZAU, a charm which enables a man to procreate children. It is made of
the skin of the elephant.

XIKUNDA, a double-headed rattle having fetish powers, carried by the
BADUNGU or police society.

Mabili (Pl. VI) as NKICi NKONDI is found at the entrance of each village
and XIBILA, even as it is found at the gates of the old kingdom of
Luango on its eastern frontier. It takes the form of a string of grass
and feathers stretched across a road from two stakes or uprights of
Nkala wood planted on each side of it.

MBUMBA is the copper bracelet worn by the NGANGA MBUMBA, who grants to
those unfortunate in health the bracelet made of the fibre of the Baobab
tree called SUNGA MBUMBA, not to be confounded with the iron bracelet or
charm given by NGANGA MBUMBA XICIMBU.

Of the same class of charms are the bracelets (not marriage bracelets):-

NGOVQ, iron.

SUNGA NSACI, SUNGA XIMBUKA, SUNGA MABILI, SUNGA XINBINGO, plaited leaves
of palm tree or cloth.

NGANGA MBUMBA XICIMBU is the full title of the NGANGA MBUMBA or medicine
man attached to Maluango's court. He it is who accompanies and
encourages the NGANGA NVUMBA elect to proceed on his way to BUALI to be
crowned. He tells him that he will overcome all his enemies, or that he
has nothing to fear, as he has no enemies, &c.

He owns the fetishes XISONGO and XISIKA.

XISONGO is a piece of iron to be found near TERO, buried in the earth
near to the sacred ground. "Is it true," says the petitioner, "that I am
to have no children?" as he tries to pull up this buried piece of iron.

XISIKA is a piece of heavy wood buried in the same way in different
parts of the country for the same purpose, *i.e.*, a test of virility. A
plain iron bracelet is given to patients by NGANGA MBUMBA XICIMBU, and
worn by them as a bracelet.

BINKAWCI NKAWC1 BI MWAKUNU (the little figures that are apart looking in
different directions) are two figures on stakes driven into the ground,
which are said to turn round as the seasons follow one another. At the
beginning of the rainy season one faces Kayi, or the EAST, the other the
lake LULEBA-that is, their backs are more or less turned to the sea. In
the dry season they face west towards the sea.

NGOFO, iron marriage bracelet (originally ivory (LUVOSE) for real
princesses). NGOFO and FUNZI are the Luango and Kakongo names for the
same marriage rite and bracelet.

LEMBE, a heavy copper marriage bracelet common to Luango and Kakongo.

XIBUTU XILONGO, a small copper bracelet connected with the medicine
given by XIGANGA XIBUTU to protect one from evil. When a man wearing
this bracelet marries, his wife also takes and wears one as a charm and
sign of marriage.

QWANGO, NGOYO, MBONDO of MBOIO, MPEMBE are ZINKICI BANKONDI (see Pl. V,
viii).

MAKWAM and XIMPUNGU are names also of figures of this class. BISONGO
(like forks) are also known here (see Pi. V).

LUSAWNZI and NKUTU are numbered 1 and 2 on page 258, *Pioneering on the
Congo*.

NDIBU, page 247 in the same book.

We now turn to the other class of images, the NKICI MBOWU, or nail
fetishes, also termed ZINKAWC1 ZI BAKICI.

By far the most comprehensive picture of fetishism that we have yet
received from any of the great travellers who have from time to time
visited the West Coast of Africa is the chapter on Fetish in Miss
Kingsley's *West African Studies*.

We call shops, or stores, "Fetishes" on this S.W. coast, and (as Miss
Kingsley rightly says) the word is derived from the Portuguese word
"Feitico," meaning charm. "Feiticeiro" is the word the old Portuguese
sailors and missionaries gave to the BAVILI'S *Zinganga zinkici*.

The BAVILI divide all people into two great classes

1\. *Muntu nzambi* (man of god).

2\. *Muntu a Ndongo* (man of black arts).

Ndongo signifies the evil spirit that is said to live in the stomach of
all witches (ZINDOXI).

Now the *Zinganga zinkici* (or the repeaters of the lore connected with
the wooden images into which nails are driven) are not priests in the
sense that the *Zinganga Bakici Baci* are. The latter are *Bantu
Nzambi*, the former *Bantu a Ndongo*. It will be seen from this that the
religion of the Bavili is divided into two great divisions, and that the
old Portuguese sailors and missionaries were most taken by the
Ndongoistic pranks of the *Zinganga zinkici*, and that they looked upon
this part of the religion of the Kongo people as the whole.\[1\] This
error has been the cause of much misjudgment of the native religion, and
is perhaps one of the causes of Miss Kingsley's taking Professor Tylor's
definition of fetishism as serving to describe the complete religion of
these people. As Professor Tylor says, fetishism is the doctrine of
spirits embodied in or attached to, or conveying influence through,
certain material objects. In the next chapter I show that the Bavili
religion goes very far beyond mere fetishism. Their ideas, it is true,
are expressed in symbolic language, but fetishism bears about as much
relation to this portion of their religion as popular Buddhism does to
Buddhistic philosophy.

\[1. Talking Of NDONGO-ism or the religion of slaves connected with
witchcraft, &c., or natural religion, they say that "Dust has been
thrown into the eyes of the chicken."\]

Now let me tell you how a fetish of this kind is made, and describe some
of their names and uses (see frontispiece).

When a party enters the wood with the Nganga (or the Doctor) attached to
the service of the fetishes ZINKICI MBOWU, into which nails are driven,
for the purpose of cutting the "Muamba" tree, with the intention of
making a fetish, it is forbidden for anyone to call another by his name.
If he does so, that man will die, and his KULU will enter into the tree
and become the presiding spirit of the fetish when made; and the caller
will of course have to answer with his life to the relations of the man
whose life has been thus wantonly thrown away. So, generally speaking, a
palaver is held, and it is there decided whose KULU it is that is to
enter into the Muamba tree and to preside over the fetish to be made. A
boy of great spirit, or else, above all, a great and daring hunter, is
chosen. Then they go into the bush and call his name. The Nganga cuts
down the tree, and blood is said to gush forth. A fowl is killed and its
blood mingled with the blood that they say comes from the tree. The
named one then dies, certainly within ten days. His life has been
sacrificed for what the Zinganga consider the welfare of the people.
They say that the named one never fails to die-and they repudiate all
idea of his being poisoned or that his death is hurried on in any
material way by the Nganga, who, they say, may be miles away. The
difference between the spirit of "Mpumbu" brought by the East Wind and
the Kulu of the known individual that is to preside over this fetish is
evident.

People pass before these fetishes (ZINKICI MBOWU), calling on them to
kill them if they do, or have done, such and such a thing. Others go to
them and insist upon their killing so and so who has done or is about to
do them some fearful injury. And as they swear or make their demand, a
nail is driven into the fetish, and the palaver is settled so far as
they are concerned. The KULU of the man whose life was sacrificed upon
the cutting of the tree sees to the rest.

These fetishes attended big palavers and were knocked\[1\] by the
parties engaged, so that he who spoke falsely or bore

\[1. See Ante, P. 56.\]

false witness should die. These are the class of fetishes most in
evidence, and as such are apparently the bitter enemies of European
Governments, who seem to take a delight in clearing the country of them.
I wonder if they are right?-at any rate before they have got the country
properly in hand and can give the inhabitants that security they are so
fond of talking about. Brute force is no doubt a great power for a
European Power to wield over such a race as the BANTU, and will make
them do much; but is it not curious that civilised countries in the
twentieth century should resort to so barbarous a form of governing a
people supposed to be so much their moral inferiors? And by taking away
a fetish of this kind they do not prevent the native from making another
one to take its place. It merely makes the native more cautious, and
forces him to guard his fetish in some secret place outside the small
sphere of official influence.'

The wooden figures in this class of NKICI MBOWU are legion, and their
multiplication comes (1) from the desire of each district to have its
own nkici, and (2) from the importation from foreign districts of those
who have gained fame for their slaying powers or as deterrents. Thus in
Luango we hear of Mangarka,\[2\] Mbiali Mundunbi, EKAWSO,\[3\] Selo
Xingululu, Mani Mavungu, Fulula, Xiela, MBWAKA, all of whom are known to
be imported from Kakongo. It has therefore been hard work to distinguish
those which were originally consecrated to the use solely of this
district. For some time I had seventeen on my list, but I find that
Maquarsia, Ngoio, and Kondi Mamba are not Zinkici Mbowu, so that I am
left with the fourteen whose names I give you under all reserve, as,
after all, I may not have got at the true and original Bavili ones:-

1\. Mambili, a figure of a man with nails driven into it, now a wreck at
Ximoko.

2\. Mamboni Pwati, figure of a man.

3\. Mambika, a figure of a man.

\[1. MANGARKA, see Manchester Museum, Mani mavungu, see *African
Society's Journal*, July, 1902.

2\. MBWAKA, see Bentley, *Pioneering in the Congo*, p. 260.

3\. EKAWSO, see *Seven Years among the Fjort*, or Exeter Museum.\]

4\. Maleka,\[1\] a figure of a man (Pl. VIII).

5\. Bixibula Xibula, a figure of a man, at Mpili.

6\. Xilinga (?).

7\. Lenga lenga, a man with knife.

8\. Zambi inyona (?).

9\. Ngembe,\[1\] a figure of a man.

10\. Mvumvu Xioxilo,\[1\] a figure of a dog.

11\. Pansu muinda, a figure of a man.

12\. Boka miemvu, a figure of a man.

13\. Lu siemu, a figure of a dog.

14\. Mavungu Mambuembo, a figure of a man.

\[1. These are now in Europe and doing no good there, you may be sure,
but certainly no harm.\]

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9. Nkici-ism](mind09)

</div>
