[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](chap05)  [Next](chap07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p.121">p.121</span>

## VI

## KING DAVID

<span id="p.122">p.122</span>

> *Neither Saint nor Superman*--*Multiform Ability*--*His Radiant
> Youth*--*The Combat With Goliath*--*The Sonata* -- *David Embarrassed
> by Popularity*--*His Friendship With Prince Jonathan*--*His Marriage
> With Princess Michal*--*Their Quarrel and Separation*--*Saul's Anger
> at the Dinner Table*--*Parting of David and Jonathan*--*The Lie to
> Ahimelech and Its Consequences*--*David's Simulation of Madness*--*A
> Leader of Sedition*--*The Pretty New Wife*--*Lamentation of David for
> Saul and Jonathan*--*Ishboshetk the King*--*His Assassination*--*David
> Monarch of All He Surveyed*--*His Kindness to Mephibosheth and Its
> Sequel*--*David's Sin and Crime*--*Nathan the Bold*-- *The Rebellion
> of Prince Absalom*--*Character of General Joab*--*David's Grief for
> His Son*--*Murder of Amasa*--*David's Feeble Old Age*--*Presumption of
> Prince Adonijah*--*Summary of David's Character*-- *Personality of
> David.*

<span id="p.123">p.123</span>

## VI

## KING DAVID

David was neither a saint nor a superman; he was an epitome of manhood.
He was a representative of masculinity, and had the virtues and vices
that often accompany virility. Physically, mentally, spiritually he may
stand as the genius of his race. Leave David out of the Bible, there
would be vast empty spaces. In his own person he represents the athlete,
the shepherd, the poet, the musician, the mystic, the man-of-war, the
father, the friend, and the statesman. His deeds, his poems, and his
prayers are alike immortal. In spite of his gross sins, he had a certain
greatness of heart that drew the love of men and women who knew him,
that still commands the affection and homage of those who read the story
of his life. As a shepherd lad, he was the incarnation of the strength,
beauty, and grace of youth. King Saul commanded his servants to bring to
the court a first-class musician.

> Then answered one of the servants, and said, Behold, I have seen a son
> of Jesse the Bethlehemite, that is cunning in playing, and a mighty
> valiant man, and a man of war, and prudent in matters, and a comely
> person, and the Lord is with him.

<span id="p.124">p.124</span>

When Saul's incompetence became manifest, Samuel was forced by the
divine voice to commit high treason, to appoint a new king while the
throne was still occupied. It would seem that there was then a higher
duty than obedience to the reigning power. Samuel called Jesse to a
sacrifice, and passed his numerous sons in review. The first one, Eliab,
was a superb creature, of such imposing face and figure that Samuel said
to himself, This is the man. But the Voice whispered to him that the
true value is not in outward appearance, but in the heart. It was a
handsome family, the family of Jesse; and the proud father ordered his
seven sons to stand in succession before the prophet. It is like a fairy
story, where the obscure and neglected child turns out to be the
favourite of fortune. Samuel was puzzled; he asked Jesse if these were
all the sons he had. It appeared that Jesse had not thought it worth
while to bring the youngest, who was out keeping the sheep.

> And he sent, and brought him in. Now he was ruddy, and withal of a
> beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to.

To the amazement of the brothers, who, however, seem to have behaved
better than the brothers of Joseph, young David was anointed king in the
presence of the family.

David had not wasted those long days in the pasture; he had become an
accomplished musician, he had composed much poetry, and he had discov-

<span id="p.125">p.125</span>

ered his prodigious strength in killing a predatory lion and a bear with
his hands. Best of all, he had had many hours of quiet reflection and
thought; in the solitude of nature, in communion with the hills, he had
drawn close to God.

At the first interview, Saul did not dream that the boy was to be his
successor; he saw only a radiant youth, who had come to charm his sad
mind with music. He loved him at first sight, kept him in his presence,
and made him his armour-bearer.

David's first exploit was to destroy the Philistine heavyweight
champion, Goliath. He was an enormous fellow. His height was six cubits
and a span. Now we do not know exactly how long the Bible cubit is, but
it is safe to call it about twenty inches; and the span was probably
half a cubit, so that the gentleman from Gath was ten feet six--a tall
man in any company. He was as strong as he was tall; for his breastplate
weighed one hundred and fifty pounds, and the tip of his spear weighed
twenty pounds. Standing straight in shining armour, it is safe to say
that he would have attracted attention anywhere.

He came out in front of his countrymen every day for forty days, and
every time he challenged the children of Israel to produce a champion to
contend with him, that they might have a fight to a finish. Every
morning and every evening he made his little speech, until the
Israelites found the repetition extremely tiresome; but as no one seemed

<span id="p.126">p.126</span>

eager to accept Goliath's invitation, the situation continued without
noticeable alteration.

David's three big brothers were in Saul's army; the boy had gone back to
feed his father's sheep. Jesse sent him to the camp with food from the
farm for his brothers, a fine present for their captain, and bade him
return with news of the family. As David drew near to the trench, he saw
the host moving out in battle array, and their singing and shouting
fired his young blood. Then, to his surprise, the big Philistine stepped
out, made his customary remarks, and the Israelites fled from his
presence. David shot questions right and left, and soon learned all
there was to know; also of the glorious reward that would be given to
anyone who could eliminate the giant. His oldest brother Eliab heard him
talking, and was disgusted. This is no place for a boy; what do you mean
by leaving your sheep? I know what's the matter with you; you have
sneaked off from home and your work, to see the battle; now get back as
fast as you can. But this big-brother sneer made little impression on
David, for he was full of a great plan. He talked so volubly that Saul
sent for him; and the king must have laughed outright when David told
him that he would fight the Philistine. But his boyish eloquence so
moved the monarch that he won permission.

Goliath looked more like a fighting-machine than like a human being; but
as we know to-day that a fifty-thousand-ton battleship can be destroyed
by one

<span id="p.127">p.127</span>

torpedo, so David knew that if he could hit Goliath in an unprotected
place with his sling-shot, it would be all over with the big champion.
He had had plenty of time to practice, and had become as skilful as many
an American boy to-day; and he went forth with his small but dangerously
offensive weapon. As for his defensive armour, that was in his feet; he
took off Saul's cumbrous suit of mail, for if he did not succeed in
hitting the Philistine, he did not want anything to interfere with his
speed in running away. He knew that Goliath was not dressed for
sprinting.

The disgust of the giant when he saw the fairfaced boy advancing found
expression in words; but David was also a good talker, and after a
slanging match, he took careful aim, and hit the big face with the first
shot, so that Goliath was knocked out. Before he could recover
consciousness, David was upon him, and killed him with his own sword. It
must be granted that in this exploit David exhibited more skill than
courage; but when you are in opposition to superior strength, you must
use your wits, like Jack-the-Giant-killer.

It is pleasant to remember that the composer Johann Kuhnau (1660-1722),
who immediately preceded Bach as organist of St. Thomas's church in
Leipzig, and was the originator of the sonata as a composition in
movements, wrote six sonatas called *Musical Representation of Some
Bible Stories.* The piece dealing with David and Goliath is more quaint

<span id="p.128">p.128</span>

than impressive, but it gives delight still. As it is not generally
known, the separate movements--real programme music--are worth
transcribing.

> 1\. The stamping and defying of Goliath.  
> 2. The terror of the Israelites and their prayer to God at the sight
> of their terrible enemy.  
> 3. The courage of David, his desire to humble the pride of the giant,
> and his child-like faith in God.  
> 4. The contest of words between David and Goliath, and the combat, in
> which Goliath, wounded in the forehead by a stone from the sling of
> David, falls to the ground and is slain.  
> 5. The flight of the Philistines, pursued and slain with the sword by
> the Israelites.  
> 6. The exultation of the Israelites over their victory.  
> 7. The praise of David, sung by the women in alternate choirs.  
> 8. The general joy and triumph expressing itself in hearty dancing and
> leaping.

Just as the Bible has been the quarry for hundreds of stage-plays, so it
affords excellent material for instrumental music.

The dismay of the Philistines was equalled only by the joy of the
Israelites; and from that moment until his death, David was a popular
hero. Saul gave him a high command in the army, and might have continued
to love him if the women had not gone out to meet David with singing and
dancing and an odious comparison. "And Saul eyed David from that day
forward." On the morrow Saul had one of his attacks of melancholia, and
as David was

<span id="p.129">p.129</span>

playing music in his presence, Saul hurled a javelin at him; but he was
not so good a shot as the young man, for he missed him twice.

Like many another, David found his popularity embarrassing, for he knew
that the king would never forgive him; he behaved with modesty and tact,
and the splendid loyalty that he had perhaps inherited from his
great-grandmother made him true to Saul to the end; but it was all in
vain. For the more modestly he behaved, the more the people loved him
and the more violent and uncontrollable became the jealousy of the king.

David lived at court; and there began that noble and beautiful
friendship between Jonathan and David that has added to the beauty of
the Bible and to the glory of human nature. Few things can exceed in
duration true friendship between man and man; as it has no physical
foundation, it does not easily decay. It is interesting to remember that
David's friendship with the king's son lasted forever; whereas his love
for the king's daughter, whom he took in marriage, burned out and became
extinct. Princess Michal loved David, her maids told Saul about it, and
he was pleased; for he saw a way of destroying him. He told his servants
to let David know that he was to become the king's son-in-law; David of
course made a modest disclaimer, saying that he could provide no worthy
marriage settlement. Then, inspired by Saul, they told him that if he
would kill a hundred Philistines,

<span id="p.130">p.130</span>

the deed would be accepted as dowry. The intention was of course to have
the rash young man lose his life in the attempt. But David went out with
his own company and slew two hundred; so Michal became his wife. His
popularity increased enormously; in the quaint Bible phrase, "his name
was much set by."

Throwing the javelin seems to have been Saul's favorite indoor sport,
though he was an indifferent shot; he once more missed David, the weapon
quivering in the wall, and he missed his son Jonathan at close range.
Perhaps he was too angry to shoot straight. Then he planned to kill
David in his bed; but Michal let her husband down through a window, and
put a dummy in his place, pretending to her father that David had
threatened her if she would not connive at his escape. It is interesting
to observe that this dummy was the ikon, or family god, showing that the
Israelites were forever breaking the second commandment.

It is a pity that this marriage, which began as a love-match, should
have ended in a quarrel, but the cause of the separation was quite
natural. Michal must have been an attractive woman, for after Saul
quarrelled with David, the king gave her to a new husband by the name of
Phalti, who was so uxorious that when later he was forced to deliver her
back to David, he followed behind her--poor fellow--weeping. He made
such a noise that Captain Abner peremptorily ordered him to go home,
like a dog whose services are no longer required.

<span id="p.131">p.131</span>

> And her husband went with her along weeping behind her to Bahurim.
> Then said Abner unto him, Go, return. And he returned.

Some time after this, King David was coming from a victory, bringing
back the ark of God. He was in such high spirits that he danced before
the Lord with all his might, very scantily dressed; as the procession
entered the city, Michal looked out of a window, and there, to her
disgust, she saw her husband the king leaping and dancing in the street.
With that regard for conventional decency so much stronger in women than
in men, she despised him; she thought he was making a fool of himself.
It is easy to understand her rage and shame; no woman likes to have her
husband make himself ridiculous. When David came into the house in
bright glee and wholly satisfied with himself, his wife greeted him in a
manner that first amazed and then infuriated him. She told him acidly
that he had made a vulgar and silly exhibition, that everyone was
secretly laughing at him. "You thought you were just wonderful, didn't
you? Well, you made an ass out of yourself." David's male pride was
horribly hurt; he answered brutally, and as so often happens in domestic
quarrels, he insulted her family, reminding her cruelly that he had been
chosen over her father; that he was better than any person in her
father's house. Now he was going to do as he pleased; he would dance
even more vilely than she had seen him. This was the end; he never spoke
to her again. Unfortunate, but human.

<span id="p.132">p.132</span>

Such is the power of the tongue. David had not hesitated to take her
back from an intervening husband; his pride, which had not recoiled from
that, could not forgive her ridicule.

When David saw that everything he did only increased Saul's anger, he
had a long talk with Jonathan about it, and the two young men swore
eternal friendship, Jonathan begging David not to forget his children
when they were fatherless. He seems to have been certain of the speedy
approach of disaster to the king, and he knew that he must fall with his
father, like a loyal prince of the house. It is pleasant to observe that
he never joined David in public opposition to the king, though doubtless
he wished to do so. At this time they arranged a system of signals.
To-morrow was the feast of the new moon; and David knew that his absence
from table would be observed, though he did not dare to be present. The
dinner-time came; Saul took his accustomed seat by the wall, and Abner,
the captain of the host, sat at his side; the king glared at David's
empty place, but said nothing. On the second day, however, he asked
Jonathan what had become of David, for he knew well enough that Jonathan
could tell him, if he would. The prince began to defend his friend, and
Saul threw a javelin across the table at him; Jonathan rose, wild with
rage, and walked out, leaving his dinner untasted. The next day, by a
previously arranged signal, Jonathan went out in the field with a lad
carrying his

<span id="p.133">p.133</span>

arrows, ostensibly to practise marksmanship; but David was hidden. When
Jonathan shot the arrows beyond the place where his friend lay, and told
the boy to pick them up, David knew that the king was obdurate. The boy
took the bow and arrows and returned to the city. No sooner had he
disappeared than David sprang up; the two friends embraced, and renewed
their vows of friendship in one of the most deeply affecting scenes to
be found in literature. Jonathan returned to the city and David wandered
off into exile; it is impossible to say which of them suffered most.

David went away to Nob, and there asked Ahimelech the high priest for
food and weapons, telling him a lie, saying that he was an emissary of
Saul, and that the king's business required haste. Ahimelech loved
David, and gave him the communion-bread and the huge sword of the dead
Goliath, which David was apparently able to swing. All might have been
well if a certain man named Doeg, devoted to Saul, had not happened to
be there. He informed against David; the king sent for Ahime-lech, who
came with the priests; despite his protestations of innocence, Saul
ordered the footmen to slay the whole company; they did not dare to
commit this sacrilege, but Doeg had no scruples, and single-handed he
butchered eighty-five of the holy and defenceless men. Many centuries
later, the poet Dryden helped to hand Doeg down to infamy.

One of Ahimelech's sons escaped, and told David

<span id="p.134">p.134</span>

the tragic news; David was overwhelmed with remorse because of his lie.
He said, "I knew Doeg would tell, when I saw him there. I am now guilty
of the death of all the members of your family." But the young man knew
he was safer with David than anywhere else, so he accompanied him on his
wanderings--one more evidence of the confidence that David inspired in
those who knew him.

Although David behaved toward Saul with forbearance and loyalty, the
king was determined to make it a case of civil war. He proclaimed David
to be a public enemy, and pursued him with the royal army. Curiously
enough, David fled to Achish, the king of Gath, the old home of Goliath;
he was immediately recognised by the people, and he simulated madness;
he "scrabbled on the doors of the gate, and let his spittle fall down
upon his beard." He was a good actor, and completely deceived King
Achish, who exclaimed in a fashion that is not without humour. David was
brought before his presence as a dangerous enemy, but his crazy
behaviour was so convincing that the king said:

> Lo, ye see the man is mad: wherefore then have ye brought him to me?  
> Have I need of mad men, that ye have brought this fellow to play the
> mad man in my presence? shall this fellow come into my house?

Although David was in reality no rebel, he was generally so regarded;
his father and his brothers

<span id="p.135">p.135</span>

joined him, which must have taken considerable courage; and a natural
thing happened.

> And everyone that was in distress, and everyone that was in debt, and
> everyone that was discontented, gathered themselves unto him; and he
> became a captain over them: and there were with him about four hundred
> men.

He must have been disgusted with this rag, tag, and bobtail of an army,
but there was no help for it; his life was in daily danger. He was the
fox, and the royal pack of hounds chased him from cover to cover.

Several times he could have killed Saul; but he loved the king, and had
a sacred reverence for the office. Once he cut off a piece of Saul's
cloak, and at a safe distance held it up to the sight of the king, as
proof of his loyalty. He also made a flattering speech, trying to prove
to Saul that he was making much ado about nothing.

> After whom is the king of Israel come out? after whom dost thou
> pursue? after a dead dog, after a flea?

This time Saul wept, and repented, saying, Is this thy voice, my son
David? And for a time they were reconciled.

While still in exile, David, in a dramatic manner, obtained a new and
beautiful wife. It seems that he and his followers had protected the
vast property of a rich farmer named Nabal; being in need of food, David
sent his young men to this plutocrat, requesting assistance. Nabal was a
hard-bitten old

<span id="p.136">p.136</span>

skinflint, and he said, Who is David? Am I going to hand over my goods
to a runaway servant? When this message was brought back, the impulsive
and passionate young leader flew into a tempest of rage and sallied out
to destroy Nabal, his family and his entire possessions. There is no
doubt that he would have done this if it had not been for Nabal's pretty
wife Abigail. She secretly took an enormous heap of costly provisions,
and went to meet the avenger. David was extremely susceptible to beauty,
and when this "woman of good understanding and of a beautiful
countenance" looked him in the eyes and spoke flatteringly and
soothingly, he melted like snow in the sunshine. She was as fair in
speech as in face; she said: "The soul of my lord shall be bound in the
bundle of life with the Lord thy God." David blessed her for coming, and
for saving him from the guilt of murder. She returned home.

That night old Nabal gave a big dinner to his cronies, and got very
drunk. He was feeling bad the next morning, but so much worse when his
wife told him of her doings that he had a stroke, and in ten days was
dead. David exclaimed with delight when he heard of this, and
immediately asked Abigail to become his wife. She accepted with
alacrity.

There were two fine qualities in David that were never understood even
by those closest to him; one was his reverential loyalty to King Saul,
the other the strength of his family affection. Both were

<span id="p.137">p.137</span>

greater than his concern for his personal glory or safety. Nearly all
men have been glad to learn of the death of their enemies, especially
when an immediate advantage rises from it. Julius Caesar and David--both
humane--are the notable exceptions. David was at Ziklag one day when a
messenger came from the field of battle, bearing the news that Saul was
dead and saying that he, the messenger, had, at the king's request,
killed him. To the astonishment of the visitor, David was struck with
horror. Wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thine hand to destroy the
Lord's anointed? And he had the man killed on the spot.

Then he composed an elegiac poem for Saul and Jonathan, which, in
immortal phrase, sets forth the passion of loyalty and friendship:

> The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places: how are the mighty
> fallen!  
> Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon; lest
> the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the
> uncircumcised triumph......  
> Saul and Jonathan were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in
> their death they were not divided: they were swifter than eagles, they
> were stronger than lions......  
> How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle! O Jonathan, thou
> wast slain in thine high places.  
> I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan; very pleasant hast thou
> been unto me: thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of
> women.  
> How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!

<span id="p.138">p.138</span>

Saul's son, Ishbosheth, was crowned king of Israel, and David king of
Judah. Civil war began, and nearly all the forty years of David's reign
were filled with fighting against foreign and domestic foes. Two famous
generals were Abner, who was a true and high-minded gentleman, and Joab,
a professional fighting-hack, who understood neither pity nor remorse,
and who never forgot a personal enemy. Abner was of the party of Israel,
for he had been Saul's captain-in-chief; in the early days of the civil
war, the three sons of Zeruiah--Joab, Abishai, and young Asahel--pursued
hard after the retreating Abner. Now Asahel was the fastest runner in
the country; he gained rapidly on Abner, who besought him to stop, or at
any rate to take armour from one of the young men, so that there might
be a fair duel. But he kept on in hot pursuit; and Abner, much against
his will, was forced in self-defence to slay him, pushing his long spear
backward.

After this battle, Abner pleaded with Joab to end the strife; and Joab
pretended that all was well. Meanwhile the loyal Abner was insulted by
the idiotic Ishbosheth, so grossly insulted that he went over to David.
Then Joab treacherously invited Abner to a quiet conference, and slew
him at the gate. King David wept bitterly, gave Abner a royal funeral,
and mourned publicly at the grave, saying that a prince and a great man
had fallen in Israel, adding, "These sons of Zeruiah be too hard for
me."

<span id="p.139">p.139</span>

King Ishbosheth was assassinated, killed in his bed, and the murderers
brought his head to the horrified David, who reminded them of what he
had done to the messenger who came from dead Saul, "who thought that I
would have given him a reward for his tidings."

> How much more, when wicked persons have slain a righteous person in
> his own house upon his bed?

He gave orders; the messengers were killed, their bodies mutilated, and
hanged over the pool in Hebron.

David was then anointed king over Israel; he reigned seven years over
Judah and thirty-three years over the united countries. Jerusalem became
the seat of the monarchy and the city of David.

His power grew apace; he formed an alliance with Hiram king of Tyre, and
his conquests extended so far that he was able to put a garrison in
Damascus, the Syrians paying tribute. Garrisons were also placed in
Edom, and the army became a highly efficient force, under the command of
General Joab.

It is pleasant to remember King David's kindness to a son of Jonathan,
who was a cripple. This was Mephibosheth, who was permanently injured,
as so many babies have been, by the carelessness of a nurse. He was five
years old, when the news of the death of his father and grandfather
came; his nurse picked him up, started to run and, in her haste, dropped
him. As a result, he was incurably lame in

<span id="p.140">p.140</span>

both feet. Years later, David enquired if there was anyone left of the
house of Saul, to whom he might show a kindness for Jonathan's sake; a
man named Ziba appeared and told the king of Mephibosheth. The lame
young man appeared in the royal presence with fear and trembling, and
did obeisance; but David told him that he would always care for him for
his father's sake; he should receive back the property that he would
have inherited from Saul, and he should be a perpetual guest at the
king's own table. Mephibosheth was overcome with embarrassed gratitude,
and said: "What is thy servant, that thou shouldest look upon such a
dead dog as I am?" But David commanded Ziba and his whole family to work
for Mephibosheth with the same zeal and reverence as if he were King
Saul himself; and as Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty servants, it was a
large order. Ziba cheerfully obeyed the king's directions; Mephibosheth
and his baby son Micha were treated with the homage due to royalty.
David never appeared to better advantage; he not only saved Mephibosheth
and his family from want, but he restored the poor cripple's
self-respect. From being a neglected and helpless fugitive, he held a
high place in the palace of the king, and it is certain that no one
dared to slight him.

It turned out later that either Mephibosheth or Ziba was a liar; it is
one of those innumerable cases that depend on human testimony, the least
dependable thing in the whole world; the testimony is

<span id="p.141">p.141</span>

flatly contradictory and both puzzled and disgusted David, so that he
finally settled the matter with a contemptuous gesture. It seems
incredible, after David's kindness, that Mephibosheth should have
behaved with rank and treacherous ingratitude; but it would not be the
first or the last time in history. When David was in sore distress
during the rebellion of Absalom, and the opportunists were in doubt
which side to support, Ziba appeared before the king with an immense
store of provisions, and in response to David's question as to
Mephibosheth, Ziba replied that the lame man stayed in Jerusalem,
rejoicing in David's downfall, and believing that the house of Saul
would regain the throne. This sounds like a huge lie; but David
apparently believed it, for he told Ziba that the property of
Mephibosheth should thenceforth belong to him. After Absalom's death,
when King David re-entered Jerusalem, who should come to meet him but
Mephibosheth, looking like a vagabond; he had neither dressed his feet,
nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his clothes from the day David had
fled. This looked like sincerity of mourning; and the king enquired, Why
did you not go with me, Mephibosheth? and he answered that he had
planned to ride to the king, but that Ziba had slandered him. In this
mental morass, the king floundered a moment, and then said impatiently
that the property must be divided between Ziba and Mephibosheth. The
latter answered humbly that he was willing to have Ziba take all, he was
so happy

<span id="p.142">p.142</span>

at the king's successful return. All we can say is, Somebody lied.

If Mephibosheth continued to eat at the king's table, the situation must
have been somewhat constrained.

It is sad that after recording the fidelity of David to the memory of
his best friend, we should have also to write down one of the blackest
crimes of his life. But although David is one of the heroes of
Israelitish history, the honest old chronicler set down the most
damaging facts, for only one reason --because they were the truth.
David's adultery and murder have made a tremendous impression on the
world, just as Napoleon's murder of the Duc D'Enghien has shocked people
more than the hundred thousand murders he committed to satisfy his
selfish ambition; what should one individual be among so many? But most
readers have so little imagination that the fate of one well-known
person of high social position stirs them more than thousands of
nameless sufferers; just as we are more distressed at an automobile
accident that happens before our eyes than we are by reading of a
faraway calamity that destroys two hundred or two thousand people. David
had much wholesale slaughter on his soul besides this particular crime;
but here we know the names of the characters, and they are as real as
acquaintances.

Toward the close of a summer day, after David had been enjoying a
siesta, he rose and walked on

<span id="p.143">p.143</span>

the roof of the royal palace; and in the dusk, he saw a woman bathing.
He sent a messenger to inquire her name, and upon learning that she was
married to Uriah the Hittite, he took her himself. It has often been the
royal prerogative to take anything that happens at the moment to seem
attractive; one reason why so many kings have no true appreciation of
beauty is because admiration with them is always mingled with predatory
desire; they have about as much artistic discernment of beauty as a
thief has of the beauty of the plate and jewels he steals. He sent
Bathsheba home again, and after a time she sent him word that she was
with child. Her husband Uriah was away with the army, fighting for his
country, which does not add to the attractiveness of David's conduct.
The king sent word to General Joab that he wished to speak with Uriah.
Accordingly, the soldier, who seems to have been a rugged, upstanding
man-at-arms, came into the presence of the king. In vain did David
attempt to persuade Uriah to go to his house; Uriah said that his
comrades were fighting at the field, and he would be ashamed to sleep in
comfort while they were in hardship and peril. Doubtless this was not
the real reason; he must have suspected the truth the moment he looked
into the king's face. So David sent the brave fellow back to the camp,
with instructions to Joab to put him in the most dangerous position in
the battle. Joab knew what was expected and why; and in the dispatch he
sent home it appeared

<span id="p.144">p.144</span>

that among the casualties was Uriah the Hittite. The greedy monarch then
married Bathsheba; but although he forgot God, God did not forget him.

Nathan, the prophet of Jehovah, appeared before David and told him a
pathetic story of the cupidity and cruelty of a rich man in dealing with
a poor and defenceless person; the king's anger was aroused --we always
despise our own wickedness when we see it in others or on the stage--and
said that the rich man must die. Then Nathan pointed his finger at the
king and said, *Thou art the man.* He prophesied three evils that would
come upon David, because of his sin: the sword should never depart from
his house, his own wives should be publicly dishonoured by another man,
and his child by Bathsheba should die. All three came true.

The only creditable part of this melancholy story is David's behaviour
to Nathan. Instead of striking him down, or rebuking him, or trying to
explain his own conduct, he said frankly, "I have sinned." He confessed
and he repented. In spite of the care of the royal specialists, the
child died, and David said, "I shall go to him, but he shall not return
to me."

He kept his wife Bathsheba, for what would have been her position if he
had sent her away? She always retained her influence over him, and later
became the mother of King Solomon.

Little pleasure had David in his children: little pleasure in anything.
As in the life of Saul, the

<span id="p.145">p.145</span>

careless days of his youth were the only happy ones he knew. In order to
retain his throne, and to save Israel from foreign domination, he could
never sheathe the sword; bloodshed was chronic.

Prince Absalom inherited the manly beauty of the house of Jesse: "from
the sole of his foot even to the crown of his head there was no blemish
in him." Especially noticeable was his magnificent hair; it was so thick
and glossy that every year when he had it cut it was like taking a
harvest off a field. But he had no more moral sense than Alcibiades; he
was a traitor to his father and to the nation. He stole away the hearts
of the people by promises as fair as his face; and finally he felt
himself strong enough to organise open rebellion. The uprising was so
general that David left the holy city in shame and disgrace, like a
hunted man with a price on his head. But in a decisive battle, in which
the king's forces were led by the two sons of Zeruiah--Joab and
Abishai--Absalom's forces were routed. Before the battle, David gave
public orders that no harm must come to the person of Absalom; as so
often happens in tragic quarrels between fathers and sons, the father
loves his child with a passionate intensity greater than in harmonious
days. Anyone who has observed life must have seen this, which, if we did
not know something of the strange workings of the human heart, would be
indeed a mystery.

Joab was a plain fighting man; he saw in Absalom the most dangerous foe
of the state, and when the

<span id="p.146">p.146</span>

retreating prince was caught by the head in the boughs of a great oak,
Joab slew him with no more compunction than one would kill a
rattlesnake.

The king sat between the two gates, awaiting news from the front; he was
far more interested in the welfare of Absalom than in his own kingdom.
The watchman, standing aloft, saw a man running alone, followed soon by
another, Ahimaaz arrived first, and shouted joyously the news of the
great victory; but the king enquired, Is the young man Absalom safe?
Ahimaaz did not dare tell him, but muttered something about a great
tumult, the significance of which he had not waited to know. Then Cushi
arrived in the same spirit of exultation; and the king asked, Is the
young man Absalom safe? Cushi, with diplomatic tact, replied, May the
enemies of the king all be as that young man now is. The overwhelming
grief in David's heart left no room for any other emotion; his personal
gain was forgotten in the loss of his selfish and cruel son. No cry of
anguish that has come down from all the immeasurable woe of the past is
more poignant than David's lamentation:

> O my son Absalom, my son Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O
> Absalom, my son, my son!

The years of imperial pride and glory, which have made monsters out of
so many men, had never hardened the nature of David; the tenderness of
his heart was ever greater than his ambition.

<span id="p.147">p.147</span>

General Joab was disgusted with David's behaviour, and told him exactly
what he thought of it. David had never liked Joab or his family, and he
did not forget this speech, which was like a knife in a green wound. He
appointed Amasa in Joab's place; but he did not live to take it. Joab
came up to Amasa affectionately, and said, "Art thou in health, my
brother?" took him by the beard to kiss him, and with the other hand ran
him through. Amasa wallowed in blood in the midst of the highway; a
crowd gathered about his dead body, for this cold-hearted and
treacherous murder shocked the whole nation.

Joab retained his position as Captain of the host, and David seems to
have been afraid of him; but after a long career of fighting loyally for
the king, his good sense deserted the old soldier at last, and he made
the fatal mistake of supporting Prince Adonijah, who, in David's old
age, rebelled against his father, and announced himself king. David was
too feeble to exert himself; but Bathsheba came in, and reminded him of
his promise that Solomon should be his heir. He therefore made a public
proclamation to that effect, which caused such general rejoicing that
the followers of Adonijah disappeared like a mist, and left him in
ridiculous isolation.

On his deathbed, David sent for Solomon and said, as Joshua had said
before him:

<span id="p.148">p.148</span>

> I go the way of all the earth: be thou strong therefore, and shew
> thyself a man:  
> And keep the charge of the Lord thy God, to walk in His ways.....as it
> is written in the law of Moses.

He left two death warrants for Solomon to execute; one for Joab, and one
for Shimei, a blackguard who had cursed him during the temporary success
of Absalom. But those who then stood by him were to be remembered in
kindness by his son.

No figure in history is more real than David; he stands before us, with
his grandeur and his littleness, his virtues and his crimes. No warrior
was ever more beloved by the mighty men who fought for him, and the
episode where he refused to drink of the water that his captains had
brought to him at the risk of their lives--for they had to fight their
way to the well, and then fight their way back, spilling blood without
spilling water--is perhaps the most charming in his career; for it shows
not only the greatness, but the fineness of his nature.

No modern historian, whatever his personal bias, can injure David or
blacken his memory, for the simple reason that we already know the worst
that can be said against him; the Bible does not spare him. But in the
opinion of most unprejudiced readers, David is not only an imposing but
an attractive personality; we admire the great king and we love the
true-hearted man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. Solomon in all His Glory--The Romantic Figure of
Elijah](chap07)
