[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](title)  [Next](chap01) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p.viii">p.viii</span>

<span id="p.ix">p.ix</span>

INTRODUCTION

Priests, atheists, sceptics, devotees, agnostics, and evangelists are
generally agreed that the Authorised Version of the English Bible is the
best example of English literature that the world has ever seen. It
combines the noblest elevations of thought, aspiration, imagination,
passion and religion with simplicity of diction.

Everyone who has a thorough knowledge of the Bible may truly be called
educated; and no other learning or culture, no matter how extensive or
elegant, can, among Europeans and Americans, form a proper substitute.
Western civilisation is founded upon the Bible; our ideas, our wisdom,
our philosophy, our literature, our art, our ideals, come more from the
Bible than from all other books put together. It is a revelation of
divinity and of humanity; it contains the loftiest religious aspiration
along with a candid representation of all that is earthly, sensual and
devilish. I thoroughly believe in a university education for both men
and women; but I believe a knowledge of the Bible without a college
course is more valuable than a college course without the Bible. For in
the Bible we have profound thought beautifully expressed;

<span id="p.x">p.x</span>

we have the nature of boys and girls, of men and women, more accurately
charted than in the works of any modern novelist or playwright. You can
learn more about human nature by reading the Bible than by living in New
York.

The Elizabethan period--a term loosely applied to the years between 1558
and 1642--is properly regarded as the most important era in English
literature. Shakespeare and his mighty contemporaries brought the drama
to the highest point in the world's history; lyrical poetry found
supreme expression; Spenser's *Faerie Queene* was a unique performance;
Bacon's Essays have never been surpassed. But the crowning achievement
of those spacious times was the Authorised Translation of the Bible,
which appeared in 1611. Three centuries of English literature followed;
but although they have been crowded with poets and novelists and
essayists, and although the teaching of the English language and
literature now gives employment to many earnest men and women, the art
of English composition reached its climax in the pages of the Bible.

The translators made more mistakes in Greek than they did in English.
When we remember that English is not a perfect language, for as a means
of expression it is inferior to both Russian and Polish, it is
marvellous to consider what that group of Elizabethan scholars did with
it. We Anglo-Saxons have a better Bible than the French or the

<span id="p.xi">p.xi</span>

Germans or the Italians or the Spanish; our English translation is even
better than the original Hebrew and Greek. There is only one way to
explain this; I have no theory to account for the so-called "inspiration
of the Bible," but I am confident that the Authorised Version was
inspired.

Now as the English-speaking people have the best Bible in the world, and
as it is the most beautiful monument ever erected with the English
alphabet, we ought to make the most of it, for it is an incomparably
rich inheritance, free to all who can read. This means that we ought
invariably in the church and on public occasions to use the Authorised
Version; all others are inferior. And, except for special purposes, it
should be used exclusively in private reading. Why make constant
companions of the second best, when the best is available?

The so-called Revised Version and modern condensed versions are valuable
for their superior accuracy in individual instances; they may be used as
checks and comments; but for steady reading, and in all public places
where the Bible is read aloud, let us have the noble, marbly English of
1611. I suggest that one reason why so many people cease reading the
Bible after childhood, is because most copies are printed in abominably
thin and small type. It is easy to obtain a Bible in convenient shape
and weight, printed in large, black type, which pleases the eyes instead
of destroying them.

<span id="p.xii">p.xii</span>

In this book I shall consider the Old Testament as a work of literature,
revealing the grandeur, the folly, the nobility, the baseness of human
nature. I shall not consider it primarily as "the history of the Hebrew
people," for the Hebrew people are much like other people, having the
same passions, impulses, purity, filth, selfishness and self-sacrifice
that dwell side by side in the heart of every man and woman in the
world. I shall consider it as I would a play, an essay, a novel, a poem.
The characters in the Bible are just as real to me as Theodore
Roosevelt. I shall therefore point out and try to interpret interesting
and significant episodes and passages, with one hope in the back of my
mind all the time--that those who read these pages will re-read the
Bible with renewed zest.

W. L. P.

Yale University,  
Tuesday, 22 *August,* 1922.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. The Creation and the Flood](chap01)
