[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vlsng07)  [Next](vlsng09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VI.

## Of how Signy sent the Children of her and Siggeir to Sigmund.

Now whenas Sigmund is loosed and the stocks are broken, he dwells in the
woods and holds himself there; but Signy sends yet again to wot of the
tidings, whether Sigmund were alive or no; but when those who were sent
came to him, he told them all as it had betid, and how things had gone
betwixt him and the wolf; so they went home and tell Signy the tidings;
but she goes and finds her brother, and they take counsel in such wise
as to make a house underground in the wild-wood; and so things go on a
while, Signy hiding him there, and sending him such things as he needed;
but King Siggeir deemed that all the Volsungs were dead.

Now Siggeir had two sons by his wife, whereof it is told that when the
eldest was ten winters old, Signy sends him to Sigmund, so that he might
give him help, if he would in any wise strive to avenge his father; so
the youngling goes to the wood, and comes late in evening-tide to
Sigmund's earth-house; and Sigmund welcomed him in seemly fashion, and
said that he should make ready their bread; "But I," said he, "will go
seek firewood."

Therewith he gives the meal-bag into his hands while he himself went to
fetch firing; but when he came back the youngling had done naught at the
bread-making. Then asks Sigmund if the bread be ready--

Says the youngling, "I durst not set hand to the meal sack, because
somewhat quick lay in the meal."

Now Sigmund deemed he wotted that the lad was of no such heart as that
he would be fain to have him for his fellow; and when he met his sister,
Sigmund said that he had come no nigher to the aid of a man though the
youngling were with him.

Then said Signy, "Take him and kill him then; for why should such an one
live longer?" and even so he did.

So this winter wears, and the next winter Signy sent her next son to
Sigmund; and there is no need to make a long tale thereof, for in like
wise went all things, and he slew the child by the counsel of Signy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII: Of the Birth of Sinfjotli the Son of
Sigmund.](vlsng09.md)
