[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vlsng29)  [Next](vlsng31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XXVIII.

## How the Queens held angry converse together at the Bathing.

On a day as the Queens went to the river to bathe them, Brynhild waded
the farthest out into the river; then asked Gudrun what that deed might
signify.

Brynhild said, "Yea, and why then should I be equal to thee in this
matter more than in others? I am minded to think that my father is
mightier than thine, and my true love has wrought many wondrous works of
fame, and hath ridden the flaming fire withal, while thy husband was but
the thrall of King Hjalprek."

Gudrun answered full of wrath, "Thou wouldst be wise if thou shouldst
hold thy peace rather than revile my husband: lo now, the talk of all
men it is, that none has ever abode in this world like unto him in all
matters soever; and little it beseems thee of all folk to mock him who
was thy first beloved: and Fafnir he slew, yea, and he rode thy flaming
fire, whereas thou didst deem that he was Gunnar the King, and by thy
side he lay, and took from thine hand the ring Andvari's-loom;--here
mayst thou well behold it!"

Then Brynhild saw the ring and knew it, and waxed as wan as a dead
woman, and she went home and spake no word the evening long.

So when Sigurd came to bed to Gudrun she asked him why Brynhild's joy
was so departed.

He answered, "I know not, but sore I misdoubt me that soon we shall know
thereof overwell."

Gudrun said, "Why may she not love her life, having wealth and bliss,
and the praise of all men, and the man withal that she would have?"

"Ah, yea!" said Sigurd, "and where in all the world was she then, when
she said that she deemed she had the noblest of all men, and the dearest
to her heart of all?"

Gudrun answers, "Tomorn will I ask her concerning this, who is the
liefest to her of all men for a husband."

Sigurd said, "Needs must I forbid thee this, and full surely wilt thou
rue the deed if thou doest it."

Now the next morning they sat in the bower, and Brynhild was silent;
then spake Gudrun--

"Be merry, Brynhild! Grievest thou because of that speech of ours
together, or what other thing slayeth thy bliss?"

Brynhild answers, "With naught but evil intent thou sayest this, for a
cruel heart thou hast."

"Say not so," said Gudrun; "but rather tell me all the tale."

Brynhild answers, "Ask such things only as are good for thee to
know--matters meet for mighty dames. Good to love good things when all
goes according to thy heart's desire!"

Gudrun says, "Early days for me to glory in that; but this word of thine
looketh toward some foreseeing. What ill dost thou thrust at us? I did
naught to grieve thee."

Brynhild answers, "For this shalt thou pay, in that thou hast got Sigurd
to thee,--nowise can I see thee living in the bliss thereof, whereas
thou hast him, and the wealth and the might of him."

But Gudrun answered, "Naught knew I of your words and vows together; and
well might my father look to the mating of me without dealing with thee
first."

"No secret speech had we," quoth Brynhild, "though we swore oath
together; and full well didst thou know that thou wentest about to
beguile me; verily thou shalt have thy reward!"

Says Gudrun, "Thou art mated better than thou are worthy of; but thy
pride and rage shall be hard to slake belike, and there for shall many a
man pay."

"Ah, I should be well content," said Brynhild, "if thou hadst not the
nobler man!"

Gudrun answers, "So noble a husband hast thou, that who knows of a
greater king or a lord of more wealth and might?"

Says Brynhild, "Sigurd slew Fafnir, and that only deed is of more worth
than all the might of King Gunnar."

(Even as the song says)--

"The worm Sigurd slew,  
Nor ere shall that deed  
Be worsened by age  
While the world is alive.  
But thy brother the King  
Never durst, never bore  
The flame to ride down  
Through the fire to fare."

Gudrun answers, "Grani would not abide the fire under Gunnar the King,
but Sigurd durst the deed, and thy heart may well abide without mocking
him."

Brynhild answers, "Nowise will I hide from thee that I deem no good of
Grimhild."

Says Gudrun, "Nay, lay no ill words on her, for in all things she is to
thee as to her own daughter."

"Ah," says Brynhild, "she is the beginning of all this hale that biteth
so; an evil drink she bare to Sigurd, so that he had no more memory of
my very name."

"All wrong thou talkest; a lie without measure is this," quoth Gudrun.

Brynhild answered, "Have thou joy of Sigurd according to the measure of
the wiles wherewith ye have beguiled me! Unworthily have ye conspired
against me; may all things go with you as my heart hopes!"

Gudrun says, "More joy shall I have of him than thy wish would give unto
me: but to no man's mind it came, that he had aforetime his pleasure of
me; nay not once."

"Evil speech thou speakest," says Brynhild; "when thy wrath runs off
thou wilt rue it; but come now, let us no more cast angry words one at
the other!"

Says Gudrun, "Thou wert the first to cast such words at me, and now thou
makest as if thou wouldst amend it, but a cruel and hard heart abides
behind."

"Let us lay aside vain babble," says Brynhild. "Long did I hold my peace
concerning my sorrow of heart, and, lo now, thy brother alone do I love;
let us fall to other talk."

Gudrun said, "Far beyond all this doth thine heart look."

And so ugly ill befell from that going to the river, and that knowing of
the ring, wherefrom did all their talk arise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX: Of Brynhild's great Grief and Mourning.](vlsng31)
