[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vlsng09)  [Next](vlsng11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VIII.

## The Death of King Siggeir and of Stigny.

The tale tells that Sigmund thought Sinfjotli over young to help him to
his revenge, and will first of all harden him with manly deeds; so in
summer-tide they fare wide through the woods and slay men for their
wealth; Sigmund deems him to take much after the kin of the Volsungs,
though he thinks that he is Siggeir's son, and deems him to have the
evil heart of his father, with the might and daring of the Volsungs;
withal he must needs think him in no wise a kinsome man, for full oft
would he bring Sigmund's wrongs to his memory, and prick him on to slay
King Siggeir.

Now on a time as they fare abroad in the wood for the getting of wealth,
they find a certain house, and two men with great gold rings asleep
therein: now these twain were spell-bound skin-changers, \[1\] and
wolf-skins were hanging up over them in the house; and every tenth day
might they come out of those skins; and they were kings' sons: so
Sigmund and Sinfjofli do the wolf-skins on them, and then might they
nowise come out of them, though forsooth the same nature went with them
as heretofore; they howled as wolves howl but both knew the meaning of
that howling; they lay out in the wild-wood, and each went his way; and
a word they made betwixt them, that they should risk the onset of seven
men, but no more, and that he who was first to be set on should howl in
wolfish wise: "Let us not depart from this," says Sigmund, "for thou art
young and over-bold, and men will deem the quarry good, when they take
thee."

Now each goes his way, and when they were parted, Sigmund meets certain
men, and gives forth a wolf's howl; and when Sinfjotli heard it, he went
straightway thereto, and slew them all, and once more they parted. But
ere Sinfjotli has fared long through the woods, eleven men meet him, and
he wrought in such wise that he slew them all, and was awearied
therewith, and crawls under an oak, and there takes his rest. Then came
Sigmund thither, and said--

"Why didst thou not call on me?"

Sinfjotli said, "I was loth to call for thy help for the slaying of
eleven men."

Then Sigmund rushed at him so hard that he staggered and fell, and
Sigmund bit him in the throat. Now that day they might not come out of
their wolf-skins: but Sigmund lays the other on his back, and bears him
home to the house, and cursed the wolf-gears and gave them to the
trolls. Now on a day he saw where two weasels went and how that one bit
the other in the throat, and then ran straightway into the thicket, and
took up a leaf and laid in on the wound, and thereon his fellow sprang
up quite and clean whole; so Sigmund went out and saw a raven flying
with a blade of that same herb to him; so he took it and drew it over
Sinfjotli's hurt, and he straightway sprang up as whole as though he had
never been hurt. There after they went home to their earth-house, and
abode there till the time came for them to put off the wolf-shapes; then
they burnt them up with fire, and prayed that no more hurt might come to
any one from them; but in that uncouth guise they wrought many famous
deeds in the kingdom and lordship of King Siggeir.

Now when Sinfjotli was come to man's estate, Sigmund deemed he had tried
him fully, and or ever a long time has gone by he turns his mind to the
avenging of his father; if so it may be brought about; so on s certain
day the twain get them gone from their earth-house, and come to the
abode of King Siggeir late in the evening, and go into the porch before
the hall, wherein were tuns of ale, and there they lie hid: now the
queen is ware of them, where they are, and is fain to meet them; and
when they met they took counsel and were of one mind that Volsung should
be revenged that same night.

Now Signy and the king had two children of tender age, who played with a
golden toy on the floor, and bowled it along the pavement of the hall,
running along with it; but therewith a golden ring from off it trundles
away into the place where Sigmund and Sinfjotli lay, and off runs the
little one to search for the same, and beholds withal where two men axe
sitting, big and grimly to look on, with overhanging helms and bright
white byrnies; \[2\] so he runs up the hall to his father, and tells him
of the sight he has seen, and thereat the king misdoubts of some guile
abiding him; but Signy heard their speech, and arose and took both the
children, and went out into the porch to them and said--

"Lo ye! These younglings have bewrayed you; come now therefore and slay
them!"

Sigmund says, "Never will I slay thy children for telling of where I lay
hid."

But Sinfjotli made little enow of it, but drew his sword and slew them
both, and cast them into the hall at King Siggeir's feet.

Then up stood the king and cried on his men to take those who had lain
privily in the porch through the night. So they ran thither and would
lay hands on them, but they stood on their defence well and manly, and
long he remembered it who was the nighest to them; but in the end they
were borne down by many men and taken, and bonds were set upon them, and
they were cast into fetters wherein they sit night long.

Then the king ponders what longest and worst of deaths he shall mete out
to them; and when morning came he let make a great barrow of stones and
turf; and when it was done, let set a great flat stone midmost inside
thereof, so that one edge was aloft, the other alow; and so great it was
that it went from wall to wall, so that none might pass it.

Now he bids folk take Sigmund and Sinfjotli and set them in the barrow,
on either side of the stone, for the worse for them he deemed it, that
they might hear each the other's speech, and yet that neither might pass
one to the other. But now, while they were covering in the barrow with
the turf-slips, thither came Signy, bearing straw with her, and cast it
down to Sinfjotli, and bade the thralls hide this thing from the king;
they said yea thereto, and therewithal was the barrow closed in.

But when night fell, Sinfjotli said to Sigmund, "Belike we shall scarce
need meat for a while, for here has the queen cast swine's flesh into
the barrow, and wrapped it round about on the outer side with straw."

Therewith he handles the flesh and finds that therein was thrust
Sigmund's sword; and he knew it by the hilts as mirk as it might be in
the barrow, and tells Sigmund thereof, and of that were they both fain
enow.

Now Sinfjotli drave the point of the sword up into the big stone, and
drew it hard along, and the sword bit on the stone. With that Sigmund
caught the sword by the point, and in this wise they sawed the stone
between them, and let not or all the sawing was done that need be done,
even as the song sings:

"Sinfjotli sawed  
And Sigmund sawed,  
Atwain with main  
The stone was done."

Now are they both together loose in the barrow, and soon they cut both
through stone and through iron, and bring themselves out thereof. Then
they go home to the hall, whenas all men slept there, and bear wood to
the hall, and lay fire therein; and withal the folk therein are waked by
the smoke, and by the hall burning over their heads.

Then the king cries out, "Who kindled this fire, I burn withal?"

"Here am I," says Sigmund, "with Sinfjotli, my sister's son; and we are
minded that thou shalt wot well that all the Volsungs are not yet dead."

Then he bade his sister come out, and take all good things at his hands,
and great honour, and fair atonement in that wise, for all her griefs.

But she answered, "Take heed now, and consider, if I have kept King
Siggeir in memory, and his slaying of Volsung the king! I let slay both
my children, whom I deemed worthless for the revenging of our father,
and I went into the wood to thee in a witch-wife's shape; and now
behold, Sinfjotli is the son of thee and of me both! And therefore has
he this so great hardihood and fierceness, in that he is the son both of
Volsung's son and Volsung's daughter; and for this, and for naught else,
have I so wrought, that Siggeir might get his bane at last; and all
these things have I done that vengeance might fall on him, and that I
too might not live long; and merrily now will I die with King Siggeir,
though I was naught merry to wed him."

Therewith she kissed Sigmund her brother, and Sinfjotli, and went back
again into the fire, and there she died with King Siggeir and all his
good men.

But the two kinsmen gathered together folk and ships, and Sigmund went
back to his father's land, and drave away thence the king, who had set
himself down there in the room of king Volsung.

So Sigmund became a mighty King and far-famed, wise and high-minded: he
had to wife one named Borghild, and two sons they had between them, one
named Helgi and the other Hamund; and when Helgi was born, Norns came to
him, \[3\] and spake over him, and said that he should be in time to
come the most renowned of all kings. Even therewith was Sigmund come
home from the wars, and so therewith he gives him the name of Helgi, and
these matters as tokens thereof, Land of Rings, Sun-litten Hill and
Sharp-shearing Sword, and withal prayed that he might grow of great
fame, and like unto the kin of the Volsungs.

And so it was that he grew up high-minded, and well beloved, and above
all other men in all prowess; and the story tells that he went to the
wars when he was fifteen winters old. Helgi was lord and ruler over the
army, but Sinfjotli was gotten to be his fellow herein; the twain bare
sway thereover.

 

ENDNOTES:

\[1\] "Skin-changers" were universally believed in once, in Iceland no
less than elsewhere, as see Ari in several places of his history,
especially the episode of Dufthach and Storwolf o' Whale. Men possessing
the power of becoming wolves at intervals, in the present case compelled
so to become, wer-wolves or "loupsgarou", find large place in medieval
story, but were equally well-known in classic times. Belief in them
still lingers in parts of Europe where wolves are to be found. Herodotus
tells of the Neuri, who assumed once a year the shape of wolves; Pliny
says that one of the family of Antaeus, chosen by lot annually, became a
wolf, and so remained for nine years; Giraldus Cambrensis will have it
that Irishmen may become wolves; and Nennius asserts point-blank that
"the descendants of wolves are still in Ossory;" they retransform
themselves into wolves when they bite. Apuleius, Petronius, and Lucian
have similar stories. The Emperor Sigismund convoked a council of
theologians in the fifteenth century who decided that wer-wolves did
exist.

\[2\] Byrny (A.S. "byrne"), corslet, cuirass.

\[3\] "Norns came to him." Nornir are the fates of the northern
mythology. They are three--"Urd", the past; "Verdandi", the present; and
"Skuld", the future. They sit beside the fountain of Urd
("Urdarbrienur"), which is below one of the roots of "Yggdrasil", the
world-tree, which tree their office it is to nourish by sprinkling it
with the water of the fountain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX: How Helgi, the son of Sigmund, won King Hodbrod and
his Realm, and wedded Sigurn.](vlsng11)
