[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vlsng27)  [Next](vlsng29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XXVI.

Now Sigurd goes his ways with all that great treasure, and in friendly
wise he departs from them; and on Grani he rides with all his war-gear
and the burden withal; and thus he rides until he comes to the hall of
King Giuki; there he rides into the burg, and that sees one of the
king's men, and he spake withal--

"Sure it may be deemed that here is come one of the Gods, for his array
is all done with gold, and his horse is far mightier than other horses,
and the manner of his weapons is most exceeding goodly, and most of all
the man himself far excels all other men ever seen."

So the king goes out with his court and greets the man, and asks--

"Who art thou who thus ridest into my burg, as none has durst hitherto
without the leave of my sons?"

He answered, "I am called Sigurd, son of King Sigmund."

Then said King Giuki, "Be thou welcome here then, and take at our hands
whatso thou wiliest."

So he went into the king's hall, and all men seemed little beside him,
and all men served him, and there he abode in great joyance.

Now oft they all ride abroad together, Sigurd and Gunnar and Hogni, and
ever is Sigurd far the foremost of them, mighty men of their hands
though they were.

But Grimhild finds how heartily Sigurd loved Brynhild, and how oft he
talks of her; and she falls to thinking how well it were, if he might
abide there and wed the daughter of King Giuki, for she saw that none
might come anigh to his goodliness, and what faith and goodhelp there
was in him, and how that he had more wealth withal than folk might tell
of any man; and the king did to him even as unto his own sons, and they
for their parts held him of more worth than themselves.

So on a night as they sat at the drink, the queen arose, and went before
Sigurd, and said--

"Great joy we have in thine abiding here, and all good things will we
put before thee to take of us; lo now, take this horn and drink
thereof."

So he took it and drank, and therewithal she said, "Thy father shall be
Giuki the king, and I shall be thy mother, and Gunnar and Hogni shall be
thy brethren, and all this shall be sworn with oaths each to each; and
then surely shall the like of you never be found on earth."

Sigurd took her speech well, for with the drinking of that drink all
memory of Brynhild departed from him. So there he abode awhile.

And on a day went Grimhild to Giuki the king, and cast her arms about
his neck, and spake--

"Behold, there has now come to us the greatest of great hearts that the
world holds; and needs must he be trusty and of great avail; give him
thy daughter then, with plenteous wealth, and as much of rule as he
will; perchance thereby he will be well content to abide here ever."

The king answered, "Seldom does it befall that kings offer their
daughters to any; yet in higher wise will it be done to offer her to
this man, than to take lowly prayers to her from others."

On a night Gudrun pours out the drink, and Sigurd beholds her how fair
she is and how full of all courtesy.

Five seasons Sigurd abode there, and ever they passed their days
together in good honour and friendship.

And so it befell that the king held talk together, and Giuki said--

"Great good thou givest us, Sigurd, and with exceeding strength thou
strengthenest our realm."

Then Gunnar said, "All things that may be will we do for thee, so thou
abidest here long; both dominion shall thou have, and our sister freely
and unprayed for, whom another man would not get for all his prayers."

Sigurd says, "Thanks have ye for this wherewith; ye honour me, and
gladly will I take the same."

Therewith they swore brotherhood together, and to be even as if they
were children of one father and one mother; and a noble feast was
holden, and endured many days, and Sigurd drank at the wedding of him
and Gudrun; and there might men behold all manner of game and glee, and
each day the feast was better and better.

Now fare these folk wide over the world, and do many great deeds, and
slay many kings' sons, and no man has ever done such works of prowess as
did they; then home they come again with much wealth won in war.

Sigurd gave of the serpent's heart to Gudrun, and she ate thereof, and
became greater-hearted, and wiser than ere before: and the son of these
twain was called Sigmund.

Now on a time went Grimhild to Gunnar her son, and spake--

"Fair blooms the life and fortune of thee, but for one thing only, and
namely whereas thou art unwedded; go woo Brynhild; good rede is this,
and Sigurd will ride with thee."

Gunnar answered, "Fair in she certes, and I am fain enow to win her;"
and therewith he tells his father, and his brethren, and Sigurd, and
they all prick him on to that wooing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII: The Wooing of Brynhild.](vlsng29)
