[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vlsng10)  [Next](vlsng12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER IX.

## How Helgi, the son of Sigmund, won King Hodbrod and his Realm, and wedded Sigurn.

Now the tale tells that Helgi in his warring met a king hight Hunding, a
mighty king, and lord of many men and many lands; they fell to battle
together, and Helgi went forth mightily, and such was the end of that
fight that Helgi had the victory, but King Hunding fell and many of his
men with him; but Helgi is deemed to have grown greatly in fame because
he had slain so mighty a king.

Then the sons of Hunding draw together a great army to avenge their
father. Hard was the fight betwixt them; but Helgi goes through the folk
of those brothers unto their banner, and there slays these sons of
Hunding, Alf and Eyolf, Herward and Hagbard, and wins there a great
victory.

Now as Helgi fared from the fight he met a many women right fair and
worthy to look on, who rode in exceeding noble array; but one far
excelled them all; then Helgi asked them the name of that their lady and
queen, and she named herself Sigrun, and said she was daughter of King
Hogni.

Then said Helgi, "Fare home with us: good welcome shall ye have!"

Then said the king's daughter, "Other work lies before us than to drink
with thee."

"Yea, and what work, king's daughter?" said Helgi.

She answers, "King Hogni has promised me to Hodbrod, the son of King
Granmar, but I have vowed a vow that I will have him to my husband no
more than if he were a crow's son and not a king's; and yet will the
thing come to pass, but and if thou standest in the way thereof and
goest against him with an army, and takest me away withal; for verily
with no king would I rather bide on bolster than with thee."

"Be of good cheer, king's daughter," says he, "for certes he and I shall
try the matter, or ever thou be given to him; yea, we shall behold which
may prevail against the other; and hereto I pledge my life."

Thereafter, Helgi sent men with money in their hand to summon his folk
to him, and all his power is called together to Red-Berg: and there
Helgi abode till such time as a great company came to him from Hedinsey;
and therewithal came mighty power from Norvi Sound aboard great and fair
ships. Then King Helgi called to him the captain of his ships, who was
hight Leif, and asked him if he had told over the tale of his army.

"A thing not easy to tell, lord," says he, "on the ships that came out
of Norvi Sound are twelve thousand men, and otherwhere are half as many
again."

Then bade King Helgi turn into the firth, called Varin's firth, and they
did so: but now there fell on them so fierce a storm and so huge a sea,
that the beat of the waves on board and bow was to hearken to like as
the clashing together of high hills broken.

But Helgi bade men fear naught, nor take in any sail, but rather hoist
every rag higher than heretofore; but little did they miss of foundering
or ever they made land; then came Sigrun, daughter of King Hogni, down
on to the beach with a great army, and turned them away thence to a good
haven called Gnipalund; but the landsmen see what has befallen and come
down to the sea-shore. The brother of King Hodbrod, lord of a land
called Swarin's Cairn, cried out to them, and asked them who was captain
over that mighty army. Then up stands Sinfjotli, with a helm on his
head, bright shining as glass, and a byrny as white as snow; a spear in
his hand, and thereon a banner of renown, and a gold-rimmed shield
hanging before him; and well he knew with what words to speak to kings--

"Go thou and say, when thou hast made an end of feeding thy swine and
thy dogs, and when thou beholdest thy wife again, that here are come the
Volsungs, and in this company may King Helgi be found, if Hodbrod be
fain of finding him, for his game and his joy it is to fight and win
fame, while thou art kissing the handmaids by the fire-side."

Then answered Granmar, "In nowise knowest thou how to speak seemly
things, and to tell of matters remembered from of old, whereas thou
layest lies on chiefs and lords; most like it is that thou must have
long been nourished with wolf-meat abroad in the wild-woods, and has
slain thy brethren; and a marvel it is to behold that thou darest to
join thyself to the company of good men and true, thou, who hast sucked
the blood of many a cold corpse."

Sinfjotli answered, "Dim belike is grown thy memory now, of how thou
wert a witch-wife on Varinsey, and wouldst fain have a man to thee, and
chose me to that same office of all the world; and how thereafter thou
wert a Valkyria \[1\] in Asgarth, and it well-nigh came to this, that
for thy sweet sake should all men fight; and nine wolf whelps I begat on
thy body in Lowness, and was the father to them all."

Granmar answers, "Great skill of lying hast thou; yet belike the father
of naught at all mayst thou be, since thou wert gelded by the giant's
daughters of Thrasness; and lo thou art the stepson of King Siggeir, and
were wont to lie abroad in wilds and woods with the kin of wolves; and
unlucky was the hand wherewith thou slewest thy brethren making for
thyself an exceeding evil name."

Said Sinfjotli, "Mindest thou not then, when thou were stallion Grani's
mare, and how I rode thee an amble on Bravoli, and that afterwards thou
wert giant Golnir's goat herd?"

Granmar says, "Rather would I feed fowls with the flesh of thee than
wrangle any longer with thee."

Then spake King Helgi, "Better were it for ye, and a more manly deed, to
fight, rather than to speak such things as it is a shame even to hearken
to; Granmar's sons are no friends of me and of mine, yet are they hardy
men none the less."

So Granmar rode away to meet King Hodbrod, at a stead called Sunfells,
and the horses of the twain were named Sveipud and Sveggjud. The
brothers met in the castle-porch, and Granmar told Hodbrod of the
war-news. King Hodbrod was clad in a byrny, and had his helm on his
head; he asked--

"What men are anigh, why look ye so wrathful?"

Granmar says, "Here are come the Volsungs, and twelve thousand men of
them are afloat off the coast, and seven thousand are at the island
called Sok, but at the stead called Grindur is the greatest company of
all, and now I deem withal that Helgi and his fellowship have good will
to give battle."

Then said the king, "Let us send a message through all our realm, and go
against them, neither let any who is fain of fight sit idle at home; let
us send word to the sons of Ring, and to King Hogni, and to Alf the Old,
for they are mighty warriors."

So the hosts met at Wolfstone, and fierce fight befell there;

Helgi rushed forth through the host of his foes, and many a man fell
there; at last folk saw a great company of shield-maidens, like burning
flames to look on, and there was come Sigrun, the king's daughter. Then
King Helgi fell on King Hodbrod, and smote him, and slew him even under
his very banner; and Sigrun cried out--

"Have thou thanks for thy so manly deed! Now shall we share the land
between us, and a day of great good hap this is to me, and for this deed
shalt thou get honour and renown, in that thou hast felled to earth so
mighty a king."

So Helgi took to him that realm and dwelt there long, when he had wedded
Sigrun, and became a king of great honour and renown, though he has
naught more to do with this story.

ENDNOTES:

\[1\] Valkyrja, "Chooser of the elected." The women were so called whom
Odin sent to choose those for death in battle who were to join the
"Einherjar" in the hall of the elected, "Val-holl."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X: The ending of Sinfjatli, Sigmund's Son.](vlsng12.md)
