[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vlsng30)  [Next](vlsng32.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XXIX.

## Of Brynhild's great Grief and Mourning.

After this talk Brynhild lay a-bed, and tidings were brought to King
Gunnar that Brynhild was sick; he goes to see her thereon, and asks what
ails her; but she answered him naught, but lay there as one dead: and
when he was hard on her for an answer, she said--

"What didst thou with that ring that I gave thee, even the one which
King Budli gave me at our last parting, when thou and King Giuki came to
him and threatened fire and the sword, unless ye had me to wife? Yea, at
that time he led me apart, and asked me which I had chosen of those who
were come; but I prayed him that I might abide to ward the land and be
chief over the third part of his men; then were there two choices for me
to deal betwixt either that I should be wedded to him whom he would, or
lose all my weal and friendship at his hands; and he said withal that
his friendship would be better to me than his wrath: then I bethought me
whether I should yield to his will, or slay many a man; and therewithal
I deemed that it would avail little to strive with him, and so it fell
out, that I promised to wed whomsoever should ride the horse Grani with
Fafnir's Hoard, and ride through my flaming fire, and slay those men
whom I called on him to slay, and now so it was, that none durst ride,
save Sigurd only, because he lacked no heart thereto; yea, and the Worm
he flew, and Regin, and five kings beside; but thou, Gunnar, durst do
naught; as pale as a dead man didst thou wax, and no king thou art, and
no champion; so whereas I made a vow unto my father, that him alone
would I love who was the noblest man alive, and that this is none save
Sigurd, lo, now have I broken my oath and brought it to naught, since he
is none of mine, and for this cause shall I compass thy death; and a
great reward of evil things have I wherewith to reward Grimhild;--never,
I wot, has woman lived eviler or of lesser heart than she."

Gunnar answered in such wise that few might hear him, "Many a vile word
hast thou spoken, and an evil-hearted woman art thou, whereas thou
revilest a woman far better than thou; never would she curse her life as
thou dost; nay, nor has she tormented dead folk, or murdered any; but
lives her life well praised of all."

Brynhild answered, "Never have I dwelt with evil things privily, or done
loathsome deeds;--yet most fain I am to slay thee."

And therewith would she slay King Gunnar, but Hogni laid her in fetters;
but then Gunnar spake withal--

"Nay, I will not that she abide in fetters."

Then said she, "Heed it not! For never again seest thou me glad in thine
hall, never drinking, never at the chess-play, never speaking the words
of kindness, never over-laying the fair cloths with gold, never giving
thee good counsel;--ah, my sorrow of heart that I might not get Sigurd
to me!"

Then she sat up and smote her needlework, and rent it asunder, and bade
set open her bower doors, that far away might the wailings of her sorrow
be heard; then great mourning and lamentation there was, so that folk
heard far and wide through that abode.

Now Gudrun asked her bower-maidens why they sat so joyless and downcast.
"What has come to you, that ye fare ye as witless women, or what
unheard-of wonders have befallen you?"

Then answered a waiting lady, hight Swaflod, "An untimely, an evil day
it is, and our hall is fulfilled of lamentation."

Then spake Gudrun to one of her handmaids, "Arise, for we have slept
long; go, wake Brynhild, and let us fall to our needlework and be
merry."

"Nay, nay," she says, "nowise may I wake her, or talk with her; for many
days has she drunk neither mead nor wine; surely the wrath of the Gods
has fallen upon her."

Then spake Gudrun to Gunnar, "Go and see her," she says, "and bid her
know that I am grieved with her grief."

"Nay," says Gunnar, "I am forbid to go see her or to share her weal."

Nevertheless he went unto her, and strives in many wise to have speech
of her, but gets no answer whatsoever; therefore he gets him gone and
finds Hogni, and bids him go see her: he said he was loth thereto, but
went, and gat no more of her.

Then they go and find Sigurd, and pray him to visit her; he answered
naught thereto, and so matters abode for that night.

But the next day, when he came home from hunting, Sigurd went to Gudrun,
and spake--

"In such wise do matters show to me, as though great and evil things
will betide from this trouble and upheaving; and that Brynhild will
surely die."

Gudrun answers, "O my lord, by great wonders is she encompassed, seven
days and seven nights has she slept, and none has dared wake her."

"Nay, she sleeps not," said Sigurd, "her heart is dealing rather with
dreadful intent against me."

Then said Gudrun, weeping, "Woe worth the while for thy death! Go and
see her; and wot if her fury may not be abated; give her gold, and
smother up her grief and anger therewith!"

Then Sigurd went out, and found the door of Brynhild's chamber open; he
deemed she slept, and drew the clothes from off her, and said--

"Awake, Brynhild! The sun shineth now over all the house, and thou hast
slept enough; cast off grief from thee, and take up gladness!"

She said, "And how then hast thou dared to come to me? In this treason
none was worse to me than thou."

Said Sigurd, "Why wilt thou not speak to folk? For what cause sorrowest
thou?"

Brynhild answers, "Ah, to thee will I tell of my wrath!"

Sigurd said, "As one under a spell art thou, if thou deemest that there
is aught cruel in my heart against thee; but thou hast him for husband
whom thou didst choose."

"Ah, nay," she said, "never did Gunnar ride through the fire to me, nor
did he give me to dower the host of the slain: I wondered at the man who
came into my hall; for I deemed indeed that I knew thine eyes; but I
might not see clearly, or divide the good from the evil, because of the
veil that lay heavy on my fortune."

Says Sigurd, "No nobler men are there than the sons of Giuki, they slew
the king of the Danes, and that great chief, the brother of King Budli."

Brynhild answered, "Surely for many an ill-deed must I reward them; mind
me not of my griefs against them! But thou, Sigurd, slewest the Worm,
and rodest the fire through; yea, and for my sake, and not one of the
sons of King Giuki."

Sigurd answers, "I am not thy husband, and thou art not my wife; yet did
a farfamed king pay dower to thee."

Says Brynhild, "Never looked I at Gunnar in such a wise that my heart
smiled on him; and hard and fell am I to him, though I hide it from
others."

"A marvellous thing," says Sigurd, "not to love such a king; what angers
thee most? For surely his love should be better to thee than gold."

"This is the sorest sorrow to me," she said, "that the bitter sword is
not reddened in thy blood."

"Have no fear thereof!" says he, "no long while to wait or the bitter
sword stand deep in my heart; and no worse needest thou to pray for
thyself, for thou wilt not live when I am dead; the days of our two
lives shall be few enough from henceforth."

Brynhild answers, "Enough and to spare of bale is in thy speech, since
thou bewrayedst me, and didst twin \[1\] me and all bliss;--naught do I
heed my life or death."

Sigurd answers, "Ah, live, and love King Gunnar and me withal!

And all my wealth will I give thee if thou die not."

Brynhild answers, "Thou knowest me not, nor the heart that is in me; for
thou art the first and best of all men, and I am become the most
loathsome of all woman to thee."

"This is truer," says Sigurd, "that I loved thee better than myself,
though I fell into the wiles from whence our lives may not escape; for
whenso my own heart and mind availed me, then I sorrowed sore that thou
wert not my wife; but as I might I put my trouble from me, for in a
king's dwelling was I; and withal and in spite of all I was well content
that we were all together. Well may it be, that that shall come to pass
which is foretold; neither shall I fear the fulfilment thereof."

Brynhild answered, and said, "Too late thou tellest me that my grief
grieved thee: little pity shall I find now."

Sigurd said, "This my heart would, that thou and I should go into one
bed together; even so wouldst thou be my wife."

Said Brynhild, "Such words may nowise be spoken, nor will I have two
kings in one hall; I will lay my life down rather than beguile Gunnar
the King."

And therewith she call to mind how they met, they two, on the mountain,
and swore oath each to each.

"But now is all changed and I will not live."

"I might not call to mind thy name," said Sigurd, "or know time again,
before the time of thy wedding; the greatest of all griefs is that."

Then said Brynhild, "I swore an oath to wed the man who should ride my
flaming fire, and that oath will I hold to, or die."

"Rather than thou die, I will wed thee, and put away Gudrun." said
Sigurd.

But therewithal so swelled the heart betwixt the sides of him, that the
rings of his byrny burst asunder.

"I will not have thee," says Brynhild, "nay, nor any other!"

Then Sigurd got him gone.

So saith the song of Sigurd--

"Out then went Sigurd,  
The great kings' well-loved,  
From the speech and the sorrow,  
Sore drooping, so grieving,  
That the shirt round about him  
Of iron tings woven,  
From the sides brake asunder  
Of the brave in the battle."

So when Sigurd came into the hall, Gunnar asked if he had come to a
knowledge of what great grief lay heavy on her, or if she had power of
speech: and Sigurd said that she lacked it not. So now Gunnar goes to
her again, and asked her, what wrought her woe, or if there were
anything that might amend it.

"I will not live," says Brynhild, "for Sigurd has bewrayed me, yea, and
thee no less, whereas thou didst suffer him to come into my bed: lo
thou, two men in one dwelling I will not have; and this shall be
Sigurd's death, or thy death, or my death;--for now has he told Gudrun
all, and she is mocking me even now!"

ENDNOTES:

\[1\] Sunder.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX: Of the Slaying of Sigurd Fafnir's-bane.](vlsng32.md)
