[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eru07)  [Next](eru09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 2: Tracts Erubin, Shekalim, Rosh Hashana*, tr.
by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

# CHAPTER IV.

REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE OVERSTEPPING OF THE LEGAL LIMITS ON THE
SABBATH, AND MEASUREMENTS OF THE SABBATH-DISTANCE.

MISHNA: If foes, or an evil spirit (a fit of insanity?), caused one to
go beyond the Sabbath limit, he after recovering his freedom must not
move further than four ells; if the foes or the fit have carried him
back within the limit, it is as if he had not gone beyond it. If they
have carried him into another town, or into a pen or a fold for cattle,
he according to Rabbon Gamaliel and R. Eliezer ben Azariah, may go about
throughout the entire extent (of the town, pen or fold). R. Joshua and
R. Aqiba maintain, that he must not move further than four ells. It once
happened that these four sages came together from Parendisim
(Brundusium, or Brindisi) and their vessel was still at sea on the
Sabbath. Rabbon Gamaliel and R. Eliezer ben Azariah walked about
throughout the whole vessel; but R. Joshua and R. Aqiba did not move
beyond four ells, as they wished to take upon themselves the rigid
observance. Once these four sages were on board a vessel and did not
enter the harbor until after dark (on the eve of Sabbath); so they
inquired of Rabbon Gamaliel: "What are we to do as to descending from
the vessel?" He answered them: Ye may descend; for I observed, that we
had already entered the limits of the Sabbath-distance before dusk.

GEMARA: The Rabbis taught: "There are three things, which cause a man to
commit deeds against his own will and against the will of his Creator,
viz.: Idolatry, and evil spirits and stress of poverty." \[For what
purpose do the Rabbis tell us this? In order, that we may pray God to
deliver us from those evils.\]

Three persons will never come to Gehenna: He who suffers from extreme
poverty, he who suffers with a diseased stomach and one who is oppressed
by the government, and others add also the man who is afflicted with a
bad wife. \[Why was the

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

latter not mentioned in the first place? Because if one has a bad wife
he should divorce her. Those however who declare that one who has a bad
wife will not see Gehenna refer to those, who cannot afford to make a
settlement upon their wives, or to those, who have children and cannot
divorce their wives. For what purpose did the Rabbis tell us this? In
order, that a man, who is subject to these misfortunes, should accept
them with resignation.\]

Three classes of human beings die in the possession of their power of
speech, viz.: "A man who is suffering from a diseased stomach, a woman
lying in and a man suffering with dropsy." \[For what purpose are we
taught to this effect? In order that shrouds may be prepared for such
people.\]

R. Na'hman said in the name of Samuel: If one went out beyond the
Sabbath-limit and foes or an evil spirit brought him back within the
limit, he must not move more than four ells from where he stands. Have
we not learned this in our Mishna, which says, if foes or evil spirits
carried him out and then brought him back it is as if he had never gone
out at all; now is it not self-evident that if he went out of his own
accord, he has only four ells of space in which to move? We might assume
that the Mishna teaches us, if foes or evil spirits carried him out and
he returned of his own accord, he has no more than four ells of space,
but if he went out of his own accord and foes or evil spirits brought
him back it would be as if he never went out at all, hence this teaching
of Samuel.

Rabba was asked: "How is the law regarding one, who only had four ells
to move in and was compelled to go out to obey nature's call?" and he
answered: "Great is the honor of man, which supersedes even a biblical
negative commandment."

The men of Neherdai said: If the man in question is prudent, he will
enter the legal limits, perform his necessities and then go on.

Said R. Papa: "If fruit was carried beyond the legal limits and then
even purposely brought back, the right to move it within the limits is
not forfeited, because the fruit certainly did not go out beyond the
limits of their own accord." R. Joseph bar Shmaya objected to this
statement: "R. Nehemiah and R. Eliezer ben Jacob both said: The fruit
which was carried out must not be handled when brought back unless this
was done unintentionally, but if intentionally, they must not be
handled?" Concerning this, there is a difference of opinion between
Tanaim

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

in a Boraitha elsewhere (and R. Papa holds with the Tana, who permits
it).

Said R. Na'hman in the name of Samuel: "If one went out and did not know
the legal distance he could traverse, he may walk on for a distance of
two thousand medium steps. This will constitute the lawful limit of the
Sabbath." He said again quoting the same authority: If one took his
Sabbath-rest in a valley, and Gentiles made an enclosure around the
valley on the Sabbath, he may go two thousand ells, but he may throw
things over the entire extent of the valley." R. Huna said: "He may go
two thousand ells, but may carry only for a distance of four ells." The
reason R. Huna prohibits throwing is in precaution, lest the man throw a
thing outside of his two thousand ells and go after it.

Hyya bar Rabh, however, said: He may go two thousand ells and may carry
things inside of that limit.

Said R. Na'hman to R. Huna: "Do not refute the dictum of Samuel; for we
have learned in a Boraitha in support of Samuel."

R. Huna said: "If one measured the legal distance on a Sabbath and his
measurement came to an end in one half of a court, he may avail himself
of that half of the court only." Is this not self-evident? If he ended
his measurement in one half of a court, why should he not avail himself
of that half? We might assume, that if the one half is permitted he
might be tempted to use the other half also, so we are told that this
precaution is not necessary.

R. Na'hman said: "Huna agrees with me, that if in measuring the
Sabbath-distance, the measurement end in the edge of a house, one may
throw things into the house although he must not go into it himself, for
the edge of the house is a fixed sign for him and will remind him, that
he must not enter the house." Said R. Huna the son of R. Nathan: "The
necessity for a precautionary measure to prevent the man from entering
the house forms the subject of a discussion between Tanaim as follows:
If foes or an evil spirit have carried the man into another town, or
into a pen or a fold for cattle, he may, according to Rabbon Gamaliel
and R. Elazar ben Azariah, go about throughout the entire extent (of
such a place); R. Joshua and R. Aqiba, however, maintain, that he must
not move further than four ells." Now, we must assume that those who
permit the traversing of the entire extent of such places do so because

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

they do not fear that the man will traverse the whole valley where those
places are situated, and those who only allow four ells, do so, because
they regard this precautionary measure necessary. The same argument
applies also to throwing, viz.: Those who have no fear that the man will
traverse the entire valley, permit throwing throughout the pen or fold
where the man Is ensconced and those who allow him only four ells hold
the same precautionary measure necessary where throwing and going after
it is concerned.

Rabh said: "The Halakha prevails according to R. Gamaliel. where a pen,
fold or ship is concerned," but Samuel said: "Only as far as a ship is
concerned, but not as regards a pen or a fold." Thus we see that, as to
a ship, all agree the Halakha prevails according to R. Gamaliel. What is
the reason therefor? Said Rabba: "Because already before the Sabbath set
in, the man is within the confines of the ship and although the ship was
involuntarily carried out beyond the legal limits, the man had prepared
his Sabbath-rest there." R. Zera said, however: "The reason is: that the
man on board of the ship did not have four ells to move in, for the ship
moves more than four ells every time it lurches foward, consequently he
does not come under the law of four ells and may go throughout the
entire extent of the ship." Rabba rejoined: "Thou referrest to a man who
entered the ship while in motion. Concerning this, there is no
difference between any of the Tanaim; even R. Aqiba permits the
traversing of the entire ship, but they differ concerning a man who
entered the ship while it was anchored."

Said R. Na'hman bar Itz'hak: From the Mishna itself we may infer, that
there was no difference concerning a ship while in motion, because it
states, that R. Joshua and R. Aqiba did not move beyond four ells, as
they wished to take upon themselves the rigid observance. Were it not
permitted at all, why should it say, that they wished to take upon
themselves the rigid observance, they would have to obey the law?

Said R. A'ha the son of Rabha to R. Ashi: "The Halakha prevails
according to R. Gamaliel where a ship is concerned." Then, there must be
some who maintain that the Halakha does not prevail according to R.
Gamaliel. Yea, there are, as we have learned in the following Boraitha:
Hananiah the son of R. Jehoshua's brother said: "The whole day that R.
Gamaliel and R. Aqiba were on board the ship they disputed concerning
this Halakha, and yesterday my uncle affirmed the Halakha to the

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

effect, that as regards a ship at anchor it prevails according to R.
Gamaliel and as for a pen or a fold it prevails according to R. Aqiba."

R. Hananiah propounded a question: Is there such a thing as a legal
limit above ten spans from the ground or not? Concerning a pillar ten
spans high and four spans wide one side of which was outside of the
legal limit there is no question; for it is equal to the ground itself,
but concerning a pillar, that was ten spans high and less than four
spans wide or a man who went on board of a ship, does the law of legal
limits apply or not? R. Hosea answered: "Come and hear! It once happened
that four sages came together from Parendisim, etc. (see Mishna). If we
say, that the law of legal limits applies to objects higher than ten
spans, then it can be understood why R. Joshua and R. Aqiba took upon
themselves the rigid observance (for concerning a ship in motion they do
not disagree with the other sages), viz.: on account of the law of legal
limits, but if this law does not apply to a ship, what rigid observance
could they have taken upon themselves?" Rejoined R. Hananiah: "It may be
that their ship was passing through shallow water, as related elsewhere
by Rabha, and was not over ten spans from the ground."

Come and hear! The seven Halakhas related on a Sabbath morn in the
presence of R. Hisda at Sura were related on the same evening in the
presence of Rabha at Pumbaditha. Who could have decreed them? No one,
but Elijah? Hence we see, that there is no such thing as legal limits
above ten spans from the ground? Nay. It may be that those Halakhas were
transmitted from one school to the other by Joseph the evil One, who did
not observe the Sabbath.

Come and hear! If one say: I wish to be a Nazarite at the coming of the
Messiah, he may drink wine on a Sabbath or on a festival but must not do
so during the week-days. (For Messiah is liable to come at any time.)
The Boraitha would be correct if we assume, that there *is* a legal
limit above ten spans from the ground, because Messiah will then not
come on the Sabbath or on a festival, but if there is no legal limit
above ten spans, the man should not drink wine even on those days,
because the Messiah might come. In that case it is different: for it is
written \[Malachi iii. 23\]: "Behold, I send unto you Elijah the prophet
before the coming of the day of the Lord, the great and the dreadful."
Hence, if Elijah did not come on the day preceding

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sabbath, he may
drink on the Sabbath. If this is so, then he may drink on a week-day
also providing Elijah did not come on the preceding day. It might be
assumed, however, that Elijah had already come and appeared before the
high court and for that reason the man should not drink on any day, lest
Elijah had already come, then this would apply also to the Sabbath?
There is a tradition among Israelites that it is an assured fact, that
Elijah will not come on the eve of a Sabbath or a festival. If that is
so, why should the man not be permitted to drink wine on the eve of
Sabbath? Because although Elijah will not come, the Messiah himself
might come.

Thus it must be assumed, that if there *is* a legal limit above ten
spans, a man who wishes to be a Nazarite on the day of the coming of the
Messiah should be permitted to drink wine not only on Sabbath and the
festivals but also on the day following Sabbath, because Elijah cannot
come on the Sabbath? The sages who prohibited a man of that kind to
drink wine on a weekday were themselves in doubt as to the validity of a
legal limit above ten spans and only made it more rigid for the man on
general principles.

"*And did not enter the harbor until after dark*," etc. It was taught in
a Boraitha, that R. Gamaliel had a telescope, through which he could see
for a distance of two thousand ells on land and on sea. If a man wishes
to measure the depth of a valley, he should use one of those telescopes
and if he should wish to measure a tree, he should observe his shadow,
measure himself and his shadow and the shadow of the tree and calculate
the proportion.

Nehemiah the son of R. Hanilayi was engrossed in thinking about a
Halakha and inadvertently stepped out beyond the legal limits. Said R.
Hisda to R. Na'hman: "Thy disciple Nehemiah is in trouble," and R.
Na'hman answered: "Make him a partition with men and let him come back."

R. Na'hman bar Itz'hak sat behind Rabha who sat in the presence of R.
Na'hman. Said R. Na'hman bar Itz'hak to Rabha: "How was the case when R.
Hisda asked R. Na'hman concerning Nehemiah who had overstepped the legal
limits? Shall we say, that there were sufficient men on hand who had
made an Erub at the limits and could therefore go out to Nehemiah then
the question was merely whether the Halakha prevailed according to R.
Gamaliel, who said, that where there is a partition, even if a man had
not declared his intention to rest there on the Sabbath,

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

he may avail himself of it and traverse its entire extent, or that there
were not sufficient men who had made an Erub who could reach Nehemiah
and the question presented itself, whether the Halakha prevailed
according to R. Eliezer, that if a man went out two ells beyond the
limits he may return, and Nehemiah did not go out further than that." Is
this not self-evident? For if there were sufficient men to reach
Nehemiah, why did R. Hisda ask R. Na'hman? Rabh had already decided that
the Halakha mentioned prevailed according to R. Gamaliel and for R.
Hisda Rabh was the final authority? The question was merely then,
whether R. Hisda could make a partition with men who had not made an
Erub, at the end of two ells beyond the limit, which according to R.
Eliezer was free to everybody, so that Nehemiah who had gone further
than two ells beyond the limit could avail himself of that partition and
return.

R. Na'hman bar Itz'hak objected to the above, addressing Rabha: "Have we
not learned in a Boraitha: 'If the wall of a booth fell in on a
festival, one must not use a man, or an animal or vessels or put up a
bed and cover it with a sheet in order to fill in the gap, because a
temporary tent must not be erected on a festival to commence with and so
much less on a Sabbath?'" Answered Rabha: Thou quotest this Boraitha but
I can quote another which states: "A man can make a wall of his comrade,
that he may be able to eat a meal or drink or sleep in a booth (the wall
of which had fallen in); he may also put up a bed and cover it with a
sheet to keep the sun off from a corpse or from food."

These two Boraithas are contradictory to each other? This .presents no
difficulty. One of them is according to the opinion of R. Eliezer and
the other according to the opinion of the sages.

It happened once, that some baldachin-makers brought in water through a
partition formed by men. Samuel punished them, saying: "This was done in
an emergency where a man had overstepped the legal limits accidentally
but ye do this 'purposely.'"

It once happened that flasks of wine were thrown out of Rabha's house on
the road in the city of Mehuzza. When Rabha came from his college, a
number of men followed him as usual, and thus relying upon the partition
formed by them, someone carried the flasks back into the house. Next
Sabbath, the same thing happened, but Rabha would not permit the flasks
to be carried back to the house, saying, that this time it might seem as

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

if it were done on purpose. In like manner straw was brought into the
house of Levi, hay to the house of Zera, and water into the house of R.
Shimi bar Hyya.

MISHNA: One who is authorized to go beyond the prescribed limit on
important business pertaining to public or private safety and is told,
that "it is already done," is at liberty to go two thousand ells in any
direction. If he was still within the prescribed limit, it is as if he
had not gone out at all, for all those who go forth on an errand of
safety, are permitted to return to their homes on Sabbath.

GEMARA: What is meant by "if he was still within the prescribed limit"?
Said Rabha: "This means to impart to us, that if he had not gone out
beyond the limit, it was as if he had not left his house. Is this not
self-evident? I would say, that if he had gone out of his house he
forfeits his right to go two thousand ells in any direction he chooses,
and we are told, that such is not the case." R. Shimi bar Hyya however
said: "This means to state, that if the man had already gone beyond the
usual limit but had not yet gone out of the additional limit allowed him
by the sages for the errand, it is regarded as if he had not overstepped
his own ordinary limit." Upon what point do they differ? Upon the
permissibility of one end of a limit including another established
limited distance adjoining it. The latter holds, that this point may be
depended upon, while the former holds that it cannot.

"*For all those who go forth on an errand of safety*, "etc. Even such as
go beyond four thousand ells? In the first part of the Mishna it is
stated that they only have two thousand ells in each direction? What
question is this? This is a case of where a man goes forth on an errand
of safety, and on such an errand it may be permitted to go beyond four
thousand ells. If there is a question it can be made upon the following
Mishna: "Those who go to assist others in case of conflagration, or of
an attack of robbers, or of flood, or of rescuing people from the ruins
of a falling building are considered for the time being as inhabitants
of that place, and may go thence on the Sabbath, two thousand ells in
every direction." Thus here it is stated, that they may go only two
thousand ells and our Mishna does not limit the distance? Said R.
Jehudah in the name of Rabh: Our Mishna means to imply, that they may
even return to their homes with all their implements of war, as we have
learned in a Boraitha: In former times, they used to deposit their arms
in a house nearest

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

to the fortifications of the city. Once it happened, however, that the
enemy was informed of the fact, that the Israelites had stored their
arms, so they pursued them and in endeavoring to enter the house to gain
possession of their arms, the Israelites trampled more of their own to
death than were killed by the enemy. Since that time it was ordered to
carry their arms back to their homes.

R. Na'hman bar Itz'hak however said: This presents no difficulty: If the
Israelites are victorious, they have only two thousand ells in which
they may go in every direction, but if they are defeated, they may
escape as far as possible.

R. Jehudah said in the name of Rabh: If enemies besieged cities
inhabited by Israelites, the latter must not go outside of the cities
with their arms and must not violate the Sabbath, providing the enemies
were there on account of money-matters; but if they were there for the
purpose of slaughter, the Sabbath may be violated and arms be carried on
Sabbath. If a city near the boundary of the country is besieged even on
account of a trivial business matter such as straw or hay, arms may be
carried and the Sabbath may be violated. Said R. Joseph bar Minyumi in
the name of R. Na'hman: "Babylon is considered as a city near the
boundary," and this dictum was explained to mean the city of Neherdai
(which was surrounded on one side by Gentile neighbors and on the other
side by Israelites).

MISHNA: If a man sit down by the road-side (towards dark on the eve of
Sabbath), then gets up and observes, that he is near a town, he must not
enter the town; for it had not been his intention to do this. Such is
the dictum of R. Meir; but R. Jehudah permits him to enter. R. Jehudah
said: "It once happened that R. Tarphon entered a town although it was
not his intention to do so."

One who falls asleep on the eve of Sabbath while on the road and thus
knows not that night has set in, is permitted (upon awaking) to go two
thousand ells in any direction. Such is the decree of R. Johanan ben
Nouri; but the sages hold, that he has only the right to move four ells.
R. Eliezer said: "And he himself forms the centre of the four ells." R.
Jehudah however said: He can go four ells in whichever direction he
pleases. Still R. Jehudah admitted, that if the man had made his choice
(which direction to take) he must not afterwards (change his mind and)
go in another direction. Should there be two persons so situated
(*i.e.*, form the centre of the four ells they are allowed to

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

move in), and part of the four ells permitted to one is within the
limits of the other, they may meet and take their meals together in the
centre of their joint space, provided that neither exceed his own limits
by going into those of his neighbor. If there are three persons so
situated and part of the four ells occupied by the middle one forms part
of the space belonging to each of the other two, the one situated in the
middle is at liberty to meet each of the others, or each of the others
may meet him; but the two on each side of him must not meet each other.
Said R. Simeon: What can this be compared to? Three courts opening into
each other and also opening into public ground. If the two outer courts
have combined in an Erub with the middle one, one is at liberty to carry
things between the middle court and each of the outer ones, but between
the two outer courts one must not carry or convey anything.

GEMARA: We have learned in a Boraitha: R. Jehudah said: It once happened
that R. Tarphon while on the road was overtaken by dusk on the eve of
Sabbath and stayed outside of the town over night. In the morning the
cattle-herders met him and said: "Rabbi, the town is not far distant.
Enter." So he entered the town, went into the college and lectured all
day. Said R. Aqiba to R. Jehudah: Wouldst thou cite this as an example?
Perhaps it had been the intention of R. Tarphon to enter the town
previously (*i.e.*, he was within two thousand ells of it) or the
college was included with the legal limits allowed R. Tarphon.

"*Such is the decree of R. Johanan ben Nouri*." Rabba propounded a
question: What is the intent of R. Johanan's decree? Does he hold that
things having no particular owner, if situated at a certain place on the
Sabbath, acquire the right to their resting-place (*i.e.*, may be
carried for a distance of two thousand ells in any direction)? And the
Mishna should have commenced by citing an instance of this kind. Why
does it give the instance of a man who had fallen asleep, whom the sages
consider the same as a thing having no particular owner? In order to
show the firmness of the sages, who, though agreeing that the man when
awake, is entitled to two thousand ells in each direction, whence we
might assume that he is entitled to the same privilege when asleep, we
are told that such is not the case; or, in order to show that R. Johanan
ben Nouri does not hold, that a thing having no particular owner
acquires the right to be carried for a distance of two thousand ells in
every direction, but

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

that a man when *asleep* is entitled to this privilege, merely because
he is entitled to it when awake.

Said R. Joseph: "Come and hear: We have learned that if rain had fallen
on the eve of a festival, the rain-water acquires the right of (being
carried) two thousand ells in every direction; but if rain had fallen
*on* a biblical festival, the rain-water has the same right (of being
carried for the same distance) as the inhabitants of the place where it
had fallen (have the right of walking)." Now, if we say, that R. Johanan
holds, that a thing having no particular owner, if situated at a certain
place on Sabbath, acquires the right of (being carried) two thousand
ells in every direction, then the Boraitha is in conformity with his
opinion; but if we say, that he does not hold to that effect, according
to whose opinion is the Boraitha, certainly not according to that of the
sages?

Said R. Jacob bar Idi in the name of R. Jehoshua ben Levi: "The Halakha
prevails according to R. Johanan ben Nouri." Said R. Zera to R. Jacob:
"Didst thou hear R. Jehoshua himself declare this, or dost thou merely
infer this from another ruling made by him?" And he answered: "I heard
him declare it." What ruling could R. Zera have referred to, which R.
Jehoshua ben Levi had made? The ruling made by R. Jehoshua ben Levi
elsewhere, that the Halakha always prevails according to the Tana, who
makes the laws regarding Erubin more lenient. Why was it necessary for
R. Jehoshua to make both statements? Said R. Zera: It was necessary; for
had he said merely, that the Halakha prevails according to R. Johanan
ben Nouri, we might assume that it always prevails thus, whether it be
more lenient or more rigorous than another; hence we are told, that the
Halakha prevails according to the one who is the more lenient regarding
the laws of Erubin.

Let him say then, that the Halakha prevails according to the one who is
the more lenient with the laws of Erubin, and that will cover the case
of R. Johanan who is more lenient. Nay; it was also necessary to make
the statement regarding R. Johanan exclusively; because it might be
assumed that the Halakha prevails according to the more lenient
interpretation where one opinion is opposed by the opinion of another
individual, or where the opinion of a number (of sages) is opposed by
the opinion of another number (of sages), but if the opinion of one is
opposed by that of a number, the latter opinion prevails whether it be
lenient or rigorous; hence we are told that the opinion of R.

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Johanan ben Nouri
prevailed although opposed by a number of sages, and from this the rule
is adduced that as far as the laws of Erubin are concerned the more
lenient Halakha prevails even if the opinion of one is opposed by a
number (of sages).

R. Papa, however, said: "Both statements made by R. Jehoshua ben Levi
are necessary, because, had he simply stated, that the Halakha of the
more lenient Tana only prevails, we might have assumed that he referred
only to Erubin of courts and not to Erubin of legal limits; therefore he
also stated the case of R. Johanan ben Nouri in order to demonstrate
that he referred also to Erubin of legal limits."

R. Ashi said: "Both statements made by R. Jehoshua ben Levi are
necessary because, had he only made the statement concerning the Halakha
of the more lenient Tana, it might have been assumed that he referred to
an Erub that had been made for a number of Sabbaths and had gradually
dwindled, but not to such Erubin as had been made afresh; hence he also
made the statement concerning R. Johanan ben Nouri in order to emphasize
the fact that the more lenient Halakhoth prevail even in the instances
of newly made Erubin." <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31.md)

R. Jacob and R. Zreiqa both said: "In all instances where R. Aqiba
differs with an individual the Halakha prevails according to R. Aqiba.
In all instances where R. Jose differs even with a number of sages the
Halakha prevails according to R. Jose, and in all instances where Rabbi
differs with an individual, the Halakha prevails according to Rabbi."
For what purpose is this statement made? Shall we act accordingly or is
this merely a vague statement? R. Assi said: "Yea; we must act
accordingly. Where R. Aqiba differs with an individual we must act in
accordance with R. Aqiba's opinion; where R. Jose differs with a number
of sages we must act in conformity with R. Jose's opinion." R. Hyya bar
Abba, however, said: R. Jacob and R. Zreiqa, did not mean to establish
the rule, that the Halakha prevails according to the opinions of R.
Aqiba, R. Jose and Rabbi, but that they should be given preference
wherever possible over their opponents (*i.e.*, if, for instance, a man
asks

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

concerning a decree of R. Jose, it may be declared valid, but it should
not be taught as a rule in the colleges that when a number of sages
decide against R. Jose the Halakha nevertheless prevails according to
his opinion). R. Jose bar R. Hanina, however, said: (Not even this
should be done.) R. Jacob and R. Zreiqa, merely assert, that it seems to
them that the Halakhas should prevail as stated, but not that this
should be maintained as a general rule (and if one inclined to their
opinion, he cannot be accounted wrong).

In the same manner as there is a divergence of opinions concerning the
statement of R. Jacob and R. Zreiqa, so is there also a dispute
concerning the following statement of R. Jacob bar Idi in the name of R.
Johanan: In all instances where R. Meir and R. Jehudah differ, the
Halakha prevails according to R. Jehudah, wherever R. Jehudah and R.
Jose differ the Halakha prevails according to R. Jose, and so much more
when R. Meir and R. Jose differ the Halakha prevails according to R.
Jose, for if R. Jehudah is given preference over R. Meir, and R. Jose
over R. Jehudah, then certainly R. Jose has preference over R. Meir.

Said R. Assi: "From this I can infer, that where R. Jose and R. Simeon
differ, the Halakha prevails according to R. Jose, for R. Abba said in
the name of R. Johanan, that wherever R. Simeon and R. Jehudah differ,
the opinion of R. Jehudah prevails." As a matter of course if R. Jehudah
is given preference over R. Simeon, R. Jose is certainly more competent
authority than R. Simeon.

The schoolmen propounded a question: "How is it, when R. Meir and R.
Simeon differ?" This question is not decided. <span
id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32.md)

R. Mesharshia said: All these rules are of no account (*i.e.*, decisions
should be made according to the dictates of one's own understanding);
for Rabh never acted according to such rules. <span
id="fr_33"></span>[2](#fn_33.md)

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> R. Jehudah. said
in the name of Samuel: "Things belonging to non-Israelites, if situated
at a certain place on the Sabbath, do not acquire the right to their
resting-place." According to whose opinion is this statement? Shall we
say, according to the opinion of the sages? This is self-evident; for
they hold, that even things having no particular owner do not acquire
the right to their resting-place, and so much more things belonging to a
Gentile, which accordingly possess an owner. Hence we must say, that
this is even in accordance with the opinion of R. Johanan ben Nouri, who
says, that things having no particular owner do acquire the right to
their resting-place (but those, which have an owner, unless he be an
Israelite, do not).

An objection was made: R. Simeon ben Elazar said: "Vessels which an
Israelite borrows from a Gentile on a festival, or which he has lent to
a Gentile and receives in return on a festival, also vessels and
treasures which were within the legal limits on the eve of Sabbath, may
be carried two thousand ells in every direction; but if a Gentile
brought fruit on a Sabbath from beyond the legal limits, it must not be
moved from its place." Now if it be said, that R. Johanan ben Nouri
holds, that things belonging to a Gentile acquire a right to their
resting-place, then R. Simeon ben Elazar's statement is in accordance
with the opinion of this R. Johanan; but if the latter holds, that
things belonging to a Gentile do *not* acquire a right to their
resting-place, according to whose opinion is the statement of R. Simeon;
not according to that of R. Johanan nor to that of the sages? Nay; R.
Johanan may hold, that things belonging to a Gentile do acquire the
right to their resting-place and still Samuel quoted the opinion of the
sages; but as for this being self-evident, it is not so, for it might be
assumed that a precautionary measure should be made in the case of a
Gentile owner in order to put them on a par with vessels of an Israelite
owner; therefore we are told that such a precautionary measure is not
necessary. R. Hyya bar Abhin, however, said in the name of R. Johanan,
that things belonging to Gentiles *do* acquire the right to their
resting-place, as a precautionary measure for things belonging to
Israelites.

It once happened that rams were brought into the city of

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

Mabrakhta on a festival. Rabha allowed the inhabitants of the city of
Mehuzza (which adjoined the other city) to buy them and take them home.
Said Rabhina to Rabha: "Why didst thou permit this; because thou holdest
to the opinion of Samuel, that things belonging to Gentiles do not
acquire the right to their resting-place, but the rule is, that where
Samuel and R. Johanan differ, the opinion of R. Johanan prevails and R.
Johanan holds, that things belonging to Gentiles do acquire the right to
their resting-place on Sabbath?"

Thereupon Rabha said: "Let the rams be sold to the inhabitants of
Mabrakhta; for that city is to the rams as four ells (being equal to the
case of where a man was brought into a pen or a fold against his will
and may in consequence traverse the entire extent of the pen or fold, as
if they were only four ells)."

R. Hyya taught: "If the legal limits of two cities terminated in the
water and a partition was made to denote the place where they met, by
means of a fishing-net, it is not sufficient; for an iron partition is
necessary in order that the water of both limits should not mingle." R.
Jose bar Hanina laughed at this teaching. Why did he laugh at it?
Because Rabh decreed, that the sages were very lenient with all things
pertaining to water (see page [24](eru05.htm#page_24).md).

"*But the sages hold, that he has only the right to move four ells*." Is
R. Jehudah not of the same opinion as the first Tana? Said Rabha: Nay;
they differ to the extent of eight square ells. The sages hold that he
may go four ells in every direction, that is, in all, eight square ells;
but R. Jehudah says, that he may go only four ells in one direction. We
have also learned to this effect in a Boraitha: "He may move in eight
square ells, so saith R. Meir." Said Rabha: "They differ as to the
extent that the man may traverse, but as for carrying things all agree,
that he may do so only for a distance of four ells."

The questions seem to be centred in four ells. Whence do we derive these
four ells? As we have learned in a Boraitha: From the passage \[Exodus
xvi. 29\]: "Remain ye, every man in his place," etc. By "his place" is
meant the size of his body. What is the size? Three ells, and one ell
additional in case he wishes to stretch his limbs. So said R. Meir. R.
Jehudah, however, said: "Three ells are allowed for the size of the body
and an additional ell in case he wishes to take a thing at his feet and
place it underneath his head." What is the point of variance between the
two? According to one, the four ells

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

must be exactly measured, and according to the other, an approximate
distance only is necessary.

R. Mesharshia said to his son: "When thou goest to see R. Papa, ask him
whether the four ells are measured proportionately to the size of the
man concerned or whether they are the holy ells (*i.e.*, ells measuring
six spans). If he should tell thee, that the holy ells are meant, what
should a man do who is as tall as Og, King of Bashan, and if he should
tell thee, that the proportionate ells are meant, why were the four ells
not included in the Boraitha, which teaches, that all things should be
reckoned according to the proportionate ells."

When the son of R. Mesharshia came to R. Papa he was told: "If we were
to learn the Talmud in this manner (*i.e.*, if we were so particular as
to details) we would never be able to learn anything. Certainly
proportionate ells are meant, and the reason the Boraitha does not
mention them, is because it was not quite certain, and there may chance
to be a dwarf, whose legal four ells the Boraitha did not feel justified
in diminishing."

"*But between the two outer courts one must not carry anything*." Why
should this not be permitted? If both of the outer courts and the middle
one have combined in one Erub, they are regarded as one court? Said R.
Jehudah: "In this instance a case is referred to, where the middle court
deposited an Erub in each of the outer courts; hence the two outer
courts have no connection with each other." R. Shesheth, however, said:
"Even if the two outer courts had deposited their Erubin in the middle
court but had each done so in a separate house, they have no connection
with each other. Had they deposited their Erubin in the same house, they
would have been regarded as one court." According to whose opinion would
this be? Shall we assume, that it was according to the Beth Shammai as
we have learned in the following Boraitha: "If five persons conjoined
their Erubin and deposited them in two vessels the school of Shammai
hold them to be of no value, but the school of Hillel say they are of
value." Nay; this latter opinion is even in conformity with the school
of Hillel who, while maintaining, that if the Erubin had been deposited
in separate vessels the connection would be consummated, may hold, that
if this was done in separate houses the connection is not valid.

R. Jehudah said in the name of Rabh: "All the foregoing is according to
the dictum of R. Simeon; the sages, however, hold, that from the two
outer courts things may be carried into the

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

middle court, but from the middle court, things must not be carried into
the outer courts; provided no Erub had been made, for one court may
serve for two others, but two must not be utilized by one." And R.
Jehudah goes on to state: "When I made this statement before Samuel, he
said: 'Even this is in accordance with the dictum of R. Simeon; but the
sages hold, that neither of the three courts may be made use of.'"

The following Boraitha is in support of the dictum of Samuel as quoted
by R. Jehudah: R. Simeon said, "What can this be compared to? Three
courts opening into each other and also opening into public ground. If
the two outer courts had combined in an Erub with the middle one, a man
is at liberty to carry victuals from either of the outer courts into the
middle court and eat them, then remove the remainder (but a man of the
middle court must not carry things into the outer courts);" the sages
however said: "No connection is permitted between the three courts."

Samuel in making this statement holds to his theory advanced elsewhere:
If there is a court between two entries, and an Erub was made by the
court with both entries, connection between the court and both entries
is nevertheless prohibited (but in each entry separately things may be
carried); if, however, no Erub was made by the court with either of the
two entries, the court acts as a bar so that carrying in either entry is
prohibited even by the inhabitants of the entries. If the court,
however, made more frequent use of one entry to the neglect of the
other, it acts as a bar only to the one frequently used, but the
inhabitants of the neglected entry *may* carry therein.

Said Rabba bar R. Huna: If the court made an Erub with the entry used
only on rare occasions (it is evident, that henceforth, the court
intends to make more frequent use of this entry and to abandon the other
entry) then the other entry becomes separated and the inhabitants
thereof may carry therein.

Rabba bar R. Huna said again in the name of Samuel: If the entry more
frequently used by the court made an Erub for its own use, and the court
itself as well as the neglected entry did not make any Erubin for their
own use, the court is relegated to the neglected entry, but cannot prove
a bar to the entry having an Erub, because that were otherwise as the
manner of the Sodomites, *i.e.*, if an act is perpetrated which is
neither beneficial nor injurious to the perpetrator but solely in order
to injure another, the perpetrator is compelled to desist. (The
comparison

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

is made to the case in question as follows: Neither the inhabitants of
the court itself nor of the entry may carry within their precincts nor
even within the entry provided with an Erub, and hence it would not be
just, if, because they were not permitted to carry, they should prove a
bar to those who by virtue of their Erub are allowed to do so.)

R. Jehudah said in the name of Samuel: "The Erub of a man who is
particular about it that his fellow (with whom he had joined in the
Erub) should not eat it, is of no account. Why so? Because the word Erub
signifies commixture, *i.e.*, those who make the Erub can individually
do with it as they see fit, and if one man is particular about it, its
intent is abolished." R. Hanina however said: The Erub is valid; but a
man of that kind is like the men of Vardina (who were notoriously
penurious).

R. Jehudah said again in the name of Samuel: "An Erub which is divided
by a man in two parts or deposited by him in two separate vessels is of
no account." Then Samuel's dictum is in accordance with Beth Shammai, as
stated in the Boraitha (page [108](#page_108).md): We may assume that
Samuel's teaching may be also according to Beth Hillel; for the latter
hold, that the Erub is valid only then, if one vessel was filled with it
and the remainder had to be put into another vessel, but if it was
originally divided and then deposited, it is not valid.

Samuel said: "The virtual intent of the Erub is, that by mutual
interchange of articles, the right to the ground is bought and sold."
Why then are eatables necessary; could it not have been permitted to
make an Erub with money? Because, as a usual thing on the eve of Sabbath
money is scarce. (If that is so, then why should an Erub that had been
made with money not be valid? This is merely a precautionary measure,
lest it should be said that the main principle of an Erub is money, and
in the case of a lack of money, eatables will not be used in its stead,
and thus the law of Erubin will sink into oblivion.) Rabba, however,
said, that the Erub signifies, that wherever the victuals have been
deposited, there the man resides, *i.e.*, wherever a man's bread is,
there is also his domicile. What is the point of difference between
Samuel and Rabba? The points of difference are as follows: A vessel of
any value, victuals worth less than a Prutah (a coin of minimum value)
and a minor. (According to Samuel a vessel having a market value may be
used, but according to Rabba it does not follow that if it is

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

deposited in a certain place the owner resides there, hence it must not
be used. Victuals worth less than a Prutah, according to Samuel, not
having a market value, must not be used, but according to Rabba, being
eatables, may be deposited. A minor, according to Samuel, cannot be
commissioned to act because no money consideration can be intrusted to
him, and according to Rabba where he only gathers the material for the
Erub, he may be commissioned to act.)

Said Rabba in the name of R. Hama bar Guria, quoting Rabh: The Halakha
prevails according to R. Simeon.

MISHNA: Should a man, when overtaken by dusk on the road (on the eve of
Sabbath), single out a tree or a hedge and say: "I will take my
Sabbath-rest underneath it," (*legally*) he has said nothing, but if he
says: "I will take my Sabbath-rest at its base," he may go from the spot
on which he stands to the base of the tree or hedge two thousand ells
and thence to his domicile two thousand ells more; thus it may be seen,
that a man may go four thousand ells after dark (on Sabbath). If he
cannot single out a tree or a hedge or is not conversant with the
Halakha (covering his case) and says: "I will take my Sabbath-rest on
the place where I stand," the spot upon which he stands (virtually)
gives him two thousand ells in any direction; in a circle, according to
the dictum of R. Hanina ben Antignous; but the sages hold, that he has
two thousand ells in a square, so as to enable him to take advantage of
the angles. This rule is explanatory to the saying (of the sages): "The
poor prepare their Erubs with their feet." R. Meir said: "This rule is
applied only to the poor," but R. Jehudah replied: It applies to poor
and rich both; inasmuch as the Erub to be made with bread was only
decreed in order to render its observance easier for the wealthy, so
that they should not be compelled to go out and prepare the Erub with
their own feet.

GEMARA: What is meant by "legally he has said nothing"? Said Rabh: "It
means literally that he has said nothing and must not move from his
place; (because where he stands, he did not acquire the right to rest on
Sabbath, his intention having been to rest underneath the tree.
Underneath the tree he acquired no right, not having specified the spot
where he would rest, and although the space underneath the tree is
within two thousand ells from his position at the time, as long as he
did not specify the exact spot he must not go there)." Samuel, however,
said: It means, that he said nothing concerning

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

the distance from the tree to his domicile but he may traverse the
distance from where he stands to the tree (because the entire space
underneath the tree is within two thousand ells of his position at the
time, and the distance from his domicile is only two thousand ells to
the base of the tree, but to the entire space underneath the tree it is
more than two thousand ells); hence this entire space is like driving an
ass and leading a camel, for it is not known from which side the
distance to his domicile is two thousand ells. If it be measured from
the north, chances are that it should be measured from the south, and
*vice versa*.

Said Rabba: (Samuel's opinion is feasible, for he says, that the man
acquired the right to two thousand ells from where he stands; but not
having determined the exact spot underneath the tree, he loses the
further two thousand ells to his domicile) but what grounds has Rabh for
his opinion? Rabh holds, that if two intentions, one consequent upon the
other, are expressed in one assertion, the inability to carry out one
intention destroys the other also (and in this case as the man cannot
proceed from the tree to the domicile it invalidates his right to go
from his place to the tree). What is the difference between the two
opinions? The difference is if one says, "I will take my rest in the
four ells of the eight ells underneath the tree," according to those who
hold that the place of rest must be exactly determined, it is of no
value, but he who holds that if two intentions, one consequent upon the
other, are expressed in one assertion, the inability to carry out one
intention destroys the other also, in this case when he determines four
ells it may be called the exact spot, and is valid.

Said R. Huna the son of R. Jehoshua: The case in the Mishna mentioned
"he legally said nothing" applies only if the space underneath the tree
is eight ells or more; but if it measures only seven ells the man may
proceed to the tree and from the tree to his domicile (because he is
entitled at any rate to four ells and no matter from which side the
distance to his domicile is measured, part of his domicile will be
within two, thousand ells).

We have learned one Boraitha in support of Rabh and another supporting
Samuel: The one upholding Rabh is as follows: If one, while on the road,
was overtaken by dusk, and, singling out a tree, said: "I will take my
Sabbath-rest underneath it," he has said nothing. If he said, however,
that he would rest in a certain place, he can proceed to that place and,

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

arriving there, may traverse the entire extent of that place and two
thousand ells outside of it. When may he do so? If he designated a
particular place, *i.e.*, if he designated a sand-heap ten spans high,
or a valley ten spans deep, and from four ells to two saahs' capacity
wide; but if he did not previously designate the place or there was no
such place in existence, he may only move four ells from where he is
situated at the time. If there were two men, one of whom could designate
the place and the other could not, the latter may invest the former with
the right to select the place for him and he (the former) may act
accordingly. This is the case only if the man designates the four ells
where he desires to rest, but if he does not, he must not move from his
place.

The Boraitha upholding Samuel is as follows: If a man made an error and
deposited his Erub in two directions, or if a man thought that it was
allowed to make two Erubin and go in one direction in the morning and in
another in the afternoon, or if a man said to his servants: "Make an
Erub for me," without specifying the place for it, and one of them made
the Erub in the north and the other in the south, the man may go south
for a distance of two thousand ells minus the distance from his house to
the Erub on the north or may go north for a distance of two thousand
ells minus the distance from his house to the Erub on the south. If the
house was midway between the two Erubin, however, *i.e.*, the two Erubin
were placed equidistant from the house two thousand ells, he must not
move beyond his house.

"*If he says, 'I will take my Sabbath-rest at its base,'*" etc. Said
Rabha: "Being overtaken by dusk" signifies, that if the man walked
slowly he could not reach the tree before dusk, but if he ran speedily
he could reach the base of the tree.

Rabba and R. Joseph were on the road: Said Rabba to R. Joseph: "We will
rest underneath the tree that tolerates good fellowship." And according
to another version he said: "We will rest underneath the tree, that
honorably acquits itself of its dues (*i.e.*, that bears quantities of
fruit and thus pays its dues)." Said R. Joseph: "I know not of such a
tree." Answered Rabha: Depend upon me, as a Boraitha stated, R. Jose
said: If there be two men, one of whom could designate the place and the
other could not, the latter may invest the former with the right to
select the place for him and he (the former) may say: "There shall we
rest." In truth this is not so. R. Jose

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

never said this; but Rabba asserted this in the name of R. Jose so that
R. Joseph should listen to him; for it was known that R. Jose was final
authority and that the Halakhas prevailed according to his opinion.

"*If he cannot single out a tree or is not conversant with the
Halakha*." From what biblical passage is all this talk about two
thousand ells adduced? We have learned in a Boraitha: It is written
\[Exod. xvi. 29\]: "Remain ye every man in his spot, let no man go out
of his place on the seventh day." "On his spot" means four ells, and
"out of his place" refers to two thousand ells. Whence does the Boraitha
adduce this assertion? Said R. Hisda: "Because it is written \[Numbers
xxxv. 5\]: 'And ye shall measure from without the city on the east side
two thousand ells,' etc. (Thus from the verse it is seen, that the city
was in the centre and they measured two thousand ells on every side and
from this the legal limits were derived.)

"*Two thousand ells in any direction in a circle*," etc. What grounds
has R. Hanina ben Antignous for the statement? If he agrees to the
interpretation of the passage quoted, he should have said in a square,
for so the passage determines, and if he does not hold to the passage at
all, whence does he adduce two thousand ells in general? He holds to the
interpretation of the passage quoted, but the end of the same verse
reads, "*This* shall be to them the open spaces of cities," and he
declares, that for the purpose of the verse it should be in a square,
but for Sabbath it should not be in a square. Whence do the sages adduce
that the two thousand ells should be in a square? The sages hold with
Hananiah, who taught, that "*this* shall be to them," should read "*as
this*," and as this should be all the legal limits of the Sabbath.

Said R. A'ha bar Jacob. One who carries four ells in public ground is
not culpable unless he carries in a diagonal of four ells. <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34.md)

Said R. Papa: "Rabha wished to examine us and asked the following
question: 'Is it necessary that a pillar ten spans high and four wide
standing in public ground, should contain a square so that a diagonal
can be drawn?' We answered: Is this not the same as the teaching of R.
Hananiah which states '*as this* should be all the legal limits of
Sabbath.'

"*R. Meir said: 'This rule is applied only to the poor,'*" etc.

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Said R. Na'hman:
"The point of difference between R. Meir and R. Jehudah is where a man
says: 'I will rest in my place' (where I am standing). R. Meir holds,
that the principal thing to be used for an Erub is bread; and for the
poor man, who has no bread with him, it is made easier; the rich man,
however, has no right to do so; but R. Jehudah holds, that the principal
way to make an Erub is to make it with one's feet, whether the man be
poor or rich, but concerning the designation of a tree or a certain
place for a Sabbath-rest while travelling, all agree, that it is allowed
for a poor man but not for a rich man." The statement in the Mishna
"This rule is explanatory to the saying," means to say that the saying
is that of R. Meir, and what does it refer to? To the previous clause in
the Mishna, "If he cannot single out a tree or is not conversant with
the Halakha." The teaching "for the poor man who has no bread with him,
it is made easier," is that of R. Jehudah.

R. Hisda, however, said: On the contrary. R. Meir and R. Jehudah differ
only as to the designation of a certain place for the Sabbath-rest, the
former holding, that for a poor man this is allowed, but not for a rich
man, and the latter holding that it is permitted for both; but all agree
that as for resting in one's place where he stands it is allowed to both
rich and poor, because the principal way of effecting an Erub is with
one's feet. The statement of the Mishna, "This rule is explanatory to
the saying," refers to a man who was overtaken by dusk, while the
teaching "for the poor man who has no bread, it is made easier," is
according to the opinion of all.

We have learned a Boraitha in support of R. Na'hman: Be it a poor man or
a rich man an Erub should be effected with bread. A rich man should not
go out to the legal limits and say: "Here will I take my Sabbath-rest"
because this is allowed only to one who was overtaken by dusk on the
road, so saith R. Meir. R. Jehudah, however, said: Be it a poor man or a
rich man the Erub should be effected with the feet and a rich man may go
out to the legal limits and take his Sabbath-rest there, because the
principal manner of effecting an Erub is with the feet. To the
householder, however, the sages allowed to send a servant, a son, or any
other messenger, to make the Erub in his stead, in order to make it
easier for him, and R. Jehudah said again: It happened to the men of the
house of Mamel and of the house of Gurion in the city of Aruma who would
distribute figs and raisins during years of famine, that the poor of the
villages

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

of Shihin and Hananiah would come on the eve of Sabbath to the legal
limits, remain there over night, and on the morrow would enter the city
of Aruma and receive their share.

R. Hyya bar Ashi taught Hyya the son of Rabh in the presence of Rabh:
"Be he a rich man or a poor man." Said Rabh to him: "Add to this
teaching, that the Halakha prevails according to R. Jehudah."

Rabba bar R. Hanan generally went on the Sabbath from Artibna to
Pumbaditha. Once, while on the way he said: "I will take my Sabbath-rest
in Tzintha (a small hamlet between the two towns)." Said Abayi to him:
Why dost thou say this, because thou knowest, that where R. Meir differs
with R. Jehudah the Halakha prevails according to R. Jehudah and
besides, thou art of the opinion of R. Hisda, who holds, that they
differ only concerning the designation of a certain place for the
Sabbath-rest; but did not R. Na'hman explain to the contrary and have we
not a Boraitha in support of R. Na'hman?

Answered Rabba bar R. Hanan, "Henceforth I shall not do this again."

Rami bar Hama asked: "It was said, that one who made an Erub by means of
his feet, has four ells for himself besides the two thousand allowed
him. What is the law concerning one who had sent bread to make the Erub?
Has he the extra four ells or not?" Said Rabha: "Come and hear: The
Mishna states that the Erub was to be made with bread only to make it
easier for the wealthy. If we should say, that he has not the four ells,
it will not be made easier for the wealthy, but on the contrary
stricter?" It will not be stricter? For he would rather lose the four
ells and be enabled to send a messenger in his stead than to go himself.

MISHNA: If a man (on the eve of Sabbath) had been despatched by his
townsmen to combine by an Erub a town (or village in the vicinity) and
was subsequently induced by a neighbor to go back (before completing his
errand) he is permitted to go to the place in question (nevertheless);
all his townsmen, however, are forbidden (to go thither). Such is the
dictum of R. Jehudah; but R. Meir said: One who can prepare an Erub and
does not prepare it, is (like one driving) an ass and (leading) a camel
(at the same time).

GEMARA: What difference is there between the man and his townsmen? Said
R. Huna: "This is a case of where a man possessed two houses which had
two legal limits between them,

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

i.e., they were four thousand ells apart and the man went out on the
road without taking bread along. He is then considered as a poor man;
(and in consequence made his Erub wherever he was with his feet) but his
townsmen who sent him to make the Erub are regarded as wealthy and their
Erub not having been effected are not allowed to go out."

We learned a Boraitha supporting this teaching: "One who has two houses
between which there are two legal limits makes the Erub valid as soon as
he starts out on the way from one to the other, such is the dictum of R.
Jehudah. Moreover, said R. Jose the son of R. Jehudah, even if his
comrades meet him and tell him to stay over night where he is, because
it is too hot or too cold, he may arise in the morning and continue on
his way (for his intention was originally to make his Erub at the end of
his journey)."

Said Rabba: "All agree that a man may continue his journey after
remaining at a certain place over night, if he had been persuaded to
interrupt his journey by another, but if he did so of his own accord, he
must not continue on his way, because he may have changed his original
intention. Wherein they differ is, if the man was persuaded to remain at
a certain place before commencing his journey. According to one, his
Erub is invalid as long as he had not yet started, and according to the
other, it is valid because the intention originally existed."

R. Joseph, however, said: "All agree that one must start on the journey,
otherwise his Erub is not valid; but they differ in a case of a man
having been persuaded to stop over at a certain place or doing so of his
own accord. One holds, that if he stopped over of his own accord, he may
have changed his original intention and hence his Erub is not valid,
while the other maintains, that as long as he had started, it does not
matter."

R. Jehudah bar Isht'tha brought a basket of fruit to R. Nathan bar
Oshiya on the eve of Sabbath (and the distance from his house to that of
R. Nathan was four thousand ells). He started to return and R. Nathan
let him go as far as the first step and then said to him: "Remain here
over night." On the morrow, he arose and returned to his home.

"*But R. Meir said: 'One who can prepare an Erub,'*" etc. Have we not
learned already in a Mishna (of the third chapter) that R. Meir and R.
Jehudah both said: "If (an Erub) is doubtful, this is (like driving) an
ass (and leading a) camel." Said R. Shesheth: It might be assumed that
the reason of R. Meir's

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

opinion is that only in the case of a doubtful Erub, it is a case of an
ass and a camel, but if it is known to a certainty that no Erub was
made, such is not the case (but it is positively forbidden); hence we
are given to understand that even where it is certain that the Erub was
not made it is also a case of an ass and a camel; because the Mishna
cites a case where it is certain that no Erub was made.

MISHNA: If one went beyond the legal limit even a single ell, he must
not go back the entire distance. R. Eliezer said: If he went two ells
beyond the limit he may go back; but if three ells, he must not.

GEMARA: Said R. Hanina: "If a man had one foot within the limit and the
other foot outside he may enter, because it is written \[Isaiah lviii.
13\]: 'If thou restrain thy feet for the sake of the Sabbath' and we
read 'thy feet' and as one foot was still within the limit, it cannot be
said, that he had restrained his feet." We have learned, however, in
another Boraitha, that he must not enter? R. Hanina holds according to
the opinion of the anonymous teachers, who maintain in still another
Boraitha, that wherever the greater part of the body of a man is
situated, there is his place.

"*R. Eliezer said: 'If he went two ells,'*" etc. Did we not learn in a
Boraitha, that R. Eliezer said: If he went one ell beyond the limit he
may go back; but if he went two ells, he must not? This presents no
difficulty; our Mishna refers to a case where he had overstepped one ell
and remained exactly two ells beyond, while the Boraitha refers to one
who had overstepped two ells and was already in the third. Did we not
learn in another Boraitha, that R. Eliezer said: "Even if he had stepped
out one ell, he must not reënter?" This Boraitha refers to the one who
measured the legal distance (as is stated in the last Mishna of the next
chapter, which will be explained then and there).

MISHNA: One who was overtaken by dusk one ell outside, of the legal
limit must not reënter the town; R. Simeon, however, said: Even if one
was fifteen ells beyond the limit, he may go back, as the land-surveyors
who establish the limits, are not very exact in their measurements and
allowance is made for those who might err.

GEMARA: We have learned in a Boraitha: "It sometimes happens that the
land-surveyors forget their mark and go beyond the distance."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_31"></span>[104:1](eru08.htm#fr_31.md) The following
paragraphs in the original Gemara are devoted to arguments of R. Papa
and R. Ashi concerning the adduction of the differences quoted by the
two Rabbis in the preceding paragraphs and quote the Boraithoth further
on. Hence we have omitted them, and the reader will understand this from
what follows. This rule is made by us for the benefit of the Hebrew
scholar and will apply to all such omissions later.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[105:1](eru08.htm#fr_32.md) Wherever a question
remains undecided in the Talmud, the letters Taph, Iod, Quph, Vav, are
inserted, and some scholars maintain, that this means "Theiqu," *i.e.*,
"So shall it remain." Others, however, maintain that the letters stand
for: "Tishbi = Elijah the prophet, Ietharetz = will answer, Qushiuth =
contradictions, Veabaioth = and questions.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[105:2](eru08.htm#fr_33.md) This statement of R.
Mesharshia applies to the whole Talmud from the fact that, although the
authorities quoted above are among the greatest of the Mishna and the
Gemara, the interpretation of all Halakoth should be based upon common
sense, and in connection with this we would wish to call the attention
of the reader to the assertion made in our article, "What is the
Talmud?" contained in our "The Pentateuch, Its Languages, Character,
etc.," and in our article entitled "Two Questions concerning the Talmud
and Schulchau Aruch," published in the *American Israelite*, 1894, that
"no one has any right to establish a code based upon Halakhoth of the
Talmud."

<span id="fn_34"></span>[114:1](eru08.htm#fr_34.md) Rashi explains this to
mean 4 ells and 8/5 or 1 3/5 of an ell additionally. It is difficult to
understand just how this is meant or how the diagonal can be derived
without the square.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V: Town Boundaries and Legal Limits](eru09.md)
