[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ros02)  [Next](ros04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 2: Tracts Erubin, Shekalim, Rosh Hashana*, tr.
by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# "NEW YEAR."

## CHAPTER I.

THE ORDINANCES ABOUT THE NEW YEARS OF THE JEWISH CALENDAR--THE
MESSENGERS THAT WERE SENT OUT FROM JERUSALEM--AND AT WHICH PERIOD OF THE
YEAR THE WORLD IS DIVINELY JUDGED.

MISHNA *I*.: There are four New Year days, viz.: The first of Nissan is
New Year for (the ascension of) Kings and for (the regular rotation of)
festivals; <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) the first of Elul is New
Year for the cattle-tithe, <span id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3) but
according to R. Eliezer and R. Simeon, it is on the first of Tishri. The
first of Tishri is New Year's day, for ordinary years, and for sabbatic
years <span id="fr_4"></span>[3](#fn_4) and jubilees; and also for the
planting of trees <span id="fr_5"></span>[4](#fn_5) and for herbs. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[5](#fn_6) On the first day of Shebhat is the New Year
for trees, <span id="fr_7"></span>[6](#fn_7) according to the school of
Shammai; but the school of Hillel says it is on the fifteenth of the
same month. <span id="fr_8"></span>[7](#fn_8)

GEMARA: "*For kings*." Why is it necessary to appoint such a day? (Let
every king count the day of his ascension to the throne as the beginning
of his year.) Said R. Hisda: "On account of documents." So that in the
case of mortgages, one may know which is the first and which is the
second by means of

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

the year of the king's reign mentioned in the documents. The rabbis
taught: A king who ascends the throne on the 29th of Adar must be
considered to have reigned one year as soon as the first of Nissan
comes, but if he ascends the throne on the first of Nissan he is not
considered to have reigned one year until the first of Nissan of the
following year. From this we infer, that only Nissan is the commencement
of years for kings (or the civil New Year); that even a fraction of a
year is considered a year; and that if a king ascends the throne on the
first of Nissan, he is not considered to have reigned one year until the
next first of Nissan, although he may have been elected in Adar. The
Boraitha teaches this lest one say that the year should be reckoned from
the day of election, and therefore the king would begin his second year
(on the first of Nissan following).

The rabbis taught: If a king die in Adar, and his successor ascend the
throne in Adar, (documents may be dated either) the (last) year of the
(dead) king or the (first) year of the new king. If a king die in
Nissan, and his successor ascend the throne in Nissan, the same is the
case. But if a king die in Adar, and his successor does not ascend the
throne until Nissan, then the year ending with Adar should be referred
to as the year of the dead king, and from Nissan it should be referred
to as that of his successor. <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) Is this
not self-evident? The case here mentioned refers to an instance where
the new king was a son of the deceased, and, while ascending the throne
in Nissan, had been elected in the month of Adar, and being the king's
son, it might be assumed that he was king immediately after his
election, and thus the following first of Nissan would inaugurate the
second year of his reign. He comes to teach us that such is not the
case.

R. Johanan says: Whence do we deduce that we reckon the commencement of
years (for the reign) of kings, only from Nissan? Because it is written
\[I Kings, vi. 1\]: "And it came to pass in the four hundred and
eightieth year after the going forth of the children of Israel out of
the land of Egypt, in the fourth year of the month Ziv, which is the
second month of the reign of Solomon over Israel." Thus the Scriptures
establish an analogy between "the reign of Solomon" and "the Exodus from
Egypt." As the Exodus from Egypt is reckoned from Nissan,

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

so also is the reign of Solomon reckoned from Nissan. But how do we know
that the Exodus even should be reckoned from Nissan? Perhaps we should
reckon it from Tishri. This would be improper, for it is written \[Numb.
xxxiii. 38\]: "And Aaron, the Priest, went up into Mount Hor at the
commandment of the Lord, and died there, in the fortieth year after the
children of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, on the first day
of the fifth month." And it is written \[Deut. i. 3\]: "And it came to
pass in the fortieth year, in the eleventh month, on the first day of
the month, Moses spake," etc. Since he mentions the fifth month, which
is certainly Abh, and he speaks of (Aaron's death as happening in) the
fortieth year (and not the forty-first year), it is clear that Tishri is
not the beginning of years (for kings). This argument would be correct
as far as the former (Aaron's) case is concerned, for the text
specifically mentions (forty years after) the Exodus; but in the latter
(Moses') case, how can we tell that (the fortieth year) means from the
Exodus? Perhaps it means (the fortieth year) from the raising of the
Tabernacle in the wilderness. From the fact that R. Papa stated further
on, that the twentieth year is mentioned twice for the sake of a
comparison by analogy, we must assume that the analogy of expression
"the fortieth year" (mentioned in connection with both Aaron and Moses)
signifies also; <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) as in the former
case it means forty years from the time of the Exodus, so also in the
latter case. But whence do we know that the incident that took place in
Abh (the death of Aaron) happened before (the speech of Moses) which is
related as happening in Shebhat? Perhaps the Shebhat incident happened
first. It is not reasonable to suppose this, for it is written \[Deut.
i. 4\]: "After he had slain Sihon the king of the Amorites," and when
Aaron died Sihon was still living. Thus it is written \[Numb. xxi. 1\]:
"And the Canaanite, the king of Arad, heard." What did he hear? He heard
that Aaron was dead, and that the clouds of glory had departed (and he
thought that a sign that permission was given from heaven to fight
against Israel). <span id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11) How can we make any
such comparison? In the one place it speaks of the Canaanite,

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

and in the other of Sihon. We have learned in a Buraitha that Sihon,
Arad, and the Canaanite are identical. This opinion of R. Johanan is
quite correct, for we find that a Boraitha quotes all the verses that he
quotes here, and arrives at the same conclusion.

R. Hisda says: The rule of the Mishna--that the year of the kings begins
with Nissan--refers to the kings of Israel only, but for the kings of
other nations it commences from Tishri. As it is said \[Neh. i. 1\]:
"The words of Nehemiah, the son of Hakhaliah. And it came to pass in the
month of Kislev, in the twentieth year," etc. And it is written \[ibid.
ii. 1\]: "And it came to pass in the month Nissan, in the twentieth year
of Artaxerxes the king," etc. Since Hanani stood before Nehemiah in
Kislev, and the Bible speaks of it as the twentieth year, and since
Nehemiah stood before the king in Nissan, and the Text calls it also the
twentieth year, it is clear that the New Year (for the non-Jewish king,
Artaxerxes) is not Nissan (or in the latter case he would have spoken of
the twenty-first year). This would be correct as far as the latter
quotation is concerned, for it specifically mentions Artaxerxes, but in
the former verse how do we know that it refers to Artaxerxes? Perhaps it
refers to another event altogether. Says R. Papa: Since in the first
passage we read "the twentieth year" and in the second we read "the
twentieth year," we may deduce by analogy that as in the one case
Artaxerxes is meant, so is he meant also in the other. But how do we
know that the event, recorded as having occurred in Kislev, and not the
Nissan incident, happened first? This we know from a Boraitha, where it
reads: The same words which Hanani said to Nehemiah in Kislev, the
latter repeated to the king in Nissan, as it is said \[Neh. i. 1, 2\]:
"The words of Nehemiah, son of Hakhaliah. And it came to pass in the
month of Kislev, in the twentieth year, as I was in Shushan the capital,
that Hanani, one of my brethren came, and certain men of Judah . . . and
the gates thereof are burned with fire." And it also said \[Neh. ii.
1-6\]: "And it came to pass in the month of Nissan, in the twentieth
year of Artaxerxes the king, that wine was before him . . . so it
pleased the king to send me; and I set him a time."

R. Joseph raised an objection. It is written \[Haggai, ii. 10\]: "In the
twenty-fourth day of the sixth month, in the second year of Darius." And
it is also written \[ibid. I\]: "In the second year, in the seventh
month, in the one-and-twentieth

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

day of the month." <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12) If the rule is
that Tishri (the seventh month) is the beginning of years for non-Jewish
kings, should not the Text read "in the third year of Darius" instead of
the second year? R. Abbahu answered: Cyrus was a most upright king, and
the Hebrews reckoned his years as they did those of the kings of Israel
(beginning with Nissan). R. Joseph opposed this. First: If that were so,
there are texts that would contradict each other, for it is written
\[Ezra, vi. 15\]: "And this house was finished on the third day of the
month Adar, which was in the sixth year of the reign of Darius the
King." And we have learned in a Boraitha: At the same time in the
following year Ezra and the children of the captivity went up from
Babylon, and the Bible says about this \[Ezra, vii. 8\]: "And he came to
Jerusalem in the fifth month in the seventh year of the king." But if
the rule is (that for Cyrus the year began with Nissan and not Tishri)
should not the Text say "the eighth year" (since the first day of
Nissan, the beginning of another year, intervenes between the third of
Adar and the month of Abh)? Secondly: How can these texts be compared?
In the one place it speaks of Cyrus, and in the other of Darius. We have
learned in a Boraitha that Darius, Cyrus, and Artaxerxes are all one and
the same person.

"*And for festivals*." Do then the festivals commence on the first of
Nissan? Do they not begin on the fifteenth of that month? R. Hisda
answered: (The Mishna means that Nissan is) the month that contains that
festival which is called the New Year for festivals (viz., Passover).

What difference does it make (in practice)? It makes a difference to one
who has made a vow, because through this festival he becomes culpable of
breaking the law, "Thou shalt not slack to pay." <span
id="fr_13"></span>[2](#fn_13) And this is according to the opinion of R.
Simeon, who says: That (before one is guilty of delay) the three
festivals must have passed by in their regular order, with Passover as
the first (of the three). Thus was also the dictum of R. Simeon ben
Jochai, who stated that the law against procrastination

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

may be violated at times only when five festivals had passed by in their
regular order; at other times when four, and again when three festivals
had passed; *i.e.*, if the vow was made before the feast of Pentecost he
becomes guilty of procrastination only when Pentecost, Tabernacles,
Passover, and again Pentecost and Tabernacles had passed by; if the vow
was made before Tabernacles then he becomes guilty.

The rabbis taught: As soon as three festivals have passed by and the
following duties (or vows) have not been fulfilled one is guilty of
procrastination; and these are: The vow of one who says, "I will give
the worth of myself (to the sanctuary);" or, "I will give what I am
estimated to be worth (in accordance with Lev. xxvii.);" or the vow
concerning objects, the use of which one has forsworn, or which one has
consecrated (to the sanctuary), or sin-offerings, guilt-offerings,
burnt-offerings, peace-offerings, charity, tithes, the firstlings, the
paschal offerings, the gleanings of the field, that which is forgotten
to be gathered in the field, the produce of the corner of the
field. <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14) R. Simeon says: The festivals
must pass by in their regular order, with Passover as the first. And R.
Meir says: As soon as even one festival has elapsed and the vow has not
been kept the law is infringed. R. Eliezer ben Jacob says: As soon as
two festivals have elapsed the law is infringed, but R. Elazar ben
Simeon says: Only the passing of the Feast of Tabernacles causes the
infringement of the law (whether or not any other festivals have passed
by between the making and the fulfilling of the vow). What is the reason
of the first Tana? Since in \[Deut. xvi.\] the Text has been speaking of
the three festivals, why does it repeat, "On the Feast of Unleavened
Bread, on the Feast of Weeks, and on the Feast of Tabernacles?" This
signifies that when Tabernacles, Passover, Pentecost, and again
Tabernacles had passed, but if the vow was made before Passover, then
the man becomes guilty if he allows the *three* festivals to pass by in
their regular order. Infer from this that the festivals must pass in the
order just mentioned before one is guilty of procrastination. R. Simeon
says: It was not necessary to repeat "on the Feast of Tabernacles,"
because the Text was speaking of that festival (when it mentioned the
names of the three festivals). Why, then, does it repeat it? To teach us
that Tabernacles shall be the last of the three festivals. R. Meir

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

arrives at his opinion because it is mentioned of each festival "Thou
shalt come there (to Jerusalem), and ye shall bring there" (your vows;
and this being said of each festival, if one elapses and the vow is not
brought, then the law against delay is infringed. The reason of R.
Eliezer ben Jacob is, that the passage \[Numb. xxix. 39\] runs: "These
shall ye offer to the Lord on your appointed feasts," and the minimum of
the plural word "feasts" is two. On what does R. Elazar b. Simeon base
his opinion? We have learned in the following Boraitha: "The Feast of
Tabernacles" should not have been mentioned in \[Deut. xvi. 16\], since
the preceding passages (of that chapter) were treating of that feast.
Why, then, was it mentioned? To indicate that that particular feast
(Tabernacles) is the one that causes the infringement of the law.

What do R. Meir and R. Eliezer ben Jacob deduce from the superfluous
passage "on the Feast of Unleavened Bread, on the Feast of Weeks, and on
the Feast of Tabernacles"? They use this verse, according to R. Elazar,
who says in the name of R. Oshiya, who said: Whence do we know that the
law of compensation <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15) applies to the
Feast of Weeks (although the feast is only one day)? For this very
reason the Bible repeats the three festivals, and he institutes a
comparison between Pentecost and Passover; and as the law of
compensation applies to Passover for seven days, so also does it apply
to Pentecost for seven days. Why, then, do the Scriptures find it
necessary to repeat the words, "In the Feast of Tabernacles"? To compare
it with the Feast of Passover, as during Passover it was obligatory to
stay over night (in Jerusalem), so was it also necessary during the
Feast of Tabernacles. But how do we know that it was obligatory during
the Feast of Unleavened Bread? It is written \[Deut. xvi. 7\]: "Thou
shalt turn in the morning (after staying over night), and go unto thy
tents." Whence do we deduce this? The rabbis taught: It is written
\[Deut. xxiii. 22\]: "When thou shalt vow a vow unto the Lord thy God,
thou shalt not delay to pay it." Perhaps these words only apply to a
vow. How do we know that they may also be applied to a voluntary
offering? In the passage just quoted we read "vow," and in another place
\[Lev. vii. 16\] we find "but if the sacrifice of his offering be a vow
or a voluntary offering";

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

as in the latter instance the "voluntary offering" is included, so is
also the former; "unto the Lord thy God," *i.e.*, offerings expressed by
"I will give the value of myself," etc., and other objects mentioned
above; "thou shalt not slack to pay it"; *i.e.*, the object promised
must be given and not anything in exchange for it; <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16) "for he will surely require it," *i.e.*,
the sin, guilt, burnt, and peace-offerings; "the Lord thy God," these
words refer to offerings of charity, tithes, and firstlings; "of thee,"
this refers to the gleanings, that which is forgotten in the field and
the produce of the corner of the field; "and it would be sin in thee,"
*i.e.*, in thee and not in thy sacrifice (which is not thereby
invalidated).

The rabbis taught: It is written \[Deut. xxiii. 24\]: "What is gone out
of thy lips," this refers to the positive commandments (of the Law);
"thou shalt keep," refers to the negative commandments; "and perform,"
is a warning to the Beth Din (that they should enforce the laws);
"according as thou hast vowed," refers to vows; "to the Lord thy God,"
refers to sin, guilt, burnt, and peace-offerings; "voluntarily," means
just what it is; "which thou hast spoken," refers to the sanctified
objects devoted to the Temple for repairs, etc.; "with thy mouth,"
refers to charity. Says Rabha: One is culpable if he does not give
forthwith that which he has vowed for charity. Why so? Because there are
always poor people (needing immediate help). Is this not self-evident?
One might suppose that, since the law prohibiting delay is found in
connection with the duty of giving charity and also of bringing the
various voluntary offerings, it would apply to both, and it would not be
infringed until the three festivals had elapsed, he comes to teach us
(that charity and sacrifices are different); in the latter case the
infringement of the law depends on the festivals, but in the case of
charity it must be given immediately, for the poor are always to be
found. And Rabha said again: As soon as three festivals have passed (and
one has not brought his offering), he daily transgresses the law against
delay. An objection was raised. As soon as a year, containing three
festivals or not, has passed (he that does not bring his offering), be
it a firstling or any of the holy offerings, transgresses daily the law
against delay. It is quite possible that the three festivals may elapse
and yet a year may not go by (*i.e.*, from Passover till Tabernacles is
only

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

seven months), but how can it happen that a year may pass and the three
festivals should not occur (in that time)? It may happen according to
those who say (that the three festivals must elapse) in their regular
order, but according to those who do not say (that the three festivals
must go by) in their regular order, how can such a case occur? This
would be correct according to Rabbi (who holds that the intercalary
month <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) is not a part of the year),
and it occurs in a leap year, when one consecrates anything (to the
Temple) after the Feast of Passover; for when the end of the second Adar
has arrived, a year (of twelve months) has elapsed, yet the three
festivals have not passed by in their regular order. But how can such a
case occur according to the rabbis? It can happen as R. Shemaiah
teaches: Pentecost falls on the fifth, sixth, or seventh of Sivan. How
is this possible? In a year when the months of Nissan and Iyar have
thirty days each, Pentecost falls on the fifth of Sivan; when they each
have twenty-nine days, Pentecost falls on the seventh of Sivan; but when
the one has twenty-nine days and the other has thirty days, Pentecost
falls on the sixth of Sivan.

R. Zera asked: How does the law against delay affect an heir? Shall we
argue that the Law says \[Deut. xxiii. 22\]: "When *thou* shalt vow"
(*i.e.*, the testator has vowed), but the heir has not vowed
(consequently the law does not apply to him), or shall we infer from the
passage \[Deut. xii. 5, 6\]: "And thither shalt thou come . . . and ye
shall bring," that the heir (who is obliged to come) is also in duty
bound to bring with him (the objects vowed by the testator)? Come and
hear. R. Hyya taught: It is written in this connection \[Deut. xxiii.
22\]: "Of thee" (*i.e.*, from the one who vowed) and this excludes the
heir. But did we not say above that these words refer to the gleanings,
etc.? The Text uses the word Me'immokh ("of thee"), which we can explain
to mean both the successor and the gleanings, etc. (*i.e.*, all that
comes "of thee").

R. Zera also asked: How does the law against delay affect a woman? Shall
I say that since she is not obligated to appear (in Jerusalem) the law
does not apply to her? or perhaps it is her duty to go there because she
is included in the law "to rejoice"? "Certainly," answered Abayi, "she
is bound by this law because it is her duty to rejoice."

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

The schoolmen asked: From when do we count the beginning of the year for
a firstling? Answered Abayi: From the moment it is born; but R. Aha b.
Jacob said: From the moment it is acceptable as an offering (*i.e.*,
when it is eight days old, Lev. xxii. 27). They do not differ, for the
former Rabbi refers to an unblemished animal and the latter to one with
a blemish. May, then, a blemished animal be eaten (on the day of its
birth)? Yes, if we are sure it was born after the full period of
gestation.

The rabbis taught: The first of Nissan is the new year for (arranging
the) months, for (appointing) leap years, for giving the half shekels,
and, some say, also for the rental of houses. Whence do we know (that it
is the new year) for months? From the passage \[Ex. xii. 2\] where it is
written: "This month shall be unto you the beginning of months; it shall
be the first month of the year to you." It is also written \[Deut. xvi.
1\]: "Observe the month of Abib" (early stage of ripening). In which
month is grain in the early stage of ripening? I can say only Nissan,
and the Law calls it the first. Could I not say Adar (when the grain
begins to shoot up)? Nay, for the grain must be ripening during the
major portion of the month (and in Adar it is not). Is it then written
that the grain must be ripening the major portion of the month?
Therefore, says Rabhina, the sages do not find (the rule of calling
Nissan the first month) in the Pentateuch, but in the Book of Esther,
where it is clearly stated \[Esther, iii. 7\], "In the first month, that
is, the month Nissan."

"*For leap years*." Do we, then, count leap years from Nissan? Does not
a Boraitha teach us that Adar only is the intercalary month? Answered R.
Na'hman b. Itz'hak: The words "FOR LEAP YEARS" mean here the termination
of leap years, <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18) and our Tana speaks
of the beginning of the leap year and not the end.

"*For giving the half shekels*." Whence do we deduce this? Said R.
Yoshiah: In Numb. xxviii. 14: "This is the burnt-offering of the new
moon throughout the months of the year." The Scriptures say "*proclaim
it a new month*," and also bring a sacrifice from the new products. We
make a comparison between the words "year" used in this passage and in
Ex. xii. 2,

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "it shall be the
first month of the year to you," and deduce that they both refer to
Nissan.

R. Jehudah says in the name of Samuel: It is required that the
congregational sacrifices <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19) brought on
the first of Nissan should be purchased with the shekels collected for
the new year; but if the sacrifice was bought with the funds obtained
from the former year's funds, it is acceptable, yet the law was but
imperfectly complied with. We have also learned the same in a Boraitha
with the addition that, if an individual offers from his own property
(proper objects for the congregational sacrifices), they are acceptable,
but he must first present them to the congregation. Is this not
self-evident? Nay, it may be feared that one will not give them to the
congregation with a free will, and this, he teaches us, is not worthy of
consideration. And the reason that our Tana does not mention that Nissan
is a new year for the giving of shekels also, is because it is said
above that if one has brought an offering (from the old funds) he has
done his duty, therefore he could not make Nissan absolutely binding as
a new year for the sacrifices.

It is said above: "And some say also for the rental of houses." The
rabbis taught: He who lets a house to another for a year, should count
(the year) as twelve months from day to day; but if the lessee says (I
rent this house) "for this year," even if the transaction takes place on
the first of Adar, as soon as the first of Nissan arrives, the year (of
rental) has expired. Can you not say Tishri (is the beginning of the
year for such transactions)? Nay, it is generally understood that if a
man rents a house in the autumn he rents it for the whole of the rainy
season (winter). And the Tana of the first part of the above Boraitha
(who does not fix Nissan as the month for rentals), and also our Tana
both are of the opinion that in Nissan, too, bad weather sometimes
prevails (and therefore Nissan and Tishri are alike in this respect).

"*On the first of Elul is the new year for the cattle-tithes*."
According to whose opinion is this? Says R. Joseph: It is according to
Rabbi's own opinion which he formed in accordance with the opinions of
different Tanaïm. With regard to the festivals he holds with R. Simeon
and with regard to the cattle-tithe he holds to the opinion of R. Meir.
If that is so, are there not

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

five beginnings of years instead of four? Rabha answered that the Mishna
mentioned only the four, which are not disputed by any one. According to
R. Meir there are four, if that "for the festivals" be excluded, and
according to R. Simeon there are four, if that "for the cattle-tithes"
be excluded. R. Na'hman bar Itz'hak, however, says: (No such explanation
is needed); the Mishna means that there are four (months) in which there
are (or may be) many beginnings of years.

"*According to R. Eliezer and R. Simeon it is on the first of Tishri*."
R. Johanan says: Both of them deduce their opinion by (various
interpretations of) the same scriptural passage. It is written \[Psalms,
lxv. 14\]: "The meadows are clothed with flocks; the valleys also are
covered with corn; men shout for joy, they also sing." R. Meir thinks
(this is the interpretation) of these words: When are the meadows
clothed with flocks? At the season when the valleys are covered with
corn. And when are the valleys covered with corn? About (the time of)
Adar. The flocks conceive in Adar and produce their young in Abh;
consequently the beginning of the year (for the cattle-tithe) is Elul.
R. Eliezer and R. Simeon, however, say: When are the meadows clothed
with flocks? At the season when they shout and sing. When do the ears of
corn (seem to) send up a hymn of praise? In Nissan. Now, the sheep
conceive in Nissan and produce in Elul, consequently the beginning of
the year (for their tithe) is Tishri. But Rabha says: All agree that
only Adar is the time when the meadows are clothed with flocks, and the
valleys are covered with corn. But they differ about this passage
\[Deut. xiv. 22\]: "Thou shalt truly tithe" (*literally*, "Thou shalt
tithe in tithing"), and we see that the text here speaks of two
tithes-viz., of cattle and of grain. R. Meir thinks that the following
comparison may be instituted between the two: just as the tithe of grain
must be given in the month nearest to the time it is reaped, so that of
cattle must be given in the month nearest to the one in which they are
born (Elul). R. Eliezer and R. Simeon, however, are of the opinion that
another comparison may be instituted between these tithes--viz., just as
the beginning of the year for giving the tithe of grain is Tishri, so
also is Tishri for that of cattle.

"*The first of Tishri is the New Year's Day for ordinary years*." For
what purpose is this rule? Answers R. Zera, to determine the equinoxes
(and solstices); and this agrees with the opinion of R. Eliezer, who
says that the world was created

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

in Tishri; but R. Na'hman says (it is the new year) for divine judgment,
as it is written \[Deut. xi. 12\]: "From the beginning of the year till
the end of the year," *i.e.*, at the beginning of the year it is
determined what shall be at the end of the year. But whence do we know
that this means Tishri? It is written \[Psalms, lxxxi. 3\]: "Blow on the
new moon the cornet at the time when it (the new moon) is hidden <span
id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20) on our solemn feast day." What feast is it
on which the moon is hidden? We can only say Rosh Hashana (New Year's
Day), and of this day it is written \[ibid. v. 4\]: "For it is a statute
unto Israel, a judgment (day) for the God of Jacob."

The rabbis taught: "It is a statute unto Israel," whence we infer that
the Heavenly Court of judgment does not enter into judgment until the
Beth Din on earth proclaims the new moon. Another Boraitha states: It is
written: "It is a statute unto Israel." From this it appears that (New
Year's Day is a day of judgment) only for Israel. Whence do we know it
is so also for other nations? Therefore it is written: "It is the day of
judgment of the God of Jacob" (the Universal God). Why, then, is
"Israel" mentioned? To inform us that Israel comes in for judgment
first. This is in accordance with the saying of R. Hisda: If a king and
a congregation have a law suit, the king enters first, as it is said \[I
Kings, viii. 59\]: "The cause of his servant (King Solomon) and the
cause of his people." Why so? Because it is not customary to let a king
wait outside.

"*For the computation of sabbatic years*." On what scriptural passage is
this based? On Lev. xxv. 4, which reads: "But in the seventh year there
shall be a sabbath of rest unto the land," and he deduces (that it means
Tishri) by analogy from the word "year" in this passage and in the
following: "From the beginning of the year" \[Deut. xi. 12\], which
surely refers to Tishri.

"*And jubilees*." Do, then, jubilees begin on the first of Tishri? Do
they not begin on the tenth, as it is written \[Lev. xxv. 9\]: "On the
Day of Atonement shall ye make the cornet sound throughout all your
land"? Our Mishna is in accordance with R. Ishmael the son of R. Johanan
ben Berokah of the following Boraitha: It is written \[Lev. xxv. 10\]:
"Ye shall sanctify the year, the fiftieth year." Why was it necessary to
repeat the word "year"? Because in the same connection it

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

is said \[ibid. 9\]: "On the Day of Atonement shall ye make the cornet
sound," and one might suppose that the jubilee is sanctified only from
the Day of Atonement (and not before). Therefore the word "year" is
repeated to teach us that by the words "ye shall sanctify the fiftieth
year" is meant, that from the very beginning of the year the jubilee
commences to be consecrated. From this R. Ishmael the son of R. Johanan
b. Berokah says: From New Year's Day until the Day of Atonement slaves
were not wont to return to their (own) homes, neither did they serve
their masters, but they ate and drank and rejoiced with the crown of
freedom on their heads. As soon as the Day of Atonement arrived the Beth
Din ordered the cornet to be blown and the slaves returned to their own
homes, and estates reverted to their (original) owners.

We have learned in another Boraitha: "It is a jubilee" (Jobhel hi). What
is meant by (these superfluous words)? Since it is said \[Lev. xxv.
10\]: "And ye shall sanctify the fiftieth year," one might think that,
as at the beginning of the year the jubilee commences to be sanctified,
the sanctification should be extended to the (Day of Atonement) after
the end of the year; and be not surprised at such a teaching, since it
is customary to add from the non-sanctified to the sanctified. Hence the
necessity of the words in the passage (next to that quoted above) \[Lev.
xxv. 11\]: "A jubilee shall that fiftieth year be unto you"; *i.e.*, the
fiftieth year shall be hallowed, and not the fifty-first, But the
rabbis, whence do they derive the regulation that the fifty-first year
is not sanctified? Because it is plainly written the fiftieth year and
not the fifty-first. This excludes the opinion of R. Jehudah who holds
that the jubilee year is added at the beginning and end. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21) The rabbis taught "Jobhel hi (it is a
jubilee)," even if the people have not relinquished (their debts), even
if the cornet is not sounded; shall we also say even if slaves are not
released? Hence the word "hi" is used (to indicate that only when the
slaves are released it is a jubilee), so says R. Jehudah. R. Jose says:
"It is a jubilee," even if debts are not relinquished and slaves are not
released; shall we also say even if the cornet is not sounded? Hence the
word "hi" is used (and means the sounding of the cornet). Since one
passage includes (all that is prescribed) and the other

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

passage exempts (certain regulations), why should we say it is a jubilee
even if they have not released slaves, but that it is not a jubilee if
they failed to sound the cornet? Because it is possible that sometimes
(a jubilee may occur) and yet there are no (Hebrew) slaves to release,
but a jubilee can never occur without the sounding of the cornet (for a
cornet can always be found). Another explanation is, that (the sounding
of the cornet) is the duty of the Beth Din (and it will never fail to
perform it), while (the releasing of slaves) is the duty of the
individual, and we cannot be sure that he will perform it. (Is not the
first explanation satisfactory) that he gives this additional
explanation? (It may not be satisfactory to some who might say) that it
is impossible that not one (Hebrew) slave should be found somewhere to
be released. Therefore (the Boraitha adds) that the blowing of the
cornet is the duty of the Beth Din (and they will not fail to perform
it).

R. Hyya b. Abba, however, said in the name of R. Johanan: The foregoing
are the words of R. Jehudah and R. Jose; but the masters hold that all
three conditions may prevent the fulfilment (of the law), because they
hold that the word "hi" \[Lev. xxv. 10\] should be explained as to the
subjects mentioned in the passage in which it occurs, and in the
preceding and the following passages also, (and in the passage
immediately following the "hi" is said, "fields reverted to their
original owners." This, then, also constitutes one of the three
conditions). But is it not written, "a jubilee," which certainly means
to add something not mentioned previously? This additional word refers
to the lands outside of Palestine, where the jubilee must also be
enforced. If so, what then is the intent of the words "throughout the
land"? (They lead us to infer) that at the time when (under a Jewish
government) liberty is proclaimed throughout the land (Palestine) it
should be proclaimed outside the land; but if it is not proclaimed in
the land, it need not be proclaimed outside the land.

"*And also for the planting of trees*." Whence do we deduce this? From
Lev. xix. 23, where it is written: "Three years shall it be as
uncircumcised," and also \[ibid. 24\]: "But in the fourth year." We
compare the term "year" used here with that of Deut. xi. 12, "from the
beginning of the 'year,'" and deduce by analogy that they both mean
Tishri.

The rabbis taught: For one who plants, slips or grafts (trees) in the
sixth year (the year before the sabbatic year), thirty days

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

before the New Year's day (as soon as the first of Tishri arrives), a
year is considered to have passed, and he is permitted to use, during
the sabbatic year (the fruits they may produce), but less than thirty
days are not to be considered a year, and the fruits may not be used,
but are prohibited until the fifteenth of Shebhat, whether it be because
they come under the category of "uncircumcised" or under the category of
"fourth year planting" \[Lev. xix. 23, 24\]. Whence do we deduce this?
R. Hyya bar Abba said in the name of R. Johanan or R. Janai: The verse
says \[Lev. xix. 24, 25\]: "And in the fourth year. . . . And in the
fifth year," *i.e.*, it may happen that in the fourth year (from the
planting, the fruit) is prohibited because it is still "uncircumcised,"
and in the fifth year (from the planting) because it is still the
product of the fourth year.

We have learned R. Eliezer says: In Tishri the world was created, the
patriarchs Abraham and Jacob were born and died; Isaac was born on the
Passover; on New Year's Day Sarah, Rachel, and Hannah were visited with
the blessing of children, Joseph was released from prison, and the
bondage of our fathers in Egypt ceased; in Nissan our ancestors were
redeemed from Egypt, and in Tishri we shall again be redeemed. R.
Jehoshua, says: In Nissan the world was created, and in the same month
the patriarchs were born, and in Nissan they also died; Isaac was born
on the Passover; on New Year's Day Sarah, Rachel, and Hannah were
visited, Joseph was released from prison, and the bondage of our fathers
in Egypt ceased. In Nissan our ancestors were redeemed from Egypt, and
in the same month we shall again be redeemed.

We have learned in a Boraitha R. Eliezer says: Whence do we know that
the world was created in Tishri? From the scriptural verse, in which it
is written \[Gen. i. 11\]: "And God said, 'Let the earth bring forth
grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree,'" etc. In what month
does the earth bring forth grass, and at the same time the trees are
*full* of fruit? Let us say Tishri, and that time of the year (mentioned
in Genesis) was the autumn; the rain descended and the fruits
flourished, as it is written \[Gen. ii. 6\]: "But there went up a mist
from the earth," etc. R. Jehoshua says: Whence do we know that the world
was created in Nissan? From the scriptural verse, in which it is written
\[Gen. i. 12\]: "And the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding
seed, and the tree yielding fruit," etc. In which month is the earth
covered with grass (and at the same

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

time) the trees bring forth fruit? Let us say Nissan, and at that time
animals, domestic and wild, and birds mate, as it is said \[Psalms, lxv.
14\]: "The meadows are clothed with flocks," etc. Further says R.
Eliezer: Whence do we know that the patriarchs were born in Tishri? From
the passage \[I Kings, viii. 2\]: "And all the men of Israel assembled
themselves unto King Solomon at the feast, in the month Ethanim"
(strong), which is the seventh month; *i.e.*, the month in which
Ethanim, the strong ones of the earth (the patriarchs), were born. How
do we know that the expression *ethan* means strength? It is written
\[Numb. xxiv. 21\] *ethan moshabhekha*, "strong is thy dwelling-place,"
and it is also written \[Micah, vi. 2\]: "Hear ye, O mountains, the
Lord's controversy, and (*ve-haëthanim*) ye strong foundations," etc.

R. Jehoshua, however, says: Whence do we know that the patriarchs were
born in Nissan? From I Kings vi. 1, where it says: "In the fourth year,
in the month Ziv (glory), which is the second month," etc., which means
in that month in which the "glorious ones" of the earth (the patriarchs)
were already born. Whether the patriarchs were born in Nissan or Tishri,
the day of their death occurred in the same month as that in which they
were born; as it is written \[Deut. xxxi. 2\]: Moses said, 'I am one
hundred and twenty years old to-day.' The word "to-day" implies "just
this day my days and years are complete," for the Holy One, blessed be
He, grants the righteous the fulfilment of the years of their life to
the very month and day, as it is said: "The number of thy days will I
make full" \[Ex. xxiii. 26\].

Isaac was born in Nissan. Whence do we know this? It is written \[Gen.
xviii. 14\]: "At the next *festival* I will return to thee, and Sarah
will have a son." What festival was it when he said this? Shall I say it
was Passover, and he referred to Pentecost? That cannot be, for what
woman bears children after fifty days' gestation? If I say it was
Pentecost, and he referred to Tishri, a similar objection might be
raised, for who bears children after five months' gestation? If I say it
was Tabernacles, and he referred to Passover, a similar objection may be
made, for who bears children in the sixth month of gestation? This last
objection could be answered according to the following Boraitha: We have
learnt that that year was a leap year, and Mar Zutra says that although
a child born after nine months' gestation is never born during the month
(but

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

only at the end of the required time), still a seven months' child can
be born before the seventh month is complete, as it is said \[I Sam. i.
20\]: "And it came to pass, *li-tequphath ha-yamim* (when the time was
come about)"; the minimum of *tequphoth* <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22) is two and of *yamim* is also two (*i.e.*,
after six months and two days' gestation, childbirth is possible).

Whence do we know that Sarah, Rachel, and Hannah were visited on New
Year's Day? Says R. Elazar: By comparing the expression "visit" that
occurs in one passage with the word "visit" that occurs in another
passage, and also by treating the expression "remember" in the same way.
It is written concerning Rachel \[Gen. xxx. 32\]: "And God remembered
Rachel," and of Hannah it is written \[I Sam. i. 19\]: "And God
remembered her." He institutes an analogy between the word "remember"
used in these passages and in connection with New Year's Day, which is
called \[Lev. xxiii. 24\] "a Sabbath, a memorial (*literally*, a
remembrance) of blowing of cornets." It is also written concerning
Hannah \[I Sam. ii. 21\]: "And the Lord visited Hannah," and of Sarah it
is written \[Gen. xxi. 1\]: "And the Lord visited Sarah," and by analogy
all these events took place on the same day (New Year's Day).

Whence do we know that Joseph was released from prison on New Year's
Day? From Psalm lxxxi., in verses 4, 5, it is written: "Blow on the new
moon the cornet at the appointed time on the day of our feast, for this
is a statute for Israel." In verse 5 of the same Psalm it is written:
"As a testimony in Joseph did he ordain it, when he went out over the
land of Egypt." On New Year's Day the bondage of our fathers in Egypt
ceased. (Whence do we know this?) It is written \[Ex. vi. 6\]: "I will
bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians," and it is
written in Psalms, lxxxi. 6: "I removed his shoulder from the burden"
(*i.e.*, I relieved Israel from the burden of Egypt on the day spoken of
in the Psalm; viz., New Year's Day). In Nissan they were redeemed, as
previously proven. In Tishri we shall again be redeemed. This he deduces
by analogy from the word "cornet" found in the following passages. In
Psalm lxxxi. 4, it is stated: "Blow the cornet on the new moon (*i.e.*,
on New Year's Day), and in Isa. xxvii. 13, it is written: And on that
day the great cornet shall be

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

blown" (and as it means New Year's Day in the one place, so does it also
in the other). R. Jehoshua says: "In Nissan they were redeemed, and in
that month we shall be redeemed again." Whence do we know this? From Ex.
xii. 42, which says: "It is a night of special observance;" *i.e.*, a
night specially appointed since the earliest times for the final
redemption of Israel.

The rabbis taught: The Jewish sages calculate the time of the flood
according to R. Eliezer, and the solstices according to R. Jehoshua, but
the sages of other nations calculate the time of the flood also as R.
Jehoshua does.

"*And for herbs*." To this a Boraitha adds "tithes and vows." Let us
see. What does he mean by "herbs"? The tithe of herbs. But are not these
included with other "tithes"? (Nay, for the tithe of herbs) is a
rabbinical institution, while the others are biblical. If so, should he
not teach the biblical commandment first? (This is no question), because
it was pleasing to him (to have discovered that, although the tithe of
herbs is only a rabbinical institution, yet it should have a special New
Year to prevent the confusion of tithes from year to year) he,
therefore, gives it precedence. And the Tana of our Mishna teaches us
the rabbinical institution (viz., the New Year for herbs), leaving us to
infer that if that must be observed, so much the more must the biblical
law be followed.

The rabbis taught: If one gathers herbs on the eve of New Year's Day
before sunset, and gathers others after sunset, he must not give the
heave-offering or the tithe from the one for the other, for it is
prohibited to give the heave-offering or tithe from the product of the
past year for that of the present, of *vice versa*. If the second year
from the last sabbatic year was just ending and the third year was just
beginning, then for the second year he must give the first and second
tithes, <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23) and for the third year he
must give the first and the poor tithes. Whence do we deduce that (in
the third year no second tithe was to be

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

given)? R. Jehoshua ben Levi says: In Deut. xxvi. 12, it is written:
"When thou hast made an end of the tithe of produce in the third year,
which is the year of the tithing," *i.e.*, the year in which only one
tithe is to be given." What is to be understood (by one tithe)? The
first and poor tithes, and the second tithe shall be omitted. But
perhaps it is not so (that the first and poor tithe are one tithe), but
that the first tithe shall be also omitted. This cannot be so, for we
read \[Numb. xviii. 26\]: "The tithe which I have given you from them,
for your inheritance," etc. (From this we see that) the Scripture
compares this tithe to an inheritance, and as an inheritance is the
perpetual property of the heir, so also is the first tithe an
uninterrupted gift for the Levite.

"*And for vows*." The rabbis taught: Whoso vows to derive no benefit
from his neighbor for a year, must reckon (for the year) twelve months,
from day to day; but if he said "for this year," if he made the vow even
on the 29th of Elul, as soon as the first of Tishri comes, that year is
complete, for he vowed to afflict himself and that purpose (even in so
brief a period) has been fulfilled. But perhaps we should say Nissan
(should be regarded as the new year in such a case)? Nay, in the matter
of vows we follow the common practice among men (who generally regard
Tishri as the New Year).

We have learned (Maasroth I., 3): We reckon the year for giving the
tithe: "for carob as soon as it begins to grow; for grain and olives as
soon as they are one-third ripe." What is meant by "as soon as it begins
to grow"? When it blossoms. Whence do we know that we reckon the tithe
on grain and olives when they are one-third ripe? Said R. Assi in the
name of R. Johanan, and the same was said in the name of R. Jose of
Galilee: It is written \[Deut. xxxi. 10\]: "At the end of every seven
years, in the solemnity of the year of release, in the Feast of
Tabernacles." What has the year of release to do with Tabernacles; it is
already the eighth year (because the Bible says "at the end of every
seven years")? It is only to tell us that all grain which was one-third
ripe before New Year's Day must be regarded even in the eighth year as
the product of the sabbatic year. And for this we find support in the
following Boraitha: R. Jonathan b. Joseph says: It is written \[Lev.
XXV. 21\]: "And it shall bring forth fruit for three (*lishlosh*)
years." Do not read *lishlosh* "for three," but in this case read
*lishlish* "for a third" (*i.e.*, it is considered produce when it is a
third ripe). But this

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

verse is required for its own particular purpose. There is another verse
\[ibid. ibid. 22\]: "And when ye sow in the eighth year, then shall ye
eat of the old harvest; until the ninth year, until its harvest come in,
shall ye eat of the old store."

We have learned in a Mishna (Shebeith, II., 7): Rice, millet, poppies,
and lentils which have taken root before New Year's Day come under the
category of tithes for the past year, and therefore one is permitted to
use them during the sabbatic year; but if they have not (taken root),
one is forbidden to use them during the sabbatic year, and they come
under the category of tithes of the following year. Says Rabha: Let us
see. The rabbis say that the year (for giving tithes) begins as follows:
"For a tree from the time they blossom, for grain and olives when they
are one-third ripe, and for herbs when they are gathered." Now under
which head are the above (rice, etc.) classed? After consideration Rabha
remarked: Since these do not all ripen simultaneously, but are gathered
little by little, the rabbis are right when they say they are tithable
from the time they take root.

We have learned in a Boraitha: R. Jose of Galilee says: It is written
\[Deut. xvi. 13\]: "When thou hast gathered in thy corn and thy wine."
We infer that as corn and wine, now being gathered, grow by means of the
past year's rains, and are tithed as last year's (before New Year's Day)
products, so every fruit that grows by the rain of last year is tithable
as the last year's produce; but herbs do not come under this category,
for they grow by means of the rains of the new year, and they are
tithable in the coming year. R. Aqiba, however, says that the words
"when thou hast gathered in thy corn and thy wine" lead us to infer that
as corn and grapes grow chiefly by means of rain, and are tithed as last
year's products, so all things that grow chiefly by rain are tithed as
belonging to the past year; but as herbs grow even by watering, they are
tithed as the next year's products. In what case is this difference of
opinion applicable? Said R. Abbuha: In the cases of onions and Egyptian
beans; for a Mishna says: Onions and Egyptian beans which have not been
watered for thirty days before New Year's Day are tithed as last year's
products, and are allowed to be used during the sabbatic year, but if
they have been watered, then they are prohibited during the sabbatic
year and are tithed as next year's products.

"*On the first of Shebhat is the New Year for trees*." Why

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

so? Said R. Elazar, in the name of R. Oshyia, because at that date the
greater part of the early rains have fallen, although the greater part
of the Tequpha is yet to come. The rabbis taught: It once happened that
R. Aqiba picked the fruit of a citron tree on the first of Shebhat, and
gave two tithes of them, one according to the school of Shammai and one
in accordance with the school of Hillel. Says R. Jose b. Jehudah: Nay,
Aqiba did not do this because of the school of Shammai or the school of
Hillel, but because R. Gamaliel <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24) and
R. Eliezer were accustomed to do so. Did he not follow the practice of
Beth Shammai because it was the first of Shebhat? Said R. Hanina, and
some say R. Hanania: The case here cited was one of a citron tree, the
fruit of which was formed before the fifteenth of last Shebhat, and he
should have given the tithe of it even before the present first of
Shebhat, but the case happened to be as cited. But Rabhina said: Put the
foregoing together and read the (words of R. Jose) as follows: It did
not happen on the first of Shebhat, but on the fifteenth, and he did not
follow the regulations of the school of Hillel or the school of Shammai,
but the custom of R. Gamaliel and R. Eliezer. Rabba bar Huna said:
Although R. Gamaliel holds that a citron tree is tithable from the time
it is picked, as is the case with "herbs," nevertheless the new year for
tithing it is in Shebhat. R. Johanan asked R. Janai: "When is the
beginning of a year for (the tithe on) citrons?" And he said, "Shebhat."
"Dost thou mean," said he, "the month Shebhat as fixed by the lunar year
or by the solar year (from the winter solstice)?" "By the lunar year,"
he replied. Rabha asked R. Na'hman, according to another version R.
Johanan asked R. Janai: "How is it in leap years (when there are
thirteen lunar months)?" And he said: "Shebhat, as in the majority of
years." It was taught: R. Johanan and Resh Lakish both say that a citron
that has grown in the sixth year and is unpicked at the entrance of the
sabbatic year is always considered the product of the sixth year. When
Rabhin came (from Palestine) he said, in the name of R. Johanan: A
citron that was as small as an olive in the sixth year, but grew to the
size of a (small) loaf of bread during the sabbatic year, if one used it
without separating the tithe he is culpable because of *Tebhel*. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[2](#fn_25)

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

The rabbis taught: A tree whose fruits formed before the fifteenth of
Shebhat must be tithed as the product of the past year, but if they
formed after that, they are tithed during the coming year. Said R.
Nehemiah: This applies to a tree that looks as if it bore two crops;
*i.e.*, whose fruits do not ripen all at once, but at two times. But in
the case of a tree that produces but one crop, as, for example, the
palm, olive, or carob, although their fruits may have formed before the
fifteenth of Shebhat, they are tithed as the products of the coming
year. R. Johanan remarked that in the case of the carob people follow
the opinion of R. Nehemiah. Resh Lakish objected to R. Johanan: Since
white figs take three years to grow fully ripe, must not the second year
after the sabbatic year be regarded as the sabbatic year for them? R.
Johanan was silent. R. Abba the priest said to R. Jose the priest: I am
surprised that R. Johanan should have accepted this query of Resh Lakish
without comment.

MISHNA: At four periods in each year the world is judged: on Passover,
in respect to the growth of grain; on Pentecost, in respect to the fruit
of trees; on New Year's Day all human beings pass before Him (God) as
sheep before a shepherd, as it is written \[Psalms, xxx. 9\]: "He who
hath fashioned all their hearts understandeth all their works"; <span
id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26) and on Tabernacles judgment is given in
regard to water (rain).

GEMARA: What grain (does the divine judgment affect on the Passover)?
Does it mean the grain now standing in the field (about to be reaped)?
At what time, then, were all the accidents that have happened to it
until that time destined (by divine will)? It does not mean standing
grain, but that just sown. Shall we say that only one judgment is passed
upon it? Have we learned in a Boraitha: If an accident or injury befall
grain before Passover it was decreed on the last Passover, but if it
happen (to the same grain) after Passover, it was decreed on the
immediately preceding Passover; if an accident or misfortune befall a
man before the Day of Atonement, it was decreed on the previous Day of
Atonement, but if it happened after the Day of Atonement it was decreed
on the preceding Day of Atonement? Answered Rabha: Learn from this that
judgment is passed twice (in one year, before the sowing and before the
reaping). Therefore said Abayi: When a man sees that the

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

grain which ripens slowly is thriving, he should as soon as possible sow
such grain as ripens quickly, in order that before the time of the next
judgment it may already have begun to grow.

With whose opinion does our Mishna agree? Not with that of R. Meir, nor
with that of R. Jehudah, nor with that of R. Jose, nor with that of R.
Nathann, nor with the teaching of the following Boraitha: All are judged
on New Year's Day, and the sentence is fixed on the Day of Atonement. So
says R. Meir. R. Jehudah says all are judged on New Year's Day, but the
sentence of each is confirmed each at its special time--at Passover for
grain, at Pentecost for the fruit of trees, at Tabernacles for rain, and
man is judged on New Year's Day, and his sentence is confirmed on the
Day of Atonement. R. Jose says man is judged every day, as it is written
\[Job, vii. 18\]: "Thou rememberest him every morning"; and R. Nathan
holds man is judged at all times, as it is written \[ibid.\]: "Thou
triest him every moment." And if you should say that the Mishna agrees
with the opinion of R. Jehudah, and that by the expression "judgment" it
means the "confirmation of the decree," then there would be a difficulty
about man. Said Rabha: The Tana of our Mishna is in accordance with the
school of R. Ishmael of the following Boraitha: At four periods is the
world judged: at Passover, in respect to grain; on Pentecost, in regard
to the fruit of trees; on Tabernacles, in respect to rain, and on New
Year's Day man is judged, but the sentence passed upon him is confirmed
on the Day of Atonement, and our Mishna speaks of the opening of
judgment only (and not the final verdict).

R. Hisda asked: "Why does not R. Jose quote the same passage as R.
Nathan in support of his opinion?" Because "trying" is not judging. But
does not "remembering" also convey the same idea? Therefore said R.
Hisda: R. Jose bases his opinion on another passage; viz. \[I Kings
viii. 59\]: "That God may maintain the cause of His servant and the
cause of His people Israel *every day*. Said R. Joseph: According to
whom do we pray nowadays for the sick and for faint (scholars) every
day? According to R. Jose (who maintains that man is judged every day).

We have learned in a Boraitha: R. Jehudah taught in the name of R.
Aqiba. Why does the Torah command \[Lev. xxiii. 10\] a sheaf of the
first fruits to be brought on the Passover? Because Passover is the
period of judgment in respect to grain, and the Holy One, blessed be He,
said: "Offer before Me the

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

first sheaf of produce on Passover, so that the standing grain may be
blessed unto you." And why the two loaves \[Lev. xxiii. 17\] on the
Pentecost? Because that is the time when judgment is passed on the fruit
of trees, and the Holy One, blessed be He, said: "Bring before Me two
loaves on the Pentecost, so that I may bless the fruits of the tree."
Why was the ceremony of "the outpouring of water" (on the altar)
performed on the Feast of Tabernacles? Because He said: "Perform the
rite of 'the outpouring of waters,' that the rains shall fall in due
season." And He also said: "Recite before Me on New Year's Day the
Malkhioth, Zikhronoth, and Shophroth; <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27) the Malkhioth, that you proclaim Me King;
the Zikhronoth, that your remembrance for good may come before Me." And
how (shall this be done)? By the sounding of the cornet.

R. Abbahu said: "Why is the cornet made a ram's horn?" The Holy One,
blessed be He, said: "Sound before Me on a cornet made of a ram's horn,
that I may remember, for your sake, the offering of Isaac, the son of
Abraham \[*vide* Gen. xxii. 13\], and I shall consider even *you* as
worthy, as if ye had shown an equal readiness to sacrifice yourselves to
Me."

R. Itz'hak said: A man is judged only according to his deeds at the time
of sentence, as it is written \[Gen. xxi. 17\]: "God heard the voice of
the lad, as he *then* was," and the same rabbi also remarked: Three
circumstances cause a man to remember his sins; viz., when he passes by
an insecure wall, when he thinks deeply of the significance of his
prayer, and when he invokes divine judgment on his neighbor, for R.
Abhin says: Whoso calls down divine judgment on his neighbor is punished
first, as we find in the case of Sarah, who said \[Gen. xvi. 5\] to
Abraham: "I suffer wrong through thee, may the Lord judge between me and
thee." And shortly after we read (that she died): "And Abraham came to
mourn for Sarah and to weep for her" \[Gen. xxiii. 2\]. (Naturally this
only applies to cases where appeal could have been made to a civil
court, and the invocation of divine judgment was not necessary. <span
id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28)) R. Itz'hak

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

preached: Four things avert the evil decree passed (by God) on
man--viz.: charity, prayer, change of name, and improvement.

Charity," as it is written \[Prov. x. 2\]: "Charity delivereth from
death. Prayer," in accordance with \[Psalms, cvii. 19\]: "They cry unto
the Lord when they are in distress, and He saveth them out of their
afflictions." "Change of name," as it is written \[Gen. xvii. 15\]: "As
for Sarai, thy wife, thou shalt not call her name Sarai, but Sarah shall
her name be," and the text continues by saying \[ibid. 16\]: "Then will
I bless her, and give thee a son also of her." "Improvement," we deduce
from Jonah, iii. 10: "And God saw their works that they had turned from
their evil ways," and immediately adds: "And God bethought Himself of
the evil He had said He would do unto them, and He did it not." Some add
to these four a fifth, change of location, as it is written \[Gen. xii.
1 and 2\]: "And God said to Abraham, get thee out from thy land" (and
afterwards), "I will make of thee a great nation."

R. Kruspedai said in the name of R. Johanan: Three books are opened on
New Year's Day: one for the utterly wicked, one for the wholly good, and
one for the average class of people. The wholly righteous are at once
inscribed, and life is decreed for them; the entirely wicked are at once
inscribed, and destruction destined for them; the average class are held
in the balance from New Year's Day till the Day of Atonement; if they
prove themselves worthy they are inscribed for life, if not they are
inscribed for destruction. Said R. Abhin: Whence this teaching? From the
passage \[Psalms, lxix. 29\]: "Let them be blotted out of the book of
the living, and they shall not be written down with the righteous."

We have learned in a Boraitha: The school of Shammai said: There are
three divisions of mankind at the Resurrection: the wholly righteous,
the utterly wicked, and the average class. The wholly righteous are at
once inscribed, and life is decreed for them; the utterly wicked are at
once inscribed, and destined for Gehenna, as we read \[Dan. xii. 2\]:
"And many of them that sleep in the dust shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt." The third
class, the men between the former two, descend to Gehenna, but they weep
and come up again, in accordance with the passage \[Zech. xiii. 9\]:
"And I will bring the third part through the fire, and I will refine
them as silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried; and he
shall call on My name, and I will answer him."

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Concerning this
last class of men Hannah says \[I Sam. ii. 6\]: "The Lord causeth to die
and maketh alive, He bringeth down to the grave and bringeth up again."
The school of Hillel says: The Merciful One inclines (the scale of
justice) to the side of mercy, and of this third class of men David says
\[Psalms, cxvi. 1\]: "It is lovely to me that the Lord heareth my
voice"; in fact, David applies to them the Psalm mentioned down to the
words, "Thou hast delivered my soul from death" \[ibid. 8\].

Transgressors of Jewish birth and also of non-Jewish birth, who sin with
their body descend to Gehenna, and are judged there for twelve months;
after that time their bodies are destroyed and burnt, and the winds
scatter their ashes under the soles of the feet of the righteous, as we
read \[Mal. iii. 23\]: "And ye shall tread down the wicked, for they
shall be as ashes under the soles of your feet"; but as for Minim,
informers and disbelievers, who deny the Torah, or Resurrection, or
separate themselves from the congregation, or who inspire their
fellowmen with dread of them, or who sin and cause others to sin, as did
Jeroboam the son of Nebat and his followers, they all descend to
Gehenna, and are judged there from generation to generation, as it is
said \[Isa. lxvi. 24\]: "And they shall go forth and look upon the
carcases of the men who have transgressed against Me; for their worm
shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched." Even when Gehenna
will be destroyed, they will not be consumed, as it is written \[Psalms,
xlix. 15\]: "And their forms wasteth away in the nether world," which
the sages comment upon to mean that their forms shall endure even when
the grave is no more. Concerning them Hannah says \[I Sam. ii. 10\]:
"The adversaries of the Lord shall be broken to pieces." R. Itz'hac b.
Abhin says: "Their faces are black like the sides of a caldron"; while
Rabha remarked: "Those who are now the handsomest of the people of
Me'huzza will yet be called the children of Gehenna."

What is meant by Jews who transgress with their *body*? Says Rabh: The
*Qarqaphtha* (frontal bone) on which the phylacteries are not
placed. <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29) And who are meant by
non-Jews who

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

transgress with the *body*? Those guilty of the sin (of adultery). Who
are those who inspire their fellowmen with dread of them? A leader of a
community who causes the people to fear him overmuch without furthering
thereby a high purpose. R. Jehudah said in the name of Rabh: No such
leader will ever have a learned son, as it is said \[Job, xxxvii. 24\]:
"Men do therefore fear him: he will never see (in his family) any wise
of heart."

The school of Hillel said above: He who is full of compassion will
incline the scale of justice to the side of mercy. How does He do it?
Answered R. Eliezer: He *presses* on (the side containing our virtues),
as it is said \[Micah, vii. 19\]: "He will turn again, he will have
compassion upon us, he will suppress our iniquities." R. Jose says: He
*lifts off* (the sins), as it is said \[ibid. 18\]: "He pardoneth
iniquity and forgiveth transgression." And it was taught in the school
of R. Ishmael that this means that He removes each first sin (so that
there is no second), and this is the correct interpretation. "But,"
Rabha remarked, "the sin itself is not blotted out, so that if one be
found in later times with more sins (than virtues), the sin not blotted
out will be added to the later ones; whoso treats with indulgence one
who has wronged him (forms an exception to this rule), for he will have
*all* his sins forgiven, as it is said \[Micah, vii. r8\]: "He pardoneth
iniquity and forgiveth transgression." From whom does He remove
iniquity? From him who forgiveth transgression (committed against him by
his neighbor).

R. Huna ben R. Jehoshua fell sick, and R. Papa went to visit him. The
latter saw that the end was near, and said to those present: "Make ready
his provisions (shrouds)." Finally he recovered, and R. Papa was ashamed
to see him. "Why did you think him so sick?" said they. "He was so,
indeed," he replied, "but the Holy One, blessed be He, said that since
he was always indulgent (with every one), he shall be forgiven," as it
is written: "He pardoneth iniquity and forgiveth transgression." From
whom docs He remove iniquity? From him who forgiveth transgression.

R. A'h the son of Hanina said: The phrase "of the remnant of his
inheritance" \[Micah, vii. 18\] is like unto a fat tail (of an Arabian
sheep) with a thorn through it (that will stick those that lay hold of
it); (for He forgives) the *remnant* of His inheritance, and not all His
inheritance. What is meant by

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

remnant? Only those who deport themselves like a remnant (*i.e.*,
modestly). R. Huna points out a contradiction in these passages. It is
written \[Psalms, cxlv. 171: "The Lord is *just* in all his ways," and
in the same passage, "and *pious* in all his works." It means, in the
beginning He is only *just*, but in the end He is *pious* (when He finds
that strict justice is too severe on mankind He tempers justice with
piety or mercy). R. Elazar also points out a contradiction. It is
written \[Psalms, lxii. 12\]: "Unto thee, O Lord, belongeth *mercy*;"
and again, "thou renderest to every man *according to his work*." This
can be explained as the above: In the beginning He rewards every man
according to his works, but in the end He is merciful. Ilphi or Ilpha
points out a similar contradiction in \[Ex. xxxiv. 6\], where it is
written "abundant in *goodness* and *truth*," and gives a similar
explanation.

It is written \[Ex. xxxiv. 6\]: "And the Lord passed by before him and
proclaimed." R. Johanan said: Had this Passage not been written, it
would have been impossible to have said it, for it teaches us that the
Holy One, blessed be He, wrapped Himself, as does a minister who recites
the prayers for a congregation, and pointing out to Moses the regular
order of prayer, said to him: Whenever Israel sins, let him pray to Me,
after this manner, and I shall pardon him.

"The Lord, the Lord," (these words mean) I am the same God before a man
sins as I am after he sins and does repentance. "God, merciful and
gracious." R. Jehudah said (concerning these words): The covenant made
through the thirteen attributes \[Ex. xxxiv.\] will never be made void,
as it is said \[ibid. 10\]: "Behold I make a covenant."

R. Johanan said: Great is repentance, for it averts the (evil) decreed
against a man, as it is written \[Isa. vi. 10\]: "Obdurate will remain
the heart of this people. . . . nor hear with their ears, nor understand
with their hearts, so that they *repent* and be *healed*." R. Papa asked
Abayi: Do not these last words, perhaps, mean before the (evil) decree
has been pronounced? It is written, he replied, "be healed." What is
that which requires healing? I can only say that against which judgment
has been pronounced. An objection was raised from the following
Boraitha: He who repents between (New Year's Day and the Day of
Atonement) is forgiven, but if he does not repent, even though he
offered the choicest sacrifice, he is not pardoned. This presents no
difficulty; in the one case it refers to

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

(the sins of) an individual, and in the other to (those of) a community.
Another objection was raised. Come and hear. It is written \[Psalms,
cvii. 23-28\]: "They that go down to the sea in ships, that do business
in great waters; these see the works of the Lord . . . for he
commandeth, and raiseth the stormy wind, which lifteth up the waves
thereof, they reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, . . .
then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he bringeth them out
of their afflictions; oh, that men would praise the Lord for his
goodness," etc. Signs are given, such as the words "but" and "only" in
the Scriptures (which intimate limiting qualifications), to indicate
that if they cried before the decree was pronounced, only then would
they be answered; but if after, they are not answered. (Would not this
be a contradiction to the words "to those of a community"?) Nay, for
those on a ship are not a community (but are considered as individuals).

Come and hear. The proselyte Beluria (a woman) asked R. Gamaliel
(concerning the following apparent contradiction): It is written in your
Law \[Deut. 17\]: "The Lord who regardeth not persons" (*literally*, who
lifteth not up countenances); and it is also written \[Numb. vi. 26\]:
"May the Lord lift up his countenance." R. Jose, the priest, joined her,
and said to her: "I will tell thee a parable. To what may this be
compared? To one who lent money to his neighbor, and set a time for its
repayment before the king, and (the borrower) swore by the king's life
(to repay it on time). The time arrived, and he did not pay, and he came
to appease the king. Said the king to him, 'I can forgive you only your
offence against me, but I cannot forgive you your offence against your
neighbor; go and ask him to forgive you.'" So also here; in the one
place it means sins committed by a man against Himself (the Lord), but
in the other it means sins committed by one man against another. As to
the decree pronounced against an individual, the Tanaim differ, however,
as we may see from the following Boraitha: R. Meir used to say, of two
who fall sick with the same sickness, and of two who enter a tribunal
(for judgment) on similar charges, one may recover and one not, one may
be acquitted and one condemned. Why should one recover and one not, and
one be acquitted and one condemned? Because the one prayed and was
answered, and one prayed and was not answered. Why should one be
answered and the other not? The one prayed devoutly and was answered,
the other did not pray

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

devoutly and therefore was not answered; but R. Elazar said it was not
because of prayer, but because the one prayed *before*, and the other
*after* the decree was pronounced. R. Itz'hak said: Prayer is helpful
for man before or after the decree has been pronounced. Is it then so
that the (evil) decree pronounced against a congregation is averted
(through the influence of prayer)? Does not one scriptural verse \[Jer.
iv. 14\] say: "Wash thine heart from wickedness," and another states
\[ibid. ii. 22\]: "For though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee
much soap, yet would the stain of thine iniquity remain before me."
Shall we not say in the one case it means *before*, and in the other
*after* the sentence has been pronounced? Nay, both refer (to a time)
after the decree has been pronounced and there is no contradiction, for
in one case it refers to a decree issued with an oath, and in the other
to a decree pronounced without an oath, as R. Samuel b. Ami said in the
name of R. Jonathan: Whence do we know that a decree, pronounced with an
oath, cannot be averted? From the passage \[I Sam. iii. 14\]: "Therefore
I have sworn unto the house of Eli, that the iniquity of Eli's house
shall not be purged with sacrifice nor meat-offering forever." Rabha,
however, said: Even in such a case it is only through *sacrifices* that
sin cannot be purged, but by (the study of) the Law it may be; and Abayi
said: With sacrifice and offering it cannot be purged, but by (the study
of) the Law, and by active benevolence it can. (Abayi based this opinion
on his own experience, for) he and (his master) Rabba were both
descendants of the house of Eli; Rabba, who only studied the Law, lived
forty years, but Abayi, who both studied the Torah and performed acts of
benevolence, lived sixty years. The rabbis tell us also: There was a
certain family in Jerusalem whose members died at eighteen years of age.
They came and informed R. Johanan ben Zakkai of their trouble. Said he:
"Perhaps you are descendants of Eli, of whom it is said, 'all the
increase of thy house shall die in the flower of their age'" \[I Sam.
ii. 33\]; "Go, then, study the Law, and live." They went and studied,
and they lived, and they called that family R. Johanan's after his name.
R. Samuel ben Inya says in the name of Rabh: Whence do we know that if
the decree against a community is even confirmed, it may nevertheless be
averted? From \[Deut. iv. 7\] where it is written: "As the Lord, our
God, in *all* things that we call upon him for;" (but how can you
harmonize that with the passage) \[Isa. Iv. 6\]: "Seek ye the Lord

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

while he may be found"? The latter passage refers to an individual, the
former to a community. When is that time that He will be found even by
an individual? Answered Rabba bar Abbahu: "During the ten days, from New
Year's Day till the Day of Atonement."

"*On New Year's Day all the inhabitants of the world pass before him,
Kibhne Maron (like sheep)*." What does the Mishna mean by these last two
words? "Like sheep," as they are translated in Aramaic, but Resh Lakish
says they mean "as the steps of the Temple" (*i.e.*, narrow, so that
people ascended them one by one). R. Jehudah, however, said in the name
of Samuel: (They mean) "like the armies of the house of David" (which
were numbered one by one). Said Rabba bar Bar Hana in the name of R.
Johanan: "Under any circumstances they are mustered at a glance. And R.
Na'hman bar Itz'hak said: Thus also we understand the words of our
Mishna: "He that fashioned all their hearts alike" \[Psalms, xxxiii.
15\], *i.e.*, the Creator, sees all their hearts (at a glance) and (at
once) understands all their works.

MISHNA: Messengers were sent out <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30) for
the following six months: for Nissan, on account of the Passover; for
Abh, on account of the fast; for Elul, on account of the New Year; for
Tishri, on account of appointing the order of the (remaining)
festivals; <span id="fr_31"></span>[2](#fn_31) for Kislev, on account of
the Feast of Dedication; for Adar, on account of the Feast of Passover;
also for Iyar, when the Temple was in existence, on account of the minor
(or second) Passover. <span id="fr_32"></span>[3](#fn_32)

GEMARA: Why were they not, also sent out for Tamuz and Tebheth (in which
months there are also fasts)? Did not R. Hana bar Bizna say in the name
of R. Sin-peon the pious: What is the meaning of the passage \[Zach.
viii. 19\]: "Thus saith the Lord of hosts; the fast of the fourth, and
the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the
tenth shall become in the house of Judah joy and gladness," etc., that
they are called fasts, and also days of joy and gladness? Are we not to
understand that only in the time of peace (cessation of persecution)
they shall be for joy and gladness, but in the time when there was not
peace they shall be fasts? Said

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> R. Papa: It means
this: When there was peace, these days should be for joy and gladness;
in the time of persecution they shall be fasts; in times when there are
neither persecution nor peace people may fast or not, as they see fit.
If that is so, why then (should messengers have been sent out) on
account of the fast of Abh? Said R. Papa: The fast (ninth day) of Abh is
different, since many misfortunes occurred on that day, as the master
said: "On the ninth of Abh, the first and second Temples were destroyed,
Bether was captured, and the city of Jerusalem was razed to the ground."

We have learned in a Boraitha: R. Simeon said: There are four matters
that R. Aqiba expounded, but which I interpret differently; "the fast of
the fourth" means the ninth of Tamuz, on which the city was broken in,
as it is written \[Jer. Iii. 6, 7\]: "In the fourth, in the ninth day of
the month . . . the city was broken in." What does he mean by fourth?
The fourth of the months. "The fast of the fifth," means the ninth of
Abh, on which the Temple of our Lord was burnt; and what does he mean by
calling it fifth? The fifth of the months. "The fast of the seventh"
means the third of Tishri, the day on which Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam,
was slain (and we fast), because the death of the righteous is equal to
the loss of the house of our Lord. And what does he mean by calling it
the seventh? The seventh of the months. "The fast of the tenth," means
the tenth of Tebheth, the day on which the king of Babylon set himself
against Jerusalem, as it is written \[Ezek. xxiv. 1, 2\]: "Again in the
ninth year, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month the word
of the Lord came unto me saying, Son of man, write thee the name of the
day, even of this same day; the king of Babylon set himself against
Jerusalem." And what does he mean by calling it the tenth? The tenth of
the months, and actually this last event should have been placed first
(since it occurred first). And why is it placed here last in order? To
mention the months in their regular order. Said R. Simeon: I, however,
do not think so, but thus: "The fast of the tenth" means the fifth of
Tebheth, on which day the news came to the exiles that the city was
smitten, as it is written \[Ezek. xxxiii. 21\]: "And it came to pass in
the twelfth year of our captivity, in the tenth (month), in the fifth
day of the month, that one that bad escaped out of Jerusalem came to me,
saying, The city is smitten," and they held the day on which they
received the news equal to the day (on which the

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

Temple) was burnt. And it seems to me that my opinion is more
satisfactory, for I speak of the first, first, and of the last, last;
while he speaks of the last, first, and of the first, last; he mentions
them in the order of the months, while I mention them in the order in
which the calamities occurred.

It was taught: Rabh and R. Hanina say: The Rolls of Fasts (which
contained the names of minor holidays on which it was prohibited to
fast) is annulled, but R. Johanan and R. Jehoshua ben Levi say: "It is
not." When Rabh and R. Hanina say that it is annulled they mean: In the
time of peace the (fast) days are days of joy and gladness, but in the
time of persecution they are fast days, and so also with other (days
mentioned in the Rolls of Fasts); and when R. Johanan and R. Jehoshua
ben Levi say it is not annulled (they mean) that those (four fasts
mentioned in Zachariah) the Bible makes dependent on the rebuilding of
the Temple; but those (mentioned in the Rolls of Fasts) remain as they
are appointed.

R. Tobi b. Matana objected: In the Rolls of Fasts it is said that on the
twenty-eighth of (Adar), the good news came to the Jews that they need
no longer abstain from studying the Law, for the king (of Syria had
earlier) issued a decree, forbidding them to study the Law, or to
circumcise their sons, and compelling them to desecrate their Sabbath.
What did Jehudah b. Shamua and his friends do? They went and took
counsel of a certain matron, whose house the celebrated people of the
city frequented. Said she to them, "Go and cry aloud at night." They did
as she advised and cried aloud, "Oh, heavens! Are we not all brethren?
Are we not all the children of one Father? Are we not All the children
of one mother? Why should we be treated differently from other nations,
and from all people who speak other languages inasmuch as ye issue such
cruel edicts against us?" The decrees were annulled, and the day (on
which this happened) they appointed a holiday. Now if it be true that
the Rolls of Fasts has been annulled (*i.e.*, the former \[feasts\] have
been all abrogated), may then new ones be added? There is a difference
of opinion among Tanaim on this question, as we have learned in the
following Boraitha: The days recorded in the Rolls of Fasts, whether
during or after the existence of the Temple. are not permitted (to be
kept as fasts), so said R. Meir; R. Jose, however, said, so long as the
Temple stood it was not permissible (to fast on them) because they were
days of joy, but since the Temple fell it is allowed because they are

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

days of mourning. One rule says that they are abrogated, but another
rule says they are not abrogated. There is a question here caused by one
rule contradicting the other. In the latter case it refers to the Feasts
of Dedication and Esther (which are never to be abrogated), and in the
former case to all other (minor feast) days.

"*For Elul on account of New Year's Day, and for Tishri on account of
appointing the order of the (remaining) festivals.*" Since (the
messengers) were sent out on account of Elul, why need they go again on
account of Tishri? Shall we say because (the Beth Din) desired to
proclaim Elul an intercalary month? (That cannot be) for did not R.
Hanina bar Kahana say in the name of Rabh: Since the time of Ezra we
have not discovered that Elul was an intercalary month? We have not
discovered it, because it was not necessary (to make it so). But if it
should be necessary, shall we make it an intercalary month? This would
disturb the position of New Year's Day. It is better that the position
of New Year's Day alone should be disturbed than that all the holidays
should be disarranged. And it seems to be so, for the Mishna says that
the messengers were sent for Tishri on account of appointing the order
of the festivals.

"*And for Kislev on account of Hanuka, and for Adar on account of the
Feast of Esther.*" But the Mishna does not say if it be a leap year,
that the messengers were sent out in the second Adar on account of
Purim. From this we learn that the Mishna is not in accordance with
Rabbi of the following Boraitha: Rabbi says: "In a leap year messengers
are sent out also in the second Adar on account of the Feast of
Esther.''

When Ula came (from Palestine) he said: They have made Elul an
intercalary month, and he also said: "Do my Babylonian comrades know the
benefit we have gained through it?" Because of what is this a benefit?"
Because of herbs," <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33) said Ula. R. A'ha
bar Hanina, however, said: "Because of dead bodies." <span
id="fr_34"></span>[2](#fn_34) What difference is there between them?
They

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

differ concerning a holiday that falls immediately before or after the
Sabbath (on the sixth or first day of the week). According to the one
who says "because of herbs" we may add an intercalary day, but (it is
not necessary) according to him who says "because of dead bodies," for
we can employ non-Jews (to bury the dead for us on the holidays). If
this is the case, why is this a benefit only for us (in Babylon); is it
not also to the advantage of them (in Palestine)? Our climate is very
hot, but theirs is not.

Is this really so? Did not Rabba bar Samuel teach: One might suppose
that as we intercalate the *year* when necessary, so we intercalate the
*month* when necessary? Therefore it is written \[Ex. xii. 2\]: "This
month shall be unto you the first of the months," which means as soon as
you see (the new moon) as on this occasion, you must *consecrate* the
month (whether or not it is necessary to *intercalate* it). (How, then,
could they intercalate Elul, which had always only twenty-nine days?) To
intercalate it (when necessary) was permitted, but to *consecrate* it
was not permitted, and Rabba's words should read: One might suppose that
as it is permitted to *intercalate the year and the month* when
necessary, so we may *consecrate the month* when necessary. Therefore it
is written \[Ex. xii. 2\]: "This month shall be unto you," etc., which
means only when the moon is seen as on this occasion, may you
*consecrate* it.

Samuel said: "I can arrange the calendar for the whole captivity." Abba,
the father of R. Simlai, said to him: "Does the master know that which a
certain Boraitha teaches concerning the secret of the intercalary day;
viz., whether the new moon appears before or after midday?" Answered he,
"No." "Then, master," said he, "if thou dost not know this, there may be
other things which thou dost not know." When R. Zera went (to Palestine)
he sent back word to his comrade (saying): The evening and the morning
(following) must both belong to the month (*i.e.*, when the old moon has
still been seen after dark on the twenty-ninth day of the month, the
thirtieth evening and following day belong to the closing month). And
this is what Abba, the father of R. Simlai, meant: We calculate only the
beginning of the new moon; if it began before midday, it is certain that
it was seen close upon the setting of the sun, but if it did not begin
before midday, it is certain that it did not appear close upon the
setting of the sun. What difference does it make (in practice)? Answered
R. Ashi, "to refute witnesses."

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

R. Zera said in the name of R. Na'hman, in every case of doubt (about
the holidays), we post-date, but never ante-date. <span
id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35) Does this mean to say that (in a case of
doubt concerning the exact day on which Tabernacles begins) we observe
the fifteenth and sixteenth, but not the fourteenth. Let us keep the
fourteenth also. Perhaps Abh and Elul have each only twenty-nine days?
Nay, if two consecutive months should each have twenty-nine days, this
would be announced.

Levi went to Babylon on the eleventh of Tishri. Said he: "Sweet is the
food of Babylon on the great Day (of Atonement now being held) in
Palestine." They said to him, "Go and testify." Answered he, "I have not
heard from the Beth Din the words, 'It is consecrated' (and therefore I
cannot testify)."

R. Johanan proclaimed: In every place that the messengers sent in Nissan
reached, but that the messengers sent in Tishri cannot reach, they must
observe two days for the holidays; and they make this restriction for
Nissan lest people would do in Tishri as in Nissan. <span
id="fr_36"></span>[2](#fn_36) Rabha used to fast two days for the Day of
Atonement. <span id="fr_37"></span>[3](#fn_37) Once it happened that he
was right (because the Day of Atonement fell one day later in Palestine
than in Babylon). R. Na'hman was once fasting on the Day of Atonement,
and in the evening a certain man came and said to him, "To-morrow will
be the Day of Atonement in Palestine." He angrily quoted, "Swift were
our persecutors" \[Lam. iv. 19\].

R. Na'hman said to certain sailors, "Ye who do not know the calendar
take notice that when the moon still shines at dawn (it is full moon,
and if it happens to be Nissan) destroy your leaven bread (for it is
then the fourteenth day)."

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

MISHNA: For the sake of (the new moon) of the two months, Nissan and
Tishri, witnesses may profane <span id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38) the
Sabbath, because in these months the messengers went to Syria, and the
order of the festivals was arranged; when, however, the Temple <span
id="fr_39"></span>[2](#fn_39) was in existence, they might profane the
Sabbath in any month, in order to offer the (new moon) sacrifice in its
proper time.

GEMARA: For the sake of these two months and not more? This would be a
contradiction to the Mishna above, which states: "For the sake of six
months messengers were sent out"? Said Abayi: "This is to be explained
thus: For all new moons the messengers were sent out while it was still
evening, but for Nissan and Tishri they were not sent out until they
heard from the lips of the Beth Din the words, 'It (the new moon or
month) is consecrated.'"

The rabbis taught: Whence do we know that for them we may profane the
Sabbath? From \[Lev. xxiii. 4\], which reads: "These are the feasts of
the Lord, which ye shall proclaim in their seasons." Might not one
suppose that as (witnesses) were permitted to profane the Sabbath until
the new moons had been consecrated, so were messengers permitted to
profane the Sabbath until (the festivals) were introduced? This the Law
says: Therefore it is written: "Which ye shall proclaim," *i.e.*, you
may profane the Sabbath in order to proclaim them, but not to introduce
them.

"*When, however, the Temple was in existence*," etc. The rabbis taught:
Formerly they profaned the Sabbath for all (new moons), but after the
destruction of the Temple, R. Johanan b. Zakkai said to them: "Have we
any (new moon) sacrifice to offer? They then instituted that (witnesses)
might profane the Sabbath only on account of Nissan and Tishri.

MISHNA: Whether the new moon had appeared clear to all or not (the
witnesses) were permitted to profane the Sabbath on its account. R. Jose
says: If it appeared clear to every, one, <span
id="fr_40"></span>[3](#fn_40) the Sabbath should not be profaned (by
witnesses). it once happened that more than forty pair (of witnesses)
were on the highway (to the Beth Din) on the Sabbath, when R. Aqiba

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

detained them at Lydda. R. Gamaliel then sent word saying, "If thou thus
detainest the people, thou wilt be the cause of their erring in the
future" (*i.e.*, they may refuse to come and testify).

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: It is written \[Eccles. xii. 10\]: Koheleth
sought to find out acceptable words," which signifies that Koheleth
sought to enforce decrees without the aid of witnesses or warning. A
heavenly voice was heard saying \[Eccles. xii. 10\]: "And that which was
written uprightly, even words of truth" (which meant that) as it is
written \[Deut. xx. 15\]: "Upon the evidence of two witnesses, etc.,
must a case be established," so should words of truth also be
established by two witnesses.

"*It once happened that more than forty pair (of witnesses) were on the
highway (to Jerusalem) and R. Aqiba detained them*," etc. We have
learned in a Boraitha: R. Jehudah said: It would be a sin to say that R.
Aqiba should have detained them. It was Shazpar, the superintendent of
Gadar, who detained them, and (and when) R. Gamaliel (heard of it, he)
sent and dismissed him.

MISHNA: When a father and son have seen the new moon, they must both go
to the Beth Din, not that they may act together as witnesses, but in
order that, should the evidence of either of them be invalidated, the
other may join to give evidence with another witness. R. Simeon says:
Father and son, and relatives in any degree may be accepted as competent
witnesses to give evidence as to the appearance of the new moon. R. Jose
says: It once happened that Tobias, the physician, his son, and his
freed slave saw the new moon in Jerusalem (and when they tendered their
evidence), the priests accepted his evidence and that of his son, but
invalidated that of his freed slave; but when they appeared before the
(Beth Din) they received his evidence, and that of his freed slave, but
invalidated that of his son.

GEMARA: Said R. Levi: What is the reason for R. Simeon's decree? It is
written \[Ex. xii. 1\]: "And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron saying,
This month shall be *unto you*," which means, this evidence shall be
acceptable from you (although you are brothers). And how do the rabbis
interpret it? They explain it as follows: This testimony shall be placed
at your disposal (*i.e.*, the Beth Din's). Says Mar Uqba in the name of
Samuel, the Halakha prevails according to R. Simeon.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

MISHNA: The following are considered incompetent to be witnesses:
gamblers with dice, usurers, pigeon breeders, <span
id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41) those who deal with the produce of the
sabbatic year, and slaves. This is the rule: All evidence that cannot be
received from a woman cannot be received from any of the above. One who
has seen the new moon, but is unable to go (to give evidence), must be
brought (if unable to walk) mounted on an ass, or even in a bed. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[2](#fn_42) Persons afraid of an attack by robbers may
take sticks with them; <span id="fr_43"></span>[2](#fn_42) and if they
have a long way to go, it will be lawful for them to provide themselves
with and carry their food. <span id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_42) Whenever
(witnesses) must be on the road a day and a night, it will be lawful to
violate the Sabbath to travel thereon, to give their evidence as to the
appearance of the moon. For thus it is written \[Lev. xxiii. 4\]: "These
are the feasts of the Lord, the holy convocations, which ye shall
proclaim in *their appointed seasons*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[1:1](ros03.htm#fr_2) This refers to the law
concerning vows. If one made a vow it had to be fulfilled before the
three festivals elapsed in the order of Passover, Pentecost, and
Tabernacles, as will be explained further on.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[1:2](ros03.htm#fr_3) A date had to be appointed
in order to keep the tithes of animals born and products of the earth,
distinct from year to year.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[1:3](ros03.htm#fr_4) Vide Lev. xxv. and Deut.
xv.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[1:4](ros03.htm#fr_5) With regard to the
prohibition of eating fruit of newly planted trees \[Lev. xix. 23-25\].

<span id="fn_6"></span>[1:5](ros03.htm#fr_6) So as not to mix the tithe
of herbs from year to year.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[1:6](ros03.htm#fr_7) With regard to the tithe
due on fruit trees.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[1:7](ros03.htm#fr_8) The Gemara fully discusses
the reasons for these institutions, but we deem it wise to anticipate,
for the sake of clearness.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[2:1](ros03.htm#fr_9) No reference should be made
after the first of Nissan to the reign of the king just deceased. For
instance: it was not permitted to speak of the year beginning with
Nissan, as the second year after the death of the king.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[3:1](ros03.htm#fr_10) The statement of R. Papa
is quoted here, because it is a rule of the Talmud that no comparisons
by analogy may be cited unless they emanate from a tradition or teaching
known to the master making such a comparison, and this rule applies
throughout the Talmud.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[3:2](ros03.htm#fr_11) Because the life of the
righteous is a protection for the whole people.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[5:1](ros03.htm#fr_12) The Rabbis of the Talmud
must have had a different version of the book of Haggai from that
existing at present. In the second passage quoted, namely Haggai ii. 1,
the words "in the second year" cannot be found. There is, therefore, a
great difficulty in understanding the discussion. Even Rashi is unable
to enlighten us on this point.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[5:2](ros03.htm#fr_13) This law of "Thou shalt
not slack to pay," is known as "BAL TE'AHER"; *i.e.*, the law against
procrastination or delay.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[6:1](ros03.htm#fr_14) Lev. xxiii, 22.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[7:1](ros03.htm#fr_15) The privilege of bringing
on one of the later days of a festival a sacrifice that should have been
offered on the first day.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[8:1](ros03.htm#fr_16) Lev. xxvii. 32.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[9:1](ros03.htm#fr_17) Leap year occurs seven
times in a cycle of nineteen years. On such occasions one month, the
second Adar, is added to the twelve lunar months.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[10:1](ros03.htm#fr_18) As soon as Nissan had
been consecrated, there could be no further debate about making the past
year intercalary, for once the new month had been called Nissan, it was
forbidden to call it by any other name.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[11:1](ros03.htm#fr_19) The TAMID or daily
offering could not be presented to the Temple by an individual.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[13:1](ros03.htm#fr_20) This is the literal
translation of the verse in Psalms; the free translation is "at the
appointed time," according to Isaac Leeser.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[14:1](ros03.htm#fr_21) *i.e.*, the jubilee year
is, at the same time, the fiftieth year of the last and the first of the
coming series.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[18:1](ros03.htm#fr_22) TEQUPHA--Solstice or
equinox; hence, the period of three months, which elapses between a
solstice and the next equinox, is also called TEQUPHA. Mar Zutra reads
the biblical term Tequphoit in the plural.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[19:1](ros03.htm#fr_23) Tithes must be given
even to-day, according to the Rabbinical law, throughout Palestine and
Syria.

It was the duty of the Israelite to give of his produce the following
offerings and tithes: (1) THERUMA, a heave-offering, to be given to the
priest every year; the measure was not fixed by the Bible; (2) MAÄSER
RISHON, or first tithe, to be given every year to the Levite; (3) MAÄSER
SHENI, or second tithe, was to be taken in the second year to Jerusalem
and eaten there, or to be converted into money, which was to be spent
there; (4) MAÄSER ANI, or the poor tithe, to be given in the third year.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[22:1](ros03.htm#fr_24) The opinion of R.
Gamaliel is stated a little further on.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[22:2](ros03.htm#fr_25) Produce of which the
levitical and priestly tithe has not been yet separated, and which must
not be used.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[23:1](ros03.htm#fr_26) Vide Introduction.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[25:1](ros03.htm#fr_27) These are the divisions
of the Additional Service for the New Year's Day. The Malkhioth consist
of ten scriptural passages in which God is proclaimed King. The
Zikhronoth consist of an equal number of scriptural passages in which
Divine remembrance is alluded to. The Shophroth are a similar series of
selections in which the Shophar (cornet) is referred to. In Chapter IV.
of this tract there is a discussion as to the composition of these
selections. We retain the Hebrew names, because we feel that no
translation or paraphrase will adequately express what they mean.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[25:2](ros03.htm#fr_28) This is taken from Tract
Baba Kama.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[27:1](ros03.htm#fr_29) There were sects at that
time who did not wear the phylacteries on the frontal bone, but on other
places. The people here referred to are those mentioned in Mishna
Megillah III. 5. Those who do not wear phylacteries at all are, under no
circumstances, included under the head of these transgressors. (*Vide*
Tosaphoth, ad loc.) For fuller information the reader is referred to our
"The History of Amulets, Charms, and Talismans" (New York, 1893).

<span id="fn_30"></span>[32:1](ros03.htm#fr_30) See Slekalim I. i.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32:2](ros03.htm#fr_31) *e.g.* Tabernacles. This
was necessary since the Beth Din might have made the month intercalary.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[32:3](ros03.htm#fr_32) *Vide*, Numb. ix. 10,
11.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[35:1](ros03.htm#fr_33) By adding an intercalary
day to Elul, the holiday (New Year or Atonement Day) was prevented from
falling on Friday or Sunday, the intention being to separate the holiday
by an intervening day from the Sabbath. Thus, herbs that were to be
eaten fresh, and other foods, would not spoil, as they might, if kept
from Thursday till after the Sabbath.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35:2](ros03.htm#fr_34) A similar practice was
followed with regard to the keeping of a dead body over the Day of
Atonement and a Sabbath. Since it was impossible to keep the dead body
two days, the Sabbath and the Atonement Day were separated by the means
of the intercalated day.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[37:1](ros03.htm#fr_35) *i.e.* if there be a
doubt about which day is the Passover or the feast of Tabernacles, the
festival should be kept for two days; not, however, by *ante-dating* and
keeping the *fourteenth* and fifteenth (of Nissan or Tishri) but by
*post-dating* and keeping the fifteenth and *sixteenth* of either month.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37:2](ros03.htm#fr_36) In Tishri, messengers
might be delayed reaching distant places, to which they were sent to
announce the date of the festival (Tabernacles), on account of New
Year's Day and the Day of Atonement, on which they could not travel more
than a short distance. in Nissan, however, they could, without delay,
reach those places, and having announced the date of the festival, only
one day was hallowed. Fearing that people might do, in regard to the
Feast of Tabernacles, what they did with regard to Passover (*i.e.*,
keep one day, even when in doubt about the date), the Rabbis instituted
that both Tabernacles and Passover should have two days hallowed instead
of one.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[37:3](ros03.htm#fr_37) He was in doubt whether
the Beth Din in Palestine had made Elul intercalary or not, and as the
messengers did not arrive until after the Day of Atonement, he fasted
two days.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[38:1](ros03.htm#fr_38) To travel to Palestine
in order to inform the Beth Din might have necessitated walking more
than the distance permitted on the Sabbath.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[38:2](ros03.htm#fr_39) The Temple in Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[38:3](ros03.htm#fr_40) It might then be
presumed that every one had seen it, and it was therefore unnecessary
for any one to go to Palestine to announce it to the Beth Din.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[40:1](ros03.htm#fr_41) Those who breed and
train pigeons for racing.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[40:2](ros03.htm#fr_44) Even on the Sabbath,
when under ordinary circumstances this might not be done.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II.](ros04)
