[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](shk08)  [Next](shk10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 2: Tracts Erubin, Shekalim, Rosh Hashana*, tr.
by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

# CHAPTER V.

MISHNA: (*a*) The following were the heads of offices <span
id="fr_51"></span>[a1](#fn_51) in the Sanctuary: Johanan, son of
Pinchas, keeper of the seals <span id="fr_52"></span>[a2](#fn_52);
A'hia, (superintendent) of drink-offerings; Mathia, son of Samuel,
(superintendent) of the casting of lots <span
id="fr_53"></span>[a3](#fn_53); Petha'hia, (superintendent) of
bird-offerings. <span id="fr_54"></span>[a4](#fn_54) Petha'hia is
Mordecai, but why do they call him Petha'hia? Because he used to expound
and interpret scriptures, and was master of seventy languages. Ben A'hia
was (superintendent) of the cures of priests suffering with abdominal
diseases. <span id="fr_55"></span>[a5](#fn_55) Ne'huniah was master of
the well. <span id="fr_56"></span>[a6](#fn_56)

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

Gebini was herald. <span id="fr_57"></span>[a7](#fn_57) Ben Gabhar was
turnkey of the gates. <span id="fr_58"></span>[a8](#fn_58) Ben Bebai was
master of the temple-guard. <span id="fr_59"></span>[a9](#fn_59) Ben
Arzah was master of the kettledrums (which were beaten as a signal for
the Levites to commence their chant). Higros, son of Levi, was (leader)
of the singing. The family of Garmo (superintended) the making of the
showbreads. <span id="fr_60"></span>[a10](#fn_60) The family of Abtinos
(superintended) the preparing of the incense. <span
id="fr_61"></span>[a11](#fn_61) Elazar (superintended) the making of the
curtains. <span id="fr_62"></span>[a12](#fn_62) Pinchas superintended
the vestments. <span id="fr_63"></span>[a13](#fn_63)

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

(*b*) No less than three treasurers and seven chamberlains must be
appointed, <span id="fr_64"></span>[b1](#fn_64) and no less than two
officers were put in charge of public moneys. Exceptions were made in
the cases of Ben A'hia, superintendent of the cures of the sick, and
Elazar, superintendent of the preparation of curtains, because they were
unanimously elected by the community.

(*c*) There were four seals in the Sanctuary, inscribed with the words
Egel (calf), Sachar (ram), Gdi (kid), and 'Houte (sinner, meaning here
one covered with sores). Ben Azai says, that there were five (seals),
and the inscriptions were in Aramaic, meaning: calf, ram, kid, poor
sinner (one afflicted with sores), and rich sinner (one afflicted with
sores). The one inscribed with "calf" was used for drink-offerings
brought with offerings of the herds, large or small, male or female; the
one inscribed with "kid" was used for drink-offerings brought with
offerings of the flocks, large or small, male or female, with the
exception of rams; the one inscribed with "ram" served for
drink-offerings brought only with rams; the seal inscribed with "sinner"
served for drink-offerings brought with the three cattle-offerings of
those afflicted with sores. <span id="fr_65"></span>[c1](#fn_65)

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

(*d*) One who desired to bring drink-offerings, for instance, went to
Johanan, who was keeper of the seals, paid his money, and received a
seal; he then went to A'hia, who had charge of the drink-offerings, gave
him the seal, and received the drink-offering. In the evening the two
officers came together, when A'hia turned over the seal and received
instead the money. If there was too much money, it belonged to the
Sanctuary; if too little, Johanan had to supply the deficit: for the
sanctuary had that prerogative.

(*e*) One who lost his seal had to wait until evening. If there was a
surplus sufficient to cover the seal, <span
id="fr_66"></span>[e1](#fn_66) he was given the drink-offering for that
amount; otherwise, he did not receive it. The date of the day was on the
seal to prevent fraud.

(*f*) There were two chambers in the sanctuary. One was

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

called chamber of the silent, the other chamber of utensils. In the
former, devout men secretly gave charitable gifts, and the poor of good
family received there secretly their sustenance. In the other chamber,
every one who desired to offer a utensil voluntarily, laid it down.
Every thirty days the treasurers opened the chamber, and every utensil
found to be fit for the maintenance of the Temple was preserved, while
the others were sold and the proceeds went to the treasury for the
maintenance of the Temple. <span id="fr_67"></span>[f1](#fn_67)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_51"></span>[20:a1](shk09.htm#fr_51)

# CHAPTER V.

MISHNA *a*. The list of officers enumerated by the Mishna were not all
officers at the same time, but served at different periods, and the
Mishna merely names the most important and pious among them.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[20:a2](shk09.htm#fr_52) See Mishna *d*, same
chapter.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[20:a3](shk09.htm#fr_53) Lots were cast for the
determination of the turn of the priests for each particular service.
The superintendent would keep a record of such as were eligible for
duty, and then cast lots for the priest who was to serve.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[20:a4](shk09.htm#fr_54) Petha'hia was
superintendent-in-chief of all those who had charge of the
bird-offerings; these bird-offerings were brought by women who had
recently been confined; and there were so many of them that a record had
to be kept, who came first, whose time was nearly expired, and how much
was to be charged for the offerings. Besides this, it often happened
that the birds became mixed and required great wisdom to separate them
and recognize to whom every bird belonged, as the changing of the birds
would make the offering invalid. (See commentary of Israel Lipshuetz.)

<span id="fn_55"></span>[20:a5](shk09.htm#fr_55) Such diseases among
priests were of very frequent occurrence and inevitable; for they were
dressed during services very lightly, being allowed to wear only four
articles of apparel; viz., a linen shirt, linen pantaloons, a linen cap,
and a girdle. Besides, they had to walk barefoot on the marble floor,
and were constantly eating meat of the sacrifices, which had to be eaten
during a specified time. Hence they needed many attendants, in order
that, as soon as one priest took sick, a substitute was brought in his
place and he was removed to the sick ward. Ben A'hia was the
superintendent-in-chief of these matters.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[20:a6](shk09.htm#fr_56) On account of the
immense influx of people into Jerusalem three times a year, the wells
for the supply of water, both on the roads and in the city, had to be
looked after, and Ne'huniah had charge of this.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[21:a7](shk09.htm#fr_57) The commencement of all
services had to be heralded, and many heralds were employed. Gebini was
herald-in-chief, and his duty was mainly to call out in the morning:
"Priests, to your duties! Levites, to your chants! Israelites, to your
places!" He had so powerful a voice that it could be heard eight miles.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[21:a8](shk09.htm#fr_58) He had charge of the
keys of the gates and of the men who stood at the gates.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[21:a9](shk09.htm#fr_59) The gates of the Temple
had to be guarded day and night, even in times of peace. To properly
care for the guard and to punish all negligence in guarding the gates
was the duty of Ben Babai.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[21:a10](shk09.htm#fr_60) For showbreads, twelve
loaves had to be made every week, and had to be made so that they would
keep fresh the entire week. For further details, see Tract Tamid. The
family of Garmo had charge of this work for generations.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[21:a11](shk09.htm#fr_61) The incense, which was
used twice a day, had to be prepared with especial skill from many
different spices, and in proper proportions. Further details are also to
be found in Tract Tamid. The family Abtinos had charge of this branch
for many generations.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[21:a12](shk09.htm#fr_62) The curtains, which
were frequently changed, had to be inspected as to workmanship,
cleanliness, etc., and this duty devolved upon Elazar.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[21:a13](shk09.htm#fr_63) The vestments of the
priests had to be carefully examined as to cleanliness, and had to be
sent out to be laundered regularly. Many rooms in the Temple were
devoted to those vestments, and Pinchas had charge of them all.

Much has been said as to the character of the men enumerated in the
Mishna, whether they were priests themselves, Levites, or ordinary
Israelites. For particularized information regarding this subject, we
would refer to "Die Priester und der Cultus," by Dr. Adolf Büchler,
Vienna, 1895. It is estimated that the priests in Jerusalem approached
the enormous number of twenty thousand. Besides, there were numbers of
Levites.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[22:b1](shk09.htm#fr_64) MISHNA *b*. The
officers of the Temple ranked as follows: The king, the high priest, the
assistant high priest (Sagan), two catholicoses, seven chamberlains
(Amarkolins), three treasurers (Gisbars), and, finally, many smaller
officials; *e.g.,* inspectors, officers of the guard, etc. (See "Die
Priester und der Cultus," pp. 90-117.) The duties of each officer are
described in Tamid and Yuma.

"Catholicos" is here used in the sense of patriarch or head, which term
still retains a similar meaning in the "Ecclesiastical History of the
Armenian Church," deriving its original meaning from the Greek
καθολικός--general or universal. In the latter sense it was adopted at a
very early period by the Christian church, In the exclusive sense of
denoting the church as the "depository of universally received doctrine
in contrast with heretical sects" it is still improperly retained by the
Roman Catholic Church. I am surprised to find no mention of the officers
of this name and function under the appropriate title anywhere in the
"Encyc. Brit."

<span id="fn_65"></span>[22:c1](shk09.htm#fr_65) MISHNA *c*. With every
sacrifice that was offered, wine and meal <span id="page_23">p.
23</span> were brought in accordance with the biblical commandment to
that effect, and in quantities prescribed by the ordinances. As the
drink and meal offerings were bought in the Temple, the person bringing
the sacrifice would receive a seal from the priest which he would
exchange for the necessary quantity of wine and meal. The
drink-offerings with goats and sheep were the same, hence the seal
inscribed "kid" served for both. One 'who brought a ram, however, which
required a larger quantity of wine and meal, would receive a separate
seal, inscribed "ram." As for offerings of the herds, they were all
equal, small or large, male or female; hence the seal inscribed "calf"
sufficed for all. Those who were afflicted with sores, and had to bring
two rams and one sheep, received a seal inscribed "sin" (which had the
hidden purpose of signifying that sores were the consequence of sin).
The poor sinners, who had only to bring one sheep, two doves, and
one-tenth of an ephah of meal and one lug of oil, without any wine,
were, according to the opinion of the sages, not in need of a seal,
because the seal inscribed "kid," which they received when bringing the
sheep, was sufficient for the other purpose. Ben Azai, however, says,
that another seal was necessary, and that an extra seal marked "poor
sinner" was given, which was intended as a sign that no wine was
necessary. The tradition of Ben Azai, that the seals were inscribed in
Aramaic characters, is also true, because, prior to the introduction of
the Greek language, all the writing in the Temple was done in Aramaic.
(See the mentioned work of Büchler.)

<span id="fn_66"></span>[23:e1](shk09.htm#fr_66) MISHNA *e*. Providing
only the surplus amounted to exactly the amount paid for the seal.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[24:f1](shk09.htm#fr_67) MISHNA *f*. In the
Palestinian Talmud in this chapter (Halakha 25), many legends are
related illustrating this Mishna.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI.](shk10)
