[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](shk06)  [Next](shk08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 2: Tracts Erubin, Shekalim, Rosh Hashana*, tr.
by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

# CHAPTER III.

MISHNA: (*a*) At three periods of the year money is drawn from the
treasury (of the Shekalim); viz.: Half a month before Passover, half a
month before Pentecost, and half a month before the Feast of Booths. The
same dates are also the terms for the obligation of cattle-tithing, so
says R. Aqiba. Ben Azai says: "The dates for the latter terms are the
twenty-ninth of Adar, the first of Sivan, and the twenty-ninth of Abh."
R. Eliezer and R. Simeon both say: "The first of Nissan, the first of
Sivan, and the twenty-ninth of Elul." But why do they say the
twenty-ninth of Elul why not the first of Tishri? Because that is a
feast-day, and it is not allowed to tithe on a feast-day; therefore they
ordained it for the preceding day, the twenty-ninth of Elul. <span
id="fr_33"></span>[a1](#fn_33.md)

(*b*) The money drawn from the treasury was brought in three chests,
each of three Saahs' capacity. On these chests was written: Aleph, Beth,
Gimmel. R. Ishmael says: "They were marked in Greek: Alpha, Beta,
Gamma."--The one that drew the money was not allowed to enter (the
treasury) with a turned-up garment, nor with shoes nor sandals, nor with
Tephillin, nor with an amulet, in order that, in the event of his
becoming impoverished, it should not be said that he was thus punished
on account of transgression against the treasury; or if he became rich,
that he enriched himself by means of money drawn from the treasury. For
a man must stand as unblemished before his fellowman as before his God,
as it is written \[Numbers xxxii. 22\]:

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "And ye be thus
guiltless before the Lord and before Israel"; and \[Proverbs iii. 4\]:
"So shalt thou find grace and good favor in the eyes of God and
man." <span id="fr_34"></span>[b1](#fn_34.md)

(*c*) The members of the family of R. Gamaliel used to enter, each one
with his shekel between his fingers, and throw it before the one who
drew the money from the treasury, and the latter immediately placed it
into the chest (which he took out).--The one who came in to draw the
money did not proceed before he had said to the bystanders: "I will now
proceed to draw," and they had answered: "Draw, draw, draw," three
times. <span id="fr_35"></span>[c1](#fn_35.md)

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

(*d*) After the man had completed the first drawing, he covered the
balance with a cover (of fur); the same was done after the second
drawing; after the third drawing the balance remained uncovered; for
(the covering in the first two instances) was done only in order not to
draw by mistake again what had already been drawn from. The first
drawing was performed in the name of the whole land of Israel, the
second in the name of the cities near the boundaries, and the third in
the name of the inhabitants of Babylon, Media, and all distant lands in
general.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[12:a1](shk07.htm#fr_33.md)

# CHAPTER III.

MISHNA *a*. The dates of the time for cattle-tithing have nothing to do
with the time for drawing the money; for as to that time, all agree upon
the dates stated in the Mishna, and the difference of opinion concerning
the time of cattle-tithing is explained in the Palestinian Talmud and in
Tract Rosh Hashana of the Babylonian Talmud.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[13:b1](shk07.htm#fr_34.md) MISHNA *b*. In this
Mishna the manner of drawing the money from the treasury is described:
how it was accomplished, that the Shekalim for which communal sacrifices
were bought should be taken from the treasury in such a manner that all
the contributors should have a share in them. The mode of procedure was
as follows: About the middle of the month of Nissan, when the money from
all Israel had been collected, the treasurers, amid great ceremony,
would open the rooms where the boxes in which the money had been
deposited by the collectors were situated, and bring out all the boxes
contained in the rooms. These boxes were in turn opened, and their
contents thrown into three cases, each of which had nine Saahs'
capacity, and were covered with a cover. The remainder, after filling
the three cases, was called the remainder of the room (and what was done
with this will be told later). After the performance of this ceremony
one man was selected, while the others withdrew, and he was to transfer
the money to be expended, from the cases into three small chests, each
having three Saahs' capacity and marked with three letters: Aleph, Beth,
Gimmel; or, Alpha, Beta, Gamma.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[13:c1](shk07.htm#fr_35.md) MISHNA *c*. After this
ceremony, the man, being almost nude--for he had no garments on in which
he could conceal a coin, no shoes, no sandals, no hat, no hose; in fact,
nothing that would afford a hiding-place for money--would take the chest
marked Aleph and bring it up to the first case, and fill it up, after
which he would cover the case. Then he would take the chest marked Beth,
fill it from the second case, cover the case, and proceed in the same
manner with the chest marked Gimmel, from the third box, which contained
nine Sa ahs' capacity; but in the last instance he would leave the case
uncovered, as a sign whence to commence filling the chests at the second
drawing of money in the same order as before, using the third case
first, then the second, and lastly the first. This was done in order
that the money should be thoroughly intermingled <span id="page_14">p.
14</span> and everybody have a share in the sacrifices bought with it.
The first drawing took place on the fifteenth of Nissan, and sacrifices
were purchased for the Passover. The next drawing was held fifteen days
before Pentecost; and Pentecost only lasting one day, not so many
sacrifices were needed, and the money lasted until fifteen days before
the Feast of Booths, when the last lot of money was withdrawn from the
cases and placed in the chests. The expenditure of the money was also
made in the order of chests, chest Aleph being emptied first, etc.; and
the intention was to place Jerusalem first, the surrounding territory
next, and all the other places where Israelites dwelt last.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV.](shk08.md)
