[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](shk05)  [Next](shk07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 2: Tracts Erubin, Shekalim, Rosh Hashana*, tr.
by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

# CHAPTER II.

MISHNA: (*a*) One may put together the Shekalim and exchange them for
Darkons <span id="fr_20"></span>[a1](#fn_20) (Greek coins of permanent
value), in order to be able to carry them more readily. just as the
money-chests were on the order of horns in the city of Jerusalem, so
were they also in the country. <span id="fr_21"></span>[a2](#fn_21) If
the inhabitants of a town sent their Shekalim (to the city of Jerusalem)
by messengers, and the money was stolen from them or was lost by
accident, if the treasurers had already drawn their share (from the
communal Shekalim), the messengers of the city must swear to the fact
before the treasurers. If the share had not yet been drawn, they (the
messengers) must swear to the facts before the inhabitants of the town,
and the latter must make the amount good. <span
id="fr_22"></span>[a3](#fn_22) If the money was recovered or returned by
the

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

thieves, both amounts are considered as Shekalim, and nothing is
credited to next year's account.

(*b*) If one give his shekel to another to pay (his head-tax) for him,
and the man appropriates it to pay his own tax, he (the latter) commits
embezzlement if the share had already been drawn; the same is the case
with one who pays his shekel with sanctified money, after his share had
been drawn and an animal was sacrificed for it. <span
id="fr_23"></span>[b1](#fn_23) If he took the money from the second
tithes or from the Sabbatical year fruit, he must eat the full value of
same in the city of Jerusalem. <span id="fr_24"></span>[b2](#fn_24)

(*c*) If one gather together single coins and say: "These shall serve
for my Shekalim," the eventual remainder is, according to the school of
Shamai, a voluntary gift; according to the school of Hillel, it is not
sanctified. If the man say, however: "Out of these I shall pay my
Shekalim," the eventual remainder is, according to both schools, not
sanctified. If he say: "These shall serve me for a sin-offering," the
eventual remainder is, according to both schools, a voluntary offering.
If he say: "Out of these will I bring a sin-offering," the eventual
remainder is, according to both schools, not sanctified. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[c1](#fn_25)

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

(*d*) R. Simeon says: "What difference is there here between the
Shekalim and the sin-offerings? Shekalim have their fixed value, but
sin-offerings have not." <span id="fr_26"></span>[d1](#fn_26) R. Jehudah
says: "Even Shekalim have no fixed value; for when Israel returned from
captivity, (half-) Darkons were paid; later (half-) Selas were paid;
again, Tabas (half-shekels) were current (but not accepted), and finally
people would only pay with Dinars." <span id="fr_27"></span>[d2](#fn_27)
Rejoined R. Simeon: "Nevertheless, the Shekalim were all of like value
at one and the same time, while as for sin-offerings, one brings one
Sela's worth, another two, and a third three Selas' worth." <span
id="fr_28"></span>[d3](#fn_28)

(*e*) The remainder of moneys intended for Shekalim is not

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

sanctified. <span id="fr_29"></span>[e1](#fn_29) The remainder of moneys
intended for the offering of the tenth part of an ephah \[Lev. v. xi.\]
(sin-offering of the poor), for bird-offerings of men or women afflicted
with venereal disease and of women that had been recently confined, and
for sin and guilt offerings, are considered voluntary offerings.
Following is the rule: The remainder of everything designated for sin
and guilt offerings is considered as a voluntary offering. <span
id="fr_30"></span>[e2](#fn_30) The remainder of whole-offerings is
applied to whole-offerings, <span id="fr_31"></span>[e3](#fn_31) of
food-offerings to food-offerings, of peace-offerings to peace-offerings;
that of the Passover- offerings to peace-offerings, and that of
Nazarite-offerings to Nazarite-offerings. The remainder of such
(offering) as is designated for a certain Nazarite is a voluntary
offering. The remainder of moneys for the poor in general, belongs to
the poor; of money collected for a certain poor man belongs to that same
poor man. The remainder of ransom moneys for prisoners is applied to
(the ransom of) other prisoners; of moneys collected for a certain
prisoner belongs to that prisoner. The remainder of burial moneys is
applied to (the burial of) other dead; of money collected for a
particular dead (man) belongs to

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

tile legal heirs. R. Meir says: "The remainder remains intact until
Elijah comes again" (as the herald of the resurrection). <span
id="fr_32"></span>[e4](#fn_32) R. Nathan says: "It should be applied to
the building of a gravestone for the departed."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[7:a1](shk06.htm#fr_20)

# CHAPTER II.

MISHNA *a*. The Darkon (Greek Δαρεικός; or *drachm*, biblical term, Ezra
viii. 27) was a Persian gold coin worth two Selas, or four half-shekels.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[7:a2](shk06.htm#fr_21) The money-chests were
narrow on one side and broad at the bottom, and had a slot through which
a Darkon on edge only could be passed, and were given to the messenger
locked.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[7:a3](shk06.htm#fr_22) If a portion of the
amount of Shekalim collected had already been spent for sacrifices or
for the improvement of the Temple, all the Israelites who were bound to
pay their Shekalim had a share in such disbursement, and the amount sent
by the town, although lost or stolen, was counted as if it had been
included in the amount spent, because it was the express understanding
that in every shekel spent for sacrifices, etc., all Israelites had a
share, in order that they might have a share in the sacrifices.
Therefore, the messengers of the city had simply to swear that they had
taken the money, and it was considered received by the treasurers. If,
however, no portion of the Shekalim had yet been expended, the share of
the inhabitants of the town, whose money had been stolen or lost, was
not included in the amount on hand, and hence the representatives of the
city were obliged to make it good (Maimonides).

<span id="fn_23"></span>[8:b1](shk06.htm#fr_23) MISHNA *b*. 'The same
reason as stated in note 3 of the preceding Mishna applies also to this
clause; and, besides, everybody had a share in the sacrifice of the
animal, even if the sacrifice were made on the strength of future
receipts, for pledges were on hand insuring the payment by the
delinquents.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[8:b2](shk06.htm#fr_24) If the money was taken
from the second tithes, the value of which had to be consumed in the
city of Jerusalem, he must replace it by an equal amount and proclaim
that this money is in exchange for the money taken from the second
tithe, and then consume it accordingly. If the money was taken from the
Sabbatical year fruit, he must replace it and proclaim the same as above
and make it public property, as is the law of Sabbatical years.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[8:c1](shk06.htm#fr_25) MISHNA *c*. The meaning
of this Mishna is as follows: If a man gathered money little by little,
with the express intention of paying his shekalim tax out of such money,
and separated it from other moneys, any remainder which he may have left
over after such payment is, according to the school of Shamai, to be
devoted for a voluntary offering, because it was separated; and
according to the school of Hillel, it is ordinary money, that may be
used at will, because it was gathered only for the purpose of paying the
amount due, which was already paid. If a man, however, had a sum of
<span id="page_9">p. 9</span> money, and declared that he would use
*this* sum for the payment of his shekalim tax, the remainder which he
may have after such payment is, even according to the school of Hillel,
to be devoted for a voluntary offering. With money devoted for a
voluntary offering, whole-offerings only were to be bought.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[9:d1](shk06.htm#fr_26) MISHNA *d*. By his
teaching in this Mishna, R. Simeon wishes to explain the reason of the
decree of the school of Hillel concerning the remainder of money which
had been gathered little by little for the purpose of paying the
Shekalim, or for the bringing of a sin-offering, and says: "Because it
is written \[Exodus xxx. 15\], 'The rich shall not give more, and the
poor shall not give less, than the half of a shekel,' a man when
gathering money for the payment of Shekalim knows exactly how much he
will need; hence, although he separated the amount gathered, the
remainder is ordinary money; but if he gathered money for a
sin-offering, which has no fixed value, and for which he did not know
exactly how much he would have to pay, his intention in separating the
money was evidently to use the entire amount for such purpose, and hence
the eventual remainder, which cannot be used for a sin-offering, as it
is already sacrificed, should be used for a voluntary offering."

<span id="fn_27"></span>[9:d2](shk06.htm#fr_27) R. Jehudah differs with
R. Simeon, and states, that the reason given by the latter for the
decree of the school of Hillel cannot be correct, for even Shekalim had
not always a fixed value, and when a man commenced to gather money for
the payment of his Shekalim he also may not have known how much he would
have to pay when the time came, because the value of the coin might be
changed in the meantime.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[9:d3](shk06.htm#fr_28) R. Simeon answered R.
Jehudah very properly: "Even if the value of the coin was changed, the
man knew well that he would pay a certain sum equal to that paid by all
others, and the entire amount <span id="page_10">p. 10</span> that he
had gathered would not be consumed; as for a sin-offering, however, he
never knew exactly just what amount he would need for its purchase,
because it had no fixed value; therefore, when he separated the money
from other moneys his intention was to use the entire amount."

<span id="fn_29"></span>[10:e1](shk06.htm#fr_29) MISHNA *e*. After
explaining the opinions of both schools (Shamai and Hillel) in the
preceding Mishna, and the Halakha, as usual, prevailing according to the
school of Hillel, this Mishna states the final Halakha anonymously, and
then cites the subsequent ordinances, concerning which there is no
difference of opinion.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[10:e2](shk06.htm#fr_30) The reason for this
rule is: A sin or guilt offering must be brought for each sin
separately. If money was designated for one sin-offering, the remainder
cannot be applied to another offering for the same sin, nor for another
sin which one might commit in the future, hence the remainder must be a
voluntary offering.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[10:e3](shk06.htm#fr_31) The remainder of
whole-offerings may be used for more whole-offerings, because the
quantity of whole-offerings, which are voluntary, is not limited. The
same applies to food and peace offerings. The remainder of
Passover-offerings, however, which cannot he used for the same purpose
again, and should, however, be used for an eatable sacrifice, cannot be
used for a voluntary offering, which is a whole-offering, but for a
peace-offering, which is eatable.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[11:e4](shk06.htm#fr_32) The reason for R.
Meir's dictum is: He holds, that if money is collected for a certain
dead man, the remainder belongs virtually to him, *i.e.*, should be
applied only for the use of the corpse; hence the heirs have no share in
it. R. Nathan, however, says, that the setting up of a gravestone is for
the use of the corpse, it being in his honor and not of any benefit to
the heirs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III.](shk07)
