[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](shk02)  [Next](shk04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 2: Tracts Erubin, Shekalim, Rosh Hashana*, tr.
by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

# PREFACE TO TRACT SHEKALIM.

AMONG the treatises contained in the Section Moed of the Babylonian
Talmud is to be found that of Shekalim, which consists, however, only of
Mishnas, the Babylonian Talmud having no Gemara. The Palestinian Talmud
contains a Gemara for this tract also, and there is an additional
commentary by Maimonides. While we are translating only the Babylonian
Talmud, we would not care to omit Shekalim, which is of peculiar
historical value and may prove quite interesting to the reader. But the
Mishna, without any explanation whatever, would naturally seem obscure,
and in some instances would be absolutely incomprehensible; and, the
Gemara of the Palestinian Talmud, as well as the commentary of
Maimonides, consisting of very complicated and intricate series of
arguments, inferences, and explanations, which would be not only
difficult of translation but also immaterial to the subject, the
insertion of which would be a deviation from our method, and
unnecessary, as would explanations of Barthanora, Tosphath-yomtabh,
etc., we were forced to provide the text with a commentary of our own,
drawn from the most authentic sources. This, we trust, will serve to
elucidate any obscure passages not quite comprehensible to the general
reader. Accordingly, every sentence or word in the Mishna requiring an
explanation is distinguished by a number or an asterisk, and has a
corresponding reference in the commentary printed below the text. We may
add that, for our personal satisfaction and to guard against any
possible errors, we have given this tract for revision to some noted
Russian scholars who are competent to judge upon it, and they find it
very intelligible.

As stated above, we have taken our commentary from the most authentic
sources we could find. We do not, therefore, solicit leniency on the
part of worthy critics, but ask them to restrain their criticisms until
they shall have carefully studied the commentaries mentioned, as well as
our commentary, with proper consideration; for ours is derived from the
Palestinian Talmud, Maimonides, etc. Conscientious critics will do so
without our

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

solicitation; and as for others, who are ready to criticise everything
impromptu as soon as it leaves our pen, such a request would be of no
avail. We nevertheless will be grateful to any one who will call our
attention to things which arc not comprehensible in the commentary, this
being our first venture of the kind, more especially as we think we
shall be compelled to do the same with other Mishnayoths to which the
Babylonian Talmud has no Gemara. A separate introduction to Tract
Shekalim we think unnecessary, as the contents of this speaks for
itself. We nevertheless will return to this when we come to Tract Midoth
(Measures).

In compliance with our promise in our prospectus, we add to this volume
the Hebrew text of the Tracts Shekalim and Rosh Hashana of our new
edition, for the benefit of students and scholars who may desire to
compare the translation with it.

M. L. RODKINSON.

NEW YORK, May, 1897.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tract Shekalim: Synopsis of Subjects](shk04)
