[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](srf06)  [Next](srf08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

# HOW LITTLE IVAN BECAME A TSAR

A cobbler's son in Vladimir had been sent to a school by a rich lady who
desired him to become a priest. His father took great pride in the boy,
and cleared a corner of his shop where he might sit in quietness to
pursue his studies undisturbed by the rest of the children, Like all
other shoe-makers he knew many old stories, and, believing these would
increase his son's knowledge, he was wont to relate them to him as he
patched and stitched the boots that his customers left to be repaired.

"What are you reading about to-day?" he asked his son, who was poring
over a book in his corner.

"The history of Ivan the Terrible, Father. He was a great Tsar, who did
much to make Russia rich and powerful."

"Does your book tell you how many Tsars called Ivan sat on the imperial
throne?"

"No, Father; were there more than one?"

"I have heard it told, my son, that five Ivans in all ruled over the
country. This information I had from a wise and learned priest. Of three
of

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

them I know little or nothing, but I know something of two. One was Ivan
called the Terrible, of whom you are reading, and the other was the
first Ivan of all. This first Ivan reigned in the days when the Tartars
oppressed the people of our country, and plundered them without mercy.
He delivered the whole land from the Tartar yoke."

"He must have been a mighty Tsar, indeed."

"And yet, when he was a boy, he lived the life of a beggar. The Tartars
sought to slay him soon after he was born, but his nurse exchanged him
for the child of a poor woman who lived in this ancient city, while her
own child was reared as a Prince in Moscow. Would you like to hear the
story of how little Ivan became a Tsar?"

"Indeed I would, Father," exclaimed the boy.

"Then come here and sit beside me," said the shoemaker, "so that your
knowledge may be increased."

The cobbler then related the legend which the peasants of many
generations had interwoven with the memory of the fourteenth-century
Tsar, Ivan I, who founded a new dynasty which endured for nearly a
century and a half. Here I set it down as it was afterwards retold by
the cobbler's son, when he grew up to be a village priest in his native
province,

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

.       .       .       .       .       .       .       .

Little Ivan was a comely boy, who lived in a hut on the outskirts of
Vladimir with his father and mother, who were very poor. He had bright
eyes and a noble brow, and the rich people smiled to him, being
attracted by his countenance, although he went about in rags. In
summer-time he fared well, for he was given alms by many, but in winter
when food became scarce the boy felt glad if he was able to procure one
meal a day. He learned how to be contented with little. Once his father
came home from the town, on a cold and bitter evening, with a small loaf
of black bread. It was all the food he could purchase that day. He cut
it into three portions, one for his wife, one for little Ivan, and one
for himself. Then he sat down before the fire to enjoy the warmth, for
he had wandered about through the cold streets since early morning.

Now there crouched behind the stove in that poor hut a grim spirit,
named Krutschina, which signifies "the Sorrowful One". She watched the
man munching slowly, and suddenly stretched out her grisly black hand
and snatched away his portion of black bread. Then she shrank back again
into her hiding-place.

"Alas!" cried the hungry man, making obeisance to the spirit, "restore
to me my black bread, else I will die of hunger."

Said the spirit, "Having devoured it, I cannot grant your request. But I
will give you instead

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

 

<span id="img_09700"></span>

[![''ONE GOLDEN EGG EACH MORNING,'' SAID LITTLE IVAN'S
MOTHER](tn/09700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/09700.jpg.md)  
''ONE GOLDEN EGG EACH MORNING,'' SAID LITTLE IVAN'S MOTHER  

 

a duck, which will lay a golden egg every morning."

"So be it, Krutschina," the poor man answered. "Thinking of the duck and
its golden egg, I will go to bed forgetting my hunger. But tell me,
first, where I will find this wonderful bird."

Said the spirit, "When you go towards the town to-morrow, you will see a
pond. In the pond there will be a duck; seize the duck and hasten home
with it."

"Very well, Krutschina," the man said; "I will do as you advise me."
Then he went to bed, and having overcome the pangs of hunger with a
strong will, fell fast asleep.

At dawn next morning he rose and left his hut to hasten towards the
town. To his great joy he soon found that the spirit had spoken truly.
He beheld a pond, and in the pond a duck. So he seized the bird at once
and returned home with it.

Little Ivan clapped his hands with joy when he beheld the duck, which
the man handed to his wife, saying, "May it lay an egg soon! We have
need of gold."

"May it be our salvation!" the poor woman exclaimed. As she spoke, she
placed the bird in a basket and covered it over carefully with a sieve.

When an hour had elapsed, she lifted up the duck and found that it had
laid a golden egg.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Great was her joy. She called her husband and
little Ivan, who had gone outside to chop wood, and they hastened to her
side. The boy clapped his hands with joy, his eyes meanwhile sparkling
like moonlit water.

"One golden egg each morning," his mother said. "Such is our good
fortune now."

The poor man was feeling hungry. He said nothing but "Give it to me." He
thrust the egg into his bosom and hastened towards the town. A merchant,
to whom he showed it, paid him down, without hesitation, a hundred
roubles, which he lifted up without excitement, as if he was accustomed
to handling large sums of money. Then he made his way to the
market-place and purchased a goodly quantity of provisions. Little Ivan
danced with joy to see his father returning from the town, carrying food
in abundance for the starving household.

Next morning the duck laid another golden egg. The man did not hasten to
the town with it. He thought he would wait for a week so that the worth
of this wonderful bird might be tested. It did not fail or disappoint
him. With each new day came a new egg, and the owner of the duck soon
found himself wealthy. He kept his secret, and his wife and son never
revealed the source of the family fortune either. After disposing of
several eggs the man built a large house, which he furnished exceedingly
well. Then he purchased a shop and began to trade with profit.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

As time went on, little Ivan's father grew very rich; but he seemed
never to be satisfied. The more gold he made the more he desired to
make. He rubbed his hands gleefully every time he thought of the duck
which laid a golden egg each morning.

One day when he was away from home, an inquisitive clerk employed at the
shop called at his house. The duck had just laid a golden egg, and he
saw his employer's wife lifting it out of the basket. Ere she realized
fully what she had done, she revealed to this young man the secret of
her husband's wealth. The clerk was greatly astonished. He lifted up the
bird and examined it with much interest. Under one of the wings he
observed gold letters, which read--

*The Man who Eats this Duck will become a Tsar*.

He placed the bird down on the floor at once, and said nothing regarding
his discovery. Well he knew that neither his employer nor his wife could
read.

"You must not tell my husband that you have seen the duck," the woman
pleaded.

The clerk shook his head. "I will promise nothing," said he.

"Keep the secret I have revealed," she urged softly, "and I will give
you much gold."

Said the clerk: "Because you have told me all

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

about the bird, you have broken a magic spell. It will never lay another
golden egg."

The woman believed him. "Do not tell my husband," she repeated. "I will
reward you for your silence. Fortunately we have enough wealth to last
us all our days. Besides, my husband makes much money in trading. He
will not miss the golden eggs now."

Said the clerk: "Very well. I promise not to confess against you. But he
will discover the truth all the same, for when he returns home to-morrow
the duck will inform him of what has happened."

The woman began to weep. "Alas!" she cried, "I fear to meet my husband.
What can I do?"

Said the clerk: "The only thing you can do now is to kill the duck."

"But what explanation can I give to my husband for killing this
wonderful bird?" she wailed.

Said the clerk: "Kill it and cook it, and I will eat it. The magic of
the bird will thus pass to me, and I will be able to bewitch your
husband and cause him to forget that he ever possessed a duck which laid
golden eggs."

Like a child, the woman did as this cunning fellow advised her. She slew
the duck, plucked and cleaned it, and thrust it into the oven. Then the
clerk said: "I will return to the shop now. Come with me and pay over
the money you promised. Then I will eat this duck and proceed at once to
bewitch your husband."

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

The woman said: "Very well. Let us get done with the business as quickly
as possible."

As she spoke she threw a cloak over her shoulders and hurried out of the
house with the clerk.

Little Ivan had risen early that morning to go skating on the frozen
river. He returned home sooner than usual, feeling very hungry, and
began to search through the house for food. Opening the oven, he saw the
duck roasting and smacked his lips. "How lucky I am!" he exclaimed. "I
will have a rare feast before mother returns."

When the duck was thoroughly cooked he pulled it out, placed it on a
large plate, and sat down at a table to devour it. He never tasted
sweeter food in his life. The more he ate the more he desired to eat,
and he went on eating until nothing was left but the bones. Then he
leapt up gladly, and seizing his skates returned to the frozen river
again.

In time his mother returned home. She laid out a table and then went to
the kitchen to obtain the duck. To her horror, she discovered that it
had been eaten up.

The clerk arrived a few minutes later. When he learned what had occurred
he became very angry, and exclaimed: "You have cheated me, false woman!
You have eaten the duck yourself. Now nothing can save you from your
husband's wrath."

He left the house at once. "Although I cannot

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

be a Tsar," he said to himself, "I am now a wealthy man, for that
foolish woman has allowed me to become possessed of the greater portion
of her husband's ready money. I shall leave this town at once and go and
live in a foreign country."

When Little Ivan's father came home next day he looked round the house,
saying, "Where is the duck?"

His wife followed him. "I do not know," she kept repeating. Little Ivan
amused himself that morning building a snow house in the back yard. His
father called to him: "Have you seen the duck? I cannot find it
anywhere."

The boy ran towards his parents and said: "Yesterday I returned from
skating, feeling very hungry. I could have eaten an ox. I opened the
oven and found a roasted duck, which I pulled out and devoured, leaving
nothing but the bones. But whether or not it was the duck you are
searching for I cannot tell."

His father flew into a sudden passion, and not only whipped the boy, but
turned him out of the house. Then he scolded his wife, who wept bitter
tears. Afterwards he went to his shop, and discovered that the clerk had
ruined him and fled away. He caused a search to be made for the
scoundrel, and after several days had gone past was informed that his
dishonest servant had been robbed and slain by a band of fierce thieves,
who infested a forest about two hundred versts from the town.

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

So it came about that this man who had owned the magic duck, which
brought him good fortune, became very poor again. He returned to the
little hut in which he had been wont to dwell, and there he mourned the
loss of his foster-son, whom he had sent away in his wrath.

Little Ivan had gone on a long journey. After he left his home he walked
onward until he reached a village five versts south of Vladimir. There
he met an old woman, who spoke to him, saying: "Why are you weeping so
bitterly? You are young and strong, and should be happy indeed."

"Alas!" answered the lad, "I have been sent away from home for eating a
duck which laid every day a golden egg."

"You have done a great wrong," the old woman told him, "and it is now
your duty to repay the loss which you have caused. My advice to you is
to travel southward until you reach Moscow, the capital of the next
kingdom. Enter through the gate and accept the first offer which is made
to you."

"Very well," answered the lad, "I shall do as you advise me."

The old woman turned towards the east, and Little Ivan took the road
leading southward. For nine days the lad wandered on and on, and each
day he grew more weary. By night he slept in the houses of peasants, and
more than one kindly woman begged of him to take rest beneath her roof
for a few days, fearing he would

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

grow faint and die by the roadside. On the tenth day, however, his
wanderings came to an end. At eventide he drew near to Moscow and
entered through the northern gate. A great crowd of people lined the
main thoroughfare, and when they beheld Little Ivan they raised shouts
of joy and cried:

"HERE COMES OUR TSAR! LONG LIVE OUR NOBLE TSAR!"

The lad was greatly astonished. Soldiers gathered round him, and then
the chief citizens came forward, and, having knelt before him and kissed
his hands, they led him towards the royal palace on the Kremlin. Crowds
thronged all the streets that Little Ivan passed through, and they
shouted words of loyal welcome. The lad gazed about him with wonder, but
he could not help smiling and bowing to see so many kindly and happy
faces. The more he smiled the more delighted the people became.

When he reached the palace, Little Ivan was informed by a high official
that the old Tsar had died some days previously. He left no heir, and
the people quarrelled among themselves as to who should be selected to
reign over them. At length they decided to proclaim as their Tsar the
first stranger who entered the northern gate of the city. Everyone was
delighted to find that a comely lad with bright eyes and a noble brow

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

chanced to visit their capital. In their hearts they were all firmly
convinced that he would grow up to be a wise and just ruler, who would
devote his life for the good of the people.

Little Ivan was taken to a private chamber, where servants washed him
and attired him in royal robes. Afterwards he followed the officers of
state to the throne-room, where the crown was placed on his head. When
this ceremony was completed, he walked out on the balcony of the palace
before the eyes of the citizens who had assembled in the square beneath.
Little Ivan looked every inch a king, and many voices shouted together:

"LONG LIVE OUR NOBLE TSAR! LONG LIVE OUR NOBLE TSAR!"

It seemed for a time to the lad that he must be dreaming. But he
realized at length his good fortune, and when he did so, he thought of
his father and mother. He felt that he could not live happily unless
they were beside him, so he called before him a gallant knight whose
name was Luga, and spoke to him, saying: "Go to my native country, which
is Vladimir, and salute the Tsar. Say I greet him, and desire above all
things that peace should prevail between my kingdom and his. Ask him to
favour me by permitting my father and mother to come here and dwell in
my palace, because my heart yearns for them."

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

The knight bowed before the new Tsar, and hastened to obey his command.
Before a month had gone past he returned to the palace with Ivan's
father and mother, who wondered greatly why they were ordered to appear
before the mighty ruler of Muskovy. They were conducted to the
throne-room, and to their great astonishment beheld their Ivan sitting
on the throne, clad in rich robes, and wearing a dazzling crown upon his
head.

Said Ivan: "Father, you turned me away from your home. Now I have
brought you to mine. Promise me that you and my mother will dwell here
with me for the rest of your days."

The old man was overcome with joy, and wept glad tears, as did his wife
also. Ivan descended from the throne and kissed them both. Then he bade
his servants to bring them royal garments, so that they might be
fittingly attired to sit at his royal table.

Ivan grew up to be a wise and powerful ruler. He acquired such great
wealth that he was surnamed "Kalita" ("the Purse"). Not only did he
reign over Muskovy, but also in time over Novgorod, which had been long
years without a Tsar, and over Vladimir, the Tsar of which had been
driven from his throne by the Tartars because of his folly and greed,
and became an outcast among men.

When Ivan had established order and peace throughout the united
principalities of his great

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

kingdom, he did his utmost to promote trade by founding many fairs and
marts, which yielded imperial duties and enriched the state. Many
merchants came from foreign countries in Europe and Asia, and Russia
became a vast market-place. A great and good Tsar was the first Ivan.
His name will live for ever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tsar Ivan and the Scots Soldiers](srf08.md)
