[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](srf08)  [Next](srf10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

# THE MAN WHO FOUGHT THE WOLVES

### I. The Plot

Snow was falling thinly in the gathering darkness on a chilly evening of
early winter in the year 1716, when a traveller, who rode a great black
horse, drew up before a small village inn on the highway which leads
from St. Petersburg (Petrograd) to Moscow. Dismounting with a sigh of
relief, he shook himself like a dog when it leaps from a pool, to get
rid of the sheets of snow that enveloped his shoulders and neck. He was
a nimble man of medium stature and muscular build, with kindly brown
eyes that relieved the stern lines of face; icicles clung to his pointed
black beard, and his eyebrows were white with rime.

"Welcome home again, Petrushka Petrovitch!" exclaimed the stout and
jovial innkeeper who greeted him pleasantly at the doorway. "What a
stranger you are! It is good to see you once more in your native
village, where the memory of your saintly father, the priest, is still
held in reverence."

"I thank you, Aleksyey Nikolaevitch," the

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

traveller answered quietly. A groom came forward to lead his panting
horse to the stables, and the traveller entered the inn stamping his
feet, which were benumbed with cold.

"Whence come you, Petrushka?" asked the innkeeper, whose small grey eyes
twinkled with good humour.

"From St. Petersburg."

"The great new city with the half-foreign name! Travellers tell me that
'burg' is the German word for 'gorod'."

Petrushka threw off his fur coat. "I need food and drink," he said, "and
would sleep here to-night."

"My daughter Sonya will feed you well. Sit down beside the stove. You
are half-frozen. . . . Ah! you are a fortunate man, Petrushka. You have
acquired much learning. You have also seen St. Petersburg. I hear the
new capital is the most wonderful city in the world. Some day I must pay
it a visit."

Petrushka smiled. "You have grown stouter, my friend," he said. "Hard
travelling in this weather would reduce your weight."

"Tell me something of which I have no knowledge," laughed the innkeeper.
"Tell me about St. Petersburg. They say it grows like a mushroom."

"The streets are now lit with lamps each night, just like Paris. What do
you think of that, Aleksyey Nikolaevitch?"

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

"Wonderful! wonderful! It must be a sight indeed. But on stormy nights
the lamps will all be blown out."

"Lanterns protect them, and they burn well in all weathers. You have no
idea how cheerful they look. Withal, they are a great convenience. One
can move about the streets now as safely by night as by day."

"Nor have any fear of thieves, eh?"

"None whatever. Besides, the new Imperial police officers are
everywhere--hundreds of them."

"There is one here, Petrushka--in your own peaceable native village.
Think of that! He stalks about as if he were the Tsar himself. When he
enters my inn, you might think it belonged to him. But do not let us
speak about him. The thought of the fellow makes my gorge rise. What
about the Tsar himself? Have you seen him of late?"

"His face is as familiar to me as is your own. One meets him everywhere
in St. Petersburg. . . . But what delays Sonya? Has she forgotten me? I
am as hungry as a wolf, my friend."

"Sonya, Sonya," called the innkeeper, "have you fallen asleep?"

"I am coming, father," the girl made answer pleasantly as she bustled
into the room, carrying a steaming bowl of soup and a loaf of bread
which she set down on a table. Petrushka at once began to partake
heartily of the first meal he had had since early morning.

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

"I have been told," the innkeeper said from beside the stove, "that the
Tsar has been given new titles by the Senate. He is now called 'Peter
the Great'. A Tsar who has built a great new city which bears his own
name is worthy indeed of being called 'Great'."

"He has also been declared 'Emperor of all Russia' and 'Father of his
country'," added Petrushka over his soup.

"There has never been such a Tsar," the inn-keeper went on. "Still,
although he is called 'Father of his country', many think he inclines
too much to favour foreigners and to imitate foreign manners and
customs. Most of his great officials are foreigners. . . . Are you still
in the service of the foreign general, Petrushka? I cannot remember his
curious name."

"General Gordon," Petrushka reminded him.

"Yes, yes, Gordon--a name that trips on one's tongue! No doubt he has
good cause to be loyal to Tsar Peter. He has grown wealthy in Russia. No
doubt he loves Russia much better now than his native land."

Sonya entered with a plate of meat, which Petrushka proceeded to devour
with relish.

"Where is General Gordon at present?" asked the innkeeper.

"Fighting in Poland," Petrushka answered. "But don't imagine, Aleksyey,
that he remains in Russia because he desires to. . . . Shut the door,"
he added in a whisper, "I have something to tell

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

you in secret regarding him--the something which brings me here this
evening."

The innkeeper closed the door. "Come and sit beside me," Petrushka said.

Aleksyey dearly loved a secret, and smiled expectantly as he drew in a
chair, sat down, placed his elbows on the table, and propped his chin on
his folded hands.

"General Gordon," Petrushka explained, "has long desired to return to
his native land."

"Where is that land? What name does it bear?"

"It is a great island in the west. One part is called Scotland and the
other part is called England."

"An island with two names. How strange!"

"The Tsar has forbidden my master to leave Russia, and he remains in the
royal service much against his will."

"You astonish me! Ah! this is news indeed."

"The General would have returned home long since had he but himself to
consider. It is not difficult for any man to escape from Russia. But he
has a wife and a family. He cannot go away and leave them behind. The
Tsar would thrust them in prison so as to compel him to return."

"Peter is a hard taskmaster. I have heard that said of him."

"Listen to me, Aleksyey Nikolaevitch. You are my kinsman and I need your
aid. Promise to help me in the task I have undertaken. You will be well
rewarded, I assure you."

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

The innkeeper's eyes sparkled with satisfaction. He loved a secret, as
has been said, but what he loved most of all was money. He seemed to
hear the clinking of gold in Petrushka's voice.

"If it is safe to help you, I shall help you, my friend," he said,
rubbing his hands together glee-fully.

"The General, as I told you," Petrushka went on, "is at present in
Poland. He has no desire to return to Russia. If his wife can leave
Moscow with her three daughters and join him in Poland, my master will
proceed to Dantzig and take ship to his native land."

"I cannot see how I can help you in this matter, Petrushka," exclaimed
the innkeeper, with a ring of disappointment in his voice. "Moscow lies
many versts distant from here, as you well know."

"Be patient and listen," Petrushka said. "You probably do not know that
one of the General's daughters is at present residing in your
neighbourhood. She is the guest of Colonel Maykov's wife. I wish you to
send Sonya to bring her here to me to-morrow morning. For this service I
will pay you two golden roubles."

The innkeeper pondered for a moment. Then he said: "What if I get into
trouble with the police over the matter? How can I rid myself of blame
if I am asked awkward questions?" His face wrinkled with anxiety.

"I will give Sonya a letter to deliver to the General's daughter, in
which she will be asked to

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

come here, so that I may hand her an important package," explained
Petrushka.

"What do you intend to do after she comes here?"

"Ask no more questions, Aleksyey Nikolaevitch, for the less you know the
less you will have to answer for. All you need ever say is that I came
here as a traveller, and gave you a letter to deliver to General
Gordon's daughter."

The innkeeper nodded his head, but made no response. His lips were
pursed and hard.

"Must I go myself?" Petrushka asked impatiently. "Are two golden roubles
as naught to you?"

"Say four roubles, and perhaps I may take the risk"

"Well, I'll say three," Petrushka answered. He rose to his feet, having
finished his meal. "If you ask for more, Aleksyey Nikolaevitch, I must
go outside and find someone else who is willing to do this service for a
few kopecks."

"Don't be so impatient, Petrushka. Sit down. You must not leave my house
to-night. It is now fully three years since we have met, and I have
often longed for your company."

"First of all, let this matter be settled," Petrushka insisted. "Will
you send Sonya with the letter on payment of three golden roubles?"

You are a hard man, but I will not reproach you. Sonya will deliver the
letter as you desire."

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

Aleksyey spoke as if he felt he was making the worst of a bargain.

The two men shook hands to confirm the agreement. "Now make yourself
comfortable, Petrushka," the innkeeper said softly. "Tell me all about
your travels and all about the great new city of St. Petersburg. I can't
understand why your master wants to live on an island instead of at Tsar
Peter's great Court."

"I said he was fighting in Poland at present," smiled Petrushka.

"But wars don't last for ever. When victories are won, great generals
return to the capital to be honoured and made rich by the Tsar."

Petrushka shrugged his shoulders. "My master would prefer to fight his
own country's battles. There is trouble brewing for the island kingdom
in these days."

"How much you know, my friend! Living here in a village, I never hear
aught of foreign countries. What has gone wrong in this island with two
names?"

"It is a long story."

"What of that? The night is young as yet. I am curious to hear why the
General desires to leave Russia."

"I will tell you as much as I know. . . . You have heard about Spain?"

"That is the country that lies beyond France. Oh yes! I have heard about
it. Indeed, I once saw a Spaniard. He was a very dark man, with

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

flashing black eyes, and he spoke Russian vilely."

"Well, Cardinal Alberoni, prime minister of King Philip of Spain, has
been plotting with Baron Goertz, of Sweden, to form a great alliance
against the island kingdom. Baron Goertz is endeavouring to bring about
a reconciliation between King Charles of Sweden and Tsar Peter, so as to
form a great alliance with purpose to overthrow the English king, whose
name is George, and bring France under the control of Spain."

"Why should Tsar Peter trouble himself about the island ruler?"

"Well you may ask. It seems that another prince claims the right to
reign over the island kingdom. He has many followers, who are called
Jacobites. Some of them, indeed, are in Tsar Peter's service."

"And is General Gordon one of these Jacobites?"

"No. He owns allegiance to King George. From what I have heard, he
desires to return home, being a valiant and accomplished soldier, to
take part in the great war if it ever breaks out."

"Supposing Tsar Peter supports the rival prince of the island kingdom,
your master will then fight against our country, eh?"

"It is unlikely the Tsar will interfere in this matter. The islanders
have a strong navy. Indeed, they are supreme on the seas. No single
Power would dare to oppose them. That is why the Swedes and the
Spaniards desire to obtain help from the Tsar."

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

"Let them fight their own battles, say I. Why should Russia help Sweden?
Are we not at war with the Swedes at present?"

"We are. Tsar Peter has no greater rival than King Charles of Sweden.
Baron Goertz, however, is endeavouring to arrange a peace betwixt our
country and his own. He proposes that the Tsar should then seize part of
Prussia, and that King Charles should take possession of Norway."

"How did you come to know all this, Petrushka?"

I have heard my master speak of the great conspiracy. He desires to
hasten to his native land, so as to warn King George of the peril which
threatens him."

"It is but natural that he should think first of his own country. May he
achieve his purpose, Petrushka! He is a most excellent man. Each time he
came here he placed in my hand a golden rouble. Besides, he has been a
good master to you, my friend."

"I am ready to lay down my life in his service," Petrushka answered. "If
it is God's will, I shall accompany him to the island kingdom to strike
a blow against the Jacobites, who are his enemies."

"Hush, Petrushka!" exclaimed the innkeeper. "Do not speak so loud. The
police-officer may be listening at the door. Let us talk of other
matters. What you have told me fills my head with confusion. I would
rather hear about the

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

 

<span id="img_14500"></span>

[![PETRUSHKA AND MARYA START ON THE JOURNEY TO MOSCOW](tn/14500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/14500.jpg)  
PETRUSHKA AND MARYA START ON THE JOURNEY TO MOSCOW  

 

great new city of St. Petersburg, the streets of which are lit with
bright lamps every night."

Petrushka smiled, and called for kvass. Then he proceeded to satisfy the
innkeeper's curiosity regarding Tsar Peter's great new capital, telling
of its wonderful buildings and wide streets, its shops and factories and
shipbuilding yards, and of the skilled foreign workmen who were
instructing Russians how to build large ships for war and trade. He then
related many anecdotes regarding Tsar Peter's visits to foreign
countries.

"At Saardam, in Holland," Petrushka said, "he went about in disguise,
and, assuming the name of Peter Timmerman, hired himself as a workman to
a shipbuilder, and lived on the wages he earned in a most wretched
hovel."

"What folly!" exclaimed the innkeeper. "It was not seemly that a Tsar
should live like a peasant."

"Tsar Peter desired to learn the art on which he hoped to found Russia's
future greatness. Afterwards he went to England, where King William
presented him with a beautiful yacht, which I have myself seen. In the
island kingdom he worked also in a dockyard until he became skilled in
the craft of shipbuilding. Then he applied himself to the study of
various trades and manufactures in which the island people have great
skill. Ere he returned to Russia he visited Germany and Austria and
Italy. No living man has travelled more than Tsar Peter."

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

It was long after midnight before Petrushka had ceased talking, and he
and the innkeeper, yawning heavily, bade each other good night and went
to bed.

### II. How Marya was Carried Away

Early next forenoon Sonya, who had set out from the inn immediately
after breakfast, returned from Colonel Maykov's house, bringing Marya,
the General's daughter, with her. The girl was slim and fair-haired,
with rosy cheeks and soft blue eyes.

"How you have grown, Marya!" Petrushka exclaimed. "It is pleasant to see
you once again. I have brought you a birthday present from your father.
How old are you now?"

"Fourteen years," answered Marya, whose eyes sparkled when Petrushka
handed her a package containing an English doll.

"You must not open the package until you return to Colonel Maykov's
house," Petrushka told her.

"How kind of you to bring it to me!" exclaimed the girl.

The man smiled and patted her cheeks. Then turning to a groom he said:
"Bring my horse from the stable. I must depart at once."

"Oh! not at once, surely," protested Marya. "Madame Maykov has asked me
to invite you to her house. She desires to speak with you on

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

\[paragraph continues\] 'a matter of great importance'. These are the
very words she used."

"I have to hasten back to St. Petersburg as quickly as possible,"
Petrushka said. "But I must tarry here a little if Madame Maykov bids.
me to visit her. She may have some message which she desires me to carry
to her husband. Will I take you back on horseback, Marya? You can sit up
behind me on the saddle."

"That will be delightful," answered the girl, little suspecting
Petrushka's intention, for he had planned to carry her away to the next
post station where he could hire a sledge and convey her to Moscow.

Having paid his bill to the innkeeper, Petrushka leapt into the saddle,
and then leaning over lifted up Marya, who sat behind him clasping her
arms about his waist.

"I shall bid you farewell when you return," the innkeeper said.

"So be it," answered Petrushka with a smile, as, tossing a coin to the
groom, he urged his horse onward and rode away.

When he had ridden a little over a verst, he reached the roadway leading
to Colonel Maykov's house, but turned his horse towards the right.

"You are taking the wrong road," Marya said with a laugh.

"Hold on tightly," answered Petrushka. "We will ride on to the next post
station. You must be in Moscow to-morrow morning, for your mother

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

and sisters are to leave at once for Poland to join your father."

"But I should first bid good-bye to Madame Maykov," Marya pleaded.

"She must not know you are leaving, little girl. I am carrying out your
father's orders. We must escape from Russia at once, else your mother
and your sisters and you yourself may be thrust into prison."

"Into prison? Why------"

"Hush! I will explain everything later. The post station is only five
versts farther on."

It was a gloomy cheerless day. As the road opened out from a tree-clad
valley lying between low hills, and turned to cross a wide barren plain
with frozen marshes, the icy wind confronted them in full blast as if
the tempest doors of the north had been suddenly flung open. Soon
Marya's teeth began to chatter, and at length she complained, in a
broken voice, that she was unable to endure the journey. Petrushka drew
rein and slipped down from the saddle.

"Be brave, little girl," he said cheerfully.

Remember you are a soldier's daughter."

He lifted Marya from her uncomfortable seat, intending to make her. walk
for a short distance. "Why, your hands are like ice," he exclaimed with
concern. "You are not sufficiently clad for this rough journey. It was
foolish of me not to think of that sooner. Never mind. I shall wrap you
up and you will feel quite comfortable,"

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

Divesting himself of his fur coat he threw it over the girl's shoulders
and knotted the long sleeves in front.

"Don't you feel warm now?" he asked.

"Oh, yes! You are very kind, Petrushka. But what about yourself?"

"I am accustomed to rough it," he laughed as he lifted her into the
saddle again. "I think you had better sit in front now. What a big
bundle you make just like a birthday doll wrapped up in a skin package!"

The girl laughed merrily, and Petrushka mounted his horse again and set
it trotting along the highway at a goodly pace.

At the post station, which was reached early in the afternoon, Petrushka
hired horses and a carriage, being unable to obtain a sledge. Then he
took Marya to the inn, and there they both partook of a warm meal.

Having purchased a heavy rug, he returned to the post station with the
girl, and lifted her into the carriage as soon as the horses had been
yoked.

"How far distant is the next station?" he asked the driver.

"Not more than eight versts, master," was the answer. "But our progress
will be slow, I fear. Much snow lies on the roads and the frost has made
it hard and slippery in places."

"Drive as swiftly as possible," Petrushka urged him. "You will be well
rewarded, my friend."

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

The journey was a slow and arduous one. The horses seemed afraid to run
fast. They were constantly tripping on the frozen ruts where the snow
lay thinnest, and at those parts which were made difficult by piled-up
wreaths of soft snow they laboured heavily at a slow pace.

It was late in the afternoon when the next post station was reached.

Petrushka at once leapt from the carriage and hastened into the office
of the Post Commissary.

"Have you a sledge for hire?" he asked abruptly.

"There is an excellent sledge here," was the answer. "You can have it
to-morrow morning."

"I shall require it in another hour," Petrushka said, "and also fresh
horses. I must hasten on and reach Moscow to-night."

"That is impossible," the Post Commissary grunted. "I have only two
horses, a brown and a grey, and they were engaged this morning. Would
you grudge the animals their natural rest?"

"And look at the sky," broke in the driver. "We'll have more snow before
very long."

"I cannot tarry here," Petrushka declared impatiently. "Do you think I
am travelling for pleasure? I will pay double rates for the horses. Let
them be well fed before we start."

"The road is not only difficult but dangerous," protested the
Commissary. "Last night a sledge was chased by wolves not many versts
distant from here."

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

"Wolves?" exclaimed the driver, turning pale.

Petrushka laughed hoarsely. "I have heard such stories before.
Travellers who spend much time at the inns always blame the wolves for
their delays. We have no need to fear wolves even if we meet them. I
have a hand-gun and two pistols. Wolves are easily scared away by
fire-arms. Besides, I shoot well."

He drew a purse of gold from his pocket and made the coins jingle.

"That is sweet music," smiled the Commissary.

"I shall pay you the full value of the horses," Petrushka said in a low
voice. "Surely you will hire them now."

"Take the child to the inn. Give her hot tea to drink," growled the
Commissary. "The horses will be ready in an hour."

He turned away and hastened towards the; stables.

"Master, what about me?" asked the driver. "I have need of something to
drink, too."

Petrushka thrust forty kopecks in the man's outstretched hand. "When we
reach Moscow," he whispered, "you will receive a gold rouble for serving
me so well."

The driver grinned. "Do not let the Commissary hear that," he whispered
back. "He might talk about it. There are men in this village who are
more to be feared than wolves."

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

### III. The Race to Moscow

Petrushka lifted Marya from the carriage and carried her to the inn. The
little girl was pale and dispirited, but when she was taken into a warm
room and placed beside the stove a flush came to her cheeks and she
began to smile. A woman brought her a dish of hot tea, and she sipped it
greedily.

"Beyond this place the roads are smooth," Petrushka said, "and we shall
travel swiftly."

"The sledge will fly like a bird, little lady," smiled the woman. "You
are sure to fall asleep. I wish I could go to Moscow with you. It is a
great and wonderful city."

"My mother is in Moscow," Marya said.

"How happy she will be when she sees you, little lady!"

"And I shall be happy, too."

Petrushka rose to leave the inn. "I shall return for you very soon," he
told the girl. Then he nodded to the driver and the two men went out
together.

They found the Commissary in the stables. "The horses have had warm
food," he said, "and seem fresh again. But do not drive them too hard. I
have placed a small axe in the sledge. You may require it if there are
wolves about."

"It is hardly necessary," answered Petrushka. "I can trust to my
fire-arms."

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

The driver crossed himself. "We are in God's hands," he said.

"Still, it would be safer if you waited until morning," remarked a
groom.

Petrushka hastened towards the inn and returned carrying Marya in his
arms.

"Stand aside!" he exclaimed impatiently as he elbowed his way through
the little crowd which had collected round the sledge. He propped up the
little girl comfortably in the seat. She was so well wrapped round with
coat and rugs that she could scarcely move. The Commissary observed that
Petrushka was insufficiently clad for travelling by night in such cold
weather.

"You will need your heavy coat," he urged. "It is foolishness on your
part not to wear it. Have you no fear of frost-bite?"

"None whatever," answered the other with a smile. "I never feel the
cold. Besides," he added in a whisper, "if there are really wolves on
the road, I'll be all the more able to deal with them as I am."

The Commissary shook his head doubtfully, but ere he could utter another
word of warning the driver whipped up his horses. Petrushka shouted a
cheery farewell as the sledge glided away.

"The man is mad," growled a groom. "If we ever look upon him in life
again I shall be greatly surprised."

"May God protect the little girl!" muttered the Commissary, turning
away.

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

The sledge went skimming smoothly along the narrow highway, the horses'
hoofs pattering with little sound on the snow and the bells tinkling
merrily in the frosty air. Soon the driver began to drone an old song,
and the horses twitched back their ears constantly as if the sound of
his voice gave them pleasure. A yellow streak of evening light appeared
in the western sky, and overhead the crescent of the new moon seemed to
be a silver sledge racing across wastes of snowy clouds.

"We are going to have a pleasant journey to Moscow, little Marya,"
Petrushka said.

The girl smiled faintly. "I am very tired," was her answer.

"But you are comfortable now, I am sure."

"Yes, very. . . . Why don't you put on your thick fur coat? I really
don't require it. The rugs will keep me quite warm."

"And you are not a bit afraid either, eh?"

"Not when you are beside me, Petrushka. The woman in the inn said we
might be attacked by wolves. You will shoot them if they come, won't
you?"

"It was wrong of the woman to try and frighten you," Petrushka said with
a frown. "Of course I shall shoot any wolves that dare to come near us.
Have no fear of them. . . . Listen to the driver's song. The bells seem
all to be ringing in tune."

Marya's eyes glowed with pleasure, and Petrushka began to tell her a
fairy story about

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

a princess who was once carried through the air in a golden car drawn by
wild geese. She listened with delight as the sledge sped onward along
the level highway. The story was a long one, and when Petrushka had
finished it had grown dark. They were passing through a forest, and the
gaunt leafless trees, laden with snow, stretched out their branches on
either side like giant hands which were trying to clutch at passers-by.
An icy wind began to blow out of the north, and tossed into the sledge
the flakes of snow which were loosened by the horses' hoofs. Marya grew
more afraid, and when she spoke her voice trembled.

"Do you feel cold?" asked Petrushka softly.

"No, I am not cold," the girl made answer, "but I am just a little
afraid."

"We shall soon leave the forest," the man assured her. "It comes to an
end about two versts farther on."

Petrushka's voice sounded hollow and strange in the darkness. From the
trees came curious snapping noises as the wind rushed past them through
spaces which had been cleared by peasants. A sense of loneliness
pervaded the night. The driver had ceased to sing. Now and again he
spoke to the horses, urging them to speed faster.

At length the awesome forest was left behind. Then the crescent moon
came out from behind a thick bank of cloud and lit up the wide solitary
plain, across which the road ran like a long

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

narrow ribbon. Suddenly Marya uttered a faint scream. "What is wrong
with your left ear?" she asked Petrushka. "It is terribly swollen."

The man raised a hand and touched his ear. It seemed hard as a piece of
wood.

"Frost-bite," he muttered.

"Put on your thick fur coat," urged Marya.

Petrushka laughed a forced laugh. "Oh! it is nothing," he said gaily.
"One can cure a frost-bite very easily."

As he spoke he gathered a handful of the snow which had collected in the
sledge and rubbed it vigorously against his ear.

"Snow is a certain cure for frost-bite," he told the girl. "Draw your
veil down over your face. The cold wind may nip you as well."

Marya did as he suggested. "Can't you cover your own face, too?" she
asked. "Wrap this rug round your shoulders."

Petrushka continued to rub the frost-bitten ear, until a shout from the
driver caused him to leap to his feet. The horses were snorting
excitedly, and the sledge rocked from side to side like a boat tossed by
angry billows.

"Keep the horses running straight ahead!" Petrushka called to the
driver, who was scolding and taunting them as if they were rowdy
children.

"What is wrong?" asked Marya, leaning forward and clutching Petrushka's
right arm.

Ere he could answer, a piercing howl rose through the keen night air.

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

"Wolves! wolves!" screamed the affrighted girl.

"Hush! Do not be afraid," Petrushka said softly and firmly. "If you cry
out like that, you is will only encourage them. I'll soon scare off the
cowardly brutes. They are afraid of fire-arms."

It was all the driver could do to keep control of his horses. The poor
animals had been suddenly thrown into a state of alarm. On a little
eminence at a bend of the road, about fifty yards in front of them,
stood a great, long-legged wolf, sharply outlined against the snow, and
howling fiercely. It was the scout of a hungry pack, which was scouring
a forest near at hand in search of food. Petrushka and the driver
realized that their only hope was to drive past this animal before its
fellows came up and attacked in force.

The horses reared and faltered, and despite the efforts of the driver
ultimately came to a standstill, snorting and trembling with fear.
Petrushka leapt from the sledge and ran forward towards the wolf. Then,
kneeling in the snow, he took steady aim with his hand-gun and fired.
The wolf was struck and fell over on the snow, yelping with pain.

In another minute the horses were racing forward again. Petrushka leapt
into the sledge when it reached him, and sat down beside Marya, who was
sobbing with terror.

"Do not weep, little girl," he said softly. "I have killed the wolf. The
horses are now scampering

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

along at a fine speed. We shall escape all danger."

"Won't the other wolves follow us?" she asked faintly.

"They will wait to devour the one I shot," answered Petrushka. "We shall
thus gain time. The horses know now that the wolves are behind us. How
splendidly they run!"

The driver was sitting bolt upright on his seat, shouting lustily to
encourage the horses.

Marya, who had dried her eyes, was somewhat reassured by the coolness
displayed by Petrushka.

"Do you think the wolves have gone away?" she asked him as, kneeling on
the seat, he peered anxiously over the back of the sledge. He turned
round to answer her, but before he could speak an affrighted scream
escaped her lips.

"What is wrong with your nose?" she asked. Petrushka's nose was
grotesquely swollen, and imparted to his face a fearsome aspect.

"Frost-bite," he groaned, seizing another handful of snow and rubbing
his nose vigorously.

The driver glanced round. "God preserve us!" he shouted; "they are
coming on now." Once again the horses had begun to show signs of alarm,
and it was as much as he could do to keep them in control.

Petrushka stood up on the seat as if defying, by a great effort of will,
the full force of the icy wind. Once again the howling of a wolf came

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

through the night. The pack was following a new leader, in full chase
after the sledge.

Marya moaned fitfully, while the horses broke into a gallop which was
sure to exhaust them sooner or later. The yelping and howling of the
wolves sounded fiercer and louder as they drew near.

Petrushka watched the dark forms growing larger and larger, and raised
his gun to fire when they came within range. He took little thought for
himself, although he realized that by neglecting the frost-bite he would
probably be disfigured for life by loss of nose and ear. His sole
concern was to protect Marya, who had been committed to his care.

The little girl had swooned with terror, and lay back on the seat.
Petrushka bent over her for a second, and adjusted a rug so as to enable
her to breathe more freely. Then he seized his gun again. In another
minute he fired, and then grasped a pistol and fired a second time. Two
wolves rolled over in the snow, and the pack faltered to tear them to
pieces and devour their flesh. Petrushka at once reloaded his fire-arms.

Shout as he might, the driver was unable to control his horses.

"Can't you keep them in hand?" shouted Petrushka.

"The grey horse has gone quite mad," the driver answered, tugging the
reins furiously. "He will upset the sledge at the first bridge."

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

"Will I shoot him?" asked Petrushka.

"Are you mad? The wolves

"It would delay them. Before they could devour the horse we might reach
shelter. How far off is Moscow?"

"Ten versts. But there is a village half that distance from here."

Petrushka climbed over the sledge to the driver's seat.

"We'll sacrifice the grey horse," he said, shouldering his gun and
discharging it. The animal at once reared madly, and then fell heavily
forward, bringing the other horse to a standstill. For a minute it
seemed as if the sledge would be upset. But the driver saved the
situation by causing the brown horse to swerve sharply. Then he leapt
out, grasping the axe in his hand, and with a few deft blows cut the
harness which attached the fallen animal to the sledge. Meanwhile
Petrushka had run forward and was holding the brown horse by the head.

Once again the howling of the wolves grew louder and nearer. There was
no time to be lost. The driver sprang forward and backed the brown
horse, until he was able to get the sledge slewed round and drawn past
the grey, which was struggling convulsively in the snow.

"Jump in!" he shouted to Petrushka.

He clapped the brown horse on the neck, spoke to it softly, and then ran
back to his seat.

"Fly like the wind!" he called to the panting

 

<span id="img_16000"></span>

[![''JUMP IN!'' SHOUTED THE DRIVER TO PETRUSHKA](tn/16000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/16000.jpg)  
''JUMP IN!'' SHOUTED THE DRIVER TO PETRUSHKA  

 

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

animal, cracking his whip excitedly. "We'll reach the village yet."

The horse darted forward just as Petrushka fired at the wolves with gun
and pistols at close range. Three animals fell sprawling in the snow.

"They won't trouble us now for a time," he shouted to the driver. "What
a gorge we have left for them!"

The driver made no answer. He kept cracking his whip and shouting to the
brown horse, which ran steadily, but was already showing signs of
exhaustion.

Petrushka knelt beside Marya and rubbed snow on her white face. Soon she
opened her eyes and sighed deeply. "Have the wolves gone away?" were her
first words.

"We have left them far behind," answered Petrushka. "Before long we
shall reach a place of safety."

The sledge went on smoothly for a time. Then the driver began to show
signs of anxiety.

"Ah, would you?" he shouted excitedly to the horse. "Get on! Lively
there! If you tarry the wolves will get us."

The brown horse was slowing up, panting heavily.

"What a feed of corn is waiting for you!" the driver called to the
horse. "Do you hear me?" He cracked his whip impatiently.

"Let him walk a bit," Petrushka said, standing up behind the driver.

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

"There is a bridge not far off," answered the driver, "and a verst
beyond it is the village. When we cross the bridge I shall feel safe."

The horse began to walk, with head drooping listlessly, and the driver
turned round to speak to Petrushka.

"You are badly frost-bitten," he said. "You will have good cause to
remember this night's journey."

The words had scarcely left his lips when the horse, scenting danger
once again, broke into a sharp trot, with head erect and ears shifting
uneasily.

"They are coming now!" exclaimed the driver, tightening his hold on the
reins. He knew full well the horse had scented the approaching pack.

"What does the driver say?" Marya asked, as Petrushka clutched his gun
and stood up on the seat. "Are the wolves still chasing us?"

The man made no answer. But Marya was not long left in doubt as to what
was happening. The shrill yelps of the bloodthirsty animals came up the
wind, sounding fiercer and more awesome than before.

"Now for the bridge!" shouted the driver to Petrushka. "Hold on!"

He whipped up the brown horse, so as to take the bridge at a run. But
the road was badly cut up as it descended to the river bank, and the
sledge rocked violently. The horse, which was straining every muscle,
seemed to realize instinctively

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

that once the bridge was crossed the chances of escape would increase.

"Steady! Steady!" bawled the driver excitedly, as the animal reached the
hollow that lay between the level highway and the bridge. In another
minute the sledge was tilting over like a listing boat, and seemed in
danger of being upset. But it was righted as abruptly with a rough jolt,
and then ran smoothly over the bridge. On the other side it plunged and
rocked again, and almost came to a standstill. Petrushka leapt out, and
running forward grasped the reins behind the horse's mouth, and led the
snorting animal up the steep bank in safety.

"Jump in!" exclaimed the driver impatiently. "You will need your
fire-arms presently."

"Give me the axe," Petrushka said. "I will keep the wolves back until
you reach the village."

"Are you mad?" shouted the other. "You will be torn to pieces in a few
minutes if you wait there. Jump in!"

The howling of the wolves sounded nearer at hand.

"Give me the axe!" Petrushka repeated in a peremptory voice. "Then drive
on as fast as possible and send help. I'll keep the brutes at bay. If I
perish, convey Marya to Moscow. She has my purse, and will reward you
generously."

The driver threw the axe from the sledge and cracked his whip.

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

"Farewell, Marya!" Petrushka shouted as the sledge skimmed past him. An
affrighted scream was the only answer he received.

"Do not be afraid, little one," shouted the driver without turning his
head. "You will soon be safe in a comfortable inn."

Petrushka climbed the parapet of the bridge to await the wolves. He had
perceived that at this point the pack would be unable to cross the
frozen river, because the banks were so steep and slippery, without
making a wide detour. They must needs scamper over the bridge if they
were to catch up the sledge before it reached the village. So he had
made up his mind suddenly to hold them back until Marya's escape was
assured, and to sacrifice his life for her sake if needs be.

His pistols were thrust in his pockets, and the axe was dangling from
his belt as he stood up with his gun at his shoulder waiting for the
wolves. Nor had he long to wait. The leading wolf scampered up
noiselessly, and paused for a second, glancing to right and left. Then
it bounded on to the bridge. Petrushka fired, and the animal dropped
dead with a bullet through its brain. He reloaded his gun, and had just
removed the ramrod after packing down the charge when the wolves came
up. The yelping animals sprang at once on the body of the leader and
fought over it. But one leapt forward towards Petrushka. He fired at
once, and wounded it so severely that it turned and ran back, howling

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

with pain. Other wolves which came up attacked it, maddened by the smell
of blood, and ere long had stripped the flesh from its bones.

Petrushka began to tremble, partly with excitement and partly because he
was suffering from the effects of frost-bite. He dreaded that he would
collapse before the sledge reached the village, so he cast aside his gun
and seized his pistols. In another minute he fired twice in succession
into the midst of the scrambling wolves. For a short interval it seemed
as if the animals would be scared away. But ere he could reload his
pistols a great grey wolf, leaping towards him, made a frantic effort to
drag him down. Petrushka seized the axe and struck a fierce blow, which
caused the animal to drop dead beneath him. But its attack had
encouraged the others, and several rushed forward to close with him,
snarling with bared teeth. A brief and desperate struggle followed.
Petrushka was bold as a lion, but his strength was fast ebbing away, and
when one of the animals succeeded in scrambling up the parapet and came
bounding towards him, he swung his axe round to strike a blow, but
overbalanced himself and fell with a crash on the frozen river beneath.

But the brave Petrushka did not die in vain. The sledge reached the
village before the terrible fight came to an end, and several men rushed
out from the inn when they heard the harness bells jingling in the night
air.

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

"Have you seen wolves on the road?" one called to the driver as he drew
near.

"Yes, yes; and a man is keeping them back on the bridge," the driver
answered, hoarse with excitement and horror, as he drew up his horse
"Hasten to his aid! There is no time to be lost," he urged them.

"Wolves, wolves!" cried the men in chorus, running towards the inn to
obtain fire-arms, and let loose the hounds that were kept to scare
wolves away.

Ere many minutes had elapsed half a dozen brave fellows went scampering
along the road towards the bridge, each armed with a brace of pistols.
Several great hounds went barking loudly in front of them. Then two men
mounted on horses galloped past the sledge.

"Petrushka's life may yet be saved," the driver said soothingly to Marya
as he lifted her out of the sledge and carried her into the inn.

When the rescuers reached the bridge they found that the wolves had fled
away, having scented danger. They at once made search for Petrushka, and
at length discovered him lying dead on the surface of the frozen river.

"God rest his soul!" an old man exclaimed piously. "He died to save
others."

"Look! look!" exclaimed another. "He has been badly frost-bitten. How
dreadfully his face is swollen!"

"He must have known his end was near," the

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

old man remarked. "But his last thoughts were not for himself. He
sacrificed the little portion of life that remained for him so that the
child might escape a dreadful death. Let us return, brother, taking the
corpse of this good man with us."

The fate of Petrushka was hidden from Marya until the morning. She wept
copiously when she was informed of his death. The women at the inn did
their utmost to comfort her, and one of them accompanied her to Moscow,
where she was delivered safely into the arms of her mother. The driver
was rewarded liberally for his services.

Two days later Mrs. Gordon and her girls crossed the frontier into
Poland, and were conveyed to a village where the General awaited their
arrival.

The war-worn soldier embraced each one affectionately. Then he asked,
"But where is Petrushka?"

Marya related all that had taken place.

"He was faithful unto death!" exclaimed General Gordon, with tears in
his eyes. "A braver man never died on a battlefield. He sacrificed
himself doing his duty, like a true Russian and a true Christian."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Old Order and the New](srf10)
