[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](srf07)  [Next](srf09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

# TSAR IVAN AND THE SCOTS SOLDIERS

### I. A Friend in Need

It was a cold and silent November night in the year of grace 1581, or,
as the Russians then reckoned it, <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) the
year 7089, "from the creation of the world". The moon began to rise over
Moscow through a purple haze, swollen and dulled, and of the colour of
molten copper. Superstitious men and women watched it with solemn eyes,
fearing it foretold the approach of some new calamity, so prone were
they to look for omens of evil. Nor did their hearts grow lighter when
at length it climbed the naked heaven and shone forth as clear as
burnished silver.

The capital of Muskovy then seemed fairer than by day. Much of the
squalor was concealed in shadow, and the thin coating of snow which had
whitened roofs and battlements and frozen streets, lay sparkling and
pure in the soft moon-light. High above the ridge of the Kremlin the
gilded Cathedral domes flashed in radiant splendour, but made no appeal
to the hearts of the

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

oppressed citizens, for nigh to the stately Church of the Assumption and
the great Cathedral of Michael the Archangel frowned the grim and
massive palace of Ivan the Terrible, the tyrannical Tsar who had
declared to his subjects: "I am your god as God is mine. My throne is
surrounded by archangels as is the throne of God."

That gloomy royal abode was still kept astir like an uneasy conscience.
The courtyard flared with torches, and lights twinkled from a hundred
windows, while monks and courtiers and warriors jostled each other in
its long corridors, continually passing to and fro. In a bleak chamber,
guarded by lynx-eyed sentinels, Ivan Gronze sat apart, a wild-eyed old
man, fretting with suppressed rage and suspicion as he received the
secret reports of his dreaded spies and informers, who slandered the
innocent if they could not discover the guilty. Although a fierce
tyrant, the Tsar was at heart a coward. He trusted no one, and dreaded
hourly that some fawning official would become his assassin. So he kept
spies, to follow spies and informers to watch informers. In the black
dungeons beneath the palace his manacled victims starved and shivered
miserably, awaiting torture and slow death.

Wraiths of cold mist, that had risen from the Moscow and Neglin rivers,
crawled over stone battlements and across the maze of shouldering roofs
around the royal palace, assuming strange, distorted shapes in the
moonlight. It

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

seemed that night as if the ghosts of murdered princes and
boyarins <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md) were returning to haunt
lonely chambers, in which they had aforetime feasted and whispered
treason, surrounded by the spies of the Tsar.

Adjoining the Kremlin, with its quaint and bold array of spires and
domes of Eastern and Western design, the walled-in Katai Gorod (china
city) drowsed in shadow, its bazaars and markets deserted and silent,
its river gate shut and strongly guarded. These two fortified enclosures
were buffered on all sides, save the Moscow river front, by the bulging
and misnamed Byelo Gorod (white city), in shape resembling a chinless
human skull, which was surrounded by thick and high earthen ramparts;
sentinels were posted at its five iron-bound oaken gates, which had been
closed at sunset. In this, the main part of the capital, were broad
squares and long streets, in which commodious mansions shouldered
wretched hovels that were cramped, overcrowded, and evil-smelling. This
way and that ran narrow, twisting lanes, through which no stranger dared
to venture even in daylight. Few houses had stone walls, most were built
of timber; the homes of the poorest people were but shapeless heaps of
dried mud and clay. Here and there throughout the city appeared wide,
open spaces covered over with the charred remains of

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

numerous dwellings that had been burned down when Moscow was attacked by
a Tartar army ten years previously.

Beyond the outer ramparts of the capital lay the unprotected slobadas
(suburbs). In these dwelt all foreigners and heretics, many of whom
seemed to enjoy more comfort and prosperity than the masses in the White
City, for among such "out-dwellers" were prosperous merchants and
traders, who hailed from countries as far apart as Persia and England,
Sweden and Italy. In the north-western quarter, known as Nemetskaya
Slobada ("the dumb suburb"), because its occupants were unable to speak
the Russian language, were hundreds of disconsolate Scots and a few
Englishmen, who had been taken prisoners in the wars with Poland and
Sweden. They had built for themselves a number of stone houses, as if
they expected their sojourn to be prolonged. These were of
characteristic Scots design, with stone stairways outside the walls;
some fronted the street, others shouldered it with their gables, while
not a few had their doors at the back, which were reached through narrow
arched courts.

Sandy Wood surveyed one of the little streets in the moonlight and
wagged his head, chuckling to himself. "One might think he was in
Crail," he muttered. "We must call this 'Fife Street', if the Tsar has
no objections."

He was a small wiry man with a scrubby grey beard, a thick short nose,
and shrewd eyes,

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

one of which kept opening and shutting when he began to speak; his blue
bonnet was worn tilted sideways on his head. During his lifetime he had
followed various occupations. He had been a stone-mason, a sailor, a
trader, and a soldier of fortune; now he acted as chief architect of the
Scots quarter of the "dumb suburb" of Moscow.

A tall, red-bearded man approached with soft footsteps from behind and
laid a hand on his shoulder. "Sandy Wood," he muttered in a grave, deep
voice, "you're the very man I've been looking for."

"That's yourself, Jeamy Lingett, is it?" said Sandy. "See here--have you
ever noticed this?" He nudged his friend gleefully, and pointed down the
street. "Does yon corner house no' remind you o’ Bob Keith's at the west
end o’ the town o’ Crail?"

"It does that," drawled the other. "Man, I thought it looked familiar."

"That house on your left there is as like as can be to the one I was
born in," the little man went on. "All that's wanted now to complete it
is a brier hedge, and honeysuckle at the gable. Ah! if ye came from
Crail, like me, Jeamy, man, ye’d ken every house in this bonnie wee
street."

"Doubtless, Sandy, doubtless. But I ken few folk in Crail other than Bob
Keith and your own relatives, often as I've been in the town. But

 

<span id="img_11200"></span>

[![SIR JEROME PAYS A VISIT TO THE SCOTS QUARTER IN
MOSCOW](tn/11200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/11200.jpg.md)  
SIR JEROME PAYS A VISIT TO THE SCOTS QUARTER IN MOSCOW  

 

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

we'll have a chat about Crail some other night. What I want to see ye
about now is o’ most serious importance. This morning who should come to
pay me his respects but a braw English gentleman, to name Sir Jerome
Horsey. He's a great traveller in foreign lands, and is held in good
favour by the Tsar himself. 'You will not always be kept in this place
under durance,' says he, 'if I can help it. I'll plead for you if such
be your will,' says he, 'before his Majesty, so that he may be pleased
to employ you all in his service, and spare such maintenance as you
sorely need.' What think ye o’ that now, Sandy, my good man?"

"He would just waste his breath to speak on our account up yonder," the
little man answered, nudging his head in the direction of the Kremlin.

We need expect but small mercy at the hands o’ Ivan the Terrible."

"Ye never can tell, Sandy; ye never can tell. Sir Jerome is a
fair-spoken gentleman, and has no motive to serve other than becomes any
good Christian."

"O’ his motives I'll say naught. I wish him well, for I'm no’ a man who
despises the English, having lived among them a few years like one o’
their own race. But this I will say. He must needs be cautious in
approaching the terrible Tsar, else he'll get a share o’ what was once
given to a messenger from Poland who brought him a letter from some
noble exile or other."

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

"I've never heard o’ that, man. Tell me about it."

"When ye pick up some Russian speech, as I've done, yell hear more of
Ivan Gronzie than maybe yell care about. I've heard it said that when
this messenger stood up before him, the Tsar stuck his iron-tipped
staff, which he keeps as sharp as a spear-point, through the poor
fellow's right foot, and says he, leering wickedly, 'Read oot what's
written there,' says he; and he left the staff sticking in the foot
until the long letter was read to the very end."

"Monstrous, monstrous!" groaned Jeamy Lingett.

"On another occasion," resumed Sandy, "he had a messenger from the King
o’ Sweden thrown naked into his wild bears' den. No later than
yesterday, man, he turned these very bears loose in the White City, and
sat jeering, at a palace window, to see the people scampering away like
sheep from foxes. Ah, Jeamy, don't speak about favours from Ivan Gronzie
to me!"

"Still," protested the other, "Sir Jerome told me he knows how to get at
the right side o’ him."

"The right side o’ a man who murdered his own son in a fit of passion?"
exclaimed Sandy incredulously. "Man, man, I'm wondering to hear you."

"Come up-by to my house," Lingett said, "and speak to Sir Jerome
yourself. He's promised to return to-night to talk matters o'er with two
or three o’ us. A friend who comes to offer a helping

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

hand in a country like this is a friend worth having. Man, he's even
promised to get the Tsar to let us build a kirk for our use."

"Weel, that was wise-like," Sandy answered musingly, as he walked round
the square with his friend. "I'm keen to try my hand at building a kirk.
I've been thinking that o'er in my mind more than once o’ late."

"I'm sure, I'm sure; a kirk's much needed here."

"I'd like to build one like St. Giles of Edinburgh, in which I've sat in
my day under John Knox, who's dead and gone these nine years back--God
rest his soul! But that would be a big job. I'll just have to give ye a
second Reformed Kirk o’ Crail. It will be the best I can do for the
lads."

"Ah! here comes none other than Sir Jerome himself," Lingett exclaimed,
as he was about to open his house door.

Sandy Wood turned round and saw riding towards him in the moonlight a
dignified English gentleman, followed by two mounted soldiers of the
Tsar, who acted as an escort.

"Ha! Well met, Jeamy Lingett," Sir Jerome exclaimed with genial voice,
dismounting nimbly. "Who is your friend?--a fellow-countryman, or I
misjudge him."

"Sandy Wood is the name he's kent by, Sir Jerome," Lingett answered,
"and a good man and true ye’ll find him."

"And Scots to the marrow o’ his bones," Sandy

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

added, doffing his bonnet. "I'm a Scot who is ever well pleased to meet
an Englishman face to face."

"A fellow of good wit, I'll warrant you," laughed Sir Jerome. "But I've
not come hither this night to fight old battles. Let us enter your
house, good Master Lingett, if such be your will."

"I bid you kindly welcome, sir," Lingett said, with a bow, as he thrust
open the door.

Sir Jerome bowed in return, and having instructed the soldiers to await
his pleasure, walked through the low doorway, followed by the two Scots
exiles.

"Be seated, sir," Lingett said courteously, drawing a rough wooden chair
in front of a log fire. "I will go round and gather a few more lads to
meet with your Honour."

"Let only one of my own countrymen come hither," Sir Jerome remarked.
"The presence of Englishmen among you troubles you greatly."

"They might be in worse company," said Sandy Wood somewhat dryly.

"That I grant, my friend," Sir Jerome answered with a smile. "I make no
reflection on any good Scotsman among you." Then his face grew grave
again as he resumed: "What troubles me greatly is that the Tsar may be
enraged to discover Englishmen among his enemies, and revenge himself by
seizing the goods and treasure of certain of our merchants here who owe
allegiance to Queen Elizabeth. For a smaller offence, His Majesty,

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

some eight years ago, did confiscate many thousand pounds' worth of
cloth, silk, wax, fur, and other merchandise from an English agent, one
Thomas Glover, and then did banish him and his dear wife empty out of
this land."

"Well, well; worry no more about the matter, Sir Jerome," said Sandy
Wood. "Your countrymen are believed to be Scots, and Scots they may
remain until they can return safely again to their native land."

"And may they feel highly honoured thereat!" smiled Jerome with
twinkling eyes.

"Having myself been called an Englishman in foreign parts, where I've
done gallant service with sword and hand gun," Sandy declared with a
characteristic chuckle, "and having thus honoured the country o’ good
Queen Bess, we can call quits, Sir Jerome, if a few subjects o’ Her
Majesty must be let to pass themselves off here as Scots to save certain
o’ their countrymen from misfortune."

Sir Jerome bowed, and Lingett turned away to summon other prisoners to
the conference. The genial knight chatted meanwhile with Sandy.

"You have travelled much, Master Wood. No doubt, like many of your
countrymen, you know more of the Continent than of England."

"I've traversed England from Carlisle to London in my day, and met with
many a kindness, sir, at the hands of your countrymen. I've found them
better than they're called north o’ the Border."

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

"It pleases me to hear you say so. What, I pray you, was the occasion of
your visit to London?"

"It was my misfortune, sir, to show my native land a pair o’ clean
heels. You'll understand I belong to the Reformed Kirk, and I've sat
under John Knox in my day. I have that. Every time I heard him preach I
said to myself: 'With every word you say, reverend sir, I agree and will
hold by.' . . . But I'm a man o’ contrary thoughts, and have aye kept a
soft place in my heart for our own Queen Mary, poor dear lady! Chancing
to be in Glasgow when she was trying to hold her own against her son's
friends, I fought on her side at the battle o’ Langside. . . . We were
scattered like chaff before the wind, and I fled to England with others
that followed her; and no’ being a man of any account, was let go
scot-free there, as the saying is. From London I crossed to Holland, and
then made my way to Sweden, where I took arms to fight against the
Russians, finding nothing better to do. In a skirmish I was taken
prisoner with the rest o’ the lads. So that's how I've wandered all the
way from Glasgow to Moskwa, where ye find me now."

"Lingett tells me that you are making yourself at home."

"That's so; as far as it's possible here. I've shown the lads how to
build a few stone houses to keep them from dying o’ weariness and cold."

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

"And you wander about freely, too. When I called this forenoon Lingett
could not find you anywhere. Have you ventured to enter the White City
without leave of the Tsar? To do so is a perilous undertaking, I warn
you."

"I've been out and in now and then, but it's no’ a place with much
attraction to a man who has seen better. Most o’ the time I'm away from
here I spend on the Moskwa river."

"Fishing, I suppose?"

"What else?" Sandy cocked his head side-ways and folded his arms.
"Fishing, as you say," he chuckled, "but no’ for fish, for I can't
endure these Russian fish at all."

"And what fish you? I pray you to tell me," asked Sir Jerome with a
smile.

"Silver and gold--rings, brooches, ear-rings, crucifixes, and
such-like," Sandy explained. "There's a fortune in that river for a man
who can work a drag-net, I tell ye. As you'll maybe ken, thousands and
thousands o’ the Moskwa folk were drowned in the river when the Tartars
came and set the city on fire. They fled from their houses with all
their valuables, and pressed through the streets in crowds like sheep
without a shepherd, the Tsar Ivan having taken flight, and those that
did not drown themselves of their own free will were forced o'er the
river bank."

"It was a lamentable spectacle," Sir Jerome said; "and has been fully
described to me by eye-witnesses. Men and women were wedged fast

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

in the streets trying to reach the gates, and some began to walk over
the heads of others until dire confusion reigned and large numbers were
trodden to death. How many thousands perished by fire, in the press, and
by drowning has never been rightly computed. I've heard it said the
victims numbered 800,000."

"God pity us all!" murmured Sandy. "No wonder the river bed is strewn
with human bones and valuables. You should come with me some day when
I'm working my drag-net and see what's to be seen for yourself."

"I have already dragged there as you have done, and was somewhat the
better for the fishing," Sir Jerome said laughingly. "But here come our
friends."

Lingett entered the house, followed by seven men, each of whom he
introduced to the knight, beginning with his countryman, "Roger Wyatt,
late of London city."

"Wyatt won't do for a prisoner who is supposed to be a Scot," Sandy Wood
chuckled, "we must call him MacWatt."

"This," Lingett said, as the next man advanced, "is Master Alastair
Grigor, a Highland gentleman, sir."

"As we know well," Sandy said, "because he talks the Gaelic language in
his sleep and sings doleful songs in it when he's longing for bonnie
Scotland."

Lingett gave the names of the others as

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "Andrew Lermont, Gilbert Keith, and Willie
Leslie".

"They're very poor masons," was Sandy's comment, "but good fighters one
and all."

Sir Jerome bade all the prisoners. be seated, and spoke, saying: "I have
come here, as my friend and yours, good Master Lingett will have stated,
with great concern regarding your welfare. Being conversant and familiar
in the Tsar's Court, I would fain plead for favours on your behalf. If
that you are so willing, I will endeavour to procure for you abundance
of food and clothing and other favours, and also permission to build a
church, so that you may meet for divine service each Sabbath day, and to
procure a learned and preaching minister after your Lutheran profession.
But first I must ask you to allow me to inform the Tsar that you are
willing to serve him on the battlefield, as you are well fitted to do,
being soldiers of fortune. I am fully confident that you would display
great valour against His Majesty's enemies."

"Are you willing, lads, to serve the Tsar, so that we may be relieved of
our misfortunes in this sad place?" asked Lingett in a solemn voice.

"You can count on me for one," declared Sandy Wood. "Although I'm
getting old, I'd like to strike a blow against those Krim Tartars, <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) who burned old Moskwa and massacred
thousands o’ men, women, and bairns."

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

"We are all ready and willing," declared the other Scots, "and speak
also for our fellows."

"And you, my friend, Mr. MacWyatt?" Sir Jerome asked with a pleasing
bow.

"For myself and my countrymen, I offer ready assent," answered Wyatt.

"We're all of one mind when there's fighting to be done," declared Sandy
Wood.

"His. Majesty, Tsar Ivan, will find us all at his service," Lingett
assured Sir Jerome, "if so be it he needs our help against his enemies,
but we'd rather be sent against the Krim Tartars than against Poles or
Swedes, in whose armies are many of our own countrymen."

Sir Jerome bowed again. "Meanwhile," he said, taking farewell, "I
counsel you to behave well and show courtesy and friendship to all
Russians, so that no bad feeling may be raised up against you. May you
soon have less cause to be doleful, and to mourn, as you now do, the
loss of goods, friends, and country! I pray God to bless you, and bid
you all good night."

### II. The "New Demons"

After leaving the Scots, Sir Jerome, mightily pleased with himself, rode
towards a spacious mansion in the north-eastern slobada, where he met
with Mr. John Logan, the agent of an English trading company which had
obtained special privileges from the Tsar.

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

"Ah! Sir Jerome, and have you found these adventurers willing to follow
your advice?" Logan asked with unconcealed anxiety.

"Fear you not on their account," Sir Jerome assured him. "By my troth!
they are valiant fellows, anxious indeed to serve the Tsar if so he
desires, being aweary of their sad condition."

Then he related all that had passed, praising Jeamy Lingett whom they
had chosen as their leader and dwelling with amusement on Sandy Wood's
sayings and doings. "If that knave had the power, and sufficient length
of days withal," Sir Jerome laughed, "he would transform Muskovy into a
second Scotland."

"I greatly fear," sighed Logan, "that the Tsar will suspect our motive
in this matter, and, refusing the services of these men, wreak his
vengeance upon us, because a few Englishmen are among the Scots
prisoners, by confiscating goods and money. We have observed signs of
his growing displeasure of late."

Sir Jerome shrugged his shoulders impatiently. "Be not surfeited with
doubts, good Master Logan," he urged. "Methinks I guess what runs in
your mind. You have heard that our noble lady Queen Elizabeth, whom God
protect and prosper, has refused with due courtesy to become the eighth
wife of Ivan Gronzie. You expect him on that account to be ready to
persecute you on slight provocation. I grant it is possible. But he is
not likely to know now that

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

any of these prisoners are our countrymen. Besides, I have good cause
for believing that His Majesty inclines well to favour England in these
days."

"Glad indeed would I be to think so. But I do not share your optimism,
Sir Jerome."

"What I tell you must be kept secret," the Knight whispered. "Were you
to repeat my words to the merchants here, you might receive the close
and unwelcome attention of the Tsar's spies, and perhaps suffer loss of
liberty. As you know well, the Tsar lives in constant dread of
revolution. Like a good general, who ever pre-pares for retreat even
when advancing victoriously, he has solicited from Queen Elizabeth a
promise to grant him an asylum in England should his ungrateful subjects
render it necessary for him to abdicate. His wish has been granted in a
solemn and binding treaty by Her Majesty, whereat he is. well pleased."

Logan uttered an exclamation of surprise. "Revolution," he declared,
"would bring ruin to my company. Alas! I pray that it is not now
imminent."

"Who knows, good Master Pessimist," Sir Jerome answered somewhat
testily, "but revolution might cause you to prosper greatly? But I do
not apprehend such a development. The spirit of Muskovy is too severely
crushed, and there does not remain alive in these melancholy times a
serious opponent to His Majesty, who,

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

although he liveth in constant fear, daily discovers treasons real and
imaginary, and spends much time in torturing and execution. The first
great change likely to occur is his death, for he grows exceedingly
frail, and is much comforted to be attended by Dr. Robert Jacobs of
London, who at his request has been sent to him by Queen Elizabeth, for
which further favour he is disposed to harbour as much gratitude as is
possible in such a man."

Logan seemed somewhat reassured. "I pray that success may attend your
efforts, Sir Jerome," he said. "Still, my mind will not feel at ease
until you have secured some definite promise from the Tsar regarding the
prisoners. I dread the wrath of Ivan Gronzie. He is a difficult man to
conciliate, living as he does in an atmosphere of treachery and
suspicion, and cunning withal, as he has need to be. May he not suspect
your motive in this matter and bring ruin to our hopes!"

### III. How the Tartars were Confounded

On the following forenoon Sir Jerome Horsey was granted an audience with
the Tsar in a small private apartment of the palace. There was no one
else present save Dr. Jacobs, who was a sharp-featured, black-bearded
man, with immobile face and brown inscrutable eyes.

The English Knight found that His Majesty had changed greatly since last
he had seen

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

him. His body was shrunken and bent, and although his face seemed more
ferocious than ever it was shrivelled prematurely and deathly pale; his
ears and lips were tinged with blue and his breathing had become
laboured; his eyes moved restlessly, casting furtive glances hither and
thither as if he entertained fear of sudden attack; he had grown almost
completely bald, and a few rugged grey patches were all that remained of
his once luxuriant beard.

"I sleep badly," he complained querulously in answer to Sir Jerome's
courteous enquiry regarding his health. "Evil dreams torment me; they
are produced by my magic-working enemies. Yet I pray daily for the
welfare of the souls of such as have been found guilty of treasonable
plottings and transferred to the judgment place of the Eternal, there to
answer for their sins. Withal, I concern myself greatly regarding the
affairs of state, constant wars against hostile nations, and the welfare
of my poor people. My health has consequently suffered greatly. I have
grown old before my time."

Having thus delivered himself, the Tsar asked Sir Jerome many questions
regarding his travels and also about England, in which country he took a
keen and special interest. A passing reference to the Scots enabled the
diplomatic Knight to say something regarding the prisoners in the "Dumb
Suburb".

Tsar Ivan frowned darkly. "These Scots", he

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

exclaimed with angry voice, "are among my deadliest and most persistent
enemies. Of them I have complained to Queen Elizabeth, that eminent
lady, who promises much but does little, so that in return for the
favours I have conferred upon her rich merchants, she might undertake to
hold them in check. But she has answered that those Scots who reach my
empire enter it through Sweden and Poland, and are therefore beyond her
control. She has, however, many war-ships, as sundry travellers have
informed me. Can she not, therefore, prevent the Scots from crossing the
seas over which her sway is complete? But I have been told also that she
cares not to offend them, as a union between the nations of England and
Scotland is pending, if not already accomplished in secret."

Sir Jerome was startled by this sudden out-burst, but, preserving
perfect self-control, made answer, saying: "Your Majesty, these Scots
have proved even more troublesome to England than to Muskovy. For
centuries they have waged warfare against my countrymen, raiding and
pillaging prosperous districts and destroying what they could not carry
away. They dwell in remote parts among barren hills and on storm-lashed
coasts, and thus protected by nature have defied the might of our arms.
Their poor circumstances and hardy manners of life have stirred in them
a spirit of adventure, and since the strengthening of England's
defences, many have crossed the seas to

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

seek fortunes in distant lands as traders and mercenary soldiers. These
Scots, your Majesty, are indeed a nation of adventurous and warlike
peoples, and, as I know well from what I have observed in my travels,
are ever ready to serve any Christian prince in return for good
maintenance and pay. This your Majesty may prove," Sir Jerome added with
a shrug of his shoulders, "if it pleases you to grant the dearest wish
of those prisoners in the 'Dumb Suburb' by employing them and providing
clothing and arms, so that they may display their valour against your
mortal enemies, the Krim Tartars. Since entering Muskovy, they have
learned to hate fiercely these barbarians, having obtained knowledge
regarding their methods of warfare, their oppressions and their
burnings, and their hatred of Christian peoples."

Ivan Gronzie grunted impatiently, tapping his bony fingers on a small
table beside him.

"But what of this union between your nation and that of the Scots?" he
asked in querulous voice.

"It has not yet been accomplished, your Majesty; nor is it imminent.
When it comes, however, the result may prove pleasing to you, for the
Scots will then find it profitable, as do my countrymen, to win your
good graces by exemplary conduct and faithful dealing."

The Tsar moved restlessly in his chair, his face betraying conflicting
emotions. After a silence

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

of many minutes' duration he remarked, as if speaking to himself, "I
have need of valiant soldiers." He tugged his beard and cast furtive
glances now and again at Sir Jerome, who preserved a placid and
respectful demeanour, having spoken as one entirely disinterested and
sincerely anxious to smooth the Tsar's difficulties in dealing with his
enemies.

At length Ivan gave his decision, half-heartedly it might be, but yet
not without evidence that he had been impressed by the courtly Knight's
information and suggestions: "I will consider this matter ", he said,
"more fully at a later time. That the Scots are valiant I know full
well, and it may be wise to dispose of them in a manner which will prove
profitable to my empire if that they can be trusted, for no punishment I
may inflict, as experience has shown, seems sufficient to deter their
nation from giving aid to my enemies west and north, who show me no
gratitude for protecting them against Tartar inroads. Were I to ally
myself with these barbarians, our joint armies could achieve the
conquest of the whole world."

He paused, for a recurring fit of wrath caused him to breathe with
difficulty.

"I thank you, Sir Jerome Horsey," he continued after an interval, "for
what you have told me regarding these Scots prisoners. But how comes it
that you are so well acquainted with their intentions and desires?"

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

A cunning smile overspread his face, as, grasping the arms of his chair,
he bent forward, gazing keenly in the Knight's face.

"Your Majesty," Sir Jerome answered promptly and blandly, "I heard such
good reports from English merchants who enjoy your favour and
hospitality, regarding your treatment of these Scots, that I paid them a
visit. It is my desire to convey to Queen Elizabeth a full and accurate
account of your leniency and compassion towards them, and by doing so to
thwart in their ill intentions those who endeavour to poison her heart
against your Majesty."

The Tsar smiled icily and seemed satisfied. "I have trusted you before,
Sir Jerome," he said, "and proved your veracity. Why, then, should I not
trust you again? When you return to England, convey my greetings to your
exalted Queen, and say it would become her to convey my intention to the
Scots King regarding these prisoners, so that he may show me some
gratitude by preventing his subjects from giving aid to my most jealous
and ungrateful enemies."

Sir Jerome bowed. "With your Majesty's permission," said he, "I would
fain visit these Scots prisoners once again, so that I may counsel them
to be faithful and obedient to your commands."

"So be it," Tsar Ivan grunted, as he rose abruptly to signify that the
interview had come to an end.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

Sir Jerome rode in high spirits towards the "Dumb Suburb" through a haze
of falling snow, and intimated to Lingett that His Majesty was impressed
favourably by the prisoners' offer of military service. He then hastened
to meet with Mr. Logan, the English agent, who expressed great
satisfaction because the Tsar had made no remark regarding the few
Englishmen among the Scots prisoners.

Ere Sir Jerome departed towards the coast, so as to obtain a passage
homeward in an English vessel, he learned with satisfaction that the
Tsar had arranged to supply the prisoners in the "Dumb Suburb" with
daily allowances of food and drink, and with clothing, horses, and
fodder, swords, hand-guns, and pistols.

Jeamy Lingett came to bid him farewell. "We'll long remember your
kindness, sir," he exclaimed, "and will consider it an honour to prove
to you, in God's good time, that you have earned our gratitude, and, as
we hope also will be the case, the gratitude also of Tsar Ivan Gronzie.
Our lads, whom you found poor enough and sad enough, are now cheerful
and well favoured. They long, one and all, to strike a blow against the
heathenish Krim Tartars, who have dealt sorely indeed with the Russian
peasantry in their diabolic raids."

"I have written His Majesty," Sir Jerome said in parting, "advising him
to grant you permission to build a church."

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

"God will reward you for that," Lingett exclaimed with fervour. "May He
protect you on your journey, and bring you back safely to us in His good
time!"

.       .       .       .       .       .       .       .

Not until summer had smoothed the seas and made beautiful hill and plain
once again did Sir Jerome Horsey return to Moscow. Being the bearer of a
private letter from Queen Elizabeth to the Tsar, and sundry other
documents of great import, he tarried nowhere on his way, but rode
straight to the royal palace accompanied by armed men who had been sent
to meet him.

He found Tsar Ivan in better health and good spirits. The royal letter
seemed to please him mightily. Having read it twice over, he turned to
Sir Jerome and said, "Doubtless you have heard of the doings of these
Scots, my faithful allies."

"Rumours have reached me, your Majesty," Sir Jerome answered, "and these
are of favourable character. I trust they are well founded."

My gratitude to you is unbounded, Sir Jerome," exclaimed His Majesty
with some warmth. "But for your advice I should never have employed
these valiant soldiers. They have stricken a sore and staggering blow
against my worst enemies, the Krim Tartars. Twelve hundred Scots, armed
with pistols and hand-guns, have done better than twelve thousand
Russians with short bows and arrows. When, in battle,

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

the Tartar hosts saw their horses falling before invisible bullets, and
their ranks mowed down like barley by a sickle, they stared with terror
at the Scots and cried out, 'Away, away with those new demons and their
thundering puffs!' and then broke and fled in dire confusion."

The Tsar gurgled a hollow laugh in his throat, and repeated over and
over again what the affrighted Krim Tartars had exclaimed.

"By my soul," he declared, "these new demons of mine will receive
fitting reward."

That evening Sir Jerome visited the "Dumb Suburb" and met with Lingett,
who had been promoted to the rank of General, and Sandy Wood, who still
bubbled over with pawky humour.

"What think ye o’ Jeamy Lingett?" he chuckled. "He's now a Russian
general, and is getting a braw estate to himself, although his father
was just a plain sailorman in Aberdeen, and he himself never anything
above the skipper o’ a leaky sloop. There's Lermont, too, and Highland
Grigor. They both hacked out long lanes through the Tartar army, so
they're getting estates as well as Jeamy Lingett. In time they'll a’
three have coughs and sneezes after their names, and be kent among the
big folk as Lingettovitch, Grigorvitch, Lermontov, and------"

"And what of yourself, good Master Wood? Have you won a sneeze or a
cough?" smiled Sir Jerome.

"No, and I want neither the one or the other,"

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Sandy made answer. "I'm taking my payment in
good red gold and white silver. Being old and near by wi’ it, I've got
permission to return home to bonnie Scotland, but I'm no’ going to leave
the lads until the new kirk is finished."

"So you have secured permission to build a church?"

"We have that, Sir Jerome, thanks to yourself, and we'll ne’er forget ye
for all your kindness to us. If you've nothing better to do, come down
by and see our bonnie wee kirk. It's as like as can be the Reformed Kirk
in my native town o’ Crail."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[108:1](srf08.htm#fr_1.md) The Julian Calendar was
introduced by Peter the Great.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[110:1](srf08.htm#fr_2.md) A class like the English
feudal barons. Also rendered in English "boyars" and "boyards".

<span id="fn_3"></span>[121:1](srf08.htm#fr_3.md) Tartars of the Crimea.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Man Who Fought the Wolves](srf09.md)
