[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index.md) 
[Legendary Creatures](../../lcr/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ddl00)  [Next](ddl02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPL5U/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Dragons and Dragon Lore*, by Ernest Ingersoll, \[1928\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

INTRODUCTION

I became intensely interested in Dragon Worship and the Dragon Myth
during my recent journey in China and Mongolia in support of the Central
Asiatic Expeditions of Roy Chapman Andrews. Especially, in the royal
city of Peking appears the apotheosis of the Dragon in every conceivable
form of symbolism and architecture. The Dragons leading up to the steps
of the temples and palaces of the Manchu emperors, and the superb
dragon-screen guarding the approach to one of the royal palaces, are but
two of the innumerable examples of the universal former belief in these
mythical animals, and of the still prevailing beliefs among the common
people of China.

For example, one night in a far distant telegraph station in the heart
of the desert of Gobi, I overheard two men pointing out Leader Andrews
and myself as 'men of the Dragon bones.' On inquiry, I learned that our
great Central Asiatic Expedition was universally regarded by the natives
as engaged in the quest of remains of extinct Dragons, and that this
superstition is connected with the still universal belief among the
natives that fossil bones, and especially fossil teeth have a high
medicinal value.

Not long after my return from Central Asia, I suggested to my friend,
Ernest Ingersoll, that he write the present volume, preparing a fresh
study of the history of the Dragon Myth which, now largely confined to
China, once spread all over Asia and Europe, as dominant not only in
mythology but entering even into the early teachings of Christianity, as
so many other pagan myths have done. I knew that the author was
well-qualified for a work of this character, because of his remarkable
success in previous volumes for old and young, and in his original
observations on various forms of animal life, from the American oyster
to many birds and mammals. He is especially versed, perhaps, in regard
to one very interesting question which is often asked, namely, how far
the animals of myth and of legend, like the Dragon, the Hydra, the
Phoenix, the Unicorn and the Mermaid, are products of pure imagination,
and how far due to some fancied resemblance of a living form or to the
tales of travelers. For example, it occurred to me, while examining the
giant fossil eggs of the extinct ostrich of China (now known under the
scientific name Struthiolithus, assigned by the late Doctor Eastman),
that it may have given rise to the myth of the Phoenix or of the Roc. On
this point, the author sends me the following very interesting notes:

I have not studied the Unicorn. . . . The Mermaid is usually attributed
to somebody's story of seeing a dugong nursing its baby, but I guess the
idea goes back to the time when old Poseidon was half man, half fish,
and had plenty of watermaidens, half woman, half fish, disporting around
him. The first time anyone saw Mistress Venus she was in that 'semi'
shape if I remember rightly. . . . I do not find the Roc indigenous in
the Far East, and I greatly doubt whether anywhere it had a 'physical'
progenitor, or was suggested by any big, extinct, ratite egg. I have
discussed this in my "Birds in Legend, Fable and Folklore," and conclude
it to be a figment of an ancient boasting storyteller's fancy. . . . The
only other imaginary form of importance in China is the Feng--a
pheasant-like 'bird' analogous to the Phoenix--and probably hatched in
the same sun-nest. . . . As to your query about 'mythical' and
'legendary' animals: My whole thesis in regard to the Dragon is that it
is entirely imaginary; and I regard the Hydra (absent from the Chinese
mind) as merely an extravagance that arose in the West, perhaps by
confusion of snake and octopus.

I feel confident that the present work will arouse a widespread interest
among students of animal form and history on the one hand, and of
folk-lore, primitive religion and mythology on the other.

HENRY FAIRFIELD OSBORN.

American Museum of Natural History,

December 20, 1927.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](ddl02.md)
