[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Iceland](../ice/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](poe01)  [Next](poe03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024NLGNQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Poetic Edda*, by Henry Adams Bellows, \[1936\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

# GENERAL INTRODUCTION

THERE is scarcely any literary work of great importance which has been
less readily available for the general reader, or even for the serious
student of literature, than the Poetic Edda. Translations have been far
from numerous, and only in Germany has the complete work of translation
been done in the full light of recent scholarship. In English the only
versions were long the conspicuously inadequate one made by Thorpe, and
published about half a century ago, and the unsatisfactory prose
translations in Vigfusson and Powell's *Corpus Poeticum Boreale*,
reprinted in the Norrœna collection. An excellent translation of the
poems dealing with the gods, in verse and with critical and explanatory
notes, made by Olive Bray, was, however, published by the Viking Club of
London in 1908. In French there exist only partial translations, chief
among them being those made by Bergmann many years ago. Among the seven
or eight German versions, those by the Brothers Grimm and by Karl
Simrock, which had considerable historical importance because of their
influence on nineteenth century German literature and art, and
particularly on the work of Richard Wagner, have been largely superseded
by Hugo Gering's admirable translation, published in 1892, and by the
recent two volume rendering by Genzmer, with excellent notes by Andreas
Heusler, 194-1920. There are competent translations in both Norwegian
and Swedish. The lack of any complete and adequately annotated English
rendering in metrical form, based on a critical text, and profiting by
the cumulative labors of such scholars as Mogk, Vigfusson,

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

Finnur Jonsson, Grundtvig, Bugge, Gislason, Hildebrand, Lüning, Sweet,
Niedner, Ettmüller, Müllenhoff, Edzardi, B. M. Olsen, Sievers, Sijmons,
Detter, Heinzel, Falk, Neckel, Heusler, and Gering, has kept this
extraordinary work practically out of the reach of those who have had
neither time nor inclination to master the intricacies of the original
Old Norse.

On the importance of the material contained in the *Poetic Edda* it is
here needless to dwell at any length. We have inherited the Germanic
traditions in our very speech, and the *Poetic Edda* is the original
storehouse of Germanic mythology. It is, indeed, in many ways the
greatest literary monument preserved to us out of the antiquity of the
kindred races which we call Germanic. Moreover, it has a literary value
altogether apart from its historical significance. The mythological
poems include, in the *Voluspo*, one of the vastest conceptions of the
creation and ultimate destruction of the world ever crystallized in
literary form; in parts of the *Hovamol*, a collection of wise counsels
that can bear comparison with most of the Biblical Book of Proverbs; in
the *Lokasenna*, a comedy none the less full of vivid characterization
because its humor is often broad; and in the *Thrymskvitha*, one of the
finest ballads in the world. The hero poems give us, in its oldest and
most vivid extant form, the story of Sigurth, Brynhild, and Atli, the
Norse parallel to the German *Nibelungenlied*. The Poetic Edda is not
only of great interest to the student of antiquity; it is a collection
including some of the most remark able poems which have been preserved
to us from the period before the pen and the printing-press. replaced
the poet-singer and oral tradition. It is above all else the desire

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

to make better known the dramatic force, the vivid and often tremendous
imagery, and the superb conceptions embodied in these poems which has
called forth the present translation.

WHAT IS THE POETIC EDDA?

Even if the poems of the so-called Edda were not so significant and
intrinsically so valuable, the long series of scholarly struggles which
have been going on over them for the better part of three centuries
would in itself give them a peculiar interest. Their history is
strangely mysterious. We do not know who composed them, or when or where
they were composed; we are by no means sure who collected them or when
he did so; finally, we are not absolutely certain as to what an "Edda"
is, and the best guess at the meaning of the word renders its
application to this collection of poems more or less misleading.

A brief review of the chief facts in the history of the *Poetic Edda*
will explain why this uncertainty has persisted. Preserved in various
manuscripts of the thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries is a prose
work consisting of a very extensive collection of mythological stories,
an explanation of the important figures and tropes of Norse poetic
diction,--the poetry of the Icelandic and Norwegian skalds was
appallingly complex in this respect,--and a treatise on metrics. This
work, clearly a handbook for poets, was commonly known as the "Edda" of
Snorri Sturluson, for at the head of the copy of it in the *Uppsalabok*,
a manuscript written presumably some fifty or sixty years after Snorri's
death, which was in 1241, we find: "This book is called Edda, which
Snorri Sturluson composed." This work, well known as the *Prose Edda*,
Snorri's *Edda* or the

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

Younger Edda, has recently been made available to readers of English in
the admirable translation by Arthur G. Brodeur, published by the
American-Scandinavian Foundation in 1916.

Icelandic tradition, however, persisted in ascribing either this *Edda*
or one resembling it to Snorri's much earlier compatriot, Sæmund the
Wise (1056-1133). When, early in the seventeenth century, the learned
Arngrimur Jonsson proved to everyone's satisfaction that Snorri and
nobody else must have been responsible for the work in question, the
next thing to determine was what, if anything, Sæmund had done of the
same kind. The nature of Snorri's book gave a clue. In the mythological
stories related a number of poems were quoted, and as these and other
poems were to all appearances Snorri's chief sources of information, it
was assumed that Sæmund must have written or compiled a verse
*Edda*--whatever an "Edda" might be--on which Snorri's work was largely
based.

So matters stood when, in 1643, Brynjolfur Sveinsson, Bishop of
Skalholt, discovered a manuscript, clearly written as early as 1300,
containing twenty-nine poems, complete or fragmentary, and some of them
with the very lines and stanzas used by Snorri. Great was the joy of the
scholars, for here, of course, must be at least a part of the
long-sought *Edda* of Sæmund the Wise. Thus the good bishop promptly
labeled his find, and as Sæmund's *Edda*, the *Elder Edda* or the
*Poetic Edda* it has been known to this day.

This precious manuscript, now in the Royal Library in Copenhagen, and
known as the *Codex Regius* (R2365), has been the basis for all
published editions of the Eddic poems. A few poems of similar character
found elsewhere

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

have subsequently been added to the collection, until now most editions
include, as in this translation, a total of thirty-four. A shorter
manuscript now in the Arnamagnæan collection in Copenhagen (AM748),
contains fragmentary or complete versions of six of the poems in the
*Codex Regius*, and one other, *Baldrs Draumar*, not found in that
collection. Four other poems (*Rigsthula*, *Hyndluljoth*, *Grougaldr*
and *Fjolsvinnsmol*, the last two here combined under the title of
Svipdagsmol), from various manuscripts, so closely resemble in
subject-matter and style the poems in the *Codex Regius* that they have
been included by most editors in the collection. Finally, Snorri's
*Edda* contains one complete poem, the *Grottasongr*, which many editors
have added to the poetic collection; it is, however, not included in
this translation, as an admirable English version of it is available in
Mr. Brodeur's rendering of Snorri's work.

From all this it is evident that the *Poetic Edda*, as we now know it,
is no definite and plainly limited work, but rather a more or less
haphazard collection of separate poems, dealing either with Norse
mythology or with hero-cycles unrelated to the traditional history of
greater Scandinavia or Iceland. How many other similar poems, now lost,
may have existed in such collections as were current in Iceland in the
later twelfth and thirteenth centuries we cannot know, though it is
evident that some poems of this type are missing. We can say only that
thirty-four poems have been preserved, twenty-nine of them in a single
manuscript collection, which differ considerably in subject-matter and
style from all the rest of extant Old Norse poetry, and these we group
together as the *Poetic Edda*.

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

But what does the word "Edda" mean? Various guesses have been made. An
early assumption was that the word somehow meant "Poetics," which fitted
Snorri's treatise to a nicety, but which, in addition to the lack of
philological evidence to support this interpretation, could by no
stretch of scholarly subtlety be made appropriate to the collection of
poems. Jacob Grimm ingeniously identified the word with the word "edda"
used in one of the poems, the *Rigsthula*, where, rather conjecturally,
it means "great-grand mother." The word exists in this sense no where
else in Norse literature, and Grimm's suggestion of "Tales of a
Grandmother," though at one time it found wide acceptance, was
grotesquely. inappropriate to either the prose or the verse work.

At last Eirikr Magnusson hit on what appears the likeliest solution of
the puzzle: that "Edda" is simply the genitive form of the proper name
"Oddi." Oddi was a settlement in the southwest of Iceland, certainly the
home of Snorri Sturluson for many years, and, traditionally at least,
also the home of Sæmund the Wise. That Snorri's work should have been
called "The Book of Oddi" is altogether reasonable, for such a method of
naming books was common--witness the "Book of the Flat Island" and other
early manuscripts. That Sæmund may also have written or compiled another
"Oddi-Book" is perfectly possible, and that tradition should have said
he did so is entirely natural.

It is, however, an open question whether or not Sæmund had anything to
do with making the collection, or any part of it, now known as the
Poetic Edda, for of course the seventeenth-century assignment of the
work to him is negligible. <span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span> We can
say only that he may have made some such compilation, for he was a
diligent student of Icelandic tradition and history, and was famed
throughout the North for his learning. But otherwise no trace of his
works survives, and as he was educated in Paris, it is probable that he
wrote rather in Latin than in the vernacular.

All that is reasonably certain is that by the middle or last of the
twelfth century there existed in Iceland one or more written collections
of Old Norse mythological and heroic poems, that the *Codex Regius*, a
copy made a hundred years or so later, represents at least a
considerable part of one of these, and that the collection of
thirty-four poems which we now know as the *Poetic* or *Elder Edda* is
practically all that has come down to us of Old Norse poetry of this
type. Anything more is largely guesswork, and both the name of the
compiler and the meaning of the title "Edda" are conjectural.

THE ORIGIN OF THE EDDIC POEMS

There is even less agreement about the birthplace, authorship and date
of the Eddic poems themselves than about the nature of the existing
collection. Clearly the poems were the work of many different men,
living in different periods; clearly, too, most of them existed in oral
tradition for generations before they were committed to writing. In
general, the mythological poems seem strongly marked by pagan sincerity,
although efforts have been made to prove them the results of deliberate
archaizing; and as Christianity became generally accepted throughout the
Norse world early in the eleventh century, it seems altogether likely
that most of the poems dealing

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

with the gods definitely antedate the year 1000. The earlier terminus is
still a matter of dispute. The general weight of critical opinion, based
chiefly on the linguistic evidence presented by Hoffory, Finnur Jonsson
and others, has indicated that the poems did not assume anything closely
analogous to their present forms prior to the ninth century. On the
other hand, Magnus Olsen's interpretation of the inscriptions on the
Eggjum Stone, which he places as early as the seventh century, have led
so competent a scholar as Birger Nerman to say that "we may be warranted
in concluding that some of the Eddic poems may have originated, wholly
or partially, in the second part of the seventh century." As for the
poems belonging to the hero cycles, one or two of them appear to be as
late as 1100, but most of them probably date back at least to the
century and a half following 900. It is a reasonable guess that the
years between 850 and 1050 saw the majority of the Eddic poems worked
into definite shape, but it must be remembered that many changes took
place during the long subsequent period of oral transmission, and also
that many of the legends, both mythological and heroic, on which the
poems were based certainly existed in the Norse regions, and quite
possibly in verse form, long before the year 900.

As to the origin of the legends on which the poems are based, the whole
question, at least so far as the stories of the gods are concerned, is
much too complex for discussion here. How much of the actual narrative
material of the mythological lays is properly to be called Scandinavian
is a matter for students of comparative mythology to

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

guess at. The tales underlying the heroic lays are clearly of foreign
origin: the Helgi story comes from Denmark, and that of Völund from
Germany, as also the great mass of traditions centering around Sigurth
(Siegfried), Brynhild, the sons of Gjuki, Atli (Attila), and Jormunrek
(Ermanarich). The introductory notes to the various poems deal with the
more important of these questions of origin. of the men who composed
these poems,--'wrote" is obviously the wrong word--we know absolutely
nothing, save that some of them must have been literary artists with a
high degree of conscious skill. The Eddic poems are
"folk-poetry,"--whatever that may be,--only in the sense that some of
them strongly reflect racial feelings and beliefs; they are anything but
crude or primitive in workmanship, and they show that not only the poets
themselves, but also many of their hearers, must have made a careful
study of the art of poetry.

Where the poems were shaped is equally uncertain. Any date prior to 875
would normally imply an origin on the mainland, but the necessarily
fluid state of oral tradition made it possible for a poem to be
"composed" many times over, and in various and far-separated places,
without altogether losing its identity. Thus, even if a poem first
assumed something approximating its present form in Iceland in the tenth
century, it may none the less embody language characteristic of Norway
two centuries earlier. Oral poetry has always had an amazing
preservative power over language, and in considering the origins of such
poems as these, we must cease thinking in terms of the printing-press,
or even in those of the scribe. The

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

claims of Norway as the birthplace of most of the Eddic poems have been
extensively advanced, but the great literary activity of Iceland after
the settlement of the island by Norwegian emigrants late in the ninth
century makes the theory of an Icelandic home for many of the poems
appear plausible. The two Atli lays, with what authority we do not know,
bear in the *Codex Regius* the superscription "the Greenland poem," and
internal evidence suggests that this statement may be correct. Certainly
in one poem, the *Rigsthula*, and probably in several others, there are
marks of Celtic influence. During a considerable part of the ninth and
tenth centuries, Scandinavians were active in Ireland and in most of the
western islands inhabited by branches of the Celtic race. Some scholars
have, indeed, claimed nearly all the Eddic poems for these "Western
Isles." However, as Iceland early came to be the true cultural center of
this Scandinavian island world, it may be said that the preponderant
evidence concerning the development of the Eddic poems in anything like
their present form points in that direction, and certainly it was in
Iceland that they were chiefly preserved.

THE EDDA AND OLD NORSE LITERATURE

Within the proper limits of an introduction it would be impossible to
give any adequate summary of the history and literature with which the
Eddic poems are indissolubly connected, but a mere mention of a few of
the salient facts may be of some service to those who are unfamiliar
with the subject. Old Norse literature covers approximately the period
between 850 and 1300. During the first part of

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

that period occurred the great wanderings of the Scandinavian peoples,
and particularly the Norwegians. A convenient date to remember is that
of the sea-fight of Hafrsfjord, 872, when Harald the Fair-Haired broke
the power of the independent Norwegian nobles, and made himself overlord
of nearly all the country. Many of the defeated nobles fled overseas,
where inviting refuges had been found for them by earlier wanderers and
plunder-seeking raiders. This was the time of the inroads of the dreaded
Northmen in France, and in 885 Hrolf Gangr (Rollo) laid siege to Paris
itself. Many Norwegians went to Ireland, where their compatriots had
already built Dublin, and where they remained in control of most of the
island till Brian Boru shattered their power at the battle of Clontarf
in 1014.

Of all the migrations, however, the most important were those to
Iceland. Here grew up an active civilization, fostered by absolute
independence and by remoteness from the wars which wracked Norway, yet
kept from degenerating into provincialism by the roving life of the
people, which brought them constantly in contact with the culture of the
South. Christianity, introduced throughout the Norse world about the
year 1000, brought with it the stability of learning, and the Icelanders
became not only the makers but also the students and recorders of
history. The years between 875 and 1100 were the great spontaneous
period of oral literature. Most of the military and political leaders
were also poets, and they composed a mass of lyric poetry concerning the
authorship of which we know a good deal, and much of which has been
preserved. Narrative

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

prose also flourished, for the Icelander had a passion for story-telling
and story-hearing. After 1100 came the day of the writers. These sagamen
collected the material that for generations had passed from mouth to
mouth, and gave it permanent form in writing. The greatest bulk of what
we now have of Old Norse literature,--and the published part of it makes
a formidable library,--originated thus in the earlier period before the
introduction of writing, and was put into final shape by the scholars,
most of them Icelanders, of the hundred years following 1150.

After 1250 came a rapid and tragic decline. Iceland lost its
independence, becoming a Norwegian province. Later Norway too fell under
alien rule, a Swede ascending the Norwegian throne in 1320. Pestilence
and famine laid waste the whole North; volcanic disturbances worked
havoc in Iceland. Literature did not quite die, but it fell upon evil
days; for the vigorous native narratives and heroic poems of the older
period were substituted translations of French romances. The poets wrote
mostly doggerel; the prose writers were devoid of national or racial
inspiration.

The mass of literature thus collected and written down largely between
1150 and 1250 maybe roughly divided into four groups. The greatest in
volume is made up of the sagas: narratives mainly in prose, ranging all
the way from authentic history of the Norwegian kings and the early
Icelandic settlements to fairy-tales. Embodied in the sagas is found the
material composing the second group: the skaldic poetry, a vast
collection of songs of praise, triumph, love, lamentation, and so on,
almost uniformly characterized

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

by an appalling complexity of figurative language. There is no absolute
line to be drawn between the poetry of the skalds and the poems of the
*Edda*, which we may call the third group; but in addition to the
remarkable artificiality of style which marks the skaldic poetry, and
which is seldom found in the poems of the *Edda*, the skalds dealt
almost exclusively with their own emotions, whereas the Eddic poems are
quite impersonal. Finally, there is the fourth group, made up of
didactic works, religious and legal treatises, and so on, studies which
originated chiefly in the later period of learned activity.

PRESERVATION OF THE EDDIC POEMS

Most of the poems of the *Poetic Edda* have unquestionably reached us in
rather bad shape. During the long period of oral transmission they
suffered all sorts of interpolations, omissions and changes, and some of
them, as they now stand, are a bewildering hodge-podge of little related
fragments. To some extent the diligent twelfth century compiler to whom
we owe the *Codex Regius*--Sæmund or another--was himself doubtless
responsible for the patchwork process, often supplemented by narrative
prose notes of his own; but in the days before written records existed,
it was easy to lose stanzas and longer passages from their context, and
equally easy to interpolate them where they did not by any means belong.
Some few of the poems, however, appear to be virtually complete and
unified as we now have them.

Under such circumstances it is clear that the establishment of a
satisfactory text is a matter of the utmost difficulty. As the basis for
this translation I have used the text

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

prepared by Karl Hildebrand (1876) and revised by Hugo Gering (1904).
Textual emendation has, however, been so extensive in every edition of
the *Edda*, and has depended so much on the theories of the editor, that
I have also made extensive use of many other editions, notably those by
Finnur Jonsson, Neckel, Sijmons, and Detter and Heinzel, together with
numerous commentaries. The condition of the text in both the principal
codices is such that no great reliance can be placed on the accuracy of
the copyists, and frequently two editions will differ fundamentally as
to their readings of a given passage or even of an entire-poem. For this
reason, and because guesswork necessarily plays so large a part in any
edition or translation of the Eddic poems, I have risked overloading the
pages with textual notes in order to show, as nearly as possible, the
exact state of the original together with all the more significant
emendations. I have done this particularly in the case of
transpositions, many of which appear absolutely necessary, and in the
indication of passages which appear to be interpolations.

THE VERSE-FORMS OF THE EDDIC POEMS

The many problems connected with the verse-forms found in the Eddic
poems have been analyzed in great detail by Sievers, Neckel, and others.
The three verse-forms exemplified in the poems need only a brief comment
here, however, in order to make clear the method used in this
translation. All of these forms group the lines normally in four-line
stanzas. In the so-called Fornyrthislag ("Old Verse"), for convenience
sometimes referred to in the notes as four-four measure, these lines
have all the same

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

structure, each line being sharply divided by a cæsural pause into two
half-lines, and each half-line having two accented syllables and two
(sometimes three) unaccented ones. The two half-lines forming a complete
line are bound together by the alliteration, or more properly
initial-rhyme, of three (or two) of the accented syllables. The
following is an example of the Fornyrthislag stanza, the accented
syllables being in italics:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

VreiÞr vas *Ving*Þórr, \| es *vakna*Þi  
ok *síns* *ham*ars \| of *sakna*Þi;  
*skegg* nam *hris*ta, \| *skor* nam *dý*ja,  
*ré*Þ *JarÞ*ar *burr* \| *umb* at *Þreif*ask.

</div>

In the second form, the Ljothahattr ("Song Measure"), the first and
third line of each stanza are as just described, but the second and
fourth are shorter, have no cæsural pause, have three accented
syllables, and regularly two initial-rhymed accented syllables, for
which reason I have occasionally referred to Ljothahattr as four-three
measure. The following is an example:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Ar skal *rí*sa \| sás *an*nars *vill*  
      *fé* eÞa *fior* *haf*a;  
*ligg*jandi *ulfr* \| sjaldan *láer* of *getr*  
      né *sof*andi *maÞr* *sigr*.

</div>

In the third and least commonly used form, the Malahattr ("Speech
Measure"), a younger verse-form than either of the other two, each line
of the four-line stanza is divided into two half-lines by a cæsural
pause, each half line having two accented syllables and three (sometimes

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

four) unaccented ones; the initial rhyme is as in the Fornyrthislag. The
following is an example:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Horsk vas *hús*freyja, \| *hug*Þi at *mann*viti,  
*lag* heyrÞi *òrÞ*a, \| hvat á *laun* *máel*tu;  
Þá vas *vant* *vit*ri, \| *vil*di Þeim *hjalÞ*a:  
skyldu of *sáe* *sig*la, \| en *sjolf* né *kvamsk*at.

</div>

A poem in Fornyrthislag is normally entitled *-kvitha* (*Thrymskvitha*,
*Guthrunarkvitha*, etc.), which for convenience I have rendered as
"lay," while a poem in Ljothahattr is entitled *-mol* (*Grimnismol*,
*Skirnismol*, etc.), which I have rendered as "ballad." It is difficult
to find any distinction other than metrical between the two terms,
although it is clear that one originally existed.

Variations frequently appear in all three kinds of verse, and these I
have attempted to indicate through the rhythm of the translation. In
order to preserve so far as possible the effect of the Eddic verse, I
have adhered, in making the English version, to certain of the
fundamental rules governing the Norse line and stanza formations. The
number of lines to each stanza conforms to what seems the best guess as
to the original, and I have consistently retained the number of accented
syllables. in translating from a highly inflected language into one
depending largely on the use of subsidiary words, it has, however, been
necessary to employ considerable freedom as to the number of unaccented
syllables in a line. The initial-rhyme is generally confined to two
accented syllables in each line. As in the original, all initial vowels
are allowed to rhyme interchangeably, but I have disregarded the rule
which lets certain groups of consonants rhyme only with themselves

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

(*e.g.*, I have allowed initial *s* or *st* to rhyme with *sk* or *sl*).
In general, I have sought to preserve the effect of the original form
whenever possible without an undue sacrifice of accuracy. For purposes
of comparison, the translations of the three stanzas just given are here
included:

Fornyrthislag:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Wild was *Ving*thor \| *when* he *awoke*,  
And *when* his *might*y \| *ham*mer he *missed*;  
He *shook* his *beard*, \| his *hair* was *brist*ling,  
To *grop*ing *set* \| the *son* of *Jorth*.

</div>

Ljothahattr:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

He must *ear*ly go *forth* \| who *fain* the *blood*  
Or the *goods* of an*other* would *get*;  
The *wolf* that lies *id*le \| shall *win* little *meat*,  
Or the *sleep*ing man suc*cess*.

</div>

Malahattr:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Wise was the *wom*an, \| she *fain* would use *wis*dom,  
She *saw* well what *meant* \| all they *said* in *sec*ret; . .  
From her *heart* it was *hid* \| how *help* she might *ren*der,  
The *sea* they should *sail*, \| while her*self* she should *go* not.

</div>

PROPER NAMES

The forms in which the proper names appear in this translation will
undoubtedly perplex and annoy those who have become accustomed to one or
another of the current methods of anglicising Old Norse names. The
nominative ending -r it has seemed best to, omit after consonants,
although it has been retained after vowels; in Baldr the final -r is a
part of the stem and is of course retained. I

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

have rendered the Norse Þ by "th" throughout, instead of spasmodically
by "d," as in many texts: *e.g.*, Othin in stead of Odin. For the Norse
ø I have used its equivalent, "ö," *e.g.*, Völund; for the o I have used
"o" and not "a," *e.g.*, Voluspo, not Valuspa or Voluspa. To avoid
confusion with accents the long vowel marks of the Icelandic are
consistently omitted, as likewise in modern Icelandic proper names. The
index at the end of the book indicates the pronunciation in each case.

CONCLUSION

That this translation may be of some value to those who can read the
poems of the *Edda* in the original language I earnestly hope. Still
more do I wish that it may lead a few who hitherto have given little
thought to the Old Norse language and literature to master the tongue
for themselves. But far above either of these I place the hope that this
English version may give to some, who have known little of the ancient
traditions of what is after all their own race, a clearer insight into
the glories of that extraordinary past, and that I may through this
medium be able to bring to others a small part of the delight which I
myself have found in the poems of the *Poetic Edda*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Voluspo](poe03)
