[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Iceland](../ice/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](poe29)  [Next](poe31.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024NLGNQ/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Poetic Edda*, by Henry Adams Bellows, \[1936\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

# DRAP NIFLUNGA

### The Slaying of The Niflungs

##### INTRODUCTORY NOTE

It has been already pointed out (introductory note to *Reginsmol*) that
the compiler of the Eddic collection had clearly undertaken to formulate
a coherent narrative of the entire Sigurth cycle, piecing together the
various poems by means of prose narrative links. To some extent these
links were based on traditions existing outside of the lays themselves,
but in the main the material was gathered from the contents of the
poems. The short prose passage entitled *Drap Niflunga*, which in the
*Codex Regius* immediately follows the *Helreith Brynhildar*, is just
such a narrative link, and scarcely deserves a special heading, but as
nearly all editions separate it from the preceding and following poems,
I have followed their example.

With Sigurth and Brynhild both dead, the story turns to the slaying of
the sons of Gjuki by Atli, Guthrun's second husband, and to a few
subsequent incidents, mostly late incorporations from other narrative
cycles, including the tragic death of Svanhild, daughter of Sigurth and
Guthrun and wife of Jormunrek (Ermanarich), and the exploits of Hamther,
son of Guthrun and her third husband, Jonak. These stories are told, or
outlined, in the two Atli lays, the second and third Guthrun lays, the
*Oddrunargratr*, the *Guthrunarhvot*, and the *Hamthesmol*. Had the
compiler seen fit to put the Atli lays immediately after the *Helreith
Brynhildar*, he would have needed only a very brief transitional note to
make the course of the story clear, but as the second Guthrun lay, the
next poem in the collection, is a lament following the death of
Guthrun's brothers, some sort of a narrative bridge was manifestly
needed.

Drap Niflunga is based entirely on the poems which follow it in the
collection, with no use of extraneous material. The part of the story
which it summarizes belongs to the semi-historical Burgundian tradition
(cf. introductory note to *Gripisspo*), in many respects parallel to the
familiar narrative of the Nibelungenlied, and, except in minor details,
showing few essentially Northern additions. Sigurth is scarcely
mentioned, and the outstanding episode is the slaying of Gunnar and
Hogni, following their journey to Atli's home.

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Gunnar and Hogni then took all the gold that Fafnir had had. There was
strife between the Gjukungs and Atli, for he held the Gjukungs guilty of
Brynhild's death. It was agreed that they should give him Guthrun as
wife, and they gave her a draught of forgetfulness to drink before she
would consent to be wedded to Atli. The sons of Atli were Erp and Eitil,
and Svanhild was the daughter of Sigurth and Guthrun. King Atli invited
Gunnar and Hogni to come to him, and sent as messenger Vingi or
Knefröth. Guthrun was aware of treachery, and sent with him a message in
runes that they should not come, and as a token she sent to Hogni the
ring Andvaranaut and tied a wolf's hair in it. Gunnar had sought Oddrun,
Atli's sister, for his wife, but had her not; then he married Glaumvor,
and Hogni's wife was

\[*Prose*. *Niflungs*: regarding the mistaken application of this name
to the sons of Gjuki, who were Burgundians, cf. *Brot*, 17 and note.
*Draught of forgetfulness*: according to the *Volsungasaga* Grimhild,
Guthrun's mother, administered this, just as she did the similar draught
which made Sigurth forget Brynhild. *Erp and Eitil:* Guthrun kills her
two sons by Atli as part of her revenge; the annotator here explains her
act further by saying that Guthrun asked her sons to intercede with
their father in favor of Guthrun's brothers, but that they refused, a
detail which he appears to have invented, as it is found nowhere else.
*Svanhild*: cf. *Sigurtharkvitha en skamma*, 54 and note. *Vingi* or
*Knefröth*: *Atlakvitha* (stanza 1) calls the messenger Knefröth;
*Atlamol* (stanza 4) speaks of two messengers, but names only one of
them, Vingi. The annotator has here tried, unsuccessfully, to combine
the two accounts. *Andvaranaut*: regarding the origin of Andvari's ring
cf. *Reginsmol*, prose after stanzas 4 and 5 and notes; Sigurth gave the
ring to Guthrun. Here again the annotator is combining two stories; in
*Atlakvitha* (stanza 8) Guthrun sends a ring (not Andvaranaut) with a
wolf's hair; in *Atlamol* (stanza 4) she sends a message written \[fp.
449\] in runes. The messenger obscures these runes, and Kostbera,
Hogni's wife, who attempts to decipher them, is not clear as to their
meaning, though she suspects danger. *Oddrun*: cf. *Sigurtharkvitha en
skamma*, 57 and note. *Glaumvor*: almost nothing is told of Gunnar's
second wife, though she appears frequently in the *Atlamol*. *Kostbera*
(or Bera), Hogni's wife, is known only as skilled in runes. Her brother
was Orkning. The sons of Hogni and Kostbera, according to the *Atlamol*
(stanza 28), were *Solar* and *Snævar*; the third son, *Gjuki*, named
after his grandfather, seems to be an invention of the annotator's.
*Adder*: according to *Oddrunargratr* (stanza 30) Atli's mother assumed
this form in order to complete her son's vengeance.\]

<span id="page_449">p. 449</span>

Kostbera; their sons were Solar and Snævar and Gjuki. And when the
Gjukungs came to Atli, then Guthrun be sought her sons to plead for the
lives of both the Gjukungs, but they would not do it. Hogni's heart was
cut out, and Gunnar was cast into the serpent's den. He smote on the
harp and put the serpents to sleep, but an adder stung him in the liver.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Guthrunarkvitha II, En Forna](poe31.md)
