[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc42005)  [Next](cc42007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 42: Philippians, Colossians, and
Thessalonians*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="iv.iii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Philippians
2:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#001)<span id="iv.iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p2"></span>**1**. If *there be* therefore any
consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the
Spirit, if any bowels and mercies,

<span id="iv.iii.i-p3"></span>**1**. Si qua igitur consolatio (*vel,
exhortatio*) in Christo, si quod solatium dilectionis, si qua
communicatio Spiritus, si qua viscera et misericordiae.  <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91)

<span id="iv.iii.i-p5"></span>**2**. Fulfil ye my joy, that ye be
likeminded, having the same love, *being* of one accord, of one mind.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p6"></span>**2**. Implete gaudium meum ut idem
sentiatis, eandem habentes caritatem, unanimes, unum sentientes.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p7"></span>**3** *Let* nothing *be done* through
strife or vainglory; but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other
better than themselves.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p8"></span>**3**. Nihil per contentionem, aut inanem
gloriam, sed per humilitatem alii alios existiment se ipsis
excellentiores.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p9"></span>**4**. Look not every man on his own
things, but every man also on the things of others.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p10"></span>**4**. Non considerans quisque quod suum
est, sed quisque quod est aliorum.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p11"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.i-p12"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p13"></span>**1** *If there is therefore any
consolation*. There is an extraordinary tenderness in this exhortation,
 <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) in which he entreats by all means
the Philippians mutually to cherish harmony among themselves, lest, in
the event of their being torn asunder by intestine contentions, they
should expose themselves to the impostures of the false apostles. For
when there are disagreements, there is invariably a door opened for
Satan to disseminate impious doctrines, while agreement is the best
bulwark for repelling them.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p15"></span>As the term <span
id="iv.iii.i-p15.1"></span>παρακλήσεως is often taken to mean
*exhortation*, the commencement of the passage might be explained in
this manner: “If an exhortation which is delivered in the name and by
the authority of Christ, has any weight with you.” The other meaning,
however, corresponds better with the context: “If there is among you
*any consolation of Christ*,” by means of which you may alleviate my
griefs, and if you would afford me *any consolation* and relief, which
you assuredly owe me in the exercise of love; if you take into view that
*fellowship of the Spirit*, which ought to make us all one; if any
feeling of humanity and mercy resides in you, which might stir you up to
alleviate my miseries, *fulfill ye my joy*, *etc.* From this we may
infer, how great a blessing unity in the Church is, and with what
eagerness pastors should endeavor to secure it.  <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) We must also at the same time take
notice, how he humbles himself by beseechingly imploring their pity,
while he might have availed himself of his paternal authority, so as to
demand respect from them as his sons.  <span
id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) He knew how to exercise authority when it
was necessary, but at present he prefers to use entreaties, because he
knew that these would be better fitted to gain an entrance into their
affections,  <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) and because he was
aware that he had to do with persons who were docile and compliant. In
this manner the pastor must have no hesitation to assume different
aspects for the sake of the Church.  <span
id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96)

<span id="iv.iii.i-p20"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p21"></span>**2** *Fulfil ye my joy*. Here again we
may see how little anxiety he had as to himself, provided only it went
well with the Church of Christ. He was kept shut up in prison, and bound
with chains; he was reckoned worthy of capital punishment — before his
view were tortures — near at hand was the executioner; yet all these
things do not prevent his experiencing unmingled joy, provided he sees
that the Churches are in a good condition. Now what he reckons the chief
indication of a prosperous condition of the Church is — when mutual
agreement prevails in it, and brotherly harmony. Thus the 137th Psalm
teaches us in like manner, that our crowning joy is the remembrance of
Jerusalem. (<span id="iv.iii.i-p21.1"></span>[Ps
137:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.i-p21.1"></span>.) But if this were the completion of Paul’s
joy, the Philippians would have been worse than cruel if they had
tortured the mind of this holy man with a twofold anguish by
disagreement among themselves.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p22"></span>*That ye think the same thing*. The sum
is this — that they be joined together in views and inclinations. For he
makes mention of agreement in doctrine and mutual love; and afterwards,
repeating the same thing, (in my opinion,) he exhorts them to be of one
mind, and to have the same views. The expression <span
id="iv.iii.i-p22.1"></span>τὸ αὐτὸ, (*the same thing*,) implies that
they must accommodate themselves to each other. Hence the beginning of
love is harmony of views, but that is not sufficient, unless men’s
hearts are at the same time joined together in mutual affection. At the
same time there were no inconsistency in rendering it thus: — “that ye
may be of the same mind — so as to have mutual love, to be one in mind
and one in views;” for participles are not unfrequently made use of
instead of infinitives. I have adopted, however, the view which seemed
to me less forced.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p23"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p24"></span>**3** *Nothing through strife or
vain-glory*. These are two most dangerous pests for disturbing the peace
of the Church. *Strife* is awakened when every one is prepared to
maintain pertinaciously his own opinion; and when it has once begun to
rage it rushes headlong  <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) in the
direction from which it has entered. *Vain-glory*  <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) tickles men’s minds, so that every one is
delighted with his own inventions. Hence the only way of guarding
against dissensions is — when we avoid strifes by deliberating and
acting peacefully, especially if we are not actuated by ambition. For
ambition is a means of fanning all strifes.  <span
id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) *Vain-glory* means any glorying in the
flesh; for what ground of glorying have men in themselves that is not
vanity?

<span id="iv.iii.i-p28"></span>*But by humility.* For both diseases he
brings forward one remedy — *humility*, and with good reason, for it is
the mother of moderation, the effect of which is that, yielding up our
own right, we give the preference to others, and are not easily thrown
into agitation. He gives a definition of true humility — when every one
esteems himself less than others. Now, if anything in our whole life is
difficult, this above everything else is so. Hence it is not to be
wondered if humility is so rare a virtue. For, as one says,  <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) “Every one has in himself the mind of
a king, by claiming everything for himself.” See! here is pride.
Afterwards from a foolish admiration of ourselves arises contempt of the
brethren. And so far are we from what Paul here enjoins, that one can
hardly endure that others should be on a level with him, for there is no
one that is not eager to have superiority.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p30"></span>But it is asked, how it is possible that
one who is in reality distinguished above others can reckon those to be
superior to him who he knows are greatly beneath him? I answer, that
this altogether depends on a right estimate of God’s gifts, and our own
infirmities. For however any one may be distinguished by illustrious
endowments, he ought to consider with himself that they have not been
conferred upon him that he might be self-complacent, that he might exalt
himself, or even that he might hold himself in esteem. Let him, instead
of this, employ himself in correcting and detecting his faults, and he
will have abundant occasion for humility. In others, on the other hand,
he will regard with honor whatever there is of excellences, and will by
means of love bury their faults. The man who will observe this rule,
will feel no difficulty in preferring others before himself. And this,
too, Paul meant when he added, that they ought not to have every one a
regard to themselves, but to their neighbors, or that they ought not to
be devoted to themselves. Hence it is quite possible that a pious man,
even though he should be aware that he is superior, may nevertheless
hold others in greater esteem.

<span id="iv.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Philippians
2:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p2"></span>**5**. Let this mind be in you, which was
also in Christ Jesus:

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p3"></span>**5**. Hoc enim sentiatur in vobis quod
et in Christo Iesu:

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p4"></span>**6**. Who, being in the form of God,
thought it not robbery to be equal with God:

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p5"></span>**6**. Qui quum in forma Dei esset, non
rapinam arbitratus esset, Deo aequalem se esse:

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p6"></span>**7**. But made himself of no reputation,
and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of
men:

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p7"></span>**7**. Sed se ipsum exinanivit, forma
servi accepta, in similitudine hominum constitutus, et forma repertus ut
homo.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p8"></span>**8**. And being found in fashion as a
man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death
of the cross.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p9"></span>**8**. Humiliavit, inquam, se ipsum,
factus obediens usque ad mortem, mortem vero crucis.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p10"></span>**9**. Wherefore God also hath highly
exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name:

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p11"></span>**9**. Quamobrem et Deus illum
superexaltavit, et dedit illi nomen quod esset super omne nomen,

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p12"></span>**10**. That at the name of Jesus every
knee should bow, of *things* in heaven, and *things* in earth, and
*things* under the earth;

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p13"></span>**10**. Ut in nomine Iesu omne genu
flectatur, cælestium, terrestrium, et infernorum,

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p14"></span>**11**. And *that* every tongue should
confess that Jesus Christ *is* Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p15"></span>**11**. Et omnis lingua confiteatur,
quod Dominus Iesus in gloriam est Dei Patris.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p16"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p17"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p18"></span>**5**. He now recommends, from the
example of Christ, the exercise of humility, to which he had exhorted
them in words. There are, however, two departments, in the *first* of
which he invites us to imitate Christ, because this is the rule of life:
 <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) in the *second*, he allures us
to it, because this is the road by which we attain true glory. Hence he
exhorts every one to have the same disposition that was in Christ. He
afterwards shews what a pattern of humility has been presented before us
in Christ. I have retained the passive form of the verb, though I do not
disapprove of the rendering given it by others, because there is no
difference as to meaning. I merely wished that the reader should be in
possession of the very form of expression which Paul has employed.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p20"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p21"></span>**6** *Inasmuch as he was in the form of
God.* This is not a comparison between things similar, but in the way of
greater and less. *Christ’s* humility consisted in his abasing himself
from the highest pinnacle of glory to the lowest ignominy: *our*
humility consists in refraining from exalting ourselves by a false
estimation. *He* gave up his right: all that is required of *us* is,
that we do not assume to ourselves more than we ought. Hence he sets out
with this — that, *inasmuch as he was in the form of God, he reckoned it
not an unlawful thing for him to shew himself in that form; yet he
emptied himself*. Since, then, the Son of God descended from so great a
height, how unreasonable that we, who are nothing, should be lifted up
with pride!

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p22"></span>*The* *form of God* means here his
majesty. For as a man is known by the appearance of his *form*, so the
majesty, which shines forth in God, is his figure.  <span
id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) Or if you would prefer a more apt
similitude, the *form* of a *king* is his equipage and magnificence,
shewing him to be a king — his scepter, his crown, his mantle,  <span
id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) his attendants,  <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) his judgment-throne, and other emblems
of royalty; the *form* of a *consul* was — his long robe, bordered with
purple, his ivory seat, his lictors with rods and hatchets. Christ,
then, before the creation of the world, was in the form of God, because
from the beginning he had his glory with the Father, as he says in <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p25.2"></span>[Joh
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p25.2"></span>. For in the wisdom of God, prior to his
assuming our flesh, there was nothing mean or contemptible, but on the
contrary a magnificence worth of God. Being such as he was, he could,
without doing wrong to any one, *shew himself equal with God*; but he
did not manifest himself to be what he really was, nor did he openly
assume in the view of men what belonged to him by right.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p26"></span>*Thought it not robbery.* There would
have been no wrong done though he had shewn himself *to be equal with
God*. For when he says, *he would not have thought,* it is as though he
had said, “He knew, indeed, that this was lawful and right for him,”
that we might know that his abasement was voluntary, not of necessity.
Hitherto it has been rendered in the indicative — *he thought*, but the
connection requires the subjunctive. It is also quite a customary thing
for Paul to employ the past indicative in the place of the subjunctive,
by leaving the potential particle <span id="iv.iii.ii-p26.1"></span>ἄν,
as it is called, to be supplied — as, for example, in <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p26.2"></span>[Ro
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003)<span id="iv.iii.ii-p26.2"></span>,
<span id="iv.iii.ii-p26.3"></span>ηὐχόμην, for *I would have wished*;
and in <span id="iv.iii.ii-p26.4"></span>[1Co
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)<span id="iv.iii.ii-p26.4"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii.ii-p26.5"></span>εἰ γὰρ ἔγνωσαν, *if they had known*.
Every one, however, must perceive that Paul treats hitherto of Christ’s
glory, which tends to enhance his abasement. Accordingly he mentions,
not what Christ did, but what it was allowable for him to do.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p27"></span>Farther, that man is utterly blind who
does not perceive that his eternal divinity is clearly set forth in
these words. Nor does Erasmus act with sufficient modesty in attempting,
by his cavils, to explain away this passage, as well as other similar
passages.  <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) He acknowledges,
indeed, everywhere that Christ is God; but what am I the better for his
orthodox confession, if my faith is not supported by any Scripture
authority? I acknowledge, certainly, that Paul does not make mention
here of Christ’s divine essence; but it does not follow from this, that
the passage is not sufficient for repelling the impiety of the Arians,
who pretended that Christ was a created God, and inferior to the Father,
and denied that he was consubstantial.  <span
id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) For where can there be *equality with
God* without *robbery*, excepting only where there is the essence of
God; for God always remains the same, who cries by Isaiah, *I live; I
will not give my glory to another.* (<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p29.2"></span>[Isa
48:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p29.2"></span>.) *Form* means figure or appearance, as
they commonly speak. This, too, I readily grant; but will there be
found, apart from God, such a *form*, so as to be neither false nor
forged? As, then, God is known by means of his excellences, and his
works are evidences of his eternal Godhead, (<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p29.3"></span>[Ro
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p29.3"></span>,) so Christ’s divine essence is rightly
proved from Christ’s majesty, which he possessed equally with the Father
before he humbled himself. As to myself, at least, not even all devils
would wrest this passage from me — inasmuch as there is in God a most
solid argument, from his glory to his essence, which are two things that
are inseparable.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p30"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p31"></span>**7** *Emptied himself.* This *emptying*
is the same as the abasement, as to which we shall see afterwards. The
expression, however, is used, <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p31.1"></span>ευμφατικωτέρως, (*more emphatically*,) to
mean, — being brought to nothing. Christ, indeed, could not divest
himself of Godhead; but he kept it concealed for a time, that it might
not be seen, under the weakness of the flesh. Hence he laid aside his
glory in the view of men, not by lessening it, but by concealing it.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p32"></span>It is asked, whether he did this as man?
Erasmus answers in the affirmative. But where was the *form of God*
before he became man? Hence we must reply, that Paul speaks of Christ
wholly, as he was *God manifested in the flesh*, (<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p32.1"></span>[1Ti
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p32.1"></span>;) but, nevertheless, this *emptying* is
applicable exclusive to his humanity, as if I should say of man, “Man
being mortal, he is exceedingly senseless if he thinks of nothing but
the world,” I refer indeed to man wholly; but at the same time I ascribe
mortality only to a part of him, namely, to the body. As, then, Christ
has one person, consisting of two natures, it is with propriety that
Paul says, that he who was the Son of God, — in reality equal to God,
did nevertheless lay aside his glory, when he in the flesh manifested
himself in the appearance of a servant.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p33"></span>It is also asked, secondly, how he can
be said to be *emptied*, while he, nevertheless, invariably proved
himself, by miracles and excellences, to be the Son of God, and in whom,
as John testifies, there was always to be seen a glory worthy of the Son
of God? (<span id="iv.iii.ii-p33.1"></span>[Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p33.1"></span>.) I answer, that the abasement of the flesh
was, notwithstanding, like a vail, by which his divine majesty was
concealed. On this account he did not wish that his transfiguration
should be made public until after his resurrection; and when he
perceives that the hour of his death is approaching, he then says,
*Father, glorify thy Son*. (<span id="iv.iii.ii-p33.2"></span>[Joh
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p33.2"></span>.) Hence, too, Paul teaches elsewhere, that
he was *declared to be the Son of God* by means of his resurrection.
(<span id="iv.iii.ii-p33.3"></span>[Ro
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p33.3"></span>.) He also declares in another place, (<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p33.4"></span>[2Co
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p33.4"></span>,) that he *suffered through the weakness of
the flesh*. In fine, the image of God shone forth in Christ in such a
manner, that he was, at the same time, abased in his outward appearance,
and brought down to nothing in the estimation of men; for he carried
about with him *the form of a servant*, and had assumed our nature,
expressly with the view of his being a servant of the Father, nay, even
of men. Paul, too, calls him the *Minister of the Circumcision*, (<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p33.5"></span>[Ro
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p33.5"></span>;) and he himself testifies of himself, that
he *came to minister*, (<span id="iv.iii.ii-p33.6"></span>[Mt
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p33.6"></span>;) and that same thing had long before been
foretold by Isaiah — *Behold my servant*, etc.  <span
id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107)

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p35"></span>*In the likeness of men* <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p35.1"></span>Γενόμενος is equivalent here to <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p35.2"></span>*constitutus* — (*having been appointed.*)
For Paul means that he had been brought down to the level of mankind, so
that there was in appearance nothing that differed from the common
condition of mankind. The Marcionites perverted this declaration for the
purpose of establishing the phantasm of which they dreamed. They can,
however, be refuted without any great difficulty, inasmuch as Paul is
treating here simply of the manner in which Christ manifested himself,
and the condition with which he was conversant when in the world. Let
one be truly man, he will nevertheless be reckoned unlike others, if he
conducts himself as if he were exempt from the condition of others. Paul
declares that it was not so as to Christ, but that he lived in such a
manner, that he seemed as though he were on a level with mankind, and
yet he was very different from a mere man, although he was truly man.
The Marcionites therefore shewed excessive childishness, in drawing an
argument from similarity of condition for the purpose of denying reality
of nature.  <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108)

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p37"></span>*Found* means here, *known* or *seen*.
For he treats, as has been observed, of estimation. In other words, as
he had affirmed previously that he was truly God, the equal of the
Father, so he here states, that he was reckoned, as it were, abject, and
in the common condition of mankind. We must always keep in view what I
said a little ago, that such abasement was voluntary.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p38"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p39"></span>**8** *He became obedient*. Even this
was great humility — that from being Lord he became a servant; but he
says that he went farther than this, because, while he was not only
immortal, but the Lord of life and death, he nevertheless became
obedient to his Father, even so far as to endure death. This was extreme
abasement, especially when we take into view the kind of death, which he
immediately adds, with the view of enhancing it.  <span
id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109) For by dying in this manner he was not
only covered with ignominy in the sight of God, but was also accursed in
the sight of God. It is assuredly such a pattern of humility as ought to
absorb the attention of all mankind; so far is it from being possible to
unfold it in words in a manner suitable to its dignity.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p41"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p42"></span>**9** *Therefore God hath highly
exalted*. By adding consolation, he shews that abasement, to which the
human mind is averse, is in the highest degree desirable. There is no
one, it is true, but will acknowledge that it is a reasonable thing that
is required from us, when we are exhorted to imitate Christ. This
consideration, however, stirs us up to imitate him the more cheerfully,
when we learn that nothing is more advantageous for us than to be
conformed to his image. Now, that all are happy who, along with Christ,
voluntarily abase themselves, he shews by his example; for from the most
abject condition he was exalted to the highest elevation. Every one
therefore that humbles himself will in like manner be exalted. Who would
now be reluctant to exercise humility, by means of which the glory of
the heavenly kingdom is attained?

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p43"></span>This passage has given occasion to
sophists, or rather they have seized hold of it, to allege that Christ
merited first for himself, and afterwards for others. Now, in the first
place, even though there were nothing false alleged, it would
nevertheless be proper to avoid such profane speculations as obscure the
grace of Christ — in imagining that he came for any other reason than
with a view to our salvation. Who does not see that this is a suggestion
of Satan — that Christ suffered upon the cross, that he might acquire
for himself, by the merit of his work, what he did not possess? For it
is the design of the Holy Spirit, that we should, in the death of
Christ, see, and taste, and ponder, and feel, and recognize nothing but
God’s unmixed goodness, and the love of Christ toward us, which was
great and inestimable, that, regardless of himself, he devoted himself
and his life for our sakes. In every instance in which the Scriptures
speak of the death of Christ, they assign to us its advantage and price;
— that by means of it we are redeemed — reconciled to God — restored to
righteousness — cleansed from our pollutions — life is procured for us,
and the gate of life opened. Who, then, would deny that it is at the
instigation of Satan that the persons referred to maintain, on the other
hand, that the chief part of the advantage is in Christ himself — that a
regard to himself had the precedence of that which he had to us — that
he merited glory for himself before he merited salvation for us?

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p44"></span>Farther, I deny the truth of what they
allege, and I maintain that Paul’s words are impiously perverted to the
establishment of their falsehood; for that the expression, *for this
cause*, denotes here a consequence rather than a reason, is manifest
from this, that it would otherwise follow, that a man could merit Divine
honors, and acquire the very throne of God — which is not merely absurd,
but even dreadful to make mention of. For of what exaltation of Christ
does the Apostle here speak? It is, that everything may be accomplished
in him that God, by the prophet Isaiah, exclusively claims to himself.
Hence the glory of God, and the majesty, which is so peculiar to him,
that it cannot be transferred to any other, will be the reward of man’s
work!

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p45"></span>Again, if they should urge the mode of
expression, without any regard to the absurdity that will follow, the
reply will be easy — that he has been given us by the Father in such a
manner, that his whole life is as a mirror that is set before us. As,
then, a mirror, though it has splendor, has it not for itself, but with
the view of its being advantageous and profitable to others, so Christ
did not seek or receive anything for himself, but everything for us. For
what need, I ask, had he, who was the equal of the Father, of a new
exaltation? Let, then, pious readers learn to detest the Sorbonnic
sophists with their perverted speculations.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p46"></span>*Hath given him a name* *Name* here is
employed to mean dignity — a manner of expression which is abundantly
common in all languages — “<span id="iv.iii.ii-p46.1"></span>Jacet *sine
nomine* truncus; He lies a headless *nameless* carcass.”  <span
id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110) The mode of expression, however, is
more especially common in Scripture. The meaning therefore is, that
supreme power was given to Christ, and that he was placed in the highest
rank of honor, so that there is no dignity found either in heaven or in
earth that is equal to his. Hence it follows that it is a Divine name.
 <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) This, too, he explains by
quoting the words of Isaiah, where the Prophet, when treating of the
propagation of the worship of God throughout the whole world, introduces
God as speaking thus: —

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p49"></span>“I live: every knee will bow to me, and
every tongue will swear to me,” *etc*. (<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p49.1"></span>[Isa
45:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p49.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p50"></span>Now, it is certain that adoration is
here meant, which belongs peculiarly to God alone. I am aware that some
philosophise with subtlety as to the name *Jesus*, as though it were
derived from the ineffable name Jehovah.  <span
id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) In the reason, however, which they
advance, I find no solidity. As for me, I feel no pleasure in empty
subtleties;  <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) and it is dangerous
to trifle in a matter of such importance. Besides, who does not see that
it is a forced, and anything rather than a genuine, exposition, when
Paul speaks of Christ’s whole dignity, to restrict his meaning to two
syllables, as if any one were to examine attentively the letters of the
word *Alexander*, in order to find in them the greatness of the name
that Alexander acquired for himself. Their subtlety, therefore, is not
solid, and the contrivance is foreign to Paul’s intention. But worse
than ridiculous is the conduct of the Sorbonnic sophists, who infer from
the passage before us that we ought to bow the knee whenever the name of
*Jesus* is pronounced, as though it were a magic word which had all
virtue included in the sound of it.  <span
id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) Paul, on the other hand, speaks of the
honor that is to be rendered to the Son of God—not to mere syllables.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p54"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p55"></span>**10** *Every knee might bow*. Though
respect is shewn to men also be means of this rite, there can
nevertheless be no doubt that what is here meant is that adoration which
belongs exclusively to God, of which the bending of the knee is a token.
 <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) As to this, it is proper to
notice, that God is to be worshipped, not merely with the inward
affection of the heart, but also by outward profession, if we would
render to him what is his due. Hence, on the other hand, when he would
describe his genuine worshippers, he says that they

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p57"></span>have not bowed the knee to the image of
Baal.  
(<span id="iv.iii.ii-p57.2"></span>[1Ki
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p57.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p58"></span>But here a question arises — whether
this relates to the divinity of Christ or to his humanity, for either of
the two is not without some inconsistency, inasmuch as nothing new could
be given to his divinity; and his humanity in itself, viewed separately,
has by no means such exaltation belonging to it that it should be adored
as God? I answer, that this, like many things else, is affirmed in
reference to Christ’s entire person, viewed as *God manifested in the
flesh*. (<span id="iv.iii.ii-p58.1"></span>[1Ti
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p58.1"></span>.) For he did not abase himself either as to
his humanity alone, or as to his divinity alone, but inasmuch as,
clothed in our flesh, he concealed himself under its infirmity. So again
God exalted his own Son in the same flesh, in which he had lived in the
world abject and despised, to the highest rank of honor, that he may sit
at his right hand.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p59"></span>Paul, however, appears to be
inconsistent with himself; for in <span id="iv.iii.ii-p59.1"></span>[Ro
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p59.1"></span>, he quotes this same passage, when he has
it in view to prove that Christ will one day be the judge of the living
and the dead. Now, it would not be applicable to that subject, if it
were already accomplished, as he here declares. I answer, that the
kingdom of Christ is on such a footing, that it is every day growing and
making improvement, while at the same time perfection is not yet
attained, nor will be until the final day of reckoning. Thus both things
hold true — that all things are now subject to Christ, and that this
subjection will, nevertheless, not be complete until the day of the
resurrection, because that which is now only begun will then be
completed. Hence, it is not without reason that this prophecy is applied
in different ways at different times, as also all the other prophecies,
which speak of the reign of Christ, do not restrict it to one particular
time, but describe it in its entire course. From this, however, we infer
that Christ is that eternal God who spoke by Isaiah.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p60"></span>*Things in heaven, things on earth,
things under the earth*. Since Paul represents all things from heaven to
hell as subject to Christ, Papists trifle childishly when they draw
purgatory from his words. Their reasoning, however, is this — that
devils are so far from bowing the knee to Christ, that they are in every
way rebellious against him, and stir up others to rebellion, as if it
were not at the same time written that they *tremble* at the simple
mention of God. (<span id="iv.iii.ii-p60.1"></span>[Jas
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p60.1"></span>.) How will it be, then, when they shall
come before the tribunal of Christ? I confess, indeed, that they are
not, and never will be, subject of their own accord and by cheerful
submission; but Paul is not speaking here of voluntary obedience; nay
more, we may, on the contrary, turn back upon them an argument, by way
of *retortion*, (<span id="iv.iii.ii-p60.2"></span>αντιστρέφον,) in this
manner: — “The fire of purgatory, according to them, is temporary, and
will be done away at the day of judgment: hence this passage cannot be
understood as to purgatory, because Paul elsewhere declares that this
prophecy will not be fulfilled until Christ shall manifest himself for
judgment.” Who does not see that they are twice children in respect of
these disgusting frivolities?  <span id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116)

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p62"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p63"></span>**11** *Is Lord, to the glory of God the
Father.* It might also be read, *In the glory*, because the particle
<span id="iv.iii.ii-p63.1"></span>εἰς (to) is often used in place of
<span id="iv.iii.ii-p63.2"></span>ἐν (*in*.) I prefer, however, to
retain its proper signification, as meaning, that as the majesty of God
has been manifested to men through Christ, so it shines forth in Christ,
and the Father is glorified in the Son. See <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p63.4"></span>[John
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p63.4"></span>, and you will find an exposition of this
passage.

<span id="iv.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Philippians
2:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p2"></span>**12**. Wherefore, my beloved, as ye
have always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much more in my
absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p3"></span>**12**. Itaque amici mei, quemadmodum
semper obedistis, ne quasi in praesentia mea solum, sed nunc multo magis
in absentia mea, cum timore et tremore vestram salutem operamini:

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p4"></span>**13**. For it is God which worketh in
you both to will and to do of *his* good pleasure.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p5"></span>**13**. Deus enim est, qui efficit in
vobis et velle et efficere, pro bona voluntate.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p6"></span>**14**. Do all things without murmurings
and disputings:

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p7"></span>**14**. Omnia facite absque
murmurationibus et disceptationibus,

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p8"></span>**15**. That ye may be blameless and
harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and
perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world;

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p9"></span>**15**. Ut sitis tales, de quibus nemo
conqueratur, et sinceri filii Dei irreprehensibiles, in medio
generationis pravae et tortuosae, inter quos lucete, tanquam luminaria
in mundo:

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p10"></span>**16**. Holding forth the word of life;
that I may rejoice in the day of Christ, that I have not run in vain,
neither laboured in vain.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p11"></span>**16**. Sermonem vitae sustinentes, in
gloriam meam, in diem Christi, quod non frustra cucurrerim, nec frustra
laboraverim.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p12"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p13"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p14"></span>**12** *Therefore*, *etc*. He concludes
the whole of the preceding exhortation with a general statement — that
they should humble themselves under the Lord’s hand, for that will very
readily secure, that, laying aside all arrogance, they will be gentle
and indulgent to each other. This is the only befitting way in which the
mind of man may learn gentleness, when one who, while viewing himself
apart, pleased himself in his hiding-places, comes to examine himself as
compared with God.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p15"></span>*As ye have always obeyed*. He commends
their previous obedience, that he may encourage them the more to
persevere. As, however, it is the part of hypocrites to approve
themselves before others, but so soon as they have withdrawn from public
view, to indulge themselves more freely, as if every occasion of
reverence and fear were removed, he admonishes them not to shew
themselves *obedient in his presence merely*, but also, and even *much
more, in his absence*. For if he were present, he could stimulate and
urge them on by continued admonitions. Now, therefore, when their
monitor is at a distance from them,  <span
id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) there is need that they should stir up
themselves.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p17"></span>*With fear and trembling*. In this way
he would have the Philippians testify and approve their obedience — by
being submissive and humble. Now the source of humility is this —
acknowledging how miserable we are, and devoid of all good. To this he
calls them in this statement. For whence comes pride, but from the
assurance which blind confidence produces, when we please ourselves, and
are more puffed up with confidence in our own virtue, than prepared to
rest upon the grace of God. In contrast with this vice is that *fear* to
which he exhorts. Now, although exhortation comes before doctrine, in
the connection of the passage, it is in reality after it, in point of
arrangement, inasmuch as it is derived from it. I shall begin,
accordingly, with doctrine.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p18"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p19"></span>**13** *It is God that worketh*. This
is the true engine for bringing down all haughtiness — this the sword
for putting an end to all pride, when we are taught that we are utterly
nothing, and can do nothing, except through the grace of God alone. I
mean supernatural grace, which comes forth from the spirit of
regeneration. For, considered as men, we already *are, and live and move
in God.* (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p19.1"></span>[Ac
17:28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p19.1"></span>.) But Paul reasons here as to a kind of
*movement* different from that universal one. Let us now observe how
much he ascribes to God, and how much he leaves to us.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p20"></span>There are, in any action, two principal
departments — the inclination, and the power to carry it into effect.
Both of these he ascribes wholly to God; what more remains to us as a
ground of glorying? Nor is there any reason to doubt that this division
has the same force as if Paul had expressed the whole in a single word;
for the inclination is the groundwork; the accomplishment of it is the
summit of the building brought to a completion. He has also expressed
much more than if he had said that God is the Author of the beginning
and of the end. For in that case sophists would have alleged, by way of
cavil, that something between the two was left to men. But as it is,
what will they find that is in any degree peculiar to us? They toil hard
in their schools to reconcile with the grace of God free-will — of such
a nature, I mean, as they conceive of — which might be capable of
turning itself by its own movement, and might have a peculiar and
separate power, by which it might co-operate with the grace of God. I do
not dispute as to the name, but as to the thing itself. In order,
therefore, that free-will may harmonize with grace, they divide in such
a manner, that God restores in us a free choice, that we may have it in
our power to *will* aright. Thus they acknowledge to have received from
God the power of willing aright, but assign to man a good inclination.
Paul, however, declares this to be a work of God, without any
reservation. For he does not say that our hearts are simply turned or
stirred up, or that the infirmity of a good will is helped, but that a
good inclination is wholly the work of God.  <span
id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p22"></span>Now, in the calumny brought forward by
them against us — that we make men to be like stones, when we teach that
they have nothing good, except from pure grace, they act a shameless
part. For we acknowledge that we have from nature an inclination, but as
it is depraved through the corruption of sin, it begins to be good only
when it has been renewed by God. Nor do we say that a man does anything
good without willing it, but that it is only when his inclination is
regulated by the Spirit of God. Hence, in so far as concerns this
department, we see that the entire praise is ascribed to God, and that
what sophists teach us is frivolous — that grace is offered to us, and
placed, as it were, in the midst of us, that we may embrace it if we
choose; for if God did not work in us efficaciously, he could not be
said to produce in us a good inclination. As to the second department,
we must entertain the same view. “God,” says he, “is <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p22.1"></span> ̔Ο ἐνεργῶν το ἐνεργεῖν *he that worketh in
us to do.*” He brings, therefore, to perfection those pious dispositions
which he has implanted in us, that they may not be unproductive, as he
promises by Ezekiel, —

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p23"></span>“I will cause them to walk in my
commandments.”  
(<span id="iv.iii.iii-p23.2"></span>[Eze
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p23.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p24"></span>From this we infer that perseverance,
also, is his free gift.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p25"></span>*According to his good pleasure.* Some
explain this to mean — the good intention of the mind.  <span
id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) I, on the other hand, take it rather
as referring to God, and understand by it his benevolent disposition,
which they commonly call <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p26.2"></span>*beneplacitum*, (*good pleasure*.) For the
Greek word <span id="iv.iii.iii-p26.3"></span>εὐδοκία is very frequently
employed in this sense; and the context requires it. For Paul has it in
view to ascribe everything to God, and to take everything from us.
Accordingly, not satisfied with having assigned to God the production
both of *willing* and of *doing* aright, he ascribes both to his
unmerited mercy. By this means he shuts out the contrivance of the
sophists as to *subsequent grace*, which they imagine to be the reward
of merit. Hence he teaches, that the whole course of our life, if we
live aright, is regulated by God, and that, too, from his unmerited
goodness.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p27"></span>*With fear and trembling*. From this
Paul deduces an exhortation — that they must *with fear work out their
own salvation*. He conjoins, as he is accustomed, *fear* and
*trembling*, for the sake of greater intensity, to denote — serious and
anxious fear. He, accordingly, represses drowsiness as well as
confidence. By the term *work* he reproves our indolence, which is
always ingenious in seeking advantages.  <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) Now it seems as if it had in the grace
of God a sweet occasion of repose; for if He *worketh in us*, why should
we not indulge ourselves at our ease? The Holy Spirit, however, calls us
to consider, that he wishes to work upon living organs, but he
immediately represses arrogance by recommending *fear* and *trembling*

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p29"></span>The inference, also, is to be carefully
observed: “You have,” says he, “all things from God; therefore be
solicitous and humble.” For there is nothing that ought to train us more
to modesty and fear, than our being taught, that it is by the grace of
God alone that we stand, and will instantly fall down, if he even in the
slightest degree withdraw his hand. Confidence in ourselves produces
carelessness and arrogance. We know from experience, that all who
confide in their own strength, grow insolent through presumption, and at
the same time, devoid of care, resign themselves to sleep. The remedy
for both evils is, when, distrusting ourselves, we depend entirely on
God alone. And assuredly, that man has made decided progress in the
knowledge, both of the grace of God, and of his own weakness, who,
aroused from carelessness, diligently seeks  <span
id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) God’s help; while those that are
puffed up with confidence in their own strength, must necessarily be at
the same time in a state of intoxicated security. Hence it is a
shameless calumny that Papists bring against us, — that in extolling the
grace of God, and putting down free-will, we make men indolent, shake
off the fear of God, and destroy all feeling of concern. It is obvious,
however, to every reader, that Paul finds matter of exhortation here —
not in the doctrine of Papists, but in what is held by us. “God,” says
he, “*works all things in us;* therefore submit to him with *fear*.” I
do not, indeed, deny that there are many who, on being told that there
is in us nothing that is good, indulge themselves the more freely in
their vices; but I deny that this is the fault of the doctrine, which,
on the contrary, when received as it ought to be, produces in our hearts
a feeling of concern.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p31"></span>Papists, however, pervert this passage
so as to shake the assurance of faith, for the man that trembles  <span
id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122) is in uncertainty. They, accordingly,
understand Paul’s words as if they meant that we ought, during our whole
life, to waver as to assurance of salvation. If, however, we would not
have Paul contradict himself, he does not by any means exhort us to
hesitation, inasmuch as he everywhere recommends confidence and (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p32.2"></span>πληροφορίαν) *full assurance*. The
solution, however, is easy, if any one is desirous of attaining the true
meaning without any spirit of contention. There are two kinds of fear;
the one produces anxiety along with humility; the other hesitation. The
*former* is opposed to fleshly confidence and carelessness, equally as
to arrogance; the latter, to assurance of faith. Farther, we must take
notice, that, as believers repose with assurance upon the grace of God,
so, when they direct their views to their own frailty, they do not by
any means resign themselves carelessly to sleep, but are by *fear* of
dangers stirred up to prayer. Yet, so far is this *fear* from disturbing
tranquillity of conscience, and shaking confidence, that it rather
confirms it. For distrust of ourselves leads us to lean more confidently
upon the mercy of God. And this is what Paul’s words import, for he
requires nothing from the Philippians, but that they submit themselves
to God with true self-renunciation.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p33"></span>*Work out your own salvation*. As
Pelagians of old, so Papists at this day make a proud boast of this
passage, with the view of extolling man’s excellence. Nay more, when the
preceding statement is mentioned to them by way of objection, *It is God
that worketh in us,* *etc.*, they immediately by this shield ward it off
(so to speak) — *Work out your own salvation*. Inasmuch, then, as the
work is ascribed to God and man in common, they assign the half to each.
In short, from the word *work* they derive free-will; from the term
*salvation* they derive the merit of eternal life. I answer, that
*salvation* is taken to mean the entire course of our calling, and that
this term includes all things, by which God accomplishes that
perfection, to which he has predestinated us by his gracious choice.
This no one will deny, that is not obstinate and impudent. We are said
to perfect it, when, under the regulation of the Spirit, we aspire after
a life of blessedness. It is God that calls us, and offers to us
salvation; it is our part to embrace by faith what he gives, and by
obedience act suitably to his calling; but we have neither from
ourselves. Hence we act only when he has prepared us for acting.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p34"></span>The word which he employs properly
signifies — to continue until the end; but we must keep in mind what I
have said, that Paul does not reason here as to how far our ability
extends, but simply teaches that God acts in us in such a manner, that
he, at the same time, does not allow us to be inactive,  <span
id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) but exercises us diligently, after
having stirred us up by a secret influence.  <span
id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p37"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p38"></span>**14** *Without murmurings*. These are
fruits of that humility to which he had exhorted them. For every man
that has learned carefully to submit himself to God, without claiming
anything for himself, will also conduct himself agreeably among men.
When every one makes it his care to please himself, two faults prevail:
First, they calumniate one another; and secondly, they strive against
one another in contentions. In the *first* place, accordingly, he
forbids malignity and secret enmities; and then, *secondly*, open
contentions. He adds, *thirdly*, that they give no occasion to others to
complain of them — a thing which is wont to arise from excessive
moroseness. It is true that hatred is not in all cases to be dreaded;
but care must be taken, that we do not make ourselves odious through our
own fault, so that the saying should be fulfilled in us, *They hated me
without a cause*. (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p38.1"></span>[Ps
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p38.1"></span>.) If, however, any one wishes to extend it
farther, I do not object to it. For murmurings and disputations spring
up, whenever any one, aiming beyond measure at his own advantage,  <span
id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) gives to others occasion of complaint.
 <span id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) Nay, even this expression may
be taken in an active sense, so as to mean — not troublesome or
querulous. And this signification will not accord ill with the context,
for a querulous temper (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p40.2"></span>μεμψιμοιρία)
 <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) is the seed of almost all
quarrels and slanderings. He adds *sincere*, because these pollutions
will never come forth from minds that have been purified.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p42"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p43"></span>**15** *The sons of God, unreprovable*.
It ought to be rendered — *unreprovable*, because *ye are the sons of
God.* For God’s adoption of us ought to be a motive to a blameless life,
that we may in some degree resemble our Father. Now, although there
never has been such perfection in the world as to have nothing worthy of
reproof, those are, nevertheless, said to be *unreprovable* who aim at
this with the whole bent of their mind, as has been observed elsewhere.
 <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p45"></span>*In the midst of a wicked generation.*
Believers, it is true, live on earth, intermingled with the wicked;
 <span id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) they breathe the same air, they
enjoy the same soil, and at that time  <span
id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) they were even more intermingled,
inasmuch as there could scarcely be found a single pious family that was
not surrounded on all sides by unbelievers. So much the more does Paul
stir up the Philippians to guard carefully against all corruptions. The
meaning therefore is this: “You are, it is true, inclosed in the midst
of the wicked; but, in the mean time, bear in mind that you are, by
God’s adoption, separated from them: let there be, therefore, in your
manner of life, conspicuous marks by which you may be distinguished. Nay
more, this consideration ought to stir you up the more to aim at a pious
and holy life, that we may not also be a part of the *crooked
generation*,  <span id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) entangled by their
vices and contagion.”

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p49"></span>As to his calling them a *wicked and
crooked generation*, this corresponds with the connection of the
passage. For he teaches us that we must so much the more carefully take
heed on this account — that many occasions of offense are stirred up by
unbelievers, which disturb their right course; and the whole life of
unbelievers is, as it were, a labyrinth of various windings, that draw
us off from the right way. They are, however, notwithstanding, epithets
of perpetual application, that are descriptive of unbelievers of all
nations and in all ages. For if the heart of man is wicked and
unsearchable, (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p49.1"></span>[Jer
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p49.1"></span>,) what will be the fruits springing from
such a root? Hence we are taught in these words, that in the life of man
there is nothing pure, nothing right, until he has been renewed by the
Spirit of God.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p50"></span>*Among whom shine ye*. The termination
of the Greek word is doubtful, for it might be taken as the *indicative*
— *ye shine*; but the *imperative* suits better with the exhortation. He
would have believers be as lamps, which shine amidst the darkness of the
world, as though he had said, “Believers, it is true, are children of
the night, and there is in the world nothing but darkness; but God has
enlightened you for this end, that the purity of your life may shine
forth amidst that darkness, that his grace may appear the more
illustrious.” Thus, also, it is said by the Prophet,

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p51"></span>“The Lord will arise upon thee,  
and his glory will be seen upon thee.”(<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p51.2"></span>[Isa
60:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p51.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p52"></span>He adds immediately afterwards, “The
Gentiles shall walk in thy light, and kings in the brightness of thy
countenance.” Though Isaiah speaks there rather of doctrine, while Paul
speaks here of an exemplary life, yet, even in relation to doctrine,
Christ in another passage specially designates the Apostles the *light
of the world*. (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p52.1"></span>[Mt
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p52.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p53"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p54"></span>**16** *Holding forth the word of life*
The reason why they ought to be luminaries is, that they carry the *word
of life,* by which they are enlightened, that they may give light also
to others. Now he alludes to lamps, in which wicks are placed that they
may burn, and he makes us resemble the lamps; while he compares the word
of God to the wick, from which the light comes. If you prefer another
figure — we are candlesticks: the doctrine of the gospel is the candle,
which, being placed in us, diffuses light on all sides. Now he
intimates, that we do injustice to the word of God, if it does not shine
forth in us in respect of purity of life. This is the import of Christ’s
saying,

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p55"></span>“No man lighteth a candle,  
and putteth it under a bushel,” etc. (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p55.2"></span>[Mt
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p55.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p56"></span>We are said, however, to *carry the
word of life* in such a way as to be, in the mean time, carried by it,
 <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) inasmuch as we are founded upon
it. The manner, however, of carrying it, of which Paul speaks, is, that
God has intrusted his doctrine with us on condition, not that we should
keep the light of it under restraint, as it were, and inactive, but that
we should hold it forth to others. The sum is this: that all that are
enlightened with heavenly doctrine carry about with them a light, which
detects and discovers their crimes,  <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) if they do not walk in holiness and
chastity; but that this light has been kindled up, not merely that they
may themselves be guided in the right way, but that they may also shew
it to others.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p59"></span>*That I may have glory*. That he may
encourage them the more, he declares that it will turn out to his glory,
if he has not labored among them in vain. Not as if those who labored
faithfully, but unsuccessfully, lost their pains, and had no reward of
their labor. As, however, success in our ministry is a singular blessing
from God, let us not feel surprised, if God, among his other gifts,
makes this the crowning one. Hence, as Paul’s Apostleship is now
rendered illustrious by so many Churches, gained over to Christ through
his instrumentality, so there can be no question that such trophies
 <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) will have a place in Christ’s
kingdom, as we will find him saying a little afterwards, *You are my
crown*. (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p60.5"></span>[Php
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p60.5"></span>.) Nor can it be doubted, that the greater
the exploits, the triumph will be the more splendid.  <span
id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p62"></span>Should any one inquire how it is that
Paul now glories in his labors, while he elsewhere forbids us to *glory*
in any but *in the Lord*, (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p62.1"></span>[1Co
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p62.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.iii-p62.2"></span>[2Co
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p62.2"></span>,) the answer is easy — that, when we have
prostrated ourselves, and all that we have before God, and have placed
in Christ all our ground of glorying, it is, at the same time, allowable
for us to glory through Christ in God’s benefits, as we have seen in the
First Epistle to the Corinthians.  <span
id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136) The expression, *at the day of the
Lord*, is intended to stimulate the Philippians to perseverance, while
the tribunal of Christ is set before their view, from which the reward
of faith is to be expected.

<span id="iv.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Philippians
2:17-24](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p2"></span>**17**. Yea, and if I be offered upon the
sacrifice and service of your faith, I joy, and rejoice with you all.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p3"></span>**17**. Quin etiam si immoler super
hostia et sacrificio fidei vestrae, gaudeo et congaudeo vobis omnibus.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p4"></span>**18**. For the same cause also do ye
joy, and rejoice with me.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p5"></span>**18**. De hoc ipso gaudete, et
congaudete mihi.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p6"></span>**19**. But I trust in the Lord Jesus to
send Timotheus shortly unto you, that I also may be of good comfort,
when I know your state.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p7"></span>**19**. Spero autem in Domino, Timotheum
brevi me ad vos missurum, ut ego tranquillo sim animo, postquam statum
vestrum cognoverim.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p8"></span>**20**. For I have no man likeminded, who
will naturally care for your state.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p9"></span>**20**. Neminem enim habeo pari animo
praeditum, qui germane res vestras curaturus sit.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p10"></span>**21**. For all seek their own, not the
things which are Jesus Christ’s.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p11"></span>**21**. Omnes enim quae sua sunt
quaerunt: non quae sunt Christi Iesu.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p12"></span>**22**. But ye know the proof of him,
that, as a son with the father, he hath served with me in the gospel.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p13"></span>**22**. Porro experimentum eius tenetis,
quod tanquam cum patre filius, ita mecum servivit in Euangelium.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p14"></span>**23**. Him therefore I hope to send
presently, so soon as I shall see how it will go with me.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p15"></span>**23**. Hunc igitur spero me missurum,
simulac mea negotia videro.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p16"></span>**24**. But I trust in the Lord that I
also myself shall come shortly.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p17"></span>**24**. Confido autem in Domino quod
ipse quoque brevi sim venturus.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p18"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p19"></span><span id="iv.iii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p20"></span>**17** *If I should be offered.*  <span
id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) The Greek word is <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p21.1"></span>σπένδομαι, and accordingly there appears to
be an allusion to those animals, by the slaughter of which agreements
and treaties were confirmed among the ancients. For the Greeks specially
employ the term <span id="iv.iii.iv-p21.2"></span>σπονδὰς to denote the
victims by which treaties are confirmed. In this way, he calls his death
the confirmation of their faith, which it certainly would be. That,
however, the whole passage may be more clearly understood, he says that
he offered sacrifice to God, when he consecrated them by the gospel.
There is a similar expression in <span id="iv.iii.iv-p21.3"></span>[Ro
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p21.3"></span>; for in that passage he represents himself
as a priest, who *offers up* the Gentiles to God by the gospel. Now, as
the gospel is a spiritual sword for slaying victims,  <span
id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) so faith is, as it were, the oblation;
for there is no faith without mortification, by means of which we are
consecrated to God.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p23"></span>He makes use of the terms, <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p23.1"></span>καὶ λειτουργίαν — *sacrifice and service*,
the *former* of which refers to the Philippians, who had been offered up
to God; and the *latter* to Paul, for it is the very act of sacrificing.
The term, it is true, is equivalent to *administration*, and thus it
includes functions and offices of every kind; but here it relates
properly to the service of God — corresponding to the phrase made use of
by the Latins — <span id="iv.iii.iv-p23.2"></span>*operari sacris* — (to
be *employed in sacred rites*  <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139) )
Now Paul says that he will rejoice, if he shall be offered up upon a
sacrifice of this nature — that it may be the more ratified and
confirmed. This is to teach the gospel from the heart — when we are
prepared to confirm with our own blood what we teach.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p25"></span>From this, however, a useful lesson is
to be gathered as to the nature of faith — that it is not a vain thing,
but of such a nature as to consecrate man to God. The ministers of the
gospel have, also, here a singular consolation in being called priests
of God, to present victims to him;  <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) for with what ardor ought that man to
apply himself to the pursuit of preaching, who knows that this is an
acceptable sacrifice to God! The wretched Papists, having no knowledge
of this kind of sacrifice, contrive another, which is utter sacrilege.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p27"></span>*I rejoice with you,* says he — so that
if it should happen that he died, they would know that this took place
for their profit, and would receive advantage from his death.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p28"></span><span id="iv.iii.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p29"></span>**18** *Rejoice ye*. By the alacrity
which he thus discovers, he encourages the Philippians, and enkindles in
them a desire to meet death with firmness,  <span
id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) inasmuch as believers suffer no harm
from it. For he has formerly taught them that death would be *gain* to
himself, (<span id="iv.iii.iv-p30.2"></span>[Php
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p30.2"></span>;) here, on the other hand, he is chiefly
concerned that his death may not disconcert the Philippians.  <span
id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142) He, accordingly, declares that it is
no ground of sorrow; nay, that they have occasion of joy, inasmuch as
they will find it to be productive of advantage. For, although it was in
itself a serious loss to be deprived of such a teacher, it was no slight
compensation that the gospel was confirmed by his blood. In the mean
time, he lets them know that to himself personally death would be matter
of joy. The rendering of Erasmus, taking it in the present tense, *Ye
rejoice*, is altogether unsuitable.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p32"></span><span id="iv.iii.iv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p33"></span>**19** *But I hope*. He promises them
the coming of Timothy, that, from their expecting him, they may bear up
more courageously, and not give way to impostors. For as in war an
expectation of help animates soldiers, so as to keep them from giving
way, so this consideration, too, was fitted to encourage greatly the
Philippians: “There will one come very shortly, who will set himself in
opposition to the contrivances of our enemies.” But if the mere
expectation of him had so much influence, his presence would exert a
much more powerful effect. We must take notice of the condition  <span
id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143) — in respect of which he submits
himself to the providence of God, forming no purpose, but with *that*
leading the way, as assuredly it is not allowable to determine anything
as to the future, except, so to speak, under the Lord’s hand. When he
adds, *that I may be in tranquillity*, he declares his affection towards
them, inasmuch as he was so much concerned as to their dangers, that he
was not at ease until he received accounts of their prosperity.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p35"></span><span id="iv.iii.iv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p36"></span>**20** *I have no man like-minded*.
While some draw another meaning from the passage, I interpret it thus:
“I have no one equally well-affected for attending to your interests.”
For Paul, in my opinion, compares Timothy with others, rather than with
himself, and he pronounces this eulogium upon him, with the express
design that he may be the more highly esteemed by them for his rare
excellence.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p37"></span><span id="iv.iii.iv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p38"></span>**21** *For all seek their own things*.
He does not speak of those who had openly abandoned the pursuit of
piety, but of those very persons whom he reckoned brethren, nay, even
those whom he admitted to familiar intercourse with him. These persons,
he nevertheless says, were so warm in the pursuit of their own
interests, that they were unbecomingly cold in the work of the Lord. It
may seem at first view as if it were no great fault to seek one’s own
profit; but how insufferable it is in the servants of Christ, appears
from this, that it renders those that give way to it utterly useless.
For it is impossible that the man who is devoted to self, should apply
himself to the interests of the Church. Did then, you will say, Paul
cultivate the society of men that were worthless and mere pretenders? I
answer, that it is not to be understood, as if they had been intent
exclusively on their own interests, and bestowed no care whatever upon
the Church, but that, taken up with their own individual interests, they
were to some extent negligent to the promotion of the public advantage
of the Church. For it must necessarily be, that one or other of two
dispositions prevails over us — either that, overlooking ourselves, we
are devoted to Christ, and those things that are Christ’s, or that,
unduly intent on our own advantage, we serve Christ in a superficial
manner.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p39"></span>From this it appears, how great a
hinderance it is to Christ’s ministers to seek their own interests. Nor
is there any force in these excuses: “I do harm to no one“ — “I must
have a regard, also, to my own advantage” — “I am not so devoid of
feeling as not to be prompted by a regard to my own advantage.” For you
must give up your own right if you would discharge your duty: a regard
to your own interests must not be put in preference to Christ’s glory,
or even placed upon a level with it. Whithersoever Christ calls you, you
must go promptly, leaving off all other things. Your calling ought to be
regarded by you in such a way, that you shall turn away all your powers
of perception from everything that would impede you. It might be in your
power to live elsewhere in greater opulence, but God has bound you to
the Church, which affords you but a very moderate sustenance: you might
elsewhere have more honor, but God has assigned you a situation, in
which you live in a humble style:  <span
id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) you might have elsewhere a more
salubrious sky, or a more delightful region, but it is here that your
station is appointed. You might wish to have to do with a more humane
people: you feel offended with their ingratitude, or barbarity, or
pride; in short, you have no sympathy with the disposition or the
manners of the nation in which you are, but you must struggle with
yourself, and do violence in a manner to opposing inclinations, that you
may  <span id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145) keep by the trade you have
got;  <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146) for you are not free, or
at your own disposal. In fine, forget yourself, if you would serve God.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p43"></span>If, however, Paul reproves so severely
those who were influenced by a greater concern for themselves than for
the Church, what judgment may be looked for by those who, while
altogether devoted to their own affairs, make no account of the
edification of the Church? However they may now flatter themselves, God
will not spare them. An allowance must be given to the ministers of the
Church to seek their own interests, so as not to be prevented from
seeking the kingdom of Christ; but in that case they will not be
represented as seeking their own interests, as a man’s life is estimated
according to its chief aim. When he says *all*, we are not to understand
the term denoting universality, as though it implied that there was no
exception, for there were others also, such as Epaphroditus,  <span
id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147) but there were few of these, and he
ascribes to all what was very generally prevalent.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p45"></span>When, however, we hear Paul complaining,
that in that golden age, in which all excellences flourished, that there
were so few that were rightly affected,  <span
id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148) let us not be disheartened, if such is
our condition in the present day: only let every one take heed to
himself, that he be not justly reckoned to belong to that catalogue. I
should wish, however, that Papists would answer me one question — where
Peter was at that time, for he must have been at Rome, if what they say
is true. O the sad and vile description that Paul gave of him! They
utter, therefore, mere fables, when they pretend that he at that time
presided over the Church of Rome. Observe, that the edification of the
Church is termed the *things of Christ*, because we are truly engaged in
his work, when we labor in the cultivation of his vineyard.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p47"></span><span id="iv.iii.iv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p48"></span>**22** *But the proof*. It is literally,
*ye know the proof of him*, unless you prefer to understand it in the
imperative mood, *know ye*; (for there had scarcely been opportunity
during that short time to make trial,) but this is not of great moment.
What is chiefly to be noticed is, that he furnishes Timothy with an
attestation of fidelity and modesty. In evidence of his fidelity, he
declares, that he had *served with him in the gospel*, for such a
connection was a token of true sincerity. In evidence of his modesty, he
states, that he had *submitted to him as to a father*. It is not to be
wondered, that this virtue is expressly commended by Paul, for it has in
all ages been rare. At the present day, where will you find one among
the young that will give way to his seniors, even in the smallest thing?
to such an extent does impertinence triumph and prevail in the present
age! In this passage, as in many others, we see how diligently Paul
makes it his aim to put honor upon pious ministers, and that not so much
for their own sakes, as on the ground of its being for the advantage of
the whole Church, that such persons should be loved and honored, and
possess the highest authority.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p49"></span><span id="iv.iii.iv-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p50"></span>**24** *I trust that I myself*. He adds
this, too, lest they should imagine that anything had happened to change
his intention as to the journey of which he had previously made mention.
At the same time, he always speaks conditionally — *If it shall please
the Lord*. For although he expected deliverance from the Lord, yet there
having been, as we have observed, no express promise, this expectation
was by no means settled, but was, as it were, suspended upon the secret
purpose of God.

<span id="iv.iii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iii.v-p1.1"></span>[Philippians
2:25-30](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p2"></span>**25**. Yet I supposed it necessary to
send to you Epaphroditus, my brother, and companion in labour, and
fellowsoldier, but your messenger, and he that ministered to my wants.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p3"></span>**25**. Porro necessarium existimavi
Epaphroditum, fratrem et cooperarium, et commilitonem meum, Apostolum
autem vestrum, et ministrum necessitatis meae mittere ad vos.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p4"></span>**26**. For he longed after you all, and
was full of heaviness, because that ye had heard that he had been sick.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p5"></span>**26**. Quandoquidem desiderabat vos
omnes, et erat anxius animi, propterea quod audieratis ipsum infirmatum
fuisse.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p6"></span>**27**. For indeed he was sick nigh unto
death: but God had mercy on him; and not on him only, but on me also,
lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p7"></span>**27**. Et certe infirmatus fuit, ut esset
morti vicinus, sed Deus misertus est illius: neque illius solum, sed
etiam mei; ut ne tristitiam super tristitiam haberem.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p8"></span>**28**. I sent him therefore the more
carefully, that, when ye see him again, ye may rejoice, and that I may
be the less sorrowful.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p9"></span>**28**. Studiosius itaque misi illum, ut
eo viso rursus gaudeatis, et ego magis vacem dolore.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p10"></span>**29**. Receive him therefore in the Lord
with all gladness; and hold such in reputation:

<span id="iv.iii.v-p11"></span>**29**. Excipite ergo illum in Domino cum
omni gaudio: et qui tales sunt, in pretio habete:

<span id="iv.iii.v-p12"></span>**30**. Because for the work of Christ he
was nigh unto death, not regarding his life, to supply your lack of
service toward me.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p13"></span>**30**. Quia propter opus Christi usque
ad mortem accessit, exponens periculo animam, ut sufficeret quod deerat
vestro erga me ministerio, (*vel, officio.*)

<span id="iv.iii.v-p14"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.v-p15"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p16"></span>**25** *I thought it necessary to send to
you Epaphroditus*. After having encouraged them by the promise of his
own coming and that of Timothy, he fortifies them also for the present,
by sending previously Epaphroditus, that in the mean time, while he
waited the issue of his own affairs, (for this was the cause of his
delay,) they might not be in want of a pastor who should take care that
matters were properly managed. Now, he recommends Epaphroditus by many
distinctions — that he is his *brother*, and helper in the affairs of
the gospel — that he is his *fellow-soldier*, by which term he intimates
what is the condition of the ministers of the gospel; that they are
engaged in an incessant warfare, for Satan will not allow them to
promote the gospel without maintaining a conflict. Let those, then, who
prepare themselves for edifying the Church, know that war is denounced
against them, and prepared. This, indeed, is common to all Christians —
to be soldiers in the camp of Christ,  <span
id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149) for Satan is the enemy of all. It is,
however, more particularly applicable to the ministers of the word, who
go before the army and bear the standard. Paul, however, more especially
might boast of his military service,  <span
id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150) inasmuch as he was exercised to a very
miracle in every kind of contest. He accordingly commends Epaphroditus,
because he had been a companion to him in his conflicts.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p19"></span>The term *Apostle* here, as in many other
passages, is taken generally to mean any evangelist,  <span
id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151) unless any one prefers to understand
it as meaning an ambassador sent by the Philippians, so that it may be
understood as conjoining these two things — an ambassador to afford
service to Paul.  <span id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152) The former
signification, however, is in my opinion more suitable. He mentions
also, among other things, to his praise, that he had *ministered to him
in prison* — a matter which will be treated of more fully ere long.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p22"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p23"></span>**26.** *He longed after you*. It is a
sign of a true pastor, that while he was at a great distance, and was
willingly detained by a pious engagement, he was nevertheless affected
with concern for his flock, and a longing after them; and on learning
that his sheep were distressed on his account,  <span
id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153) he was concerned as to their grief. On
the other hand, the anxiety of the Philippians for their pastor is here
discovered.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p25"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p26"></span>**27** *But God had mercy on him*. He had
expressed the severity of the disease — that Epaphroditus had been sick,
so that life was despaired of, in order that the goodness of God might
shine forth more clearly in his restored health. It is, however,
surprising that he should ascribe it to the mercy of God that
Epaphroditus had had his period of life prolonged, while he had
previously declared that he desired death in preference to life. (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p26.1"></span>[Php
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p26.1"></span>.) And what were better for us than that we
should remove hence to the kingdom of God, delivered from the many
miseries of this world, and more especially, rescued from that bondage
of sin in which he elsewhere exclaims that he is *wretched*, (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p26.2"></span>[Ro
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p26.2"></span>,) to attain the full enjoyment of that
liberty of the Spirit, by which we become connected with the Son of God?
 <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) It were tedious to enumerate
all the things which tend to make death better than life to believers,
and more to be desired. Where, then, is there any token of the mercy of
God, when it does nothing but lengthen out our miseries? I answer, that
all these things do not prevent this life from being, nevertheless,
considered in itself, an excellent gift of God. More especially those
who live to Christ are happily exercised here in hope of heavenly glory;
and accordingly, as we have had occasion to see a little ago, life is
gain to them.  <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) Besides, there is
another thing, too, that is to be considered — that it is no small honor
that is conferred upon us, when God glorifies himself in us; for it
becomes us to look not so much to life itself, as to the end for which
we live.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p29"></span>*But on me also, lest I should have
sorrow.* Paul acknowledges that the death of Epaphroditus would have
been bitterly painful to him, and he recognises it as an instance of
God’s sparing mercy toward himself, that he had been restored to health.
He does not, therefore, make it his boast that he has the *apathy*
(<span id="iv.iii.v-p29.1"></span>ἀπάθειαν) of the Stoics, as if he were
a man of iron, and exempt from human affections.  <span
id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156) “What then!” some one will say, “where
is that unconquerable magnanimity?—where is that indefatigable
perseverance?” I answer, that Christian patience differs widely from
philosophical obstinacy, and still more from the stubborn and fierce
sterness of the Stoics. For what excellence were there in patiently
enduring the cross, if there were in it no feeling of pain and
bitterness? But when the consolation of God overcomes that feeling, so
that we do not resist, but, on the contrary, give our back to the
endurance of the rod, (<span id="iv.iii.v-p30.1"></span>[Isa
50:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p30.1"></span>,) we in that case present to God a sacrifice
of obedience that is acceptable to him. Thus Paul acknowledges that he
felt some uneasiness and pain from his bonds, but that he nevertheless
cheerfully endured these same bonds for the sake of Christ.  <span
id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) He acknowledges that he would have
felt the death of Epaphroditus an event hard to be endured, but he would
at length have brought his temper of mind into accordance with the will
of God, although all reluctance was not yet fully removed; for we give
proof of our obedience, only when we bridle our depraved affections, and
do not give way to the infirmity of the flesh.  <span
id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158)

<span id="iv.iii.v-p33"></span>*Two* things, therefore, are to be
observed: in the *first* place, that the dispositions which God
originally implanted in our nature are not evil in themselves, because
they do not arise from the fault of corrupt nature, but come forth from
God as their Author; of this nature is the grief that is felt on
occasion of the death of friends: in the *second* place, that Paul had
many other reasons for regret in connection with the death of
Epaphroditus, and that these were not merely excusable, but altogether
necessary. This, in the first place, is invariable in the case of all
believers, that, on occasion of the death of any one, they are reminded
of the anger of God against sin; but Paul was the more affected with the
loss sustained by the Church, which he saw would be deprived of a
singularly good pastor at a time when the good were so few in number.
Those who would have dispositions of this kind altogether subdued and
eradicated, do not picture to themselves merely men of flint, but men
that are fierce and savage. In the depravity of our nature, however,
everything in us is so perverted, that in whatever direction our minds
are bent, they always go beyond bounds. Hence it is that there is
nothing that is so pure or right in itself, as not to bring with it some
contagion. Nay more, Paul, as being a man, would, I do not deny, have
experienced in his grief something of human error,  <span
id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) for he was subject to infirmity, and
required to be tried with temptations, in order that he might have
occasion of victory by striving and resisting.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p35"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p36"></span>**28** *I have sent him the more
carefully*. The presence of Epaphroditus was no small consolation to
him; yet to such a degree did he prefer the welfare of the Philippians
to his own advantage, that he says that he rejoices on occasion of his
departure, because it grieved him that, on his account, he was taken
away from the flock that was intrusted to him, and was reluctant to
avail himself of his services, though otherwise agreeable to him, when
it was at the expense of loss to them. Hence he says, that he will feel
more happiness in the joy of the Philippians.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p37"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p38"></span>**29** *Receive him with all joy*. He
employs the word *all* to mean sincere and abundant. He also recommends
him again to the Philippians; so intent is he upon this, that all that
approve themselves as good and faithful pastors may be held in the
highest estimation: for he does not speak merely of one, but exhorts
that all such should be held in estimation; for they are precious pearls
from God’s treasuries, and the rarer they are, they are so much the more
worthy of esteem. Nor can it be doubted that God often punishes our
ingratitude and proud disdain, by depriving us of good pastors, when he
sees that the most eminent that are given by him are ordinarily
despised. Let every one, then, who is desirous that the Church should be
fortified against the stratagems and assaults of wolves, make it his
care, after the example of Paul, that the authority of good pastors be
established;  <span id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) as, on the other
hand, there is nothing upon which the instruments of the devil are more
intent, than on undermining it by every means in their power.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p40"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p41"></span>**30** *Because for the work of Christ*.
I consider this as referring to that infirmity, which he had drawn down
upon himself by incessant assiduity. Hence he reckons the distemper of
Epaphroditus among his excellences, as it certainly was a signal token
of his ardent zeal. Sickness, indeed, is not an excellence, but it is an
excellence not to spare yourself that you may serve Christ. Epaphroditus
felt that his health would be in danger if he applied himself beyond
measure; yet he would rather be negligent as to health than be deficient
in duty; and that he may commend this conduct the more to the
Philippians, he says that it was a filling up of their deficiency,
 <span id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161) because, being situated at a
distance, they could not furnish aid to Paul at Rome. Hence
Epaphroditus, having been sent for this purpose, acted in their stead.
 <span id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) He speaks of the services
rendered to him as the *work of the Lord*, as assuredly there is nothing
in which we can better serve God, than when we help his servants who
labor for the truth of the gospel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc42006.htm#fr_91) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p4"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.i-p4.1"></span>Entrailles et misericordes, *ou*, cordiales
affections et misericordes;” — “Bowels and mercies, *or*, cordial
affections and mercies.”

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc42006.htm#fr_92) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p14"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.i-p14.1"></span>Ceste
exhortation est plene d’affections vehementes;” — “This exhortation is
full of intense affections.”

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc42006.htm#fr_93) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p16"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.i-p16.1"></span>Et que
les pasteurs le doyuent procurer d’vne affection vehemente et zele
ardent;” — “And that pastors should endeavor to procure it with intense
desire and ardent zeal.”

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc42006.htm#fr_94) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p17"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.i-p17.1"></span>Il
peust vser d’authorite paternelle, et demander que pour la reuerence
qu’ils luy deuoyent comme ses enfans, ils feissent ce qu’il enseigne
yci;” — “He might have exercised paternal authority, and have demanded
that in consideration of the respect which they owed him as his
children, they should do what he here inculcates.”

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc42006.htm#fr_95) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p18"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.i-p18.1"></span>Pour
entrer dedans leurs cœurs, et es mouuoir leurs affections;” — “For
entering into their hearts, and moving their affections.”

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc42006.htm#fr_96) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p19"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.i-p19.1"></span>Ne
doit faire difficulte de se transformer selon qu’il cognoistra que ce
sera le proufit de l’Eglise;” — “Should have no hesitation in
transforming himself according as he may perceive that this will be for
the advantage of the Church.”

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc42006.htm#fr_97) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p25"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.i-p25.1"></span>Sans
pouuoir estre arrestee;” — “Without being capable of being arrested.”

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc42006.htm#fr_98) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p26"></span> <span
id="iv.iii.i-p26.1"></span>Κενοδόξοι persons whose object is to acquire
power, and who, if they see others superior to themselves, are offended.
(<span id="iv.iii.i-p26.2"></span>[Ga
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#026)<span
id="iv.iii.i-p26.2"></span>.) This <span
id="iv.iii.i-p26.3"></span>κενοδοξία *vain-glory*, produces contentions
of all kinds; and it produces this evil besides, that persons who have
gone wrong, and who might have been restored to truth and virtue by
humble, friendly admonition, are often, by the interference of
*vain-glorious*, ostentatious instructors, confirmed in error and vice.”
— *Storr*. See *Biblical Cabinet*, vol. 40, p. 132, *note*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc42006.htm#fr_99) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p26.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p27"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.i-p27.1"></span>Est le
sufflet qui allume toutes contentions;” — “Is the bellows that kindles
up all strifes.”

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc42006.htm#fr_100) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p29"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.i-p29.1"></span>Comme
quelqu’vn a dit anciennement;” — “As some one has said anciently.”

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc42006.htm#fr_101) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p19"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p19.1"></span>Pourceque l’imitation d’ iceluy est la regle
de bien viure;” — “Because imitation of him is the rule of right
living.”

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc42006.htm#fr_102) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p23"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.ii-p23.1"></span>Car
tout ainsi qu’vn homme est cognu quand on contemple la forme de son
visage et sa personne, aussi la maieste, qui reluit en Dieu, est la
forme ou figure d’iceluy;” — “For just as a man is known, when we mark
the form of his appearance and his person, so the majesty, which shines
forth in God, is his form or figure.”

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc42006.htm#fr_103) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p24"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.ii-p24.1"></span>Le
manteau royal;” — “His royal mantle.”

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc42006.htm#fr_104) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p25"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.ii-p25.1"></span>La
garde a l’entour;” — “The guard in attendance.”

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc42006.htm#fr_105) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p28"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p28.1"></span>Comme s’ils ne faisoyent rien a ce
propos-la;” — “As if they had no bearing on that point.”

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc42006.htm#fr_106) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p29"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p29.1"></span>C’est à dire d’vne mesme substance auec le
Pere;” — “That is to say, of the same substance as the Father.”

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc42006.htm#fr_107) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p33.7"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p34"></span> <span id="iv.iii.ii-p34.1"></span>[Isa.
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001), [Matt.
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p34.1"></span>, — *fj.*

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc42006.htm#fr_108) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p36"></span> See Calvin’s *Institutes*, vol.
2:13-15.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc42006.htm#fr_109) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p40"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.ii-p40.1"></span>Pour
amplifier et exaggerer la chose;” — “For the sake of amplifying and
enhancing the thing.”

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc42006.htm#fr_110) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p47"></span> *Virg. Æn.* 2:557, 558.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc42006.htm#fr_111) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p48"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.ii-p48.1"></span>Et
de cela il s’en ensuit, que c’est vn nom ou dignite propre a Dieu seul;”
—”And from this it follows, that it is a name or dignity that belongs to
God alone.”

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc42006.htm#fr_112) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p51"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p51.1"></span>Comme s’il estoit deduit du nom Jehouah,
lequel les Juifs par superstition disent qu’il n’est licite de
proferer;” — “As if it were derived from the name Jehovah, which the
Jews superstitiously say that it is not lawful to utter.”

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc42006.htm#fr_113) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p52"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.ii-p52.1"></span>En
ces subtilitez vaines et frivoles;” —”In these empty and frivolous
subtleties.”

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc42006.htm#fr_114) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p53"></span>”<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p53.1"></span>Duquel toute la vertu consistast au son et
en la prononciation;” —”The whole virtue of which consisted in the sound
and the pronunciation.”

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc42006.htm#fr_115) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p56"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.ii-p56.1"></span>Vn
signe et ceremonie externe;” —”An outward sign and rite.”

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc42006.htm#fr_116) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p60.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p61"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.ii-p61.1"></span>Qui
ne voit qu’ils sont plus qu’ enfans en telles subtilitez friuoles et
niaiseries qu’ils affectent?” — “Who does not see that they are worse
than children in such frivolous subtleties and fooleries which they
affect?”

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc42006.htm#fr_117) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p16"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p16.1"></span>Maintenant donc qu’il est loin d’eux, et
qu’il ne les pent plus admonester en presence;” — “Now, therefore, when
he is at a distance from them, and can no longer admonish them when
present.”

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc42006.htm#fr_118) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p21"></span> See *Institutes*, vol. 1, pp. 350,
353.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc42006.htm#fr_119) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p26"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p26.1"></span>Aucuns exposent le mot Grec, bon propos et
bon cœur, le rapportans aux hommes;” — “Some explain the Greek word as
meaning, a good purpose and a good heart, making it refer to men.”

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc42006.htm#fr_120) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p28"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p28.1"></span>Ingenieuse a cercher ses auantages, et
quelques vaines excuses;” — “Ingenious in seeking its advantages, and
some vain pretexts.”

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc42006.htm#fr_121) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p30"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p30.1"></span>Cerche songneusement et implore;” —
“Diligently seeks and implores.”

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc42006.htm#fr_122) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p32"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p32.1"></span>Car celuy qui tremble, disent-ils;” — “For
he that trembles, say they.”

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc42006.htm#fr_123) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p35"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p35.1"></span>Deuenir paresseux et oisifs;” — “To become
idle and indolent.”

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc42006.htm#fr_124) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p36"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p36.1"></span>Mais apres nous auoir poussez et incitez
par vne inspiration secrete et cachee, nous employe et exerce
songneusement;” — “But, after having stimulated and incited us by a
secret and hidden inspiration, he diligently employs and exercises us.”

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc42006.htm#fr_125) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p39"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p39.1"></span>Cerchant outre mesure son proufit et
vtilite particuliere;” — “Seeking beyond measure his own particular
profit and advantage.”

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc42006.htm#fr_126) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p40"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.iii-p40.1"></span>Le
vice qui est en plusieurs qu’ils sont pleins de complaints contre les
autres;” — “The fault that is in very many — that they are full of
complaints as to others.”

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc42006.htm#fr_127) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p40.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p41"></span> The term is used by Aristotle. See
*Arist*. Virt. et. Vit. 7. 6. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc42006.htm#fr_128) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p44"></span> Our Author most probably refers to
what he had stated when commenting on <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p44.1"></span>[1Co
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p44.1"></span>. See Calvin on the *Corinthians*, vol. 1,
pp. 58, 59. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc42006.htm#fr_129) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p46"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p46.1"></span>Mesles auec les infideles et meschans;” —
“Mingled with the unbelieving and the wicked.”

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc42006.htm#fr_130) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p47"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.iii-p47.1"></span>Et
lors mesme que S. Paul escriuoit ceci;” — “And even at the time that St.
Paul wrote this.”

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc42006.htm#fr_131) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p48"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.iii-p48.1"></span>De
la generation peruerse et maudite;” — “Of the perverse and accursed
generation.”

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc42006.htm#fr_132) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p57"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p57.1"></span>Soustenus ou portez d’elle;” — “Sustained
or carried by it.”

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc42006.htm#fr_133) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p58"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p58.1"></span>Leur turpitude et vilenie;” — “Their
disgrace and villany.”

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc42006.htm#fr_134) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p60"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p60.1"></span>Telles conquestes et marques de triomphe;”
— “Such conquests and tokens of triumph.” The term <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p60.2"></span>*tropaea* made use of by our Author,
(corresponding to the Greek term <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p60.3"></span>πρόπαια,) properly signifies, monuments of
the enemy’s *defeat*, (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p60.4"></span>προπή.) —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc42006.htm#fr_135) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p60.6"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p61"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p61.1"></span>Tant plus qu’il y aura de faits
cheualeureux, que le triomphe aussi n’en soit d’autant plus magnifique
et honorable;” — “The more there are of illustrious deeds, the triumph
also will be so much the more magnificent and honorable.”

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc42006.htm#fr_136) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p62.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p63"></span> See Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 1,
pp. 94, 95.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc42006.htm#fr_137) <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p21"></span> Paul’s statement here is interpreted by
Dr. John Brown as equivalent to the following: — “If my life be poured
out as a libation over your conversion to Christ, ‘I joy and rejoice
with you all.’ It could not be better sacrificed than in the cause of
his glory and your salvation.” — Brown’s Discourses and Sayings of our
Lord illustrated, vol. 3 p. 379. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc42006.htm#fr_138) <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p21.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p22"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.iv-p22.1"></span>Pour
tuer les bestes qu’on doit sacrifier;” — “For killing the animals that
ought to be sacrificed.”

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc42006.htm#fr_139) <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p24"></span> See *Liv*. 50:1, c. 31, *ad fin.* —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc42006.htm#fr_140) <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p26"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.iv-p26.1"></span>Pour
luy offrir en sacrifice les ames des fideles;” — “To offer to him in
sacrifice the souls of the believers.”

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc42006.htm#fr_141) <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p30"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.iv-p30.1"></span>Les
enflambe a mourir constamment, et receuoir la mort d’vn cœur magnanime;”
— “Enkindles them to die with firmness, and meet death with
magnanimity.”

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc42006.htm#fr_142) <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p30.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p31"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.iv-p31.1"></span>Que
sa mort ne trouble et estonne les Philippians;” — “That his death may
not distress and alarm the Philippians.”

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc42006.htm#fr_143) <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p34"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.iv-p34.1"></span>En
ces mots, *au Seigneur Jesus*, il faut noter la condition;” — “In these
words, *in the Lord Jesus*, we must notice the condition.”

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc42006.htm#fr_144) <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p40"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.iv-p40.1"></span>Sans
estre en plus grande reputation;” — “Without being in very great
reputation.”

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc42006.htm#fr_145) <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p41"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.iv-p41.1"></span>En
sorte que tu to contentes du lieu qui t’est ordonné, et que t’employes a
ta charge;” — “So as to content yourself with the place that is
appointed for you, and employ yourself in your own department.”

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc42006.htm#fr_146) <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p42"></span> See Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 1,
p. 249.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc42006.htm#fr_147) <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p44"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.iv-p44.1"></span>Car
il y en auoit d’autres qui auoyent plus grand soin de l’Eglise de Dieu,
que d’eux-mesmes, comme Epaphrodite;” — “For there were others of them
that had greater concern as to the Church of God, than as to themselves,
such as Epaphroditus.”

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc42006.htm#fr_148) <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p46"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p46.1"></span>Qu’il y auoit si peu de gens sages et qui
eussent vn cœur entier a nostre Seigneur;” — “That there were so few
persons that were wise, and had devotedness of heart to our Lord.”

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc42006.htm#fr_149) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p17"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.v-p17.1"></span>De
batailler sous l’enseigne de Christ;” — “To fight under Christ’s
banner.”

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc42006.htm#fr_150) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p18"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.v-p18.1"></span>S.
Paul pouuoit se vanter plus que pas on des autres, que sa condition
estoit semblable a celle d’vn gendarme;” — “St. Paul might boast more
than any other that his condition resembled that of a soldier.”

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc42006.htm#fr_151) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p20"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.v-p20.1"></span>Pour
tous prescheurs de l’euangile;” — “For all preachers of the gospel.”

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc42006.htm#fr_152) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p21"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.v-p21.1"></span>Ambassade pour administrer a Sainct Paul en
sa necessite;” — “An ambassador to minister to St. Paul in his
necessity.”

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc42006.htm#fr_153) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p24"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.v-p24.1"></span>Pour
l’amour de luy;” — “From love to him.”

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc42006.htm#fr_154) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p26.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p27"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.v-p27.1"></span>Par
laquelle nous soyons parfaitement conioints auec le Fils de Dieu;” — “By
which we are perfectly united with the Son of God.”

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc42006.htm#fr_155) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p28"></span> Calvin seems to refer here to what he
had said when commenting on <span
id="iv.iii.v-p28.2"></span>[Philippians
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#021)<span id="iv.iii.v-p28.2"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc42006.htm#fr_156) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p30"></span> Calvin, in the French version, makes
reference to what he has said on the subject in the *Institutes*. See
*Institutes*, vol. 2, p. 281. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc42006.htm#fr_157) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p31"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.v-p31.1"></span>Pour
l’amour de Christ;” — “From love to Christ.”

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc42006.htm#fr_158) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p32"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.v-p32.1"></span>Ne
nous laissons point vaincre par l’infirmite de nostre chair;” — “Do not
allow ourselves to be overcome by the infirmity of our flesh.”

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc42006.htm#fr_159) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p34"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.v-p34.1"></span>Mesme
ie ne nie pas que sainct Paul (comme il estoit homme) ne se trouué
surprins de quelque exces vicieux en sa douleur;” — “Nay more, I do not
deny that St. Paul (inasmuch as he was a man) might find himself
overtaken with some faulty excess in his grief.”

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc42006.htm#fr_160) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p39"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.v-p39.1"></span>Soit
establie et demeure entiere;” — “Be established, and remain entire.”

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc42006.htm#fr_161) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p42"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.v-p42.1"></span>Vn
accomplissement, ou moyen de suppleer ce qui defailloit de leur
seruice;” — “A filling up, or a means of supplying what was defective in
their service.”

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc42006.htm#fr_162) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p43"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.v-p43.1"></span>Faisoit en cest endroit ce qu’ils deuoyent
faire;” — “Did in this matter what they ought to have done

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](cc42007)
