[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc42000)  [Next](cc42002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 42: Philippians, Colossians, and
Thessalonians*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span> 

<span id="ii-p2"></span>TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE

<span id="ii-p3"></span>The Commentaries of Calvin on the Epistles of
Paul are generally considered to be among the most successful of his
Expositions of Scripture. In the writings, indeed, of one whose vast
powers have been applied to the exposition of nearly the whole of the
Inspired Volume, and whose rare endowments, as an interpreter of
Scripture, have drawn forth expressions of the profoundest admiration
even from the most inveterate adversaries of the system of doctrine
maintained by him, there is room for some diversity of opinion as to the
particular portions of Divine truth which he has most successfully
expounded. It is mentioned by *M. Teissier*, in his extracts from *M. de
Thou’s* History,  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) that “although all
the works of Calvin have merited the esteem of persons of good taste, he
has in the opinion of some succeeded best in unfolding the doctrine of
Providence,” while, according to *Joseph Scaliger*, who “reckoned Calvin
to have had a divine genius, and to have excelled in the explication of
Scripture, so that no one among the ancients could be compared” to him,
“the best of his theological treatises was his Commentary on Daniel.”

<span id="ii-p5"></span>While, however, there may be some difference of
opinion among the many admirers of Calvin as to the particular portion
of his expository writings, in which his vast powers shine forth to most
advantage, there can be no question that his expositions of the Epistles
of Paul are singularly felicitous. It is stated by *Tholuck*, in his
view of Calvin as an interpreter of the Holy Scriptures, that among his
Commentaries on the new Testament, “those on the Epistles of Paul are by
far the best,” and that “in the Pauline Epistles, he merges himself in
the spirit of the Apostle, and becoming one with him, as every one
clearly feels, he deduces everywhere the explanation of that which is
particular from that which is general.”  <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) A similar view of the peculiar excellence of
Calvin’s expositions of the Epistles of Paul is given by *Böhmer*, of
Berlin, in his introduction to the Epistle to the Colossians, (as quoted
by the late *Dr. Pye Smith*, in his encomium on the writings of Calvin.)
“John Calvin well merited the epithet, often given to him, of The Great
Divine. Independent, in the highest degree, of other men, he most often
discerns, with piercing eye, the spiritual mind of Paul, and with his
masterly command of language, makes it so clear, that both the most
learned student of theology, and the plain affectionate believer, are
equally benefited and satisfied.”  <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2)

<span id="ii-p8"></span>That the Expository Treatises of Calvin on
Paul’s Epistles should be considered by the most eminent critics to be
peculiarly successful is the more remarkable, when we take into view the
disadvantageous circumstances under which most, if not all, of them were
prepared. His Commentaries on six of Paul’s Epistles were written by him
(as we are informed by *Beza*, in his Life of Calvin  <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) ) in 1548, a year of most harassing conflict
with the enemies of the truth. His Correspondence, however, at this
period, clearly shews that his devout mind found tranquility in an
assurance of Divine support. In writing to *Brentius*, who was then
living in exile at Basle, he says: “Amidst all these calamities one
consideration supports and refreshes my mind: I assure myself that God,
in commencing the wonderful restoration of his Church, which we have
witnessed, has not held out a vain and transient hope to us, but has
begun a work that he will not fail to accomplish in spite of the malice
of men and the opposition of Satan. In the meantime let us patiently
undergo the purification which is necessary for us.”  <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) It manifestly appears, also, from the
Dedicatory Epistle prefixed to his Commentaries on four of Paul’s
Epistles, addressed to Christopher, Duke of Wirtemberg, that he had
found the Epistles of Paul peculiarly consoling to his mind amidst
outward troubles. Calvin is thought, indeed, to have had a marked
resemblance in disposition and character to the great Apostle of the
Gentiles, so that he has been termed by an eloquent writer,  <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) “the Paul of the Reformation,” — a
circumstance which is thought to have contributed to render him more
successful in the exposition of Paul’s’ Epistles, while, as is justly
observed by the Translator of Calvin on Galatians and Ephesians in the
*Biblical Cabinet*, (vol. 30.) “the chief cause unquestionably lay in
his singularly clear perception of that system of doctrine which Paul
was honored to declare.”

<span id="ii-p12"></span>The Epistle To The Philippians stands
associated with a most interesting event in the history of the progress
of Christianity. While the charge given to the Apostles as to the
universal promulgation of the Gospel was most explicit, it was in a
gradual manner, and for the most part under the guidance of
circumstances seemingly fortuitous, that their sphere of labor was
extended. “Beginning at Jerusalem,” (<span id="ii-p12.1"></span>[Lu
24:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047)<span id="ii-p12.1"></span>,) as
expressly instructed by their Master, they would, to all appearance,
have continued to pursue their labors in and around that city, had not
occurrences taken place from time to time, and these, too, of an
untoward nature, considered in themselves, which led them to extend the
benefits of the Gospel to countries more and more remote from their
original sphere of labor.

<span id="ii-p13"></span>Philippi was the first place in Europe in which
the Gospel of Christ was proclaimed, and it is sufficiently manifest
from Luke’s narrative, that the introduction of the Gospel at that time
into Europe was not the result of any preconcerted plan on the part of
the Apostles themselves. Had they been left to their own choice, they
would, it appears, have disseminated the Gospel in Bithynia, or some
other province of Asia Minor; but, instead of this, they were specially
directed by the Spirit of God to “come over into Macedonia,” (<span
id="ii-p13.1"></span>[Ac 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#009)<span
id="ii-p13.1"></span>,) by which means the Gospel was for the first time
introduced into Europe. And when we consider the important place which
Europe has held during so many ages in connection with the progress of
Christianity, and more especially the high honor assigned to European
Christians, as being chiefly instrumental in its diffusion throughout
the world, we cannot fail to mark with deep interest the circumstances
connected with the first preaching of the Gospel at Philippi. “The
little rill,” says *Foster*, “near the source of one of the great
American rivers, is an interesting object to the traveler, who is
apprized, as he steps across it, or walks a few miles along its bank,
that this is the stream which runs so far, and which gradually swells
into so immense a flood.”  <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) For a
similar reason, the preaching of the Gospel by Paul in the hearing of a
few women by a river’s side near Philippi, trivial as the circumstance
may appear in itself, becomes invested with the deepest interest, when
viewed in connection with the state and prospects of Christianity at the
present day.

<span id="ii-p15"></span>While Luke makes mention only of two
individuals — Lydia and the Jailer — with their respective households,
as the fruits of the first preaching of the Gospel at Philippi, it
clearly appears, from the Epistle to the Philippians, that from these
small beginnings a flourishing Christian Church had sprung up, which, at
the time when the Epistle was written, was in so prosperous a state,
that the Apostle, who reproves so sharply the Churches of Corinth and
Galatia, finds no occasion for censuring the Philippians, but commends
in the highest terms their exemplary deportment.

<span id="ii-p16"></span>Philippi was originally called *Crenides*, from
the numerous *fountains* of water in its neighborhood, and afterwards
*Dathos*, or *Datos*, from its gold and silver mines. The city received
the name of Philippi from Philip, father of Alexander the Great, by whom
it was rebuilt and greatly enlarged. It is celebrated in profane
history, as is noticed by Calvin in the Argument on the Epistle to the
Philippians, for a signal victory which was gained by Octavius,
afterwards Augustus Cæsar, and Antony over Brutus and Cassius; and it is
not a little remarkable, that a city which was the scene of a victory
that decided the fate of the Roman Empire, should have been afterwards
illustrious as the scene of a nobler victory, intimately connected with
the signal triumph of the Gospel in Europe.

<span id="ii-p17"></span>The Epistle bears evidence of having been
written by Paul when a prisoner for the sake of Christ; and there seems
every reason to believe that it was written by him during his first
imprisonment at Rome. *Dr. Paley*, in his Horæ Paulinæ, adduces a
variety of arguments, founded on incidental notices in the Epistle
itself, to prove that it was written “near the conclusion of St. Paul’s
imprisonment at Rome, and after a residence in that city of considerable
duration.” It is generally believed to have been written about A.D. 62.
The Epistle “breathes,” says *Barnes*, “the spirit of a ripe Christian,
whose piety was mellowing for the harvest; of one who felt that he was
not far from heaven, and might soon be with Christ ... At the mercy of
such a man as Nero; a prisoner; among strangers, and with death staring
him in the face, it is natural to suppose that there would be a peculiar
solemnity, tenderness, pathos, and ardor of affection breathing through
the entire Epistle. Such is the fact; and in none of the writings of
Paul are these qualities more apparent than in this letter to the
Philippians.”

<span id="ii-p18"></span>The Epistle To The Colossians is generally
supposed to have been written by PAUL about A.D. 62, in the ninth year
of the reign of the Emperor Nero. It bears evidence of having been
written during Paul’s first imprisonment at Rome. The Apostle, in the
course of the Epistle, makes repeated allusions to the circumstance of
his being at the time in “bonds” (<span id="ii-p18.1"></span>[Col
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#018)<span id="ii-p18.1"></span>) for
the sake of Christ. Colosse (or, as several ancient manuscripts read,
Colassæ) was, at the time when the Epistle to the Colossians was
written, a flourishing city in the south of Phrygia, situated most
picturesquely under the immense range of Mount Cadmus, and near the
confluence of the rivers Lycus and Meander; but, about a year after
Paul’s Epistle was written, was, along with the neighboring cities of
Laodicea and Hierapolis, destroyed by an earthquake, as is noticed by
Calvin in the Argument of the Epistle. The site of the ancient city, the
only remaining vestiges of which consist of arches, vaults, squared
stones, and broken pottery, is now occupied by the village of Khonas, in
which, as stated by the General Assembly’s Deputation to Palestine in
1839, “a band of about thirty Greek Christians are found.”  <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7)

<span id="ii-p20"></span>It has been matter of controversy by whom the
Church of Colosse was planted. *Dr. Lardner* adduces a variety of
considerations tending to shew that it was founded by Paul, chiefly the
following: —That as Paul was twice in Phrygia, as stated by Luke, (<span
id="ii-p20.1"></span>[Acts 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006), [Acts
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#023)<span id="ii-p20.1"></span>,) it
is extremely probable, that on one or other of those occasions he was at
Colosse, and planted a Church there; that he expresses himself toward
the close of the first chapter in such terms as seem to imply that he
had himself dispensed the Gospel to the Colossians, and that the general
tenor of the Epistle seems to indicate that he is not writing to
strangers, but to persons with whom he had been personally conversant,
and to whom he had been, under God, the instrument of conversion. On the
other hand, many distinguished commentators are of opinion that the
Church of Colosse was not founded by Paul. Calvin, in the Argument of
the Epistle, speaks of the Colossians as having been instructed in the
Gospel, *not* by Paul, but by Epaphras and other Ministers. *Hug* and
*Koppe* are decidedly of opinion that Paul did not plant the Church of
Colosse, and had no personal acquaintance with the Christians there.
*Davenant* is of opinion that the Church of Colosse was planted by
Epaphras. *Byfield*, in his Exposition of the Colossians, thinks it
probable that the Church of Colosse was planted, *not* by Paul, but by
Epaphras or Archippus. *Doddridge* thinks the Epistle “contains no
argument from whence it can certainly be inferred that he” (PAUL) “was
personally acquainted with the Colossians.” *Scott*, in his Preface to
the Epistle, gives it as his “decided *opinion*, that the evidence
against the Apostle’s having been at Colosse is far stronger than any
that has been adduced on the affirmative side of the question.” In
short, there is no inconsiderable force in the arguments adduced on both
sides, and “uncertainty still lies on the dispute whether Paul was ever
at Colosse.”  <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8)

<span id="ii-p22"></span>While, however, there is so much uncertainty as
to the person by whom the Church of Colosse was planted, that
uncertainty, it is to be noticed, does not by any means arise from any
indication of comparative indifference on the part of the Apostle Paul
to the welfare of the Colossian converts in the Epistle which he
addresses to them. While a prisoner at Rome for the sake of the Gospel,
he had heard with deep concern of the insidious attempts which had been
made by certain false teachers to draw off the Colossian Christians from
the doctrine in which they had been instructed. It is not certain what
were the precise tenets, that were attempted to be disseminated among
them. There seems to have been a strange blending of the doctrines of
the Essenes with the subtleties of Platonism, and the asceticism of
Oriental Philosophy.

<span id="ii-p23"></span>The general scope of the Epistle is briefly
stated by *Davenant* as follows — that the hope of man’s salvation is
placed entirely in Christ alone, and that consequently we must rest
satisfied with faith in Christ, and live according to the rule laid down
in the Gospel, to the rejection of Mosaic ceremonies and philosophical
speculations. The attentive reader of the New Testament cannot fail to
observe a striking similarity between the Epistle to the Colossians and
that addressed to the Ephesians, not merely in their general structure,
but also in the subjects treated of, and even in the order and
connection in which they are introduced — a closeness of resemblance
which clearly indicates, not merely that the Epistles were written by
the same person, and about the same time, but also that the Churches to
whom they were addressed, were in many respects similarly situated.

<span id="ii-p24"></span>Among the expository treatises on the Epistle
to the Colossians, there is, apart from that of Calvin, no one that
better deserves, or will more amply repay attentive perusal, than that
of *Bishop Davenant*, as a sound, judicious, and eminently practical
exposition of a portion of the New Testament, in which the distinctive
doctrines and principles of Christianity are so largely brought into
view. It deserves also to be mentioned in connection with this, that
*Mr. Howe*, in his funeral sermon on the death of his intimate friend,
the *Rev. Richard Adams* of Oxford, afterwards of London, speaks with
high commendation of his “judicious and dilucid expositions of the
Epistles to the Philippians and the Colossians — which was the part he
bore in the supplement to that useful work — the English Annotations on
the Bible, by the *Rev. Mr. Matthew Pool*.”  <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9)

<span id="ii-p26"></span>The First Epistle To The Thessalonians is
generally believed to have been the first Epistle written by PAUL to any
of the Churches of Christ. It appears to have been written towards the
close of A.D. 52, about two years subsequently to the introduction of
the Gospel into Thessalonica by the instrumentality of Paul and Silas.
Thessalonica was a large and populous city, situated on the Thermean
Bay. The city was originally called Thermæ, but came to receive the name
of Thessalonica from Philip, King of Macedon, by whom it was rebuilt and
enlarged, in memory of the *victory* which he there gained over the
*Thessalians*. Its present name is Saloniki — manifestly a corruption of
Thessalonica. It contains a population of 70,000, and is a city of great
commercial importance.

<span id="ii-p27"></span>In the account which Luke gives of the
introduction of the Gospel into Thessalonica, mention is made of Paul’s
entering into a Synagogue of the Jews and “reasoning with them three
Sabbath days out of the Scriptures.” (<span id="ii-p27.1"></span>[Ac
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#002)<span id="ii-p27.1"></span>.) This
was the means of converting to the Christian faith some of his Jewish
hearers; but, as is manifest from Paul’s First Epistle to the
Thessalonians, the converts gained were chiefly from among the
idolatrous Gentiles. Thessalonica “adored many gods, but principally
Jupiter, as the father of Hercules, the alleged founder of its ancient
royal family.”  <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) A violent tumult
which had been raised against PAUL and SILAS by the unbelieving Jews
constrained them to quit Thessalonica on a sudden, and escape to Berea,
and afterwards to Athens; and the abrupt manner in which the Apostle’s
labors at Thessalonica were broken off, seems to have led him to feel
the more solicitous as to the prosperity of the Gospel in that city, and
to have given occasion for the Church of the Thessalonians being favored
to receive the earliest of PAUL’S Epistles.

<span id="ii-p29"></span>The First Epistle to the Thessalonians
concludes with a special direction that we do not find to be given in
connection with any other of Paul’s Epistles:

<span id="ii-p30"></span>“I charge you by the Lord, that this Epistle be
read unto all the holy brethren.”  
(<span id="ii-p30.2"></span>[1Th
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#027)<span id="ii-p30.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii-p31"></span>The strict charge thus given as to the public
reading of the Epistle is justly adduced by *Paley*, in his Horæ
Paulinæ, as a most convincing evidence of the authenticity of the
Epistle. “Either the Epistle was publicly read in the Church of
Thessalonica during St. Paul’s lifetime, or it was not. If it was, no
publication could be more authentic, no species of notoriety more
unquestionable, no method of preserving the integrity of the copy more
secure. If it was not, the clause we produce would remain a standing
condemnation of the forgery, and, one would suppose, an invincible
impediment to its success.”

<span id="ii-p32"></span>It is an interesting circumstance, that the
first Epistle written by Paul to any Christian Church affords a most
pleasing view of the fruits of the Gospel among the Christians to whom
it is addressed; while it presents a most attractive picture of zeal and
devotedness on the part of the writer. “If I wished,” says *Fuller* of
Kettering, “to be impressed with a pattern of a Christian minister, I
would study the second chapter of this Epistle” (1st Thessalonians);
“and if I wished to see a pattern of a Christian people, I know not
where I could look better than to the Church of the Thessalonians.”
 <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) The general design of the Epistle
is to express the high satisfaction afforded to the mind of the writer
by the favorable accounts which had been brought him by Timothy
respecting the Christians at Thessalonica, as well as to encourage them
to stedfast adherence to the truth amidst more than ordinary temptations
to apostasy. “Imagine,” says *Benson*, in his Preface to the Epistle,
“the Great Apostle of the Gentiles to be full of a just resentment and
generous indignation against his countrymen, the unbelieving Jews, who
had lately treated him and them so maliciously; and at the same time
having the most tender and parental care and affection for the young
converts at Thessalonica, and you will have the very posture of his mind
during the writing of this Epistle, for these two things appear
everywhere throughout the Epistle.”

<span id="ii-p34"></span>The Second Epistle To The Thessalonians appears
to have been written a short time after PAUL’S former Epistle to that
Church. The Apostle had learned, that some expressions in his former
Epistle in reference to the hopes of Christians beyond the grave had
been misapprehended by the Thessalonian converts, as though he had
intended to intimate that Christ’s second advent was near at hand. In
correcting this mistaken idea, he takes occasion to predict a great
apostasy that was to overspread to a large extent the Christian Church,
and when we consider how directly opposed “The Mystery Of Iniquity”
(<span id="ii-p34.1"></span>[2Th
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#007)<span id="ii-p34.1"></span>) here
predicted is to the nature of Christianity, and how unlikely the
breaking out of such a system of error must have appeared at the time
when the prediction was given forth, this portion of the Apostolical
Writings must be regarded as affording unequivocal evidence of their
Divine authority. It is not a little remarkable that the Apostle Paul,
in one of the earliest of his Epistles, and when writing to a Church
that was in a most flourishing condition, foretells with the utmost
distinctness and minuteness, the rise and progress of a system of
delusive error, which was not to be fully developed until several
centuries subsequently to the time when the prediction was committed to
writing; while it manifests itself even at the present day so strikingly
in accordance with Paul’s prediction, that no historian of recent times
could have furnished a more accurate delineation of the appalling system
in all its leading features, than was thus presented to the mind of Paul
eighteen hundred years ago by the Spirit of Inspiration. This the Second
Epistle to the Thessalonians, while it is the shortest of Paul’s
Epistles to the Churches, is invested with more than ordinary interest,
as predicting the rise, progress, and final destinies of the Papal
system.

<span id="ii-p35"></span>“The Epistle naturally divides itself,” as is
remarked by *Dr. Adam Clarke*, “into three parts, and each is contained
in a separate chapter:

<span id="ii-p36"></span>**“Part I., Chapter 1,** contains the Address,
and Motives of Consolation in their afflicted and persecuted state.

<span id="ii-p37"></span>**“Part II., Chapter 2,** is partly
Prophetical, and partly Didactic. It contains the doctrine concerning
Christ’s Coming to Judgment, and a Prophecy concerning some future but
great Apostasy from the Christian Faith.

<span id="ii-p38"></span>**“Part III., Chapter 3.,** is wholly
Hortatory, and contains a number of important Advices relative to
Christian Virtues and a proper behavior in those situations in life in
which it had pleased God to call them.”

<span id="ii-p39"></span>The Reader will find prefixed to the present
translation of Calvin’s Commentary on the Colossians, a copy of the
Translator’s “Epistle Dedicatorie” to the old English translation of
Calvin’s Commentary on that Epistle, published in black letter in 1581.
The Translator, who gives merely his initials, (R.V.,) appears to have
been Robert Vahne, or Vaughan, who published also in 1581 a translation
of Calvin’s Commentary on the Galatians. The title-page is as follows:
—”A Commentarie of M. Iohn Caluine, vpon the Epistle to the Colossians.
And translated into English by R.V.

<span id="ii-p40"></span>Pray for the peace of Hierusalem, they shall
prosper that loue thee.  
<span id="ii-p40.2"></span>[Ps
122:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#006)<span id="ii-p40.2"></span>.

<span id="ii-p41"></span>At London, Printed by Thomas Purfoote, and are
to be sold at his shop ouer against S. Sepulchers Church.”

<span id="ii-p42"></span>He is also the author of “A Dialogue defensyue
for women agaynst malicyous detractoures,” published in 1542; and of a
translation published in 1582, of “Examination of the Councell of Trent,
touching the Decree of Traditions, by Mart. Kemnicious.”

<span id="ii-p43"></span>It will be observed, that there is no separate
Dedication by Calvin of his Commentaries on the Philippians and
Colossians — his Commentaries on these Epistles having been dedicated by
him, along with those on Galatians and Ephesians, to Christopher, Duke
of Wirtemberg. The Dedication will be inserted in a future volume of The
Calvin Translations, which will contain the Translation of the
Commentaries on Galatians and Ephesians.

<span id="ii-p44"></span>Maturinus Corderius, (*Mathurin Cordier*,) to
whom CALVIN dedicates his Commentary on the First Epistle to the
Thessalonians, was, as stated by *Beza*, in his Life of Calvin,  <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) “a man of great worth and erudition, and
in the highest repute in almost all the schools of France as a teacher
of youth.” He taught at Paris, Nevers, Bordeaux, Neufchatel, Lausanne,
and Geneva. He was the author of the “<span
id="ii-p45.1"></span>Colloquies,” so much used in the education of youth
throughout Europe. CALVIN was his pupil at the <span
id="ii-p45.2"></span>*College de la Marche*. He died at Geneva, where he
taught till within a few days of his death, in 1564, at the age of
eighty-five.

<span id="ii-p46"></span>Benedict Textor, to whom CALVIN dedicates his
Commentary on the *Second* Epistle to the Thessalonians, appears to have
been the son or nephew of Jean Tixier de Ravisi, or Ravisius Textor
(Lord of Ravisi,) who was Rector of the University of Navarre at Paris,
and was the author of various works. He died in 1524. There is a small
volume still extant containing “Epistles” (to the number of 149,) which
appears to have been written by a relative of Benedict Textor. It bears
date 1602, and is entitled “<span id="ii-p46.1"></span>Epistolæ Joannis
Ravisii Textoris (Nivernensis) — non vulgaris eruditionis.”

<span id="ii-p47"></span>While The Commentaries of Calvin everywhere
abound with important statements in reference to Popery, so that the
reader will find able and successful refutations of the errors of that
corrupt and delusive system brought forward in connection with the
interpretation of passages of the Word of God, which might have seemed
to have no particular bearing on the Papal system, and introduced by him
for the most part with less abruptness than is to be observed in the
writings of some of his contemporaries, the present Volume of his
Commentaries is rendered the more interesting, and will, we trust, under
the Divine blessing, be productive of the greater utility, in the
present eventful times, from its containing Calvin’s exposition of a
portion of THE NEW TESTAMENT that presents the minutest and most
comprehensive view that is to be found in any part of the Sacred
Writings, of the rise, progress, and ultimate overthrow of Antichrist.

<span id="ii-p48"></span>J. P.  
ELGIN, March 1851.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc42001.htm#fr_0) <span id="ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p4"></span> <span id="ii-p4.1"></span>*Les Eloges des
Hommes Savans.”* — Tom. 1, p. 240.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc42001.htm#fr_1) <span id="ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p6"></span> “Merits of CALVIN,” pp. 6, 31.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc42001.htm#fr_2) <span id="ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p7"></span> *Ibid*., pp. 65, 66.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc42001.htm#fr_3) <span id="ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p9"></span> CALVIN’S Tracts, vol. 1:

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc42001.htm#fr_4) <span id="ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p10"></span> “CALVIN and the Swiss Reformation,” p. 350.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc42001.htm#fr_5) <span id="ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p11"></span> Dr. Mason of New York

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc42001.htm#fr_6) <span id="ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii-p14"></span> Foster’s Essays, (Lond. 1819,) p. 5.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc42001.htm#fr_7) <span id="ii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii-p19"></span> “Narrative of a Mission of Inquiry to the
Jews,” p. 339.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc42001.htm#fr_8) <span id="ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii-p21"></span> *Eadie’s* Biblical Cyclopædia, Art.
*Colossians.*

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc42001.htm#fr_9) <span
id="ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p25"></span> *Howe’s* Works, (Lond. 1822,) vol. 3, p. 435.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc42001.htm#fr_10) <span
id="ii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii-p28"></span> *Illustrated Commentary*, vol. 5, p. 297.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc42001.htm#fr_11) <span
id="ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p33"></span> *Fuller’s* Works, vol. 4:

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc42001.htm#fr_12) <span
id="ii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii-p45"></span> CALVIN’S Tracts, vol. 1:.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dedication to the 1581 English Edition](cc42002)
