[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [UFOs](../../index) 
[Heaven's Gate](../index)  [Contents](book)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<table data-border="0" width="100%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><em><strong>Guidelines sent to those who were seriously<br />
considering joining the class<br />
- those who had responded to articles, ads, and<br />
correspondence</strong></em></td>
<td style="text-align: right;" data-valign="top"><em><strong>October 23, 1993</strong></em></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

|                                                                              |
|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------:|
| **NOTE: This particular type of classroom experience is no longer offered.** |

TOTAL OVERCOMERS CLASSROOM  
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### **INTRODUCTION**

-   The Next Level's desire is to help (or nourish) souls. They are
    eager to assist any creatures who are heading in the right direction
    of their own volition. If they think you have the capacity to
    respond to this, and ***they*** want to ***give you*** an
    opportunity to receive it, then a member of the Next Level actually
    *puts you in contact* with the information that is presented in our
    ad, "*Final Offer **-** from the Evolutionary Level Above Human*."
    It was the Next Level's presence, standing right beside you, that
    explains that powerful response you felt as you first read the ad.
-   At this point, the Next Level observes closely how you choose to
    respond, knowing they can only help you if you **ask** them. Even
    though the Next Level may have "touched" you, your response is not
    predetermined. There will be forces aggressively trying to turn you
    away from this, and completely non-aggressive Members of the Next
    Level available to assist *if you ask* for their help. It is up to
    you to decide which voice to listen to. Many who sincerely feel
    astounded by the ad and that it rocks their very foundation, will
    likely decide, "It requires too much; it means I'd have to change
    everything; I wish I had never seen it." Others may listen to
    thoughts that come from another "god" or alien group that say,
    "Don't pay any attention to this **-** they're just some 'cult' or
    New Age antichrist." But if you read the ad, and then *use the
    terminology* in the ad to *connect*, by saying, ***"Next Level **-**
    if this is true, help me to perceive it,"*** then the Next Level
    will be there to assist you as long as *you keep asking*, until you
    are physically in contact with the classroom.
-   So, if you are one who felt a powerful response and a recognition, a
    knowing deep inside that this is something you must pursue, then you
    are invited to *make application* for entry into the classroom **-**
    hoping that the strength of your *desire* to become a part of the
    Next Level, the degree of your *thirst* to grow and change, and your
    understanding of what the requirements are, find you *acceptable* as
    a beginning student. It is the content and quality of your soul (or
    what is in your heart) that finds you now a candidate.
-   In other words, the Next Level or the *true* Kingdom of God is
    extremely selective, and to be considered as a candidate is an
    honor. Therefore, it is the *student* who begins with a *trial*
    period, rather than the student feeling that the classroom is on
    *trial*. If the Next Level has truly "drawn you to us," then it will
    be your desire to *prove to the Next Level* that *you* are worthy
    and ready. We understand that you may have doubts regarding your
    *own ability* to conquer your weak areas, and this can be a healthy
    attitude **-** one that encourages you to trust and to seek help
    from your classmates and Teachers.
-   We know at first you may have experienced some degree of skepticism
    or doubt, but if you are continuing to wonder whether or not you are
    a part of us, or seem to desire more "proof," or are hesitant to
    sever your ties or conquer your addictions **-** these are all
    indications that this may not be the right place or time for you.
    However, if deep down you feel like, "I have no choice **-**
    something inside me tells me I *must* proceed with this **-** at
    least take another step," in other words, if you *know* that your
    relationship with the Next Level is the *only* thing that makes any
    sense to you, then we will be able to serve in the capacity of
    helping you.
-   If you believe that we truly do represent the Kingdom of God, then
    you can understand why you cannot enter the classroom on *your*
    terms. You cannot "call the shots," or be concerned about having a
    position of leadership or needing recognition. Further, you would
    want only the Next Level, through its procedures, to be your
    guidance. A student who *is* a part of this family will grow to
    value flexibility and know that whatever instruction he receives is
    exactly what he needs for his most accelerated growth.

### **POSSESSIONS**

#### **Understanding**

-   Part of the process of separating from and "overcoming" the world
    (the human kingdom) requires trust **-** trust that if you truly
    relinquish yourself, including your care and keeping, to those in
    the Next Level, all of your needs will be taken care of.
-   For the serious student, hanging onto possessions or situations that
    offer worldly security prevents and interferes with "letting go" of
    that which binds you to the human kingdom **-** you unknowingly
    impose upon yourself limitations that will restrict your potential
    for change. In other words, after clearly deciding this is all you
    want, an "ace in the hole" could be a serious obstacle to
    accelerated change.
-   The transitional process requires a total commitment, and as long as
    you keep one foot in the world, that foothold will continue to hold
    you back (will keep you attached and bound to this level) and
    prevent you from completing your task.

#### **Practical Application**

-   Upon first entering the classroom (beginning a trial period), we
    don't feel it is necessary in all cases for you to have completely
    "burned *all* your bridges." In other words, we could understand how
    some individuals might leave their affairs in such a way that they
    would not find themselves without any means of support (or without a
    way to take care of their needs) if they should decide, after a
    brief orientation, to return to the human world. However, a
    prospective student would be open and honest about what bridges have
    not been burned. If you have any "hidden agenda" for recovering your
    human existence "if this doesn't work out," it means you have doubts
    as to who you are or who we are, and the classroom experience cannot
    work for you.
-   During the "trial period" or until the student proves to be on
    "solid ground" and has convinced us that he has no intention of
    "turning back" (wanting to recover his life in the world), **the
    possessions that you bring in will be set aside** and not be
    considered as part of the class resources.
-   However, before becoming a "full-fledged" class member or
    "candidate" (after successfully completing a trial period), each
    student would arrive at the point of not desiring to have any
    personal possessions.
-   The classroom circumstance is not one of martyrdom. We have always
    been taken care of very comfortably. Items and possessions are all
    shared **-** there is no personal or individual ownership.
-   Some individuals have entered with virtually no possessions, while
    others have made sizable contributions. It makes no difference to us
    in which circumstance you find yourself, and it in no way reflects
    your level of growth or readiness. The Next Level designs each
    individual's circumstance with exactly the proper elements for that
    particular soul's maximum potential for growth.

### **RELATIONSHIPS**

-   Ties with your past would have to be severed *before* you enter the
    classroom. (This does not imply that we might not have occasional
    instructions for calls, letters, or visits.) Also, the influences
    that cause us to feel "pangs" from that severance may still have to
    be dealt with *in* the classroom, but this is an example of the
    withdrawal **-** the overcoming process **-** that occurs.
-   Everyone is led to this information *individually*, and your
    overcoming is individual. In the world there is nothing wrong with
    the relationships you had, but once you begin this overcoming
    process, then those relationships can't help but hold you back. It
    would be like trying to live in two worlds at the same time. It is
    possible that individuals from the same family unit (spouse, parent,
    brother, sister) may find themselves as candidates. Even as
    prospective candidates, individuals must speak or relate to us only
    for themselves and not for friends or relations. Once in the
    classroom, they would learn to relate to each other only as task
    partners and crew members.
-   There are no children (or minors) among us. It is our understanding
    that souls capable of making the decision to separate from the world
    would be housed in mature vehicles (bodies). Every class member is
    celibate, so certainly no children have been born into our group.
-   You can be assured that those you leave behind will be taken care of
    and watched over by the Next Level. They will be in the hands of
    their Heavenly Father, who knows what they need and how to help
    them.

### **ADDICTIONS**

-   What we are doing in our overcoming is breaking the binds of
    humanism (of this civilization). Which means that anything you are
    *bound* to that is uncommon to the Next Level, you will have to be
    free of. You are literally becoming a new creature.
-   There are many commonly recognized addictions, such as alcoholism,
    sensuality, tobacco use, drug addiction, love addiction, etc.
    Members of the class, no matter what they may have participated in
    prior to joining the classroom, no longer smoke, drink, take drugs,
    or participate in sexuality to any degree, and this is expected of
    you also.
-   We also consider many types of behavior and characteristics
    undesirable, because the vehicle (body) uses them to satisfy a human
    desire and because they are not characteristics of the Next Level.
    More specifically, your vehicle has in its genes the programming of
    likes and dislikes (such as brands of toothpaste or types of foods),
    habits, opinions, judgments, and ways of expressing yourself, from
    the many generations of your vehicle's family strain, most of which
    are foreign to the Next Level. Plus your soul is picking up **-**
    where it left off **-** on what it has not yet overcome from
    previous incarnations. In the Next Level's eyes, these things are
    not very different from an alcohol or drug addiction. Examples are
    many of the little habits we unconsciously get into, and certain
    patterns of thinking, behavior, and responses, such as being
    critical of others or getting down on yourself, having negative
    responses to situations, needing to to talk constantly, having
    things *your* way or on a particular timetable, or needing human
    affection or attention.
-   The classroom, as part of its design, "surfaces" the habits and
    characteristics that each individual needs to rise above. For the
    most part, you will be able to drop or shed many of these
    characteristics easily **-** even the more hard-core addictions can
    rapidly disappear.

### **TRIAL PERIOD**

Before you can be a full-fledged class member, you must first arrive at
a place in your understanding, attitude, and control that demonstrates
to your classmates and Teachers that you are on solid ground **-** you
are stable. It is the classroom that makes that determination, which
will be based, in part, on the following:

-   You have already severed your ties to human relationships and
    possessions (as described under "Relationships" and
    "Possessions").  
-   You recognize that you are part of this *family* and want only to
    adopt the ways of the Next Level as demonstrated in this classroom
    **-** nothing threatens your ***total*** commitment.  
-   You see the value in asking for, accepting, and applying the help
    (per Next Level ways and procedures) offered by your classmates and
    Teachers.

In the classroom, we all maintain certain basic, minimum standards of
*control* of our vehicles' behavior and responses. There are basic
requirements of Next Level conduct that we expect of ourselves and that
we would expect of any newcomers as well. The trial period offers us a
chance to observe your degree of control and restraint and helps us
learn the areas you might need to work on. There are certain types of
conduct that are unacceptable in our classroom **-** such as deceit,
lying, sensuality, or permitting verbal outbursts or physical abuse
(such as harsh words, sarcasm, hurtful teasing, loss of temper, anger).
Also, we strive daily to improve our standards in all areas of
*restraint* **-** like controlling excessive talking, noise level, or
the inappropriate offering of suggestions **-** and we work consistently
at not permitting human characteristics such as negativity, selfishness,
vanity, or defensiveness to express their presence.

Though these requirements are seriously stated, this is not to suggest
that the class doesn't enjoy a lot of fun, good humor, and appropriate
pleasures.

If you find that this class is not what you want (whether you are unable
to really sever ties to the world, or the standards in the class seem
too demanding, *whatever* the reason), you are free to leave at any
time. Likewise, if it seems to us that you are reluctant to change your
behavior (clinging to worldly traits), we might suggest that the
classroom is not appropriate for you. In either case, we will help you
(in the ways that we can) make your transition back into the world.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**End of Section 5**

To return to: [**\|** Table of Contents **\|**](book.htm#sec5)
