[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [UFOs](../../index) 
[Heaven's Gate](../index)  [Contents](book)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

***Poster - January 17, 1994***

  

### *CREW FROM THE EVOLUTIONARY LEVEL ABOVE HUMAN OFFERS* **-**

## *LAST CHANCE* TO ADVANCE

# BEYOND HUMAN

(*If you don't want **out** of the human kingdom, you don't want
**into** the Kingdom Level Above Human*.)

<!-- -->

-   How the Evolutionary Level Above Human **-** what religions call the
    "Kingdom of God" **-** is a many-membered Kingdom **-** a
    ***physical*** Kingdom Level above the human kingdom (with souls,
    minds, and ***bodies* -** not just "spirit"). This Kingdom Level
    makes its "Headquarters" in the most *distant* segment of the
    Heavens **-** outside of "time" **-** from whence all Creation
    originates, both terrestrial and extraterrestrial.
-   How membership in the Kingdom Level Above Human is attained **-** by
    outgrowing or rising above (overcoming) all human-mammalian
    characteristics and behavior under the direct personal tutorship of
    a member or members of that Kingdom while they are incarnate in
    human bodies.
-   How **-** *now* at the close of this Age **-** the door to that
    Kingdom is briefly open.
-   How ***life***, from the Next Level's point of view, begins when a
    soul receives from that Kingdom Level a "*deposit* of recognition"
    of the information regarding that Kingdom Level's existence, and
    recognition of a Representative from that Level Above Human. The
    soul can choose to accept further ***life***, or "nourishment," from
    members of that Level indefinitely, or reject it at any point and
    fall back into ignorance or "death."
-   How these Representatives from the Evolutionary Level Above Human
    incarnated (took adult human bodies) in the mid-1970's and have been
    "separate from the world" **-** practicing non-sexual, non-mammalian
    behavior **-** for the past 18 years.
-   How religions have, in fact, **unknowingly** become victims of
    slavery to Luciferian forces **-** "space races" who represent
    themselves to humans as "gods," but who are nothing more than
    technically advanced humans (clinging to human behavior) from
    previous civilizations, who use the discarnate (spirit) world to
    keep humans preoccupied with their addictions, and who travel in
    primitive "UFOs." (The Next Level **-** the *true* Kingdom of God
    **-** has the only truly advanced space-time travel vehicles, or
    spacecrafts.)
-   How human physical bodies are only *containers* (suits of clothes)
    for souls**;** how the *soul* is the *true identity***;** and how
    invasive influences and discarnate spirits can be recognized, dealt
    with, and aborted.
-   How ***this*** information is the ***same*** information that the
    Next Level sent with its Representative 2000 years ago.
-   Now that "test time" is here, **who** will be able to *believe* this
    information and *accept* these as crew members from the Evolutionary
    Level Above Human?

***Meeting Time and Place***  
  
  
  

*Reading material will be available. Come EARLY if you want to know more
about us.*

**FREE ADMISSION - PUBLIC INVITED**

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

For the next topic in this section: [**\|** Organized Religion Has
Become the Primary Pulpit for Misinformation and the Great "Cover-Up"
**\|**](6-6)  
To return to: [**\|** Table of Contents **\|**](book.htm#sec6a)
