[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [UFOs](../../index) 
[Heaven's Gate](../index)  [Contents](book)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<table data-border="0" width="100%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: center;" colspan="2"><strong></strong>
<h3 id="my-ode-to-ti-and-do">My Ode to Ti and Do!</h3></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: center;">What This Class Has Meant to Me -- <em>EVERYTHING</em>!</td>
<td style="text-align: right;" data-valign="top"><em>By Qstody</em></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

How can I express my testimony when mere human words could never be
adequate to describe my Infinite gratitude for the Next Level and their
Representatives, Ti and Do, for rescuing me from a nightmare of a Dead
End existence. It seemed as though I was drowning in an ocean of the
blind, lost, unconscious, walking dead. Everyone pretended to "Know"
what was going on, but they all seemed to be drowning in their own sea
of misinformation and misinterpretation of GOD's (**the CREATOR's**)
designed laws.

The humans seemed completely distracted, self-satisfied slaves. All
their pursuits and paths going nowhere but in circles. Like programmed
puppets worshipping false myths, rituals, futile belief systems and
counterfeit fantasy gods. I felt angry, alienated, hopeless, incomplete
and utterly unsatisfied in this world no matter what I tried. Many times
I could barely keep from going into a complete coma, trying to stay
awake enough to muster a desperate constant prayer, to keep my hope and
motivation alive in this space alien HELL. Luckily, having received a
"DEPOSIT" or "GIFT" of recognition led to my *constant* **ASKING** and
finally finding the real truth (***facts***) about the Kingdom of Heaven
and meeting my Older Members ***Ti*** and ***Do***, who were like "LIFE"
preservers in this void of traps, deception, and ILLusion. So, the life
of the new creature was growing within, despite the vile, insidious
lower forces and the empty people that surrounded me who claimed to be
seeking God. None of it seemed real. What did seem very real were the
"REPS" from the real Kingdom of God, offering information about the
steps to get to the Kingdom of Heaven.

I want to be considered as a possible candidate for viability in their
world, the real Kingdom of Heaven, the headquarters of all creation.
That is my deepest, fondest dream - provided I can be pleasing to the
Next Level through ***Ti** and ***Do** - dropping all that is not Next
Level *fast*. It's hard work but simple. I ***KNOW*** *that the **only
thing that really matters at all is keeping my eyes on the Next Level**.
My only desire is to be grafted to my Older Members' unlimited mind
right on up to the Chief of Chiefs, to nourish the new creature I'm
becoming. I'm determined with all my will and effort to have ***only***
a high Next Level vibration, consciousness, and identity - to totally
overcome this primitive world. I will not bring any of this world's
worthless desires with me, by dropping all humanness and mammalian
pursuits. I will escape death's disguise - the death that humans are
tricked into by following any of the ways of this world promoted by the
*lower forces*/space aliens. I must turn all of the negative of this
world into a positive, into strength, flexibility, and control. What
makes me feel most ***alive*** is sharing Next Level information and
knowing and growing closer to my Teachers. I thirst for the unknown
beyond my limited scope of awareness, while upgrading my standards hour
by hour, situation by situation - striving for more maturity and growth
constantly. I find myself always asking, "What is it I'm overlooking
that is unlike the Next Level"?***

I want to leave this world with some kind of record of my respect and
honor for ***Ti** and ***Do** and the Next Level - for their sacrifice
and the price they paid to drop down into this space alien hell to help
me **really** *change* into a new Next Level creature. I thank them for
helping me strive to overcome this primitive level/world, to know and
sustain who I am, and for my hopefully **growing** *connection* to the
Next Level. With my every prayer, every passing moment, every ounce of
energy, effort, will, heartbeat, breath, thought, feeling, actions both
unconscious and conscious, I, Qstody (quest), strive to **PROVE** I'm
possibly *worthy* to be considered a viable candidate in their world. I
want to be ***only*** a keen, quick, pure, positive, *clear, clean,
vessel* - attempting with all my will and effort to be pleasing to the
Next Level in all respects, all the time, at all costs and ***PROVE***
it! Thank you for helping me restore my virginity and dignity. Please
give me the brave heart and courage to endure to the end of this mission
and go to my home of origin, your world! *Anything is Possible* with the
Next Level! Thank you, all my classmates, for each and everyone of you,
for your help and encouragement.**

THANK YOU ***TI** and ***DO** FOR EVERYTHING, for helping me remember
who ***I*** am and especially your example of beings from the REAL
Kingdom of Heaven. What's next?**

April 8, 1996

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

For the next topic in this section: [**\|** The Hidden Facts of Ti and
Do **\|**](a17)  
To return to: [**\|** Table of Contents **\|**](book.htm#appndxa1)
