[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Nostradamus](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oon05)  [Next](oon07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024NL7LM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Oracles of Nostradamus*, by Charles A. Ward, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

# Préface À Mon Fils

### THE PREFACE OF MICHAEL NOSTRADAMUS TO HIS PROPHECIES

To César Nostradamus his son, life and felicity. Thy late arrival, <span
id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20.md) César Nostradamus my son, has made me
bestow much time, through nightly vigils, to leave you in writing a
memorial to refer to, after the corporal extinction of your progenitor,
that might serve for the common profit of mankind, out of what the
Divine Being has permitted me to learn from the revolution of the stars.
And since it has pleased the immortal God that thou shouldst come into
the natural light of this terrene abode, and shouldst say that thy years
are not yet calculated astronomically, and thy March months are
incapable to receive in their weak understanding what I must necessarily
record \[as to happen\] after my time:--seeing also that it is not
possible to leave thee in writing what might suffer injury and be
obliterated by time; for the inherited gift of occult prediction will
remain confined to my own bowels:--considering that events of human
proposal are uncertain, whilst all is governed and directed by the
incalculable power of Heaven, guiding us, not by

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bacchic fury, nor
yet by Lymphatic <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21.md) motion, but by
astronomical assertion--"*Soli numine divino afflati præsagiunt et
spirito prophetico particularia*." <span id="fr_22"></span>[2](#fn_22.md)

Although for years past I have predicted, a long time in advance, what
has afterwards come to pass, and in particular regions attributing the
whole accomplishment to divine power and inspiration, also other
unfortunate and fortunate occurrences have been pronounced with
accelerated promptitude which have since happened in other parts of the
world,--for I was willing to maintain silence and to pass over matters
that might prove injurious \[if published\] not only as relates to the
present time, but also for the most part of future time, if committed to
writing, since kingdoms, sects, and religions will pass through stages
so very contrary, and, as regards the present time, diametrically
opposed,--that if I were to relate what will happen in the future,
governors, sectaries, and ecclesiastics would find it so ill-accordant
with \[si\] their auricular fancy, that they would go near to condemn
what future ages will know and perceive to be true. Considering also the
sentence of the true

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Saviour, "*Nolite
sanctum dare canibus neque mittatis rnargaritas vestras ante porcos, ne
forte conculcent eas pedibus suis, et conversi dirumpant vos*" \[Matt.
vii. 6\].

This it is which has led me to withhold my tongue from the vulgar, and
my pen from paper. But, later on, I thought I would enlarge a little,
and declare in dark and abstruse sayings in consideration of \[*pour*\]
the vulgar advent \[vid, Le Pelletier, i. 163\] the most urgent of its
future causes, as perceived by me, be the revolutionary changes what
they may, so only as not to scandalize the auricular frigidity (of my
hearers), and write all down under a cloudy figure that shall
essentially and above all things be prophetical. Although
"*Abscondidisti hæc à sapientibus, et prudentibus, id est, potentibus et
regibus, et enucleasti ea exiguis et tenuibus*." <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23.md) By the grace of God and the good angels,
the Prophets have had committed to them the spirit of vaticination, by
which they see things at a distance, and are enabled to forecast future
events. For there is nothing that can be accomplished without Him, whose
power and goodness are so great to all His creatures as long as they put
their trust in Him, much as they may be \[exposed\] or subject to other
influences, \[yet\] on account of their likeness to the nature of their
good guardian angel \[or genius\] that heat and prophetic power draweth
nigh to us, as do the rays of the sun which cast their influence alike
upon bodies that are elementary and non-elementary. As for ourselves
personally who are but human, we can attain to nothing by our own
unaided natural knowledge, nor the bent of our intelligence, in the way
of deciphering the recondite secrets of God the Creator. "*Quia non est
nostrum noscere tempora*,

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

nec momenta," <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24.md) etc. Although, indeed,
now or hereafter some persons may arrive to whom God Almighty may be
pleased to reveal by imaginative impression some secrets of the future,
as accorded in time past to judicial astrology, when \[*que* for
*quand*\] a certain power and volitional faculty came upon them, as a
flame of fire appears. <span id="fr_25"></span>[2](#fn_25.md) They grew
inspired, and were able to judge of all inspiration, human and divine,
alike. For the divine works, which are absolutely universal, God will
complete; those which are contingent, or medial, the good angels direct;
and the third sort come under the evil angels. <span
id="fr_26"></span>[3](#fn_26.md)

Perhaps, my son, I speak to thee here a little too occultly. But as to
the hidden vaticinations which come to one by the subtle spirit of fire,
or sometimes by the understanding disturbed, \[it may even be, by\]
contemplating the remotest stars, as being intelligences on the watch,
even to giving utterance to declarations \[that\] being taken down in
writing declare, without favour, and without any taint of improper

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

loquacity, that all things whatsoever proceed from the divine power of
the great eternal Deity from whom all goodness emanates. Further, my
son, although I have inserted the name of prophet, I do not desire to
assume a title of so high sublimity at the present moment. For he who
"*Propheta dicitur hodie, olim vocabatur videns*;" <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27.md) for, strictly speaking, my son, a prophet
is one who sees things remote from the knowledge of all mankind. Or, to
put the case; to the prophet, by means of the perfect light of prophecy,
there he opened up very manifestly divine things as well as human; which
cannot come about, seeing that the effects of future prediction extend
to such remote periods. Now, the secrets of God are incomprehensible,
and their efficient virtue belongs to a sphere far remote from natural
knowledge; for, deriving their immediate origin from the free will,
things set in motion causes that of themselves could never attract such
attention as could make them recognized, either by human augury, or by
any other knowledge of occult power; it is a thing comprised only within
the concavity of heaven itself, from the present fact of all eternity,
which comes in itself to embrace all time.

Still, by the means of some eternal power, by an epileptic Herculean
agitation, the causes by the celestial movement become known. I do not
say, my son, in order that you may fully understand me, that the
knowledge of this matter cannot yet impress itself upon thy feeble
brain, that very remote future causes may not come within the cognizance
of a reasonable being; if they are, notwithstanding, purely the creation
of the intellectual soul of things present, future things are not by any
means too hidden or concealed. But the perfect knowledge of causes
cannot be acquired without divine inspiration; since all prophetic
inspiration derives its

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

first motive principle from God the Creator, next from good fortune, and
then from nature. Wherefore the independent causes being independently
produced, or not produced, the presage partially happens, where it was
predicted. For the human understanding, being intellectually create',
cannot a penetrate occult causes, otherwise than by the voice of a
genius by means of the thin flame (vid. page [68](oon08.htm#page_68).md)
\[showing\] to what direction future causes incline to develop
themselves. And further, my son, I implore you never to apply your
understanding on such reveries and vanities as dry up the body and bring
perdition to the soul and disturb all the senses. In like manner, I
caution you against the seduction of a more than execrable magic, that
has been denounced already by the sacred Scriptures, by the divine
canons of the Church--although we have to exempt from this judgment
Judicial Astrology. By the aid of this it is, and by divine revelation
and inspiration, united with deep calculations, we have reduced our
prophecies to writing. And, notwithstanding that this occult philosophy
was not reproved by the Church, I have felt no desire to divulge their
unbridled promptings. Although many volumes have come before me, which
had laid hidden for many ages. But dreading what might happen in the
future, after reading them, I presented them to Vulcan, and as the fire
kindled them, the flame, licking the air, shot forth an unaccustomed
brightness, clearer than the light is of natural flame, resembling more
the explosion of powder, casting a subtle illumination over the house as
if the whole were wrapped in sudden conflagration.--So that at last you
might not in the future be abused by searching for the perfect
transformation, lunar or solar, or incorruptible metals hidden under the
earth, or the sea, I reduced them to ashes.--But as to the judgment

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

which perfects itself by means of the celestial judgment, that I am
desirous to manifest to you: by that method you may have cognizance of
things future, avoiding all fantastic imaginations that may arise, and
limiting the particularity of the topics by divine and supernatural
inspiration; harmonizing with the celestial figures these topics, and
that part of time, which the occult property has relation to, by the
potential virtue and faculty divine, in whose presence the three aspects
of time are clasped in one by eternity--an evolution that connects in
one causes past, present, and future--"*quia omnia sunt nuda et aperta*,
etc." <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28.md)--

From all which, my son, you can easily comprehend, notwithstanding your
tender brain, the things that are to happen can be foretold by nocturnal
and celestial lights, which are natural, coupled to a spirit of
prophecy,--not that I would assume the name or efficacy of a prophet,
but, by revealed inspiration, as a mortal man the senses place me no
farther from heaven than the feet are from the earth. "*Possum non
errare, falli, decipi*," <span id="fr_29"></span>[2](#fn_29) (albeit.md) I
am the greatest sinner in this world, and heir to every human
affliction. But being surprised sometimes in the ecstatic work, amid
prolonged calculation, and engaged in nocturnal studies of sweet odour,
I have composed books of prophecies, containing each one hundred
astronomic quatrains of forecasts, which I have tried to polish through
obscurely, and which are perpetual vaticinations, from now to the year
3797. It is possible that this figure will make some lift up their
forehead, at such a vast extent of time, and variety of things to take
place under the concave journey of the moon; and this universal
treatment of causes, my son,

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

throughout the earth, which, if you reach the natural age, of man, you
will see in your climate, under the heaven of your proper nativity, as
things that have been foreseen.

Although the everlasting God alone knows the eternity of the light
proceeding from Himself, I say frankly to all to whom He has decreed in
long and melancholy inspiration to reveal His limitless magnitude, which
is beyond both mensuration and comprehension, that by means of this
occult cause divinely manifested, principally by two chief causes,
comprised in the understanding of the inspired one who prophesies. One
is that which comes by infusion, which clarifies the supernatural light,
in him who predicts by astral process, or forecasts by inspired
revelation, which is practically a participation in the divine eternity,
by which means the prophet comes to judge of that which his share of
divine spirit has given him, by means of communication with God the
Creator, and the natural endowment accorded him. It is to know that what
is predicted is true, and has had a heavenly origin; that such light and
the thin flame is altogether efficacious; that it descends from above,
no less than does natural clearness; and natural light renders
philosophers quite sure of their principles, so that by means of the
principles of a first cause they have penetrated the profoundest abysses
and attained the loftiest doctrines.

But to this end, my son, that I may not wander too profoundly for the
future capacity of thy senses, and also because I find that letters
shall suffer great and incomparable loss, and that I find the world
before the universal conflagration, such deluges and deep submersion,
that there will remain scarcely any land not covered with water, and
that for so long a period, that everything will perish except
Ethnographies and Topographies. Further, after and before these
inundations, in many districts the rains will have been

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

so slight, and there will fall from heaven such an abundance of fire and
incandescent stones, that scarcely anything will remain unconsumed, and
this will occur a short time before the last conflagration. Further,
when the planet Mars completes its cycle, at the end of his second
period, he will recommence his course. But some will gather in Aquarius
through several years, and others in Cancer, which will be of still
longer duration. Now that we are conducted by the moon, under the
direction of the Creator, and before she has finished her entire circuit
the sun will come, and then Saturn. Now, according to the celestial
signs, the reign of Saturn shall come back again, so that, all
calculated, the world is drawing on towards its anaragonic revolution.

From the time I am writing this, before 177 years 3 months and 11 days,
by pestilence, long famine, and wars, and more still by inundations, the
world between this day and that, before and after, shall be diminished,
and its population so reduced that there will hardly be hands enough to
attend to agriculture, and the lands will be left as long without
culture as they have been under tillage. This, so far as celestial
judgment manifests, that we are now in the seventh millenary, which
completes all and introduces us to the eighth, where is the upper
firmament of the eighth sphere, which, in a latitudinary dimension, is
where the Almighty will come to complete the revolution, where the
celestial figures will return to their courses, and the upper motion
which renders the earth stable for us and fixed, "*non inclinabitur in
seculum seculorum*," <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30.md) unless His will
be accomplished, and no otherwise.

Although by ambiguous opinions exceeding all natural reason by
Mahometical dreams, also sometimes God the Creator by the ministry of
angels of fire, and missive flame,

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

presents to the external senses, even of our eyes, the causes of future
predictions, that indicate the future event which must manifest itself
to him who presages anything. For the presage which is made by the
exterior light comes infallibly to judge partly with and by means of the
exterior flame; although truly the part which seems to come by the eye
of the understanding springs only from the lesion of the imaginative
sense. The reason is too evident, the whole is predicted by the afflatus
of divinity, and by means of the angelic spirit inspired to the man
prophesying, rendering him \[as it were\] anointed with vaticinations,
visiting him to illuminate him, and, stirring the forefront of his
phantasy by divers nightly apparitions no less than daily certitude, he
prophesies by astronomic administration conjoined with the holiest
future prediction, taking nothing into his consideration but the
hardihood of his free courage.

Come at this hour to understand, my son, that I find by my revelations
\[astral\], and which are in accordance with revealed inspiration, that
the sword of death is on its way to us now, in the shape of pestilence,
war (more horrible than has been known for three generations of men),
and famine, that shall fall upon the earth, and return upon it at
frequent intervals. For the stars accord with such a revolution, and
with the written word, "*Visitabo in virgâ ferrea iniquitates eorum, et
in verberibus percutiam eos*." <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31.md) For
the mercy of God, my son, will not be spread abroad for a time, till the
major part of my prophesies shall have been accomplished, and have
become by accomplishment resolved. Thus oftentimes in the course of
these sinister storms the Lord will say, "*Conteram ego, et confringam,
et* 

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

non miserebor." <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32.md) And a thousand other
accidents will come by waters and continual rain, as I have more fully
and at large set forth in my other Prophecies, which are drawn out at
length, *in solutâ oratione*; <span id="fr_33"></span>[2](#fn_33.md) (in
these I) designate the localities, times, and terms prefixed, that all
men who come after may see, recognizing the circumstances that come
about by infallible indications. As we have marked by the others where
we speak more clearly, for although they are covered with a veil of
cloud, they are clear enough to be comprehended by men of good
intelligence: "*Sed quando submoventa erit ignorantia*," <span
id="fr_34"></span>[3](#fn_34.md) the total will stand out with greater
clearance still. Making an end here, my son, take now this gift of thy
father, Michael Nostradamus, hoping to expound to thee each several
prophecy of these quatrains here given, beseeching the immortal Father
that He will endue thee with a long life of happy and prospering
felicity.

From Salon, this 1st of March, 1555.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[39:1](oon06.htm#fr_20.md) César Nostradamus was
born at the beginning of 1555, so he was but a few weeks old when his
father dedicated to him the first four "Centuries," published for the
first time in 1555, by Macé Bonhonune, the printer at Lyons. In the name
of this son the epistle is really a dedication to his spiritual sons;
that is, to his interpreters and students in all future ages.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[40:1](oon06.htm#fr_21.md) Lymphatics, Garencières
(p. 16) tells, were anciently those who were mad for love; and he
absurdly adds that the sign of it was, that such persons threw
themselves into the water,--*lympha* meaning water. Varro says that in
Greece those who were mad were called νυμφολήπτους, which means caught
by nymphs. Festus, to fit this, thinks that men went mad by seeing the
image of nymphs in the water fountains. Others have it that they were
afraid of water, as if it were hydrophobia that possessed them. But
*nympha* and *lympha* approach each other so nearly, that when a man is
once caught by a nymph he is, for the time being, mad to all intents and
purposes,--"it is not given to a man to love and to be wise." Leaving
all this to be settled as it may, there is no question but in the
medical technology of Nostradamus a deep melancholy is what was
understood by the Lymphatic motion,--melancholy being the temperament
most apt for study, poetry, and vaticination. Garencières invents a word
for the occasion, or uses one that has since grown obsolete. He employs
the verb *lymphatize*.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[40:2](oon06.htm#fr_22.md) "Such alone as are
inspired by the divine power can predict particular events in a spirit
of prophecy"

<span id="fn_23"></span>[41:1](oon06.htm#fr_23.md) "Thou hast hidden these
things from the wise and prudent, *i.e.* from the powerful and from
kings, and hast revealed them to the small and weak." This is
Nostradamus's gloss upon Matt. xi. 25.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[42:1](oon06.htm#fr_24.md) Acts i. 7.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[42:2](oon06.htm#fr_25.md) Nostradamus seems,
whenever he alludes to this appearance of flame as preceding
vaticination, to have in his mind the descent of tongues of fire at
Pentecost (Acts ii. 3), διαμεριζόμεναι γλῶσσαι ὡσεὶ πυρόσ. A flame of
fire, be it observed, conveys a double symbol: it resembles a tongue in
form. Its luminousness and its purifying tendency express the celestial
nature of spirit, as contrasted with matter, and also inspiration. So
that intrinsically and extrinsically it represents prophetic utterance.
Grotius contributes an unusually good note upon this passage, pointing
out that as in Genesis (xi. g), confusion of tongues scattered mankind,
so hero (Acts ii. 3) the gift of tongues was to bring men again into one
brotherhood.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[42:3](oon06.htm#fr_26.md) This passage is very
difficult to bring to a clear sense in translation, Garencières has
simply evaded it. It seems to mean that God operates all the great
effects in the universe; that, as He is the Maker, so is He the
perpetual operator in the world,--its cause and life; but that the
guardian angels are good and bad, and are charged with some sort of duty
and office, not as affecting the mechanic frame of the world, but in
respect of mankind. This is in conformity with the Cabala and Hermetical
teaching; but what he precisely means cannot, I think, be quite
absolutely stated.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[43:1](oon06.htm#fr_27.md) "He who is called
prophet now, once was called seer."

<span id="fn_28"></span>[45:1](oon06.htm#fr_28.md) "For all things are
naked and open."

<span id="fn_29"></span>[45:2](oon06.htm#fr_29.md) "I am able not to err,
fail, or be deceived."

<span id="fn_30"></span>[47:1](oon06.htm#fr_30.md) "Whence it shall not
deviate from age to age."

<span id="fn_31"></span>[48:1](oon06.htm#fr_31.md) "I will visit their
iniquities with a rod of iron, and with blows will strike them." This
somewhat resembles a passage in the Psalms (ii. 7), but it is not a
quotation.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[49:1](oon06.htm#fr_32.md) "I will trample them and
break them, and not show pity." This resembles Isai. lxiii. 3.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[49:2](oon06.htm#fr_33.md) In prose, and not in
verse, as the quatrains are. These prose forcastings have, I am afraid,
been altogether lost.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[49:3](oon06.htm#fr_34.md) "When the time arrives
for the removal of ignorance."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle to Henry II](oon07.md)
