[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Nostradamus](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oon07)  [Next](oon09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024NL7LM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Oracles of Nostradamus*, by Charles A. Ward, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

# Magic

BEFORE we enter upon the historical application of the quatrains which
admit of interpretation, it will be well to devote a little attention to
the views of magic entertained by Nostradamus, to learn from his own
mouth what class of readers he proposed to address, and to gather, as
far as we may be able, in what manner he proceeded to cultivate the
spirit of prophecy and the divine gift with which he thought himself to
be endowed. Were he even as certainly an impostor as Cagliostro, this
inquiry would have an interest of its own attaching to it; but if we can
for a moment suppose that he genuinely believed himself to be endowed
with a faculty of divination, the investigation of that assumption on
his part would present a considerable psychological interest merely as a
human phenomenon. On the other hand, if he were a man truly gifted with
forecast, I do not know that, in this age of scepticism as to things
spiritual, anything more wholesome could be proposed to our
contemplation than a prophetic record fulfilling itself before the eyes
of disbelievers and gainsayers; who, wishing to scoff and desiring to
suppress such things, find themselves utterly powerless to annul the
harmony between the vision recorded three hundred years ago and the
event of yesterday. Whether such things are or not, it will be for the
reader, when he has gone through the book, to say. At present we will
only busy ourselves with what Nostradamus

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

says of himself. He is a notability and worthy of criticism be the final
verdict for or against him.

At the end of Century VI. occur four Latin lines headed--

LEGIS CANTIO CONTRA INEPTOS CRITICOS. \[I. 51.\]

Qui legent hosce versus maturè censunto,  
Profanum vulgus et inscium ne attrectato,  
Omnesque Astrologi, Blenni, Barbari procul sunto.  
Qui aliter facit, is ritè sacer esto.

The sense of these lines is much clearer than the prosody, but that
matters little.

Translation.

AN INCANTATION IN ARREST OF INEPT CRITICS.

Let those who read these verses meditate them seriously! Let the profane
and ignorant vulgar not handle them! Let astrologers, fools, and savages
stand off! Who acts contrary to this, let him he cursed according to the
rites of magic.

We now come to the magic formula.

Century I.--*Quatrain* I. \[I. 52.\]

Estant assis de nuict secret estude,  
Seul, reposé sur la sele <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42) d'airain,  
Flambe exigue sortant de solitude,  
Fait prospèrer <span id="fr_43"></span>[2](#fn_43) qui <span
id="fr_44"></span>[3](#fn_44) n'est à croire vain.

Translation.

Gathered at night in study deep I sate,  
Alone, upon the tripod stool of brass,  
Exiguous flame came out of solitude,  
Promise of magic that may be believed.

Being seated at night and wrapt in secret study, entirely alone, I
placed myself on the brazen tripod of prophecy. A still small flame came
forth of solitude, helping me to realize successfully what it will not
prove vain to have believed.

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

The reader will here refer to the "Preface à mon fils," [p.
44](oon06.htm#page_44).

"L'entendement cree intellectuellement ne peut voir occultement, sinon
par la voix faicte au lymbe moyennant la exigue flame, en laquelle
partie les causes futures se viendront à incliner."

This passage conveys in prose what the last and the following quatrain
conveys in verse.

THE MAGICAL CALL BY WATER. \[I. 53.\]

Century I.--*Quatrain* 1.

La verge <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45) en main mise au milieu de
BRANCHES,  
De l'Onde il mouille et le limbe, <span id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_46) et
le pied:  
Un peur et voix fremissent par <span id="fr_47"></span>[3](#fn_47) les
manches,  
Splendeur divine, Le Divin près s' assied.

Translation.

The rod in hand set in the midst of the Branches,  
He moistens with water both the fringe and foot;  
Fear and a voice make me quake in my sleeves;  
Splendour divine, the God is seated near.

To make this entirely clear is almost impossible. But what we can get at
is very curious, showing as it does, if nothing else, that the
borderland of the unseen world was actually contiguous with that of the
world of Nostradamus. They even overlapped, in his estimation, so as to
form an intermediate neutral territory like the marches in the North,
where the inhabitants of each district could meet and communicate. We
are positive that this is all illusive, superstitious, demoniacal. It
may be so. But one effect it undeniably produces. It unites man more to
the universe, and less to the world; it makes death less strange and
less cold, and

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

furnishes to the soul, and the things of the soul, more nutriment than
it can extract from modern life and culture.

The general meaning seems to be that he sat with a wand, branch, or
divining-rod of laurel, probably forked like the winchel rod of the
water-finders, one fork being held in each hand. This in some way had
power to evoke his Genius (or *génie familier*, as Le Pelletier styles
it). When he appeared, he moistened in the brazier that held water,
himself, the fringe of his robe (*limbe*), and his foot. The rod, held
as I have suggested, then becoming electrical, caused fear with the
sound of a voice and a shuddering up to the elbows. Then shone forth the
fatidical splendour of a divine light, and the Deity is present, seated
near to him.

M. le Pelletier tells us that there was a pagan rite of the god Branchus
that corresponded with this fatidical ceremony practised by Nostradamus.
He even suggests that this very Branchus might have been the familiar
spirit of our prophet. It must be admitted that in the *texte-type*, in
the words "au milieu de BRANCHES," Branches is printed in capital
letters, so that the probable reason for that peculiarity is that the
God Branchus, as well as the *branches d'un laurier*, is shadowed forth.
But to suppose that a pagan deity could ever be either the familiar or
the guardian angel of a son of the Church of Rome makes such a
Renaissance-jumble of the two religions that I think we had better not
meddle with it.

As to the assertion that there was a pagan rite of Branchus, I doubt it
much; and, if there were, certain it is that Nostradamus speaks here far
too covertly for us to assume from his writing that he was discharging
any rite special to Branchus. He seems to be following out the usual
magical forms employed for establishing vaticinatory connection with the
other world, or setting up the counter analogy between

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

mind and spirit, according to that beautiful esoteric verse in
Ecclesiasticus (xlvii. 24), "All things are double, one against another;
He hath made nothing imperfect." Were such things never to interlink,
men might well say, as they do now in the wisdom of science, that spirit
and intellect are not doubles, and that no knowledge can be reached save
by physical experiment. In this case there will be a particular link
missing if science be right. The sage, *Estant assis de nuict secret
estude*, will earnestly desire such assumption may prove to be
erroneous. He will readily formulate with St. Paul that the invisible
things from creation may be known from the visible; but also that the
visible things can never be understood but by the invisible. Recollect
that the visible is not visible to the visible, but to the invisible
alone. The eye is the machine of sight, but not sight; and who has seen
the eye of the eye?

The Greek myth about Branchus, so far as I can see, is this, with sundry
forms and variations. He was a youth of Miletus. The reputed son of
Smicrus (*Lempriere*), or Macarcus Varro says, but begotten by Apollo.
The mother dreamed that the sun entered her mouth, and, passing through
her, the child at birth was named Branchus, βρόγχος, the throat.
Afterwards he kissed Apollo in the woods, and became endowed with the
gift of prophecy. He had a temple at Didyma, which Pausanias calls the
Temple of Apollo; but Varro goes on to say that after the kiss of the
god he prophesied, but quickly after disappeared, when a grand temple
was jointly dedicated to him and to Apollo,--*Philesius*, from φιλεῖν,
to kiss. His oracles at Didyma were inferior to none but Delphi. The
name Didymean, *double* or *twain*, was from the double light of the sun
and its reflection in the moonlight. Sun-touched and moon-struck madness
and inspiration may in Branchus be said to meet,

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

as out of one throat come things good and evil. The name Didymean was
changed to Branchidæ. Strabo (Book xlv.) relates that the priests of
this grand temple betrayed its treasures to Xerxes, and accompanied him
in his retreat to escape the punishment of their sacrilege. They had
settled near to Sogdiana, when Alexander arrived there (Strabo, Book
xi.); he destroyed them and their city. This Byronical madman, who could
see no iniquity in the slaughter of thousands to gratify the lust of a
crack-brained ambition, thought to promote morals by slaughtering the
descendants of traitors, they, the descendants, being innocent of
everything except being born. The Milesians had long ago rebuilt the
temple of Branchus on such a scale that in magnitude it surpassed all
others in Greece. It was, in fact, too big to be roofed in, being four
or five stadia in compass. Those who wish to see more can consult
Suidas, s. v., βραγχίδαι.

The gloss of M. le Pelletier on the quatrain is as follows: that
Nostradamus, wand in hand, touches the branches of the tripod, like the
priests of Branchus (this I have tried to expunge), and invokes his
familiar spirit, which appears to him in the vapour floating above a
basin of water, which he had consecrated beforehand according to
prescribed magical rites, and in which he dips the fringe of his
garment, and his feet. An involuntary shivering (peur) agitates his hand
when about to write from the dictation (voix) of the spirit. The
fatidical light shines, and the angel is seated at his side. Le
Pelletier takes occasion here to remark that mediums at this day write
under a spirit of dictation, to which they simply lend their arm as an
instrument.

Garencières' interpretation is that of most of the old commentators,
even down to the time of M. Bareste, 1840. The rod is a pen, in the
middle of the branches means his fingers, the water is the ink, and
wetting limb and foot is

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

covering the paper all but the four margins. It is hardly unfair to say
that this is both nonsensical and ignorant, although not devoid of
ingenuity. I think it will fit the circumstances far better to take it,
as I have done, that the wand was a forked laurel branch that dipped
forcibly, like the winchel rod, when Nostradamus held it over the water,
that it strained, as the hazel-rod does, almost to breaking, and that at
this invitation it is to be supposed that the spirit appears. The
incantation being completed and successful, the operator must be
supposed to set aside the winchel, and assume the pen, quaking with a
solemn sense of the spiritual presence. This fear was, Garencières says,
to prevent the puffing up of pride, as we read in Daniel, John, and the
4th of Esdras.

Readers who take no interest in this, and are consequently weary by this
time of the length we have run into in the investigation, will leap over
what follows to get to the next quatrain.

M. le Pelletier refers to Ficinus' translation of Jamblicus' "De
Mysteriis Ægyptiorum," 1607. He gives the Latin and French. I will
merely introduce here the English translation, as the book is of easy
reference to those who wish to examine further for themselves the
sources which Nostra, damus had consulted, and from which he drew his
summary exposition.

"The sibyl at Delphi received the god in two forms,--either by a subtle
and fiery spirit, which burst forth upon any one through the crevice of
some cavern, or else sitting on a brazen seat of four or three feet in
the inner shrine, dedicated to the god, and where she was exposed on two
sides to the divine influx, whence she was irradiate with a divine
light" (p. 66).

"Now, the prophetess of Branchus either sits upon a pillar, (r holds in
her hand a rod bestowed by some deity, or moistens her feet or the hem
of her garment with water, or inhales the vapour of water, and by these
means is filled with divine illumination, and. having obtained the

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

deity, she prophesies. By these practices she adapts herself to the god,
whom she receives from without" (p. 67).

"Porphyrius says that the art \[or magic\] is not to be despised which,
out of certain vapours due to fire under favourable stellar influences,
forms the images of gods spontaneously appearing in the air, in a
certain degree like the gods themselves, and possessing a very similar
efficacy" (p. 90.

"For amongst the demons there is one who is chief, and who exercises
influence at the moment of birth, and apportions to each his demon (or
familiar). After this there is present to each one his own guardian,
that develops a *cultus* congruous to his nature, and teaches him both
his name and the most suitable form of invocation (to bring him when
required), and this method is most congenial to the demons" (p. 171).

These forms of Jamblicus are analogous to those employed by Nostradamus;
but there the person prophesying wets the feet and fingers, whilst
according to our version Of the quatrains it is the demon or spirit
applies them to himself: *Le Divin près s'assied*. In Jamblicus the one
who prophesies becomes possessed by entry of the spirit. Nostradamus
describes an external and visible presence which corresponds to
Porphyrius' account of *deorum idola in aere*.

CORPOREAL DEMONS. \[I. 59.\]

Century I.--*Quatrain* 42.

La dix Calendes d'Avril de faict gotique  
Resuscité encor par gens malins:  
Le feu estainct, assemblée diabolique  
Cherchant les os du Damant et Pselin. <span
id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48)

Translation.

The 10th of the Calends of April Gothic computation have been again put
in practice by sorcerers (*gens malins*). The lights put out, the
diabolic assembly searching for the Demon \[*Damant* for *Démon*\]
treated of by Michael Psellus.

The *texte-type* is most corrupt in this quatrain; for

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Damant et Pselin*
read *Démon e* (or *ex*) *Pselin*, the demon as treated of by Psellus.

The scholium of M. le Pelletier on this is--The magical incantations,
which were successful formerly when wrought on the night of Good Friday,
were reintroduced into practice by sorcerers of skill on the 10th Calend
of April according to the ancient computation (*de faict gotique*). In a
note added he professes that the 10th Calend Old Style would be the last
day of March by the Gregorian, and he thinks it probable, that
Nostradamus here designates some particular year, when Good Friday fell
on the 31st or' March. Garencières upon this notes that it falls on the
23rd of March, called Gothic, because adhered to by the northern nations
long after the Gregorian had been adopted at Rome. I do not see how the
10th Calend could ever fall on the 31st, nor indeed what the 31st has to
do with the matter. Those who arc more familiar with such calculations
may perhaps explain. Like the witches' Sabbath, these diabolic meetings
were accompanied by the lewdest rites, as will at once be seen by the
following passage from Psellus, which I leave untranslated. It is from
the Latin translation of Psellus by Marsilius Ficinus, and will be found
in his collected works (ii. 884) in folio ed. 1641.

"'Euchetæ et gnosci, ut dæmonia toto concipiant pectore, nefanda
sacrificia perpetrant Conveniunt die quo passus est Salvator, <span
id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49) vespere, statutur in locum, unà cum
puellis sibi notis, et post quædam sacra extinctis luminibus, <span
id="fr_50"></span>[2](#fn_50) mistim coëunt, sive cum sorore, sive cum
filiâ, sive cum quâlibet" (Psellus as above, p. 894).

"There is a further kind of vaticination by a basin, by means of which
rustics frequently predict. just as there is a mode of predicting by
means

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

of the air and the leaves of trees, so there is a kind of predictive
power in the basin, known and practised by the Assyrians, which has a
great similarity to this incarnation or coupling of demons with matter.
Thus those about to prophesy take a basin full of water, which attracts
the spirits moving stealthily in the depths (*dæmonibus congruentem in
profunda repentibus*.) Le Pelletier translates this, (*appropié à
l'usage des démons cachés au fond des eaux*). The basin then, full of
water, seems in sort to breathe (or move) as with sounds (*s'il allait
émettre des sons*); it seems to me that the water was agitated with
circular ripples, as from some sound emitted below. Now, this water
diffused through the basin differs but little in kind from water out of
the basin, but yet it much excels it from a virtue imparted to it by the
charms \[that have been droned over it\], and which have rendered it
more apt to receive the spirit of prophecy. For this description of
spirit is tetchy and terrene, and much under the influence of composite
spells. When the water begins to lend itself as the vehicle of sound, he
\[the spirit\] also presently gives out a thin reedy note \[of
satisfaction\], but devoid of meaning; and close upon that, whilst the
water is undulating, certain weak and peeping sounds whisper forth
predictions of the future. A spirit of this kind is vagrant everywhere,
for he is endowed with the solar pass \[so that our terrestrial
atmosphere lies everywhere open to him\], and that order of spirits, in
the work appointed to it, speaks at all times with a subdued voice, that
by its indistinct obscurity it may be less easy to seize the falsehoods
that it utters" (Psellus as above, p. 885).

From the mode in which Psellus describes the matter in hand, it is very
perceptible that he was no great conjuror, and was merely speaking upon
hearsay and report. If lies were the business of the spirit, he would be
no prophet. Again, if he wished to circulate lies, he must still make
things clear enough to his votaries for them to circulate them and work
mischief thereby. Are we to suppose that, like an abandoned human being,
he had some sense of shame left still, and, like Lord John Russell,
would only tell as few lies as possible? Psellus's demon is so foolish
that he would soon have been without any one to consult his shrine. He
could not have given a reason for his own conduct, in the past or
present, and was the last being that any one would resort to to
anticipate intelligence of the future. Still

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

the procedure might have been somewhat as Psellus describes it, although
the reasons could not.

An historian of the fourth century, and a man of veracity, Marcellinus
has given us curious details of how prophetical tripods were considered
by the Romans in his day. It comes out quite naturally in the judicial
proofs investigating a conspiracy against the life of Valens the
Emperor; what we should call a state trial. The conspirators were put to
the torture, and as an item in the indictment the figure of j little
table becomes prominent, as to which the accused were questioned by the
judges. At last one of them, Hillarius, broken by pain, revealed the
secret in these words:

"Honoured judges, we constructed this unfortunate little table that you
see here after the fashion of the tripod \[or, more strictly, the
cauldron <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51)\] at Delphi, with dark
incantations, out of branches of laurel; and with imprecations of secret
song, and numerous ceremonies repeated over daily, we consecrated it by
magic rites, till at last we put it in motion. When it reached this
capacity of movement, as often as we wished to interrogate it by secret
inquiry, we proceeded thus.

It was placed in the middle of a room (*in medio domûs*) purified
throughout by Arabian perfumes; a round dish was simply laid upon it,
formed of a composite material of many metals. On the phlange of its
outer round were skilfully engraved the scriptile forms of the alphabet
separated into as many exactly measured spaces. Over this basin (or
dish) a man stood clothed in linen garments and shod with linen socks,
his head bound round with a turban-like tuft of hair, and bearing a rod
of vervain, the prospering plant. After we had favourably conciliated
the deity, who is the giver of all presage, with duly formulated charms
and ceremonial knowledge, he communicated a gentle movement to a ring
that hung suspended over the basin. . . . This was tied up by an
exceedingly fine Carpathian thread, which had been initiated with
mystical observances. This ring, moving by little leaps or jumps, so as
to alight upon the distinct intervals with the separate letters
inscribed, each in its compartment to itself, gives out in heroic verse
answers suitable to the inquiries made, comprehended perfectly in number
and measure; such as are called Pythic, or those delivered by the
oracles of the Branchidæ.

"To us inquiring who should succeed to the present empire, because

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

it had been already mentioned that it would be one entirely suitable
\[to our aim and purpose\], the leaping ring had glanced upon the two
syllables THEO. With the last addition of a letter \[that is, D\], a man
present exclaimed, 'THEODORUM,' the fatal necessity of the portent
indicating as much. Nothing further was sought upon this head; for it
was agreed amongst us that this was the individual we wanted" (*Ammianus
Marcellinus*, Return Gestarum, xxix. 1).

In this case the ambiguity of the oracle is due to the precipitance of
the inquirers. The oracle was true as far as they allowed it to proceed,
but had they waited to spell it out they would have learned that the
name was not THEOD*orus*, but THEOD*osius* the Great, who was to be the
successor to Valens.

This is an authentic passage of high interest. It shows considerable
analogy with the table-turning of the moderns; it also gives insight
into singular and elaborate processes of divination by magic as being
frequently practised at Rome in the fourth century. Clearly the Pagans
had no notion in that century that oracles had at all finally ceased on
a Good Friday in the first century, or that Pan, the god of rumour, was
dead. The sun still shone to them as the Apollo of prophecy, and they
still sought presage of a spirit who was made free of the solar order
(*qui solarem ordinem est sortitus*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_42"></span>[68:1](oon08.htm#fr_42) Romance tongue, *sele*
for *selle*, tripod seat, *tripode æneo*, such as the priestess of
Apollo or Pythia sat on to deliver oracles.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[68:2](oon08.htm#fr_43) Latin, *prosperare*, to
succeed, or realize an experience.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[68:3](oon08.htm#fr_44) *Qui* for *ce qui*.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[69:1](oon08.htm#fr_45) Latin, *virga*, branch
or wand.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[69:2](oon08.htm#fr_46) Latin, *limbus*, hem,
border, fringe.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[69:3](oon08.htm#fr_47) Latin, *per*, in, or
through.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[74:1](oon08.htm#fr_48) Ex Michaele Psello, *de
Dæmonibus*. Works of Marsilius Ficinus, ii. 884, ed. 1641, folio.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[75:1](oon08.htm#fr_49) This refers to some Good
Friday evening on the 10th Calend of April Old Style, as set forth in
the first line of this quatrain.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[75:2](oon08.htm#fr_50) This is exhibited in the
third line of the quatrain: *Le feu estainct, assemblée diabolique*.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[77:1](oon08.htm#fr_51) Æneid, iii. 92 and vi.
347.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Historical Fragments](oon09)
