[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Nostradamus](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oon10)  [Next](oon12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024NL7LM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Oracles of Nostradamus*, by Charles A. Ward, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

# Louis XIII

(1610-1643.)

PUNISHMENT OF THE GREAT MONTMORENCY (OCTOBER 30, 1632.) \[I. 113.\]

Century IX.--*Quatrain* 18.

Le lys Dauffois <span id="fr_135"></span>[1](#fn_135.md) portera <span
id="fr_136"></span>[2](#fn_136.md) dans Nanci  
Jusques en Flandres electeur de l'Empire;  
Neufve obturée <span id="fr_137"></span>[3](#fn_137.md) an grand
Montmorency,  
Hors lieux prouvés <span id="fr_138"></span>[4](#fn_138.md) delivré <span
id="fr_139"></span>[5](#fn_139.md) á clere peyne. <span
id="fr_140"></span>[6](#fn_140.md)

Translation.

The Dauphin shall carry his lily standards into Nancy, just as in
Flanders the Elector of Trèves shall be carried prisoner of the
Spaniards into Brussels. A new prison will be given to the great
Montmorency, who will be delivered for execution into the hands of
Clerepeyne. This man will behead him in a spot not devoted to
executions.

I HAVE given this in prose, as it could only yield ingenious doggerel in
verse.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

Louis XIII., of whom it may be remarked that he was the first who bore
the title of Dauphin de France since the publication of Century IX., in
1506, entered Nancy on September 25, 1633, a day after his army. In 1635
he enters Flanders on behalf of the Elector, whom the Spaniards had, on
t e 26th of March of that year, carried prisoner to Brussels.
Nostradamus then reverts to October 30, 1632, when the great Montmorency
was executed for rebellion, being first confined in the newly built
(*neufve obturée*) Hotel de Ville at Toulouse. In the courtyard of this
building Clerepeyne, a soldier, shall cut off his head, and not, as
ought to have been the case, at the place appointed for public
executions, such as was La Give at Paris.

It so happens that Clerepeyne's name is fully attested by Étienne
Joubert and by the Chevalier de Jant, both contemporary with the event.
Further than this, M. Motret has brought to light, after minute historic
research, that the family, by solicitation of the King, could obtain
only two concessions of mere formality--that the execution should be
with closed doors, and by a soldier in lieu of the common headsman. The
*place publique* or *marché* would be the place mentioned in the
official order.

If the reader will carefully give his attention to the full drift of
this quatrain, when the mere difficulty of verbal contortion has been
resolved, he must feel that the prognostication has to be reckoned as
one of the most astounding of oracles ever set forth in history. A
French King takes Nancy. The Elector of Trèves is bandied about between
France and Spain, like a shuttlecock of State; and then, by name, comes
the execution of the great Montmorency, detailed with, it is true, the
brevity of Tacitus, but, when understood, with a singular felicity of
detail implied in the pregnant words *neufve obturée*, of the newly
built town

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

hall. Not in the market-place is he executed, but in the central
courtyard. Let *clere peyne* (*clara pœna*) stand merely for celebrated
attainder, the thing is still prodigious beyond all precedent. But when
you know, in addition, that a part of Nostradamus's prophetic method
consists in using every possible play of words, including paronomasia
and anagram, and you find that the soldier who acted as headsman--a man
called upon by chance to gratify the almost absurd sensibilities of the
family--was *Clerepeyne*, a name that corresponds to a title with the
two words employed by the prophet, then, indeed, the marvel mounts into
the stupendous. It cannot be paralleled out of the works of the
individual we are busy with. It is incredible, and yet you must believe
it. It is not to be understood, but it must be accepted. Joubert, de
Jant, the Cure de Louvicamp, and Motret, have all contributed to its
historical confirmation on independent lines. It was in print, beyond
possibility of gainsaying, more than fifty years before any of the
events occurred. Clerepeyne could not have been even born at the time
his name was being put through the printing press at Lyons. The mind
that can realize all these details, and then be content to fall back
upon chance to explain them, or upon the verbal fact that visions must
be visionary--an axiom quite as philosophic, by-the-bye, as Hume's
"Essay on Miracles" is built upon--is a mind not at all to be envied,
Such incredulity is more astounding than the prophecy itself. It is
easier to believe the prophecy than the philosopher who says he does not
believe it. The Tower is below London Bridge. Has anybody ever asked
"why?" This 18th quatrain of Century IX. of Nostradamus is just as much
a fact as the Tower of London is, and vastly more impregnable.
Intelligent people will be amused by an explanation; but the substantive
fact can stand without any,

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

till the day of Doom if necessary. It is only some human popinjay, Plato
Pry, the philosopher, who would like to gossip to us the How, and so
sport another borrowed feather in his feather-brain,--or hum us with
another bee from his bonnet; that hive of mad insects.

THE CONSPIRACY OF CINQ MARS (MARCH 13, 1642.) \[I. 115.\]

Century VIII--*Quatrain* 68.

Vieux Cardinal par la jeusne deccu, <span
id="fr_141"></span>[1](#fn_141.md)  
Hors de sa charge sa verra desarmé,  
Arles ne monstres <span id="fr_142"></span>[2](#fn_142.md) double <span
id="fr_143"></span>[3](#fn_143.md) soit apperceu;  
Et Liqueduct <span id="fr_144"></span>[4](#fn_144.md) et le Prince
embausmé.

Translation.

The old cardinal is supplanted by a young man, and will see himself
deprived of his charge, and disarmed. \[Le Pelletier renders\]: If Arles
you do not show, in a manner that shall be visible, a counterpart of the
treaty, then the man who will cause himself to be conveyed by water will
be embalmed, and the Prince also.

The above is the contortion to which Le Pelletier resorts to force out
of it the sense it undoubtedly contains. My proposed reading reduces the
difficulty.

The old Cardinal Richelieu shall find himself supplanted by the young
Cinq Mars. He was but twenty-two when he achieved this bit of dexterous
Court intrigue against Richelieu, <span id="fr_145"></span>[5](#fn_145.md)
the most rusé fox in Europe, as rumour ran.

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

Cinq Mars was his own *protégé*, and no doubt threw him with a trick
learned from his master. A sprightly youngster of the apt breed can
learn such things quickly. But when the cardinal was at Arles he learnt
that a certain treasonable treaty was negotiated with Spain by his rival
in the name of the King's brother, and this made known brought Richelieu
back to power straight. Now, if we read the line

Arles, le monstre double soit apperceu:  
At Arles, let the monster diploma (treacherous treaty) be discovered,--

or Cinq Mars himself might be the double monster,--it would be but a
gentle emendation in a classic line, and it makes the sense run well.
Richelieu returned by water (*Liqueduct*) from Tarascon to Lyons, by the
Rhone, with his bed upon the boat, but sick unto death, carrying Cinq
Mars and De Thou prisoners along with him. In the same style he
descended the Seine from Fontainebleau to Paris, where he died, two
months later, on December 4, 1642. Louis XIII. died on the 14th of the
following May. Both were embalmed, which was the practice then
customary. The King when dead becomes a Prince again, when the breath
was out of the body that 4th of December. Le roi est mort, vive le Roy
Louis XIV.

IMPROVEMENT IN FIREARMS (1630-1671.) \[I. 116.\]

Century III.--*Quatrain* 44.

Quand l'animal à l'homme domestique,  <span
id="fr_146"></span>[1](#fn_146.md) <span id="page_130">p. 130</span>  
Après grands peines et sauts viendra parler,  
Le foudre à vierge <span id="fr_147"></span>[1](#fn_147.md) sera sit <span
id="fr_148"></span>[2](#fn_148.md) malefique,  
De terre prinse <span id="fr_149"></span>[3](#fn_149.md) et suspendue en
l'air.

Translation.

When the dog, <span id="fr_150"></span>[4](#fn_150.md) after many trials,
shall begin to leap and speak, the powder loaded by ram-rod shall spread
destruction round (*sera très malefique*.) Powder taken from the earth
and exploded in the air.

When the firelock shall have been invented after many trials, and shall
speak through the mouth of the gun, with recoil \[*sauts*, or kick\],
after the powder-charge is well driven home with the ramrod, it will be
most murderous by explosion in the air. The invention of the musket
dates 1630. Troops, Le Pelletier says, were first armed with it in 1671.
Nostradamus, it is to be observed, anticipates by an ingenious
amplification and periphrasis the very name *chien*, by which the French
designate this portion of the lock. It would not have served its purpose
for the name of the same thing in English. This anticipation of the
slang term of manufacture, a hundred years before the thing itself was
used or named, seems to show an intimacy with what would be called
matters of chance, that is inconceivable and beyond all
comprehensibility.

I cannot but append here a translation of Guynaud's remarks upon this
quatrain. They are, I think, the funniest that occur in the whole book.
He says:

"Nostradamus warns us here that two prodigious things are to occur at
last: one, that the industry and care of man will arrive at such a point
that a domestic animal, such as dogs are, will be got to speak. For to
imagine that this can be intended of birds is out of the question quite,
as they are excluded from the list of domestic animals created by God
for the service of man, as quadrupeds are. The words of the two first
lines of the

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

prophecy are *Quand après grande peine l'animal domestique viendra
parler a l'homme et qu'il sautera*,--just as dogs do in approaching
their master. A [further](errata.htm#1.md) thing is to happen that is no
less astonishing: a demon is to mingle himself with powder, and suddenly
transport a girl into the air, when she will remain suspended for
possibly a whole day long, according to these words: '*La foudre â
vièrge sera si malefique; de terre prinse et surpendue en l'air*.' The
critics may suppose that to mean that the girl will be hanged; but this
is not so, in my opinion, because the word *malefique* is derived from
the Latin *maleficus*, which in itself indicates a maleficent spirit
delighting to work evil, as the devil always is."--GUYNAUD,
"Concordances," p. 271.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_135"></span>[125:1](oon11.htm#fr_135.md) *Dauffois*, for
*Dauphinois* synonym, for *Dauphin*.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[125:2](oon11.htm#fr_136.md) *Portera*, for
supportera, says Le Pelletier. For my part, it seems best to leave it to
its natural rendering, that he will carry his colours into Nancy.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[125:3](oon11.htm#fr_137.md) Latin, *obturare*, to
shut up in.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[125:4](oon11.htm#fr_138.md) *Prouvés* is for
approuvés.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[125:5](oon11.htm#fr_139.md) *Delivré*, is for
livré.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[125:6](oon11.htm#fr_140.md) This is a play upon
words, unrecognized by Garencières, as he did not know that *Clerepeyne*
was the name of the man who cut off Montmorency's head, although, of
course, Garencières is quite alive to the fact that the quatrain refers
to Louis XIII. and the great Montmorency. In Latin *clara pœna* means
celebrated punishment. Here is another instance of the mention of a name
of an obscure individual that history for a moment flashes light upon,
and then drops him back into the mud of oblivious ooze for ever,--emblem
apt of Fame! This was written, if not Printed, a good eighty years
before Clerepeyne became the midge-mote of a sunbeam upon that late
autumnal day in history, when the night struck chilly on high roofs in
Dauphiny.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[128:1](oon11.htm#fr_141.md) Latin, *decisus*,
suppressed cut off.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[128:2](oon11.htm#fr_142.md) *Ne monstres*. I
think there is a printer's error here in the *texte-type*, and that we
should read *le monstre*.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[128:3](oon11.htm#fr_143.md) *Double*, diploma, or
duplicate of a treaty.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[128:4](oon11.htm#fr_144.md) Latin, *ille aquâ
ductus*, he that is taken by water.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[128:5](oon11.htm#fr_145.md) Richelieu, if you
examine him by Philippe de Champagne's splendid triple portrait of him,
hanging in our Gallery, may be read as if in life by any physiognomist
who pleases to devote the time to it. I have gazed many a time, through
long years, with gifted friends and others, and oftener still alone,
into those heartless eyes, attracted irresistibly (I only now see why)
by the vast discrepancy between the world-wide renown of this French
Minister, and his cynically petty face-sly, vulpine, unfeeling,
unprincipled, spiteful, a coxcomb of feminine manners, of an <span
id="page_129">p. 129</span> egotism and paltry vanity inordinate, but of
a refinement, showing the highest social culture, a tongue that could
gloze with ladies; he might, by *lettre de cachet*, have shut up a
French Walsingham in the Bastille to prevent his own overthrow; but as
to coping with him or a Burleigh as a statesman, as an equal in any
powerful cabinet in Europe, by force of character, he could not have
done it. Artifice, backed by the force of France, then rising into unity
of action, or helped by circumstances that tied the hands of his
antagonist, he might even throw a giant unawares. Richelieu was an
artificial contriver, not a born ruler, if a mature face of fifty be any
index to the volume or memoir of a man's life.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[129:1](oon11.htm#fr_146.md) Arrange these words,
*l'animal domestique à l'homme*, *i.e.* *the dog*.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[130:1](oon11.htm#fr_147.md) Latinism, *fulmen à
virgâ*, saltpetre; that is, the powder and ram-rod.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[130:2](oon11.htm#fr_148.md) Romance, *si*,
synonym of *très*, very.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[130:3](oon11.htm#fr_149.md) Romance, *prinse*,
*prise*, taken, brought.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[130:4](oon11.htm#fr_150.md) The *chien* is the
cock or hammer of the lock.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Louis XIV](oon12.md)
