<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](slaa09)  [Next](slaa11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1585090441/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002L16OXS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Sun Lore of All Ages*, by William Tyler Olcott, \[1914\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span> <span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

### Chapter VIII

#### Sun-Catcher Myths

IN the mythology of every land there may be found legends relating to
the snaring of the sun, or the retarding of its daily course. The
regularity and the steadfastness of the sun's apparent diurnal motion,
and its undeviating and deliberate journey across the sky, was such a
peculiar and obvious circumstance that it was a matter of conjecture and
speculation at a very early date in the world's history. The cause of
this phenomenon was naturally attributed to compulsion; for why should
the sun mount the sky each morning with absolute regularity, and pursue
the same path always unless compelled to do so?

Some time or other the Sun probably did as he liked, and doubtless he
was caught in a trap, and beaten into submission; or, perhaps formerly
he went rapidly across the heavens, but, being caught he was forced to
proceed at a more leisurely gait. Thus the ancients speculated regarding
the daily apparent movement of the sun, and these notions gave rise to a
wealth of tradition, myth, and legend

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

that have come down to us in many devious ways. The tales that relate
especially to the snaring and trapping of the Sun have been termed by
mythologists "Sun-Catcher Myths."

In a pass of the Andes there stand, on the cliffs that rise high on
either side, two ruined towers. Into their walls are clamped iron hooks,
which tradition relates held fast a net that was stretched across the
pass to catch the rising Sun. According to an Indian legend, the Sun was
once caught and bound with a chain which only permitted him to swing a
little way to one side or the other.

It is said that Jerome of Prague, when travelling among the heathen
Lithuanians, early in the fifteenth century, found a tribe who
worshipped the Sun, and idolised a large iron hammer. The priests
informed him that once the Sun had been invisible for many months
because a powerful king had imprisoned him in a strong tower, but the
signs of the zodiac had broken open the tower with this very hammer, and
released the Sun, therefore they worshipped it.

A Japanese myth relates that in early times the Sun, displeased at men's
misdeeds, retired into a cave, and left the world in darkness. <span
id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62) This caused

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

great distress, but finally the wise men devised a plan to lure her from
her retreat, which plan was successful. When the Sun discovered the
ruse, she desired to forsake the world once more, but, before she could
do so, she was bound by cords, and held fast by eight hundred thousand
gods, who have ever since restrained her from leaving the world.

As we have seen, the worship of the Sun was abandoned for a time in
Peru, as one Inca denied that the Sun was a supreme deity because he
followed a circumscribed course. "If he were free," said the Inca, "he
would visit other parts of the heavens where he had never been. As he
follows one path, he must be tied like a beast who goes ever round and
round in the same track."

Both in the Orient and Occident we find myths relating to the subjection
of the Sun, but whereas the culture of the East invented the beautifully
adorned legends of Phœbus Apollo, and the mighty Herakles, who, although
all-powerful, was doomed to a life of servitude at the behest of
another, in the West the crude imagination of the barbarians conjured up
the mental picture of the snaring of the Sun by an artfully contrived
net or trap.

The association of the Sun with cords or ropes in the myths is clearly
derived from the phenomenon in evidence when the sun's rays filter

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

through a broken mass of clouds; then the long streams of light that
seem to radiate from the sun and touch the earth are in imagination not
unlike strands of gold which, as the legend related, held the Sun fast
bound to earth. Thus did they appear to the Polynesians, who call these
rays of the sun the ropes by which the Sun is fastened. They say the Sun
once drove swiftly through the sky, but a god subdued him, and now bound
by ropes and cords he goes humbly along his daily appointed path.

The Polynesian myth <span id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63) that tells of
this snaring of the Sun is one of the most interesting legends in solar
mythology, and it is therefore given in much detail:

Maui, the Polynesian hero god, after performing many great exploits,
returned home to dwell with his brothers. He soon became restless,
however, and, looking about for adventure, he decided that the Sun's
daily course across the sky was altogether too rapid, and night-fall
followed dawn too quickly to suit him.

"So at last one day he said to his brothers: 'Let us now catch the sun
in a noose, so that we may compel him to move more slowly, in order that
mankind may have long days to labour in to procure subsistence for
themselves.' But they

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

answered him: 'Why, no man could approach it on account of its warmth
and the fierceness of its heat.' But nothing daunted, Maui persisted
that he could snare the sun, and with the aid of his brothers spun and
twisted ropes to form a noose. After they had sufficient ropes with
which to bind the sun, Maui and his brothers journeyed a long distance
eastward to the very edge of the place out of which the sun rises. Then
they set to work, and built on each side of this place a long high wall
of clay with huts of boughs of trees at each end to hide themselves in.
When these were finished, they made the loops of the noose, and the
brothers of Maui then lay in wait on one side of the place out of which
the sun rises, and Maui himself lay in wait upon the other side.

"The young hero held in his hand his enchanted weapon, the jaw bone of
his ancestress, and said to his brothers: 'Mind now, keep yourselves
hid, and do not go showing yourselves foolishly to the sun, if you do
you will frighten him; but wait patiently until his head and forelegs
have got well into the snare, then I will shout out, haul away as hard
as you can on the ropes on both sides, and then I'll rush out and attack
him, but do you keep your ropes tight for a good long time (while I
attack him), until he is nearly dead, when we will let him go, but mind
now, my brothers, do not let

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

him move you to pity with his shrieks and screams.'

"At last the sun came rising out of his place like a fire spreading far
and wide over the mountains and forests. He rises up, his head passes
through the noose, and it takes in more and more of his body until his
fore-paws pass through, then are pulled tight the ropes, and the monster
began to struggle and roll himself about, whilst the snare jerked
backwards and forwards as he struggled. Then forth rushed that bold hero
Maui with his enchanted weapon. Alas, the sun screams aloud, he roars;
Maui strikes him fiercely with many blows; they hold him for a long
time. At last they let him go, and then weak from wounds the sun crept
slowly along its course. Then was learnt by men the second name of the
sun, for in its agony the sun screamed out: 'Why am I thus smitten by
you? Oh man: Do you know what you are doing? Why should you wish to kill
Tama-nui-te-ra?' Thus was learnt the second name. At last they let him
go, and the sun went very slowly and feebly on his course.

"Maui, however, took the precaution to keep the ropes on him, and they
may still be seen hanging from the sun at dawn and eve."

It is also related that in snaring the Sun, Maui injured it, and thus
deprived it of half its light,

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

and since then the days have been longer and cooler and men have been
able to work in peace.

The following Sun-catcher myth <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64)
refers more to a temporary staying of the Sun in its daily course, than
to a permanent change in its rate of speed such as Maui effected:

"There was once a man who, like the white people, though it was years
before pipes, muskets, or priests were heard of, never could be
contented with what he had. Pudding was not good enough for him, and he
worried his family out of all heart with his new ways and ideas. At last
he set to build himself a house of great stones to last forever. So he
rose early and toiled late, but the stones were so heavy, and so far
off, and the sun went around so quickly, that he could get on but very
slowly. One evening he lay awake, and thought, and thought, and it
struck him that as the sun had but one road to come by, he might stop
him, and keep him till the work was done. So he rose before the dawn,
and pulling out in his canoe, as the sun rose, he threw a rope around
his neck, but no, the sun marched on, and went his course unchecked. He
then put nets over the place where the sun rose, he used up all his mats
to stop him, but in vain, the sun went on, and laughed in the hot winds
at all his efforts. Meanwhile the house stood still,

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

and the builder fairly despaired. At last the great Itu, who generally
lies on his mats, and cares not at all for those he has made, turned
round and heard his cry, and because he was a good warrior sent him
help. He made the facehere creeper grow, and again the poor man sprang
up from the ground near his house, where he had lain down in despair. He
took his canoe, and made a noose of the creeper. It was a bad season
when the sun is dull, and heavy, so up he came half asleep and tired,
nor looked about him, but put his head into the noose. He pulled and
jerked, but Itu had made it too strong. The man built his house, the sun
cried and cried till the island of Savai was nearly drowned but not till
the last stone was laid was he suffered to resume his career. None can
break the facehere creeper. It is the Itu's cord."

A study of North American mythology reveals in the traditions of the
Ojibways a myth similar in many respects to the Polynesian Sun-catcher
myth. This legend <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65) relates that in
primitive times the animals ruled the earth, having killed all of
humankind except a girl and her small brother. They lived in fear and
seclusion:

"The boy never grew bigger than a little child, and his sister used to
take him out with her when she went to get food for the lodge-fire, for
he was

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

too little to leave alone. A big bird might have flown away with him.
One day she made him a bow and arrows, and told him to hide where she
had been chopping, and when the snow birds came to pick the worms out of
the wood, he was to shoot one. That day he tried in vain to kill one,
but the next, toward night-fall, she heard his little footsteps on the
snow. He brought in a bird, and told his sister she was to take off the
skin, and put half the bird at a time into the pottage, for till then
men had not begun to eat animal food, but had lived on vegetables alone.
At last the boy had killed ten birds, and his sister made him a little
coat of the skins. 'Sister,' said he one day, 'are we all alone in the
world? Is there nobody else living?' Then she told him that those they
feared, and who had destroyed their relatives, lived in a certain part,
and he must by no means go that way, but this only made him more eager
to go, and he took his bow and arrow and started. When he had walked a
long while, he lay down on a knoll, where the sun had melted the snow,
and fell fast asleep, but while he was sleeping the sun beat so hot upon
him, that his bird-skin coat was all singed and shrunk. When he awoke
and found his coat spoilt, he vowed vengeance against the sun, and bade
his sister make him a snare. She made him one of deer's sinew, and then
one of

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

her own hair, but they would not do. At last she brought him one that
was right. He pulled it between his lips, and as he pulled it became a
red metal cord. With this he set out a little after midnight, and fixed
his snare on a spot just where the sun would strike the land as it rose
above the earth's disk, and sure enough he caught the sun, so that it
was held fast in the cord, and did not rise. The animals who ruled the
earth were immediately put into a great commotion. They had no light.
They called a council to debate upon the matter, and to appoint some one
to go and cut the cord, for this was a very hazardous enterprise, as the
rays of the sun would burn whoever came so near. At last the dormouse
undertook it, for at this time the dormouse was the largest animal in
the world. When it stood up, it looked like a mountain. When it got to
the place where the sun was snared, its back began to smoke, and burn
with the intensity of the heat, and the top of its carcass was reduced
to enormous heaps of ashes. It succeeded, however, in cutting the cord
with its teeth, and freeing the sun, but it was reduced to a very small
size, and has remained so ever since."

In this myth we have the Sun-catcher myth of the South Sea Islands
combined with part of our own fairy tale of Jack-and-the-Bean-Stalk. In
this latter tale it is related that Jack, in spite of

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

his mother's prayers, goes up the ladder that is to take him to the
dwelling of the Giant who killed his father; so the boy of the Indian
legend will not heed his sister's persuasion, but goes to seek the
enemies who had slain his kindred.

In these myths the loosing of the imprisoned Sun is told in a story of
which the European fable of the "Lion and the Mouse" might be a mere
moralised remnant.

We have another version of the foregoing myth, which was told by the
Wyandot Indians to the missionary Paul Le Jeune:

"There was a child whose father had been killed and eaten by a bear, and
his mother by the Great Hare. A woman came and found the child and
adopted him as her little brother, calling him 'Chakabech.' He did not
grow bigger than a baby, but he was so strong that the trees served as
arrows for his bow. When he had killed the destroyers of his parents, he
wished to go up to heaven, and climbed up a tree. Then he blew upon it
and it grew up and up till he came to heaven and there he found a
beautiful country. So he went down to fetch his sister, building huts as
he went down to lodge her in, brought her up the tree into heaven, and
then broke off the tree low down, so that no one can go up to heaven
that way. Then Chakabech went out, and set his snares for

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

game, but when he got up at night to look at them, he found everything
on fire, and went back to his sister to tell her. Then she told him he
must have caught the sun. Going along by night he must have got in
unawares, and when Chakabech went to see, so it was, but he dared not go
near enough to let the sun out. By chance he found a little mouse, and
blew upon her till she grew so big that she could set the sun free, and
the sun released from the trap went again on his way, but while he was
held in the snare, day failed down here on earth."

Still another version of the Sun-catcher myth is found among the Dogrib
Indians, who dwell in the far North-west:

"When Chapewee after the Deluge formed the earth and landed the animals
upon it from his canoe, he stuck up a piece of wood which became a
fir-tree, and grew with amazing rapidity until its top reached the
skies. A squirrel ran up this tree, and was pursued by Chapewee, who
endeavoured to knock it down, but could not overtake it. He continued
the chase however, until he reached the stars, where he found a fine
plain, and a beaten road. In this road he set a snare made of his
sister's hair, and then returned to earth. The sun appeared as usual in
the heavens in the morning, but at noon it was caught by the snare

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

which Chapewee had set for the squirrel, and the sky was instantly
darkened. Chapewee's family, on this said to him: 'You must have done
something wrong when you were aloft, for we no longer enjoy the light of
day.' 'I have,' replied he, 'but it was unintentional.' Chapewee then
endeavoured to repair the fault he had committed, and sent a number of
animals up the tree to release the sun by cutting the snare, but the
intense heat of that luminary reduced them all to ashes. The efforts of
the more active animals being thus frustrated, a ground mole, though
such a grovelling and awkward beast, succeeded by burrowing under the
road in the sky until it reached and cut asunder the snare which bound
the sun. It lost its eyes, however, the instant it thrust its head into
the light, and its nose and teeth have ever since been brown as if
burnt."

In the following Omaha myth of "How the Rabbit Caught the Sun in a
Trap," <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66) we find the Sun ensnared
again unwittingly. These myths differ from the Polynesian Sun-catcher
myths in this respect,—that there appears to have been no deliberate
intention of catching the Sun, no deliberate plan to restrain his
liberty, which is a characteristic feature of the South Sea Island
myths.

"Once upon a time a rabbit dwelt in a lodge

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

with no one but his grandmother. He was accustomed to go hunting early
in the morning. Inevitably a person with very long feet had preceded
him, leaving a trail. The rabbit desired to find out who this party was,
and got up one morning very early, but even then he had been preceded,
so he laid a snare that night so as to catch this early bird, laying a
noose where the footprints used to be seen. Rising early the next
morning he inspected his trap, and found he had caught the sun. Now he
was very much frightened, and the sun said to him: 'Why have you done
this? You have done a great wrong. Come hither and untie me.' Finally
the rabbit mustered up courage and bending his head down rushed at the
sun and severed the rope with his knife, but the sun was so hot that the
rabbit scorched the hair between his shoulders, so that it was yellow,
and from that time the rabbit has had a singed spot on his back between
his shoulders."

In the legends of the Bungee Indians of Lake Winnipeg, we find again a
reference to the state of dissatisfaction existing in early times with
the Sun's vagarious method of lighting the world, and the schemes that
were suggested to bring about a change of conditions. In the following
myth <span id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_67) the Sun is ensnared as the
result of a deliberate plan:

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

"Before the Creation, the world was a wide waste of water, and there was
no light upon the earth, the sun being only an occasional visitor to
this world. Anxious to keep the sun from wandering away very far, the
god Weese-ke-jak constructed an enormous trap to catch the sun, and the
next time the sun came near the earth he was caught in the trap. In vain
he struggled to get free, but the cords by which he was held were too
strong for him. The near proximity of the sun to the earth caused such
heat, that everything was in danger of being burned. Then Weese-ke-jak
concluded to make some sort of a compromise with the sun before he would
consent to give him his liberty. It was stipulated that the sun was only
to come near the outer edges of the earth in the mornings and evenings,
and during the day to keep farther away, just near enough to warm the
earth without scorching it. But now another difficulty presented itself,
the sun had not the power to unloose the band by which he was held, and
the intense heat prevented either Weese-ke-jak or any of his creations
from approaching the sun to cut the band and set him free. The beaver at
that time was rather an insignificant creature, having only a few small
teeth in his head, and being covered with bristly hair like a hog, his
tail being only a small stump about two or three inches long. He

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

offered to release the sun, and succeeded in gnawing through the cords
that held the sun before being quite roasted alive. The cords being
severed the sun rose from the earth like a vast balloon. Weese-ke-jak in
gratitude for his deliverance from the burning rays of the sun rewarded
the beaver by giving him a beautiful soft coat, and fine sharp teeth of
a brown colour, as if scorched by fire. This is how the beaver came by
his hatchet-like teeth and furry coat."

A feature of these legends is the stress laid on man's indebtedness to a
small and insignificant animal, which, in every case, at the risk of his
own life, frees the Sun from the toils into which he has been brought by
man's machinations. A moral seems to be drawn from these myths, that
even the lowly may effect great things, and the despised of earth may
rise to heights which even the mighty cannot attain.

We come now to a brief discussion of the myths relating to the temporary
retarding or accelerating of the Sun's speed in order that man might
accomplish a purpose. Chief among these traditions is the Biblical story
of Joshua's command to the Sun to stay its course, related in the tenth
chapter of the Book of Joshua: "And he \[Joshua\] said in the sight of
Israel, Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon; and thou, Moon, in the valley
of Ajalon. And the sun stood still, and the moon stayed, until the
people

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

had avenged themselves upon their enemies. Is not this written in the
book of Jasher? So the sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and
hasted not to go down about a whole day. And there was no day like that
before it or after it, that the Lord hearkened unto the voice of a man,
for the Lord fought for Israel."

This idea that man could stay the Sun's daily course is to be met with
in the Fiji Islands, where, on the top of a small hill, a patch of reeds
grew. Travellers who feared that they would not reach the end of their
journey before the Sun set, were wont to tie the tops of a handful of
these reeds together to detain the Sun from going down. It has been
thought that by this act they may have imagined they could entangle the
Sun in the reeds for a time and thus stay his course.

When the Australian blackfellow desired to prevent the Sun from going
down till he reached home, he placed a sod in the fork of a tree exactly
facing the setting Sun. Another Australian custom is to place stones in
trees at different heights from the ground, in order to indicate the
height of the Sun in the sky at the moment when they passed a particular
tree. Those following are thus made aware when their friends in advance
passed the spot. Frazer, <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68) referring
to this custom, considers

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

that the natives who practised it may have imagined that "to mark the
sun's progress was to arrest it at the point marked. On the other hand,
to make the sun go faster, the Australians throw sand into the air, and
blow with their mouths toward the sun."

South African natives in travelling will put a stone in a branch of a
tree, or place some grass on the path with a stone over it, believing
that this will cause their friends to keep the meal waiting till their
arrival, as it would make the Sun go slower down the western sky.

The Indians of Yucatan, when journeying westward, placed a stone in a
tree, or pulled out some of their eyelashes, and blew them toward the
Sun to stay or speed the Sun's course.

The idea that the Sun's speed could be regulated may have arisen from
the fact, that, under certain conditions, it really does appear to vary
in its rate of motion in relation to its position in the heavens. During
the first few hours succeeding sunrise, when the Sun is not far from the
horizon, and can be compared with terrestrial objects, it really appears
to move with greater speed than when it journeys across the meridian;
and when at nightfall it seeks the west it seems in like manner to
hasten with accelerated speed. From this optical illusion the fancy may
have sprung born of the

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

false reasoning that, if the Sun varied his speed to suit his will, man
could also control his course, and hasten or retard his progress. This
has doubtless given rise to the similarity of these legends that have
come down to us from many different and widely separated lands, for
primitive man the world over viewed the phenomena of nature from much
the same standpoint, and wove his legends from the fabric of an
imagination common to all men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_62"></span>[206:1](slaa10.htm#fr_62) Here again we
encounter in a land far distant the tradition common among the American
Indians, that at one time the land they dwelt in was shrouded in
darkness.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[208:1](slaa10.htm#fr_63) *Polynesian
Mythology*, Sir George Gray.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[211:1](slaa10.htm#fr_64) *Researches in the
Early History of Mankind*, Edward B. Tylor.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[212:1](slaa10.htm#fr_65) *Researches in the
Early History of Mankind*, Edward B. Tylor.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[217:1](slaa10.htm#fr_66) Annual Report of the
Bureau of Ethnology, 1879-80.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[218:1](slaa10.htm#fr_67) Vol. xix., *Journal
American Folk-Lore*.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[221:1](slaa10.htm#fr_68) *The Golden Bough*, J.
G. Frazer.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Solar Festivals](slaa11)

</div>
