<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Lang Fairy Books](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gnfb43) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Green Fairy Book*, by Andrew Lang, \[1892\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f42"></span>

THE THREE DOGS

There was once upon a time a shepherd who had two children, a son and a
daughter. When he was on his death-bed he turned to them and said, 'I
have nothing to leave you but three sheep and a small house; divide them
between you, as you like, but don't quarrel over them whatever you do.'

When the shepherd was dead, the brother asked his sister which she would
like best, the sheep or the little house; and when she had chosen the
house he said, 'Then I'll take the sheep and go out to seek my fortune
in the wide world. I don't see why I shouldn't be as lucky as many
another who has set out on the same search, and it wasn't for nothing
that I was born on a Sunday.'

And so he started on his travels, driving his three sheep in front of
him, and for a long time it seemed as if fortune didn't mean to favour
him at all. One day he was sitting disconsolately at a cross road, when
a man suddenly appeared before him with three black dogs, each one
bigger than the other.  'Hullo, my fine fellow,' said the man, 'I see
you have three fat sheep. I'll tell you what; if you'll give them to me,
I'll give you my three dogs.'

In spite of his sadness, the youth smiled and replied, 'What would I do
with your dogs? My sheep at least feed themselves, but I should have to
find food for the dogs.'

'My dogs are not like other dogs,' said the stranger; 'they will feed
you instead of you them, and will make your fortune. The smallest one is
called "Salt," and will bring you food whenever you wish; the second is
called "Pepper," and will tear anyone to pieces who offers to hurt you;
and the great big strong one is called "Mustard," and is so powerful
that it will break iron or steel with its teeth.'

The shepherd at last let himself be persuaded, and gave the stranger his
sheep. In order to test the truth of his statement about the dogs, he
said at once, 'Salt, I am hungry,' and before the words were out of his
mouth the dog had disappeared, and returned in a few minutes with a
large basket full of the most delicious food. Then the youth
congratulated himself on the bargain he had made, and continued his
journey in the best of spirits.

One day he met a carriage and pair, all draped in black; even the horses
were covered with black trappings, and the coachman was clothed in crape
from top to toe. Inside the carriage sat a beautiful girl in a black
dress crying bitterly. The horses advanced slowly and mournfully, with
their heads bent on the ground.

'Coachman, what's the meaning of all this grief?' asked the shepherd.

At first the coachman wouldn't say anything, but when the youth pressed
him he told him that a huge dragon dwelt in the neighbourhood, and
required yearly the sacrifice of a beautiful maiden. This year the lot
had fallen on the King's daughter, and the whole country was filled with
woe and lamentation in consequence.

The shepherd felt very sorry for the lovely maiden, and determined to
follow the carriage. In a little it halted at the foot of a high
mountain. The girl got out, and walked slowly and sadly to meet her
terrible fate. The coachman perceived that the shepherd wished to follow
her, and warned him not to do so if he valued his life; but the shepherd
wouldn't listen to his advice. When they had climbed about half-way up
the hill they saw a terrible-looking monster with the body of a snake,
and with huge wings and claws, coming towards them, breathing forth
flames of fire, and preparing to seize its victim. Then the shepherd
called, 'Pepper, come to the rescue,' and the second dog set upon the
dragon, and after a fierce struggle bit it so sharply in the neck that
the monster rolled over, and in a few moments breathed its last. Then
the dog ate up the body, all except its two front teeth, which the
shepherd picked up and put in his pocket.

The Princess was quite overcome with terror and joy, and fell fainting
at the feet of her deliverer. When she recovered her consciousness she
begged the shepherd to return with her to her father, who would reward
him richly. But the youth answered that he wanted to see something of
the world, and that he would return again in three years, and nothing
would make him change this resolve. The Princess seated herself once
more in her carriage, and, bidding each other farewell, she and the
shepherd separated, she to return home, and he to see the world.

But while the Princess was driving over a bridge the carriage suddenly
stood still, and the coachman turned round to her and said, 'Your
deliverer has gone, and doesn't thank you for your gratitude. It would
be nice of you to make a poor fellow happy; therefore you may tell your
father that it was I who slew the dragon, and if you refuse to, I will
throw you into the river, and no one will be any the wiser, for they
will think the dragon has devoured you.'

The maiden was in a dreadful state when she heard these words; but there
was nothing for her to do but to swear that she would give out the
coachman as her deliverer, and not to divulge the secret to anyone. So
they returned to the capital, and everyone was delighted when they saw
the Princess had returned unharmed; the black flags were taken down from
all the palace towers, and gay-coloured ones put up in their place, and
the King embraced his daughter and her supposed rescuer with tears of
joy, and, turning to the coachman, he said, 'You have not only saved the
life of my child, but you have also freed the country from a terrible
scourge; therefore, it is only fitting that you should be richly
rewarded. Take, therefore, my daughter for your wife; but as she is
still so young, do not let the marriage be celebrated for another year.'

The coachman thanked the King for his graciousness, and was then led
away to be richly dressed and instructed in all the arts and graces that
befitted his new position. But the poor Princess wept bitterly, though
she did not dare to confide her grief to anyone. When the year was over,
she begged so hard for another year's respite that it was granted to
her. But this year passed also, and she threw herself at her father's
feet, and begged so piteously for one more year that the King's heart
was melted, and he yielded to her request, much to the Princess's joy,
for she knew that her real deliverer would appear at the end of the
third year. And so the year passed away like the other two, and the
wedding-day was fixed, and all the people were prepared to feast and
make merry.

But on the wedding-day it happened that a stranger came to the town with
three black dogs. He asked what the meaning of all the feasting and fuss
was, and they told him that the King's daughter was just going to be
married to the man who had slain the terrible dragon. The stranger at
once denounced the coachman as a liar; but no one would listen to him,
and he was seized and thrown into a cell with iron doors.

While he was lying on his straw pallet, pondering mournfully on his
fate, he thought he heard the low whining of his dogs outside; then an
idea dawned on him, and he called out as loudly as he could, 'Mustard,
come to my help,' and in a second he saw the paws of his biggest dog at
the window of his cell, and before he could count two the creature had
bitten through the iron bars and stood beside him. Then they both let
themselves out of the prison by the window, and the poor youth was free
once more, though he felt very sad when he thought that another was to
enjoy the reward that rightfully belonged to him. He felt hungry too, so
he called his dog 'Salt,' and asked him to bring home some food. The
faithful creature trotted off, and soon returned with a table-napkin
full of the most delicious food, and the napkin itself was embroidered
with a kingly crown.

The King had just seated himself at the wedding-feast with all his
Court, when the dog appeared and licked the Princess's hand in an
appealing manner. With a joyful start she recognised the beast, and
bound her own table-napkin round his neck. Then she plucked up her
courage and told her father the whole story. The King at once sent a
servant to follow the dog, and in a short time the stranger was led into
the Kings presence. The former coachman grew as white as a sheet when he
saw the shepherd, and, falling on his knees, begged for mercy and
pardon. The Princess recognized her deliverer at once, and did not need
the proof of the two dragon's teeth which he drew from his pocket. The
coachman was thrown into a dark dungeon, and the shepherd took his place
at the Princess's side, and this time, you may be sure, she did not beg
for the wedding to be put off.

The young couple lived for some time in great peace and happiness, when
suddenly one day the former shepherd bethought himself of his poor
sister and expressed a wish to see her again, and to let her share in
his good fortune. So they sent a carriage to fetch her, and soon she
arrived at the court, and found herself once more in her brother's arms.
Then one of the dogs spoke and said, 'Our task is done; you have no more
need of us. We only waited to see that you did not forget your sister in
your prosperity.' And with these words the three dogs became three birds
and flew away into the heavens.

Grimm.

 

 

 

 

 
