<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act023)  [Next](act025.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#001.md)

[Acts 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 24:1</span></span>

Ananias - Who would spare no trouble on the occasion, with several of
the elders, members of the sanhedrim.

[Acts 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 24:2</span></span>

Tertullus began - A speech how different from St. Paul's; which is true,
modest, solid, and without paint. Felix was a man of the most infamous
character, and a plague to all the provinces over which he presided.

[Acts 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 24:4</span></span>

But that I may not trouble thee any farther - By trespassing either on
thy patience or modesty. The eloquence of Tertullus was as bad as his
cause: a lame introduction, a lame transition, and a lame conclusion.
Did not God confound the orator's language?

[Acts 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 24:10</span></span>

Knowing - for several years thou hast been a judge over this nation -
And so not unacquainted with our religious rites and customs, and
consequently more capable of understanding and deciding a cause of this
nature. There was no flattery in this. It was a plain fact. He governed
Judea six or seven years. I answer for myself - As it may be observed,
his answer exactly corresponds with the three articles of Tertullus's
charge: sedition, heresy, and profanation of the temple. As to the
first, he suggests,. that he had not been long enough at Jerusalem to
form a party and attempt an insurrection: (for it was about twelve days
since he came up thither; five of which he had been at Cesarea, [Act
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#001.md); one or two were spent in his
journey thither, and most of the rest he had been confined at
Jerusalem.) And he challenges them, in fact, to produce any evidence of
such practices, [Act 24:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#011.md). As to
the second, he confesses himself to be a Christian; but maintains this
to be a religion perfectly agreeable to the law and the prophets, and
therefore deserving a fair reception, [Act
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#014.md), [Act
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#016.md). And as for profaning the
temple, he observes that he behaved there in a most peaceful and regular
manner, so that his innocence had been manifest even before the
sanhedrim, where the authors of the tumult did not dare to appear
against him.

[Acts 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 24:14</span></span>

After the way which they call heresy - This appellation St. Paul
corrects. Not that it was then an odious word; but it was not honourable
enough. A party or sect (so that word signifies) is formed by men. This
way was prescribed by God. The apostle had now said what was sufficient
for his defence; but having a fair occasion, he makes an ingenuous
confession of his faith in this verse, his hope in the next, [Act
24:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#014.md), his love in [Act
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#017.md). So worship I the God of my
fathers - This was a very proper plea before a Roman magistrate; as it
proved that he was under the protection of the Roman laws, since the
Jews were so: whereas had he introduced the worship of new gods he would
have forfeited that protection. Believing all things which are written -
Concerning the Messiah.

[Acts 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 24:15</span></span>

Both of the just and of the unjust - In a public court this was
peculiarly proper to be observed.

[Acts 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 24:16</span></span>

For this cause - With a view to this, I also exercise myself - As well
as they.

[Acts 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 24:19</span></span>

Who ought to have been present before thee - But the world never commit
greater blunders, even against its own laws, than when it is persecuting
the children of God.

[Acts 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 24:21</span></span>

Unless they think me blamable for this one word - Which nevertheless was
the real truth. [Act 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#006.md).

[Acts 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 24:22</span></span>

After I have been more accurately informed - Which he afterward was; and
he doubtless (as well as Festus and Agrippa) transmitted a full account
of these things to Rome.

[Acts 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 24:23</span></span>

He commanded the centurion to let him have liberty - To be only a
prisoner at large. Hereby the Gospel was spread more and more; not to
the satisfaction of the Jews. But they could not hinder it.

[Acts 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 24:24</span></span>

And after Paul had been kept some days in this gentle confinement at
Cesarea, Felix, who had been absent for a short time, coming thither
again, with Drusilla, his wife - The daughter of Herod Agrippa, one of
the finest women of that age. Felix persuaded her to forsake her
husband, Azizus, king of Emessa, and to be married to himself, though a
heathen. She was afterward, with a son she had by Felix, consumed in an
eruption of Mount Vesuvius. Concerning the faith in Christ - That is,
the doctrine of Christ.

[Acts 24:25](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 24:25</span></span>

And as he reasoned of justice, temperance, and judgment to come - This
was the only effectual way of preaching Christ to an unjust, lewd judge.
Felix being terrified - How happily might this conviction have ended,
had he been careful to pursue the views which were then opening upon his
mind! But, like thousands, he deferred the consideration of these things
to a more convenient season. A season which, alas! never came. For
though he heard again, he was terrified no more. In the meantime we do
not find Drusilla, though a Jewess, was thus alarmed. She had been used
to hear of a future judgment: perhaps too she trusted to the being a
daughter of Abraham, or to the expiation of the law, and so was proof
against the convictions which seized on her husband, though a heathen.
Let this teach us to guard against all such false dependencies as tend
to elude those convictions that might otherwise be produced in us by the
faithful preaching of the word of God. Let us stop our ears against
those messengers of Satan, who appear as angels of light; who would
teach us to reconcile the hope of salvation with a corrupt heart or an
unholy life. Go thy way for this time - O how will every damned soul one
day lament his having neglected such a time as this!

[Acts 24:26](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 24:26</span></span>

He hoped also - An evil hope: so when he heard his eye was not single.
No marvel then that he profited nothing by all St. Paul's discourses:
that money would be given - By the Christians for the liberty of so able
a minister. And waiting for this, unhappy Felix fell short of the
treasure of the Gospel.

[Acts 24:27](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 24:27</span></span>

But after two years - After St. Paul had been two years a prisoner,
Felix desiring to gratify the Jews, left Paul bound - Thus men of the
world, to gratify one another, stretch forth their hands to the things
of God! Yet the wisdom of Felix did not profit him, did not satisfy the
Jews at all. Their accusations followed him to Rome, and had utterly
ruined him, but for the interest which his brother Pallas had with Nero.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 25](act025.md)

</div>
