<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act018)  [Next](act020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#001)

[Acts 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 19:1</span></span>

Having passed through - Galatia and Phrygia, which were termed the upper
parts of Asia Minor. Certain disciples - Who had been formerly baptized
by John the Baptist, and since imperfectly instructed in Christianity.

[Acts 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 19:2</span></span>

Have ye received the Holy Ghost? - The extraordinary gifts of the
Spirit, as well as his sanctifying graces? We have not so much as heard
- Whether there be any such gifts.

[Acts 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 19:3</span></span>

Into what were ye baptized - Into what dispensation? To the sealing of
what doctrine? Into John's baptism - We were baptized by John and
believe what he taught.

[Acts 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 19:4</span></span>

John baptized - That is, the whole baptism and preaching of John pointed
at Christ. After this John is mentioned no more in the New Testament.
Here he gives way to Christ altogether.

[Acts 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 19:5</span></span>

And hearing this, they were baptized - By some other. Paul only laid his
hands upon them. They were baptized - They were baptized twice; but not
with the same baptism. John did not administer that baptism which Christ
afterward commanded, that is, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost.

[Acts 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 19:9</span></span>

The way - The Christian way of worshipping God. He departed - Leaving
them their synagogue to themselves. Discoursing daily - Not on the
Sabbath only, in the school of one Tyrannus - Which we do not find was
any otherwise consecrated, than by preaching the Gospel there.

[Acts 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 19:10</span></span>

All who desired it among the inhabitants of the proconsular Asia, now
heard the word: St. Paul had been forbidden to preach it in Asia before,
[Act 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006). But now the time was come.

[Acts 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 19:11</span></span>

Special miracles - Wrought in a very uncommon manner.

[Acts 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 19:12</span></span>

Evil spirits - Who also occasioned many of those diseases, which yet
might appear to be purely natural.

[Acts 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 19:13</span></span>

Exorcists - Several of the Jews about this time pretended to a power of
casting out devils, particularly by certain arts or charms, supposed to
be derived from Solomon. Undertook to name - Vain undertaking! Satan
laughs at all those who attempt to expel him either out of the bodies or
the souls of men but by Divine faith. All the light of reason is nothing
to the craft or strength of that subtle spirit. His craft cannot be
known but by the Spirit of God nor can his strength be conquered but by
the power of faith.

[Acts 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 19:17</span></span>

And the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified - So that even the malice
of the devil wrought for the furtherance of the Gospel.

[Acts 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 19:18</span></span>

Many came confessing - Of their own accord, and openly declaring their
deeds - The efficacy of God's word, penetrating the inmost recesses of
their soul, wrought that free and open confession to which perhaps even
torments would not have compelled them.

[Acts 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 19:19</span></span>

Curious arts - Magical arts, to which that soft appellation was given by
those who practised them. Ephesus was peculiarly famous for these. And
as these practices were of so much reputation there, it is no wonder the
books which taught them should bear a great price. Bringing their books
together - As it were by common consent, burnt them - Which was far
better than selling them, even though the money had been given to the
poor. Fifty thousand pieces of silver - If these pieces of silver be
taken for Jewish shekels, the sum will amount to six thousand two
hundred and fifty pounds.

[Acts 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 19:20</span></span>

So powerfully did the word of God grow - In extent, and prevail - In
power and efficacy.

[Acts 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 19:21</span></span>

After these things were ended - Paul sought not to rest, but pressed on,
as if he had yet done nothing. He is already possessed of Ephesus and
Asia. He purposes for Macedonia and Achaia. He has his eye upon
Jerusalem, then upon Rome; afterward on Spain, [Rom
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#028). No Cesar, no Alexander the
Great, no other hero, comes up to the magnanimity of this little
Benjamite. Faith and love to God and man had enlarged his heart, even as
the sand of the sea.

[Acts 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 19:24</span></span>

Silver shrines - Silver models of that famous temple, which were bought
not only by the citizens, but by strangers from all parts. The
artificers - The other silversmiths.

[Acts 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 19:25</span></span>

The workmen - Employed by him and them.

[Acts 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 19:26</span></span>

Saying, that they are not gods which are made with hands - This
manifestly shows, that the contrary opinion did then generally prevail,
namely, that there was a real Divinity in their sacred images. Though
some of the later heathens spoke of them just as the Romanists do now.

[Acts 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 19:27</span></span>

There is danger, not only that this our craft \[trade\] should come into
disgrace, but also that the temple of the great goddess Diana should be
despised - No wonder a discourse should make so deep an impression,
which was edged both by interest and superstition. The great goddess was
one of the standing titles of Diana. Her majesty destroyed - Miserable
majesty, which was capable of being thus destroyed! Whom all Asia and
the world - That is, the Roman empire, worshippeth - Although under a
great variety of titles and characters. But the multitude of those that
err does not turn error into truth.

[Acts 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 19:29</span></span>

They rushed with one accord - Demetrius and his company, into the
theatre - Where criminals were wont to be thrown to the wild beasts,
dragging with them Gaius and Aristarchus - When they could not find
Paul. Probably they hoped to oblige them to fight with the wild beasts,
as some think St. Paul had done before.

[Acts 19:30](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 19:30</span></span>

When Paul would have gone in to the people - Being above all fear, to
plead the cause of his companions, and prove they are not gods which are
made with hands.

[Acts 19:31](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 19:31</span></span>

The principal officers of Asia - The Asian priests, who presided over
the public games, which they were then celebrating in honour of Diana.

[Acts 19:32](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 19:32</span></span>

The greater part did not know for what they were come together - Which
is commonly the case in such an assembly.

[Acts 19:33](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 19:33</span></span>

And they thrust forward - Namely, the artificers and workmen, Alexander
- Probably some well - known Christian whom they saw in the crowd: the
Jews pushing him on - To expose him to the more danger. And Alexander
waving with his hand - In token of desiring silence, would have made a
defence - For himself and his brethren.

[Acts 19:34](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 19:34</span></span>

But when they knew that he was a Jew - And consequently an enemy to
their worship of images; they prevented him, by crying, Great is Diana
of the Ephesians.

[Acts 19:35](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 19:35</span></span>

The register - Probably the chief governor of the public games. The
image which fell down from Jupiter - They believed that very image of
Diana, which stood in her temple, fell down from Jupiter in heaven.
Perhaps he designed to insinuate, as if falling down from Jupiter, it
was not made with hands, and so was not that sort of idols which Paul
had said were no gods.

[Acts 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">act 19:37</span></span>

Nor blasphemers of your goddess - They simply declared the one God, and
the vanity of idols in general.

[Acts 19:38](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">act 19:38</span></span>

There are proconsuls - One in every province. There was one at Ephesus.

[Acts 19:39](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">act 19:39</span></span>

In a lawful assembly - In such a regular assembly as has authority to
judge of religious and political affairs.

[Acts 19:40](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">act 19:40</span></span>

This concourse - He wisely calls it by an inoffensive name.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 20](act020)

</div>
