<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act017)  [Next](act019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#001)

[Acts 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 18:1</span></span>

Paul departing from Athens - He did not stay there long. The
philosophers there were too easy, too indolent, and too wise in their
own eyes to receive the Gospel.

[Acts 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 18:2</span></span>

Claudius, the Roman emperor, had commanded all the Jews to depart from
Rome - All who were Jews by birth. Whether they were Jews or Christians
by religion, the Romans were too stately to regard.

[Acts 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 18:3</span></span>

They were tent makers by trade - For it was a rule among the Jews (and
why is it not among the Christians?) to bring up all their children to
some trade, were they ever so rich or noble.

[Acts 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 18:5</span></span>

And when Silas and Timotheus were come from Macedonia - Silas seems to
have stayed a considerable time at Berea: but Timotheus had come to the
apostle while he was at Athens, and been sent by him to comfort and
confirm the Church at Thessalonica, [Th1
3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#001). But now at length both Silas
and Timotheus came to the apostle at Corinth. Paul was pressed in spirit
- The more probably from what Silas and Timotheus related. Every
Christian ought diligently to observe any such pressure in his own
spirit, and if it agree with Scripture, to follow it: if he does not he
will feel great heaviness.

[Acts 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 18:6</span></span>

He shook his raiment - To signify he would from that time refrain from
them: and to intimate, that God would soon shake them off as unworthy to
be numbered among his people. I am pure - None can say this but he that
has borne a full testimony against sin. From henceforth I will go to the
Gentiles - But not to them altogether. He did not break off all
intercourse with the Jews even at Corinth. Only he preached no more in
their synagogue.

[Acts 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 18:7</span></span>

He went into the house of one named Justus - A Gentile, and preached
there, though probably he still lodged with Aquila.

[Acts 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 18:8</span></span>

And many hearing - The conversation of Crispus, and the preaching of
Paul.

[Acts 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 18:10</span></span>

I am with thee: therefore fear not all the learning, politeness,
grandeur, or power of the inhabitants of this city. Speak and hold not
thy peace - For thy labour shall not be in vain. For I have much people
in this city - So he prophetically calls them that afterward believed.

[Acts 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 18:11</span></span>

He continued there a year and six months - A long time! But how few
souls are now gained in a longer time than this? Who is in the fault?
Generally both teachers and hearers.

[Acts 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 18:12</span></span>

When Gallio was proconsul of Achaia - Of which Corinth was the chief
city. This Gallio, the brother of the famous Seneca, is much commended
both by him and by other writers, for the sweetness and generosity of
his temper, and easiness of his behaviour. Yet one thing he lacked! But
he knew it not and had no concern about it.

[Acts 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 18:15</span></span>

But if it be - He speaks with the utmost coolness and contempt, a
question of names - The names of the heathen gods were fables and
shadows. But the question concerning the name of Jesus is of more
importance than all things else under heaven. Yet there is this
singularity (among a thousand others) in the Christian religion, that
human reason, curious as it is in all other things, abhors to inquire
into it.

[Acts 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 18:17</span></span>

Then they all took Sosthenes - The successor of Crispus, and probably
Paul's chief accuser, and beat him - It seems because he had occasioned
them so much trouble to no purpose, before the judgment seat - One can
hardly think in the sight of Gallio, though at no great distance from
him. And it seems to have had a happy effect. For Sosthenes himself was
afterward a Christian, [Co1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001).

[Acts 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 18:18</span></span>

Paul continued many days - After the year and six months, to confirm the
brethren. Aquila having shaved his head - As was the custom in a vow,
[Act 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#024); [Num
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#018). At Cenchrea - A seaport town, at
a small distance from Corinth.

[Acts 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 18:21</span></span>

I must by all means keep the feast at Jerusalem - This was not from any
apprehension that he was obliged in conscience to keep the Jewish
feasts; but to take the opportunity of meeting a great number of his
countrymen to whom he might preach Christ, or whom he might farther
instruct, or free from the prejudices they had imbibed against him. But
I will return to you - So he did, [Act
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#001).

[Acts 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 18:22</span></span>

And landing at Cesarea, he went up - Immediately to Jerusalem; and
saluted the Church - Eminently so called, being the mother Church of
Christian believers: and having kept the feast there, he went down from
thence to Antioch.

[Acts 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 18:23</span></span>

He went over the country of Galatia and Phrygia - It is supposed,
spending about four years therein, including the time he stayed at
Ephesus.

[Acts 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 18:24</span></span>

An eloquent man, mighty in the Scriptures - Of the Old Testament. Every
talent may be of use in the kingdom of God, if joined with the knowledge
of the Scriptures and fervour of spirit.

[Acts 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 18:25</span></span>

This man had been instructed - Though not perfectly, in the way of the
Lord - In the doctrine of Christ. Knowing only the baptism of John -
Only what John taught those whom he baptized, namely, to repent and
believe in a Messiah shortly to appear.

[Acts 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 18:26</span></span>

He spake - Privately; and taught publicly. Probably he returned to live
at Alexandria, soon after he had been baptized by John; and so had no
opportunity of being fully acquainted with the doctrines of the Gospel,
as delivered by Christ and his apostles. And explained to him the way of
God more perfectly - He who knows Christ, is able to instruct even those
that are mighty in the Scriptures.

[Acts 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 18:27</span></span>

Who greatly helped through grace - It is through grace only that any
gift of any one is profitable to another. Them that had believed -
Apollos did not plant, but water. This was the peculiar gift which he
had received. And he was better able to convince the Jews, than to
convert the heathens.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 19](act019)

</div>
