<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act022)  [Next](act024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001)

[Acts 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 23:1</span></span>

And Paul earnestly beholding the council - Professing a clear conscience
by his very countenance; and likewise waiting to see whether any of them
was minded to ask him any question, said, I have lived in all good
conscience before God till this day - He speaks chiefly of the time
since he became a Christian. For none questioned him concerning what he
had been before. And yet even in his unconverted state, although he was
in an error, yet he had acted from conscience, before God - Whatever men
may think or say of me.

[Acts 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 23:3</span></span>

Then said Paul - Being carried away by a sudden and prophetic impulse.
God is about to smite thee, thou whited wall - Fair without; full of
dirt and rubbish within. And he might well be so termed, not only as he
committed this outrage, while gravely sitting on the tribunal of justice
but also as, at the same time that he stood high in the esteem of the
citizens, he cruelly defrauded the priests of their legal subsistence,
so that some of them even perished for want. And God did remarkably
smite him; for about five years after this, his house being reduced to
ashes, in a tumult begun by his own son, he was besieged in the royal
palace; where having hid himself in an old aqueduct, he was dragged out
and miserably slain.

[Acts 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 23:5</span></span>

I was not aware, brethren, that it was the high priest - He seems to
mean, I did not advert to it, in the prophetic transport of my mind: but
he does not add, that his not adverting to it proceeded from the power
of the Spirit coming upon him; as knowing they were not able to bear it.
This answer admirably shows the situation of mind he was then in, partly
with regard to the bystanders, whom he thus softens, adding also the
title of brethren, and justifying their reproof by the prohibition of
Moses; partly with regard to himself, who, after that singular transport
subsided, was again under the direction of the general command. [Exo
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#028).

[Acts 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 23:6</span></span>

I am a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee: for the hope of the resurrection
of the dead am I called in question - So he was in effect; although not
formally, or explicitly.

[Acts 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 23:8</span></span>

The Pharisees confess both - Both the resurrection, and the existence of
angels and separate spirits.

[Acts 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 23:9</span></span>

And the scribes of the Pharisees' side arising - Every sect contains
both learned and unlearned. The former used to be the mouth of the
party. If a spirit - St. Paul in his speech from the stairs had
affirmed, that Jesus, whom they knew to have been dead, was alive, and
that he had spoken to him from heaven, and again in a vision. So they
add nothing, only they construe it in their own way, putting an angel or
spirit for Jesus.

[Acts 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 23:11</span></span>

And the night following, the Lord Jesus - What Paul had before purposed
in spirit, [Act 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#021), God now in due
time confirms. Another declaration to the same effect is made by an
angel of God, [Act 27:23](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#023). And from the
23d chapter the sum of this book turns on the testimony of Paul to the
Romans. How would the defenders of St. Peter's supremacy triumph, could
they find out half as much ascribed to him! Be of good courage, Paul -
As he laboured under singular distresses and persecutions, so he was
favoured with extraordinary assurances of the Divine assistance. Thou
must testify - Particular promises are usually given when all things
appear desperate. At Rome also - Danger is nothing in the eyes of God:
all hinderances farther his work. A promise of what is afar off, implies
all that necessarily lies between. Paul shall testify at Rome: therefore
he shall come to Rome; therefore he shall escape the Jews, the sea, the
viper.

[Acts 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 23:12</span></span>

Some of the Jews bound themselves - Such execrable vows were not
uncommon among the Jews. And if they were prevented from accomplishing
what they had vowed, it was an easy matter to obtain absolution from
their rabbis.

[Acts 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 23:15</span></span>

Now therefore ye - Which they never scrupled at all, as not doubting but
they were doing God service.

[Acts 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 23:17</span></span>

And Paul - Though he had an express promise of it from Christ, was not
to neglect any proper means of safety.

[Acts 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 23:19</span></span>

And the tribune taking him by the hand - In a mild, condescending way.
Lysias seems to have conducted this whole affair with great integrity,
humanity, and prudence.

[Acts 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 23:24</span></span>

Provide beasts - If a change should be necessary, to set Paul on - So we
read of his riding once; but not by choice.

[Acts 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 23:27</span></span>

Having learned that he was a Roman - True; but not before he rescued
him. Here he uses art.

[Acts 23:31](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 23:31</span></span>

The soldiers brought him by night to Antipatris - But not the same night
they set out. For Antipatris was about thirty - eight of our miles
northwest of Jerusalem. Herod the Great rebuilt it, and gave it this
name in honour of his father Antipater: Cesarea was near seventy miles
from Jerusalem, and about thirty from Antipatris.

[Acts 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 23:35</span></span>

In Herod's palace - This was a palace and a court built by Herod the
Great. Probably some tower belonging to it might be used for a kind of
state prison.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 24](act024)

</div>
