<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act002)  [Next](act004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#001)

[Acts 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 3:1</span></span>

The ninth hour - The Jews divided the time from sunrise to sunset into
twelve hours; which were consequently of unequal length at different
times of the year, as the days were longer or shorter. The third hour
therefore was nine in the morning; the ninth, three in the afternoon;
but not exactly. For the third hour was the middle space between sunrise
and noon; which, if the sun rose at five, (the earliest hour of its
rising in that climate,) was half an hour after eight: if at seven (the
latest hour of its rising there) was half an hour after nine. The chief
hours of prayer were the third and ninth; at which seasons the morning
and evening sacrifices were offered, and incense (a kind of emblem
representing prayer) burnt on the golden altar.

[Acts 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 3:2</span></span>

At the gate of the temple, called Beautiful - This gate was added by
Herod the Great, between the court of the Gentiles and that of Israel.
It was thirty cubits high, and fifteen broad, and made of Corinthian
brass, more pompous in its workmanship and splendour than those that
were covered with silver and gold.

[Acts 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 3:6</span></span>

Then said Peter, Silver and gold have I none - How unlike his supposed
successor! Can the bishop of Rome either say or do the same?

[Acts 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 3:12</span></span>

Peter answered the people - Who were running together, and inquiring
into the circumstances of the fact.

[Acts 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 3:13</span></span>

The God of our fathers - This was wisely introduced in the beginning of
his discourse, that it might appear they taught no new religion,
inconsistent with that of Moses, and were far from having the least
design to divert their regards from the God of Israel. Hath glorified
his Son - By this miracle, whom ye delivered up - When God had given him
to you, and when ye ought to have received him as a most precious
treasure, and to have preserved him with all your power.

[Acts 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 3:14</span></span>

Ye renounced the Holy One - Whom God had marked out as such; and the
Just One - Even in the judgment of Pilate.

[Acts 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 3:16</span></span>

His name - Himself: his power and love. The faith which is by him - Of
which he is the giver, as well as the object.

[Acts 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 3:17</span></span>

And now, brethren - A word full of courtesy and compassion, I know - He
speaks to their heart, that through ignorance ye did it - which
lessened, though it could not take away, the guilt. As did also your
rulers - The prejudice lying from the authority of the chief priests and
elders, he here removes, but with great tenderness. He does not call
them our, but your rulers. For as the Jewish dispensation ceased at the
death of Christ, consequently so did the authority of its rulers.

[Acts 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 3:18</span></span>

But God - Who was not ignorant, permitted this which he had foretold, to
bring good out of it.

[Acts 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 3:19</span></span>

Be converted - Be turned from sin and Satan unto God. See [Act
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#020). But this term, so common in
modern writings, very rarely occurs in Scripture: perhaps not once in
the sense we now use it, for an entire change from vice to holiness.
That the times of refreshing - Wherein God largely bestows his
refreshing grace, may come - To you also. To others they will assuredly
come, whether ye repent or no.

[Acts 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 3:20</span></span>

And he may send - The apostles generally speak of our Lord's second
coming, as being just at hand. Who was before appointed - Before the
foundation of the world.

[Acts 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 3:21</span></span>

Till the times of the restitution of all things - The apostle here
comprises at once the whole course of the times of the New Testament,
between our Lord's ascension and his coming in glory. The most eminent
of these are the apostolic age, and that of the spotless Church, which
will consist of all the Jews and Gentiles united, after all persecutions
and apostacies are at an end.

[Acts 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 3:22</span></span>

The Lord shall raise you up a prophet like unto me - And that in many
particulars. Moses instituted the Jewish Church: Christ instituted the
Christian. With the prophesying of Moses was soon joined the effect, the
deliverance of Israel from Egypt: with the prophesying of Christ that
grand effect, the deliverance of his people from sin and death. Those
who could not bear the voice of God, yet desired to hear that of Moses.
Much more do those who are wearied with the law, desire to hear the
voice of Christ. Moses spake to the people all, and only those things,
which God had commanded him: so did Christ. But though he was like
Moses, yet he was infinitely superior to him, in person, as well as in
office. [Deu 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015).

[Acts 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 3:23</span></span>

Every soul who will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed from among
the people - One cannot imagine a more masterly address than this, to
warn the Jews of the dreadful consequence of their infidelity, in the
very words of their favourite prophet, out of a pretended zeal for whom
they rejected Christ.

[Acts 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 3:24</span></span>

These days - The days of the Messiah.

[Acts 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 3:25</span></span>

Ye are the sons of the prophets and of the covenant - That in, heirs of
the prophecies. To you properly, as the first heirs, belong the
prophecies and the covenant. [Gen
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003).

[Acts 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 3:26</span></span>

To bless you, by turning you from your iniquities - Which is the great
Gospel blessing.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 4](act004)

</div>
