<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act014)  [Next](act016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001)

[Acts 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 15:1</span></span>

Coming down from Judea - Perhaps to supply what they thought Paul and
Barnabas had omitted.

[Acts 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 15:2</span></span>

They (the brethren) determined that Paul and Barnabas, and certain
others should go up to Jerusalem about this question - This is the
journey to which St. Paul refers, [Gal
2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001), when he says he went up by
revelation: which is very consistent with this; for the Church in
sending them might be directed by a revelation made either immediately
to St. Paul, or to some other person, relating to so important an
affair. Important indeed it was, that these Jewish impositions should be
solemnly opposed in time; because multitudes of converts were still
zealous for the law, and ready to contend for the observance of it.
Indeed many of the Christians of Antioch would have acquiesced in the
determination of Paul alone. But as many others might have prejudices
against him, for his having been so much concerned for the Gentiles, it
was highly expedient to take the concurrent judgment of all the apostles
on this occasion.

[Acts 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 15:4</span></span>

They were received - That is solemnly welcomed.

[Acts 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 15:5</span></span>

But certain Pharisees - For even believers are apt to retain their
former turn of mind, and prejudices derived therefrom. The law of Moses
- The whole law, both moral and ritual.

[Acts 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 15:7</span></span>

After much debate - It does not appear that this was among the apostles
themselves. But if it had, if they themselves had debated at first, yet
might their final decision be from an unerring direction. For how really
soever they were inspired, we need not suppose their inspiration was
always so instantaneous and express, as to supersede any deliberation in
their own minds, or any consultation with each other. Peter rose up -
This is the last time he is mentioned in the Acts.

[Acts 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 15:8</span></span>

God bare them witness - That he had accepted them, by giving them the
Holy Ghost.

[Acts 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 15:9</span></span>

Purifying - This word is repeated from [Act
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#015); their hearts - The heart is the
proper seat of purity; by faith - Without concerning themselves with the
Mosaic law.

[Acts 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 15:10</span></span>

Now therefore - Seeing these things are so: why tempt ye God? - Why do
ye provoke him to anger, by putting so heavy a yoke on their neck?

[Acts 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 15:11</span></span>

The Lord Jesus - He does not here say our Lord; because in this solemn
place he means the Lord of all, we - Jews, shall be saved even as they -
Gentiles, namely, through the grace of the Lord Jesus, not by our
observance of the ceremonial law.

[Acts 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 15:12</span></span>

Miracles and wonders - By which also what St. Peter had said was
confirmed.

[Acts 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 15:14</span></span>

Simon hath declared - James, the apostle of the Hebrews, calls Peter by
his Hebrew name. To take out of them a people for his name - That is to
believe in him, to be called by his name.

[Acts 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 15:15</span></span>

To this agree - St. Peter had urged the plain fact, which St. James
confirms by Scripture prophecy. The words of the prophets - One of whom
is immediately cited.

[Acts 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 15:16</span></span>

After this - After the Jewish dispensation expires. I will build again
the fallen tabernacle of David - By raising from his seed the Christ,
who shall build on the ruins of his fallen tabernacle a spiritual and
eternal kingdom. [Amo 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011).

[Acts 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 15:17</span></span>

The Gentiles on whom my name is called - That is, who are called by my
name; who are my people.

[Acts 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 15:18</span></span>

Known unto God are all his works from eternity - Which the apostle
infers from the prophecy itself, and the accomplishment of it. And this
conversion of the Gentiles being known to him from eternity, we ought
not to think a new or strange thing. It is observable, he does not speak
of God's works in the natural world, (which had been nothing to his
present purpose,) but of his dealing with the children of men. Now he
could not know these, without knowing the characters and actions of
particular persons, on a correspondence with which the wisdom and
goodness of his providential dispensations is founded. For instance, he
could not know how he would deal with heathen idolaters (whom he was now
calling into his Church) without knowing there would be heathen
idolaters: and yet this was a thing purely contingent, a thing as
dependent on the freedom of the human mind, as any we can imagine. This
text, therefore, among a thousand more, is an unanswerable proof, that
God foreknows future contingencies, though there are difficulties
relating hereto which men cannot solve.

[Acts 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 15:20</span></span>

To abstain from fornication - Which even the philosophers among the
heathens did not account any fault. It was particularly frequent in the
worship of their idols, on which account they are here named together.
And from things strangled - That is, from whatever had been killed,
without pouring out the blood. When God first permitted man to eat
flesh, he commanded Noah, and in him all his posterity, whenever they
killed any creature for food, to abstain from the blood thereof. It was
to be poured upon the ground as water: doubtless in honour of that blood
which was in due time poured out for the sin of the world.

[Acts 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 15:21</span></span>

Perhaps the connection is, To the Jews we need write nothing on these
heads; for they hear the law continually.

[Acts 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 15:22</span></span>

With the whole Church - Which therefore had a part therein; to send
chosen men - Who might put it beyond all dispute, that this was the
judgment of the apostles and all the brethren.

[Acts 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 15:23</span></span>

Writing thus, and sending it by their hand - The whole conduct of this
affair plainly shows that the Church in those days had no conception of
St. Peter's primacy, or of his being the chief judge in controversies.
For the decree is drawn up, not according to his, but the Apostle
James's proposal and direction: and that in the name, not of St. Peter,
but of all the apostles and elders, and of the whole Church. Nay, St.
Peter's name is not mentioned at all, either in the order for sending to
Jerusalem on the question, [Act 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002),
or in the address of the messengers concerning it, [Act
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#004), or in the letter which was
written in answer.

[Acts 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 15:24</span></span>

Forasmuch as, &c. - The simplicity, weightiness, and conciseness of this
letter are highly observable.

[Acts 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 15:26</span></span>

Men that have hazarded their lives - This is spoken of Paul and
Barnabas.

[Acts 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 15:27</span></span>

Who will tell you the same things - Which we have written.

[Acts 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 15:28</span></span>

These necessary things - All of these were necessary for that time. But
the first of them was not necessary long; and the direction concerning
it was therefore repealed by the same Spirit, as we read in the former
Epistle to the Corinthians.

[Acts 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 15:29</span></span>

Blood - The eating which was never permitted the children of God from
the beginning of the world. Nothing can be clearer than this. For, 1.
From Adam to Noah no man ate flesh at all; consequently no man then ate
blood. 2. When God allowed Noah and his posterity to eat flesh, he
absolutely forbade them to eat blood; and accordingly this, with the
other six precepts of Noah, was delivered down from Noah to Moses. 3.
God renewed this prohibition by Moses, which was not repealed from the
time of Moses till Christ came. 4. Neither after his coming did any
presume to repeal this decree of the Holy Ghost, till it seemed good to
the bishop of Rome so to do, about the middle of the eighth century. 5.
From that time those Churches which acknowledged his authority held the
eating of blood to be an indifferent thing. But, 6. In all those
Churches which never did acknowledge the bishop of Rome's authority, it
never was allowed to eat blood; nor is it allowed at this day. This is
the plain fact; let men reason as plausibly as they please on one side
or the other. From which keeping yourselves ye will do well - That is,
ye will find a blessing. This gentle manner of concluding was worthy the
apostolical wisdom and goodness. But how soon did succeeding councils of
inferior authority change it into the style of anathemas! Forms which
have proved an occasion of consecrating some of the most devilish
passions under the most sacred names; and like some ill - adjusted
weapons of war, are most likely to hurt the hand from which they are
thrown.

[Acts 15:35](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 15:35</span></span>

Paul and Barnabas abode in Antioch - And it was during this time that
Peter came down from Jerusalem, and that St. Paul withstood him to the
face, for separating himself from the Gentiles, [Gal
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011), &c.

[Acts 15:36](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 15:36</span></span>

Let us go and visit the brethren in every city where we have preached -
This was all that St. Paul designed at first; but it was not all that
God designed by his journey, whose providence carried him much farther
than he intended. And see how they do - How their souls prosper: how
they grow in faith, hope love: what else ought to be the grand and
constant inquiry in every ecclesiastical visitation? Reader, how dost
thou do?

[Acts 15:37](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">act 15:37</span></span>

Barnabas counselled to take John - His kinsman.

[Acts 15:38](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">act 15:38</span></span>

But Paul thought it not right - To trust him again, who had deserted
them before: who had shrunk from the labour and danger of converting
those they were now going to confirm.

[Acts 15:39](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">act 15:39</span></span>

And there was a sharp contention - Literally, a paroxysm, or fit of a
fever. But nothing in the text implies that the sharpness was on both
sides. It is far more probable that it was not; that St. Paul, who had
the right on his side, as he undoubtedly had,) maintained it with love.
And Barnabas taking Mark with him, sailed away to Cyprus - Forsaking the
work in which he was engaged, he went away to his own country.

[Acts 15:40](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">act 15:40</span></span>

But Paul departed - Held on his intended course: being recommended by
the brethren to the grace of God - We do not find that Barnabas stayed
for this. O how mighty is the grace of God! which in the midst of the
world, in the midst of sin, among so many snares of Satan, and in spite
of the incredible weakness and depravity of nature, yet overcomes all
opposition, sanctifies, sustains, and preserves us to the end! It
appears not only that Paul and Barnabas were afterward thoroughly
reconciled, [Co1 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#006); [Gal
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009); but also that John was again
admitted by St. Paul as a companion in his labours, [Col
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010); [Plm
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#024); [Ti2
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#011).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 16](act016)

</div>
