<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1028)  [Next](ch2001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch1 29:2</span></span>

My might - Work for God must be done with all our might, or we shall
bring nothing to pass in it.

[1 Chronicles 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch1 29:4</span></span>

Of Ophir - The best and purest gold. The walls - The walls of the temple
with God, and of the rooms adjoining to it, with silver beaten out into
plates.

[1 Chronicles 29:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ch1 29:5</span></span>

To consecrate - To offer an offering, as I have done. Heb. To fill his
hand unto the Lord. They that engage themselves in the service of God,
will have their hands full: there is work enough for the whole man in
that service.

[1 Chronicles 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ch1 29:9</span></span>

Rejoiced - Because this was both an effect of God's grace in them, an
eminent token of God's favour to them, and a pledge that this long -
desired work, would receive a certain and speedy accomplishment. Great
joy - To see the work, which his heart was so much set upon, likely to
go on. It is a great reviving to good men when they are leaving the
world, to see those they leave behind zealous for the work of God.

[1 Chronicles 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ch1 29:10</span></span>

Blessed, &c. - David was now full of days, and near his end, and it well
becomes the aged children of God, to have their hearts much enlarged in
praise and thanksgiving. The nearer we come to the land of everlasting
praise, the more we should speak the language, and do the work of that
world.

[1 Chronicles 29:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ch1 29:14</span></span>

To offer - That thou shouldest give us both riches to make such an
offering, and a willing heart to offer them, both which are the gifts
and the fruits of thy good grace and mercy to us. Of thine - We return
only what we have received, and therefore only pay a debt to thee. The
more we do for God, the more we are indebted to him; for the honour of
being employed in his service, and for grace enabling us in any measure
to serve him.

[1 Chronicles 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ch1 29:15</span></span>

Strangers - For the land which we possess is thine, not ours; we are not
the proprietors but only thy tenants: and as our fathers once were mere
strangers in it, even before men, so we at this day are no better before
thee, having no absolute right in it, but only to travel through it, and
sojourn in it for the short time that we live in the world. None abiding
- We only give thee what we must shortly leave, and what we cannot keep
to ourselves: and therefore it is a great favour that thou wilt accept
such offerings. David's days had as much of substance in them as most
men: for he was upon the whole a good man, an useful man, and now an old
man. And yet he puts himself in the front of those who must acknowledge,
that their days on the earth are as a shadow: which speaks of our life
as a vain life, a dark life, a transient life, and a life that will have
its period, either in perfect light or perfect darkness.

[1 Chronicles 29:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ch1 29:16</span></span>

All thine own - In like manner we ought to acknowledge God in all
spiritual things: referring every good thought, good desire, and good
work to his grace.

[1 Chronicles 29:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ch1 29:18</span></span>

Of Abraham, &c. - A God in covenant with them, and with us for their
sakes. Keep forever - Since it is from thy grace that thy people have
such willing minds, continue that grace to them, that they may persist
in the same generous disposition towards thee and thy worship. Prepare -
Or, rather, confirm, thou who hast begun a good work, confirm and carry
it on by thy grace.

[1 Chronicles 29:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ch1 29:20</span></span>

Worshipped - The Lord with religious, and the king with civil worship.

[1 Chronicles 29:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ch1 29:22</span></span>

The second time - The first time, was when he was made king during
Adonijah's conspiracy. And Zadok - It must be remembered that the high -
priest had his viceregent who might officiate in his stead. So that this
action of theirs, the anointing Zadok, did not, actually constitute him
high - priest, but only settled the reversion of it upon him and his
line after Abiathar's death; even as David's making Solomon king, and
their anointing Solomon to be the chief governor here, did not put him
into actual possession of the kingdom, but only gave him a right to it
after the present king's death: hence, notwithstanding this anointing,
Abiathar continued to exercise his office 'till Solomon thrust him out,
[Kg1 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#027).

[1 Chronicles 29:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">ch1 29:24</span></span>

Of the Lord - On the throne of Israel, which is called the throne of the
Lord, because the Lord himself was in a peculiar manner the king and
governor of Israel. He had the founding, he had the filling of their
throne, by immediate direction.

[1 Chronicles 29:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">ch1 29:26</span></span>

Thus, &c. - This sacred writer having mentioned the anointing of Solomon
and upon that occasion proceeded to give a farther account of Solomon's
actual settlement in his kingdom, returns to his main business, to give
an account of the close of David's reign and life. He here brings him to
the end of his day, leaves him asleep, and draws the curtains about him.

[1 Chronicles 29:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">ch1 29:28</span></span>

Riches and honour - That is, he had enough of this world, and of the
riches of and honour of it; and he knew when he had enough. He was
satisfied with it, and very willing to go to a better place.

[1 Chronicles 29:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">ch1 29:29</span></span>

The book - In the chronicles of the kingdom, which were written by
Nathan and Gad, who were not only prophets, but historiographers out of
which either they or some other prophets took by the direction of God's
spirit such passages, as were most important and useful for the church
in succeeding ages.

[1 Chronicles 29:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">ch1 29:30</span></span>

The times - The changes which befel him; both his troubles, and his
successes, the word time or times being often put for things done or
happening in them. The countries - Bordering upon the land of Canaan.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 1](ch2001)

</div>
