<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2.md)  
  [Previous](ch2019)  [Next](ch2021.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#001.md)

[2 Chronicles 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch2 20:2</span></span>

The sea - The dead sea, beyond which mount Seir lay. Syria - Largely so
called, and so it includes the Moabites and Ammonites. And it may be
thus expressed, to intimate that they came by the instigation of the
Syrians, to revenge themselves of Jehoshaphat for joining with Ahab
against them.

[2 Chronicles 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ch2 20:5</span></span>

The house - Largely so called, in the court of the people, upon that
brazen scaffold which Solomon had erected. New court - Before the
priests court: which is called the new court, because it had lately been
renewed when the altar was renewed.

[2 Chronicles 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ch2 20:7</span></span>

Abraham - To whom thou hast engaged thyself by covenant to be his
friend, and the friend of his seed for ever.

[2 Chronicles 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ch2 20:9</span></span>

The sword - Or rather, the sword of judgement or of vengeance, that is,
war, whereby thou punisheth thy people for their sins.

[2 Chronicles 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ch2 20:12</span></span>

Wilt thou not judge - Wilt thou not give sentence against them, and
execute it upon them? The justice of God is the refuge of those that are
wronged. No might - Though he had great armies, yet he seems to have
been surprized by these men, before his forces were in readiness to
oppose them.

[2 Chronicles 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ch2 20:13</span></span>

Little ones - Whom they used to present before the Lord in times of
great distress, to stir up themselves to more fervent prayers, their
eyes being upon their harmless and tender children, and to move God to
compassion, because God hath declared, that he will be prevailed with,
by such methods as these.

[2 Chronicles 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ch2 20:15</span></span>

But God's - God will fight for you, and he alone will do the work, you
need not strike a stroke.

[2 Chronicles 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ch2 20:16</span></span>

Go down - From Jerusalem, where he and his army now were; which stood
upon high ground.

[2 Chronicles 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ch2 20:19</span></span>

Stood up - By Jehoshaphat's appointment. On high - With heart and voice
lifted up: whereby they shewed their full assurance of the victory.

[2 Chronicles 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ch2 20:20</span></span>

Believe - God's promise delivered to us by this prophet, and
consequently all other predictions of the prophet.

[2 Chronicles 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ch2 20:21</span></span>

Consulted - Jehoshaphat called a counsel of war, and it was resolved, to
appoint singers to go out before the army, who had nothing to do, but to
praise God, to praise his holiness, which is his beauty, to praise him
as they did in the temple, that beauty of holiness. By this strange
advance to the field of battle, Jehoshaphat shewed his firm reliance on
the word of God, which enabled him to triumph before the battle, to
animate his own men and confound the enemy.

[2 Chronicles 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ch2 20:22</span></span>

To sing - So acceptable are the fervent prayers of God's people to God,
and so terrible to their enemies. Ambushments - Or, liers in wait,
either the holy angels, who appeared in the shape of men, and possibly
put on the appearances and visages of the Moabites or Ammonites, and in
that shape slew the rest, who supposing this slaughter to be done by a
part of their own army, fell upon them, and so broke forth into mutual
slaughters. Or, God raised jealousies and animosities among themselves,
which broke forth, first into secret ambushments, which one party laid
for another, and then into open hostilities to their utter destruction.
So vain are all mens attempts against God, who needs none to destroy his
enemies but themselves, and their own mistakes, and passions, which he
can, when he pleaseth, arm against them.

[2 Chronicles 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">ch2 20:24</span></span>

The watch tower - Which stood upon the cliff of Ziz, mentioned [Ch2
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#016.md), and looked toward the
wilderness, where their enemies lay encamped, whose numbers, and order,
and condition, they could descry from thence.

[2 Chronicles 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">ch2 20:25</span></span>

Jewels - Which they brought with them to corrupt any of Jehoshaphat's
officers as they saw occasion: to procure necessaries for their vast
army from time to time: and because they came as to triumph rather than
to fight, being confident of the victory because of their numbers, and
especially because they thought to surprize Jehoshaphat ere he could
make any considerable preparations against them; God also permitting
them to be puffed up to their own destruction.

[2 Chronicles 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">ch2 20:26</span></span>

Berachah - Heb. of blessing; so called from their solemn blessings and
praises given to God in it upon this occasion.

[2 Chronicles 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">ch2 20:28</span></span>

To the house - To renew their praises in the court of the temple, the
proper and usual place for it. Praising God must not be the work of a
day only, but our praises when we have received mercy, must be often
repeated, as our prayers were, when we where in pursuit of it. Every day
we must bless God: as long as we live, and while we have any being, we
must praise him, spending our time in that work, in which we hope to
spend our eternity.

[2 Chronicles 20:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">ch2 20:33</span></span>

Not taken - Not universally; the fault was not in Jehoshaphat, but in
the people, who, though they did worship the true God, yet would not be
confined to the temple, but for their own conveniency, or from their
affection to their ancient custom chose to worship him in the high -
places.

[2 Chronicles 20:35](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">ch2 20:35</span></span>

After this - This is mentioned as an aggravation of his sin, after so
great an obligation laid upon him by God; and after he had been so
singularly reproved by a prophet yet he relapsed into the same sin which
proceeded partly from that near relation which was contracted between
the two families, and partly from the easiness of Jehoshaphat's temper,
which could not resist the solicitations of others, in such things as
might seem indifferent. For he did not join with him in war, as he did
with Ahab, but in a peaceable way only, in a matter of trade and
commerce. And yet God reproves and punisheth him for it, [Ch2
20:37](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#037.md), to shew his great dislike of
all familiar conversation of his servants and people with professed
enemies of God and of religion, as Ahaziah was. Very wickedly - Or who
did industriously, and maliciously, and constantly work wickedness, as
the Hebrew phrase implies, giving himself up to idolatry and all
wickedness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 21](ch2021.md)

</div>
