<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1.md)  
  [Previous](co1002)  [Next](co1004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001.md)

[1 Corinthians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 3:1</span></span>

And I, brethren - He spoke before, [Co1
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#001.md), of his entrance, now of his
progress, among them. Could not speak to you as unto spiritual - Adult,
experienced Christians. But as unto men who were still in great measure
carnal, as unto babes in Christ - Still weak in grace, though eminent in
gifts, [Co1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#005.md).

[1 Corinthians 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 3:2</span></span>

I fed you, as babes, with milk - The first and plainest truths of the
gospel. So should every preacher suit his doctrine to his hearers.

[1 Corinthians 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 3:3</span></span>

For while there is among you emulation in your hearts, strife in your
words, and actual divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk according to
men - As mere men; not as Christians, according to God.

[1 Corinthians 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 3:4</span></span>

I am of Apollos - St. Paul named himself and Apollos, to show that he
would condemn any division among them, even though it were in favour of
himself, or the dearest friend he had in the world. Are ye not carnal -
For the Spirit of God allows no party zeal.

[1 Corinthians 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 3:5</span></span>

Ministers - Or servants. By whom ye believed, as the Lord, the Master of
those servants, gave to every man.

[1 Corinthians 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 3:7</span></span>

God that giveth the increase - Is all in all: without him neither
planting nor watering avails.

[1 Corinthians 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 3:8</span></span>

But he that planteth and he that watereth are one - Which is another
argument against division. Though their labours are different. they are
all employed in one general work, - the saving souls. Hence he takes
occasion to speak of the reward of them that labour faithfully, and the
awful account to be given by all. Every man shall receive his own
peculiar reward according to his own peculiar labour - Not according to
his success; but he who labours much, though with small success, shall
have a great reward.

Has not all this reasoning the same force still? The ministers are still
surely instruments in God's hand, and depend as entirely as ever on his
blessing, to give the increase to their labours. Without this, they are
nothing: with it, their part is so small, that they hardly deserve to be
mentioned. May their hearts and hands be more united; and, retaining a
due sense of the honour God doeth them in employing them, may they
faithfully labour, not as for themselves, but for the great Proprietor
of all, till the day come when he will reward them in full proportion to
their fidelity and diligence!

[1 Corinthians 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 3:9</span></span>

For we are all fellowlabourers - God's labourers, and fellowlabourers
with each other. Ye are God's husbandry - This is the sum of what went
before: it is a comprehensive word, taking in both a field, a garden,
and a vineyard. Ye are God's building - This is the sum of what follows.

[1 Corinthians 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 3:10</span></span>

According to the grace of God given to me - This he premises, lest he
should seem to ascribe it to himself. Let every one take heed how he
buildeth thereon - That all his doctrines may be consistent with the
foundation.

[1 Corinthians 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 3:11</span></span>

For other foundation - On which the whole church: and all its doctrines,
duties, and blessings may be built. Can no man lay than what is laid -
In the counsels of divine wisdom, in the promises and prophecies of the
Old Testament, in the preaching of the apostles, St. Paul in particular.
Which is Jesus Christ - Who, in his person and offices, is the firm,
immovable Rock of Ages, every way sufficient to bear all the weight that
God himself, or the sinner, when he believes, can lay upon him.

[1 Corinthians 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 3:12</span></span>

If any one build gold, silver, costly stones - Three sorts of materials
which will bear the fire; true and solid doctrines. Wood, hay, stubble -
Three which will not bear the fire. Such are all doctrines, ceremonies,
and forms of human invention; all but the substantial, vital truths of
Christianity.

[1 Corinthians 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 3:13</span></span>

The time is coming when every one's work shall be made manifest: for the
day of the Lord, that great and final day, shall declare it - To all the
world. For it is revealed - What faith beholds as so certain and so near
is spoken of as already present. By fire; yea, the fire shall try every
one's work, of what sort it is - The strict process of that day will try
every man's doctrines, whether they come up to the scripture standard or
not. Here is a plain allusion to the flaming light and consuming heat of
the general conflagration. But the expression, when applied to the
trying of doctrines, and consuming those that are wrong, is evidently
figurative; because no material fire can have such an effect on what is
of a moral nature. And therefore it is added, he who builds wood, hay,
or stubble, shall be saved as through the fire - Or, as narrowly as a
man escapes through the fire, when his house is all in flames about him.

This text, then, is so far from establishing the Romish purgatory, that
it utterly overthrows it. For the fire here mentioned does not exist
till the day of judgment: therefore, if this be the fire of purgatory,
it follows that purgatory does not exist before the day of judgment.

[1 Corinthians 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 3:14</span></span>

He shall receive a reward - A peculiar degree of glory. Some degree even
the other will receive, seeing he held the foundation; though through
ignorance he built thereon what would not abide the fire.

[1 Corinthians 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 3:15</span></span>

He shall suffer loss - The loss of that peculiar degree of glory.

[1 Corinthians 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co1 3:16</span></span>

Ye - All Christians. Are the temple of God - The most noble kind of
building, [Co1 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#009.md).

[1 Corinthians 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co1 3:17</span></span>

If any man destroy the temple of God - Destroy a real Christian, by
schisms, or doctrines fundamentally wrong. Him shall God destroy - He
shall not be saved at all; not even as through the fire."

[1 Corinthians 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 3:18</span></span>

Let him become a fool in this world - Such as the world accounts so.
That he may become wise - In God's account.

[1 Corinthians 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co1 3:19</span></span>

For all the boasted wisdom of the world is mere foolishness in the sight
of God. He taketh the wise in their own craftiness - Not only while they
think they are acting wisely, but by their very wisdom, which itself is
their snare, and the occasion of their destruction. [Job
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013.md).

[1 Corinthians 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co1 3:20</span></span>

That they are but vain - Empty, foolish; they and all their thoughts.
[Psa 94:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#011.md).

[1 Corinthians 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co1 3:21</span></span>

Therefore - Upon the whole. Let none glory in men - So as to divide into
parties on their account. For all things are yours - and we in
particular. We are not your lords, but rather your servants.

[1 Corinthians 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co1 3:22</span></span>

Whether Paul or Apollos, or Cephas - We are all equally yours, to serve
you for Christ's sake. Or the world - This leap from Peter to the world
greatly enlarges the thought, and argues a kind of impatience of
enumerating the rest. Peter and every one in the whole world, however
excellent in gifts, or grace, or office, are also your servants for
Christ's sake. Or life, or death - These, with all their various
circumstances, are disposed as will be most for your advantage. Or
things present - On earth. Or things to come - In heaven. Contend,
therefore, no more about these little things; but be ye united in love,
as ye are in blessings.

[1 Corinthians 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co1 3:23</span></span>

And ye are Christ's - His property, his subjects. his members. And
Christ is God's - As Mediator, he refers all his services to his
Father's glory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 4](co1004.md)

</div>
