<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1.md)  
  [Previous](rom016)  [Next](co1002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001.md)

[1 Corinthians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 1:1</span></span>

Paul, called to be an apostle - There is great propriety in every clause
of the salutation, particularly in this, as there were some in the
church of Corinth who called the authority of his mission in question.
Through the will of God - Called "the commandment of God," [Ti1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001.md) This was to the churches the
ground of his authority; to Paul himself, of an humble and ready mind.
By the mention of God, the authority of man is excluded, [Gal
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001.md); by the mention of the will of
God, the merit of Paul, [Co1 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#008.md), &c.
And Sosthenes - A Corinthian, St. Paul's companion in travel. It was
both humility and prudence in the apostle, thus to join his name with
his own, in an epistle wherein he was to reprove so many irregularities.
Sosthenes the brother - Probably this word is emphatical; as if he had
said, Who, from a Jewish opposer of the gospel, became a faithful
brother.

[1 Corinthians 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 1:2</span></span>

To the church of God which is in Corinth - St. Paul, writing in a
familiar manner to the Corinthians, as also to the Thessalonians and
Galatians, uses this plain appellation. To the other churches he uses a
more solemn address. Sanctified through Jesus Christ - And so
undoubtedly they were in general, notwithstanding some exceptions.
Called - Of Jesus Christ, [Rom 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#006.md) And
- As the fruit of that calling made holy. With all that in every place -
Nothing could better suit that catholic love which St. Paul labours to
promote in this epistle, than such a declaration of his good wishes for
every true Christian upon earth. Call upon the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ - This plainly implies that all Christians pray to Christ, as
well as to the Father through him.

[1 Corinthians 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 1:4</span></span>

Always - Whenever I mention you to God in prayer.

[1 Corinthians 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 1:5</span></span>

In all utterance and knowledge - Of divine things. These gifts the
Corinthians particularly admired. Therefore this congratulation
naturally tended to soften their spirits, and I make way for the
reproofs which follow.

[1 Corinthians 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 1:6</span></span>

The testimony of Christ - The gospel. Was confirmed among you - By these
gifts attending it. They knew they had received these by the hand of
Paul: and this consideration was highly proper, to revive in them their
former reverence and affection for their spiritual father.

[1 Corinthians 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 1:7</span></span>

Waiting - With earnest desire. For the glorious revelation of our Lord
Jesus Christ - A sure mark of a true or false Christian, to long for, or
dread, this revelation.

[1 Corinthians 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 1:8</span></span>

Who will also - if you faithfully apply to him. Confirm you to the end.
In the day of Christ - Now it is our day, wherein we are to work out our
salvation; then it will be eminently the day of Christ, and of his glory
in the saints.

[1 Corinthians 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 1:9</span></span>

God is faithful - To all his promises; and therefore "to him that hath
shall be given." By whom ye are called - A pledge of his willingness to
save you unto the uttermost.

[1 Corinthians 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 1:10</span></span>

Now I exhort you - Ye have faith and hope; secure love also. By the
endearing name of our Lord Jesus Christ - lnfinitely preferable to all
the human names in which ye glory. That ye all speak the same thing -
They now spoke different things, [Co1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#012.md) And that there be no schisms
among you - No alienation of affection from each other. Is this word
ever taken in any other sense in scripture? But that ye be joined in the
same mind - Affections, desires. And judgment - Touching all the grand
truths of the gospel.

[1 Corinthians 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 1:11</span></span>

It hath been declared to me by them of the family of Chloe - Whom some
suppose to have been the wife of Stephanas, and the mother of Fortunatus
and Achaicus. By these three the Corinthians had sent their letter to
St. Paul, [Co1 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#017.md). That there are
contentions - A word equivalent with schisms in the preceding verse.

[1 Corinthians 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 1:12</span></span>

Now this I say - That is, what I mean is this: there are various parties
among you, who set themselves, one against an other, in behalf of the
several teachers they admire. And I of Christ - They spoke well, if they
had not on this pretence despised their teachers, [Co1
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#008.md) Perhaps they valued themselves on
having heard Christ preach in his own person.

[1 Corinthians 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 1:13</span></span>

Is Christ divided - Are not all the members still under one head? Was
not he alone crucified for you all; and were ye not all baptized in his
name? The glory of Christ then is not to be divided between him and his
servants; neither is the unity of the body to be torn asunder, seeing
Christ is one still.

[1 Corinthians 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 1:14</span></span>

I thank God - (A pious phrase for the common one, "I rejoice,") that, in
the course of his providence, I baptized none of you, but Crispus, once
the ruler of the synagogue, and Caius.

[1 Corinthians 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 1:15</span></span>

Lest any should say that I had baptized in my own name - In order to
attach them to myself.

[1 Corinthians 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co1 1:16</span></span>

I know not - That is, it does not at present occur to my memory, that I
baptized any other.

[1 Corinthians 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co1 1:17</span></span>

For God did not send me to baptize - That was not my chief errand: those
of inferior rank and abilities could do it: though all the apostles were
sent to baptize also, [Mat 28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019.md) But
to preach the gospel - So the apostle slides into his general
proposition: but not with wisdom of speech - With the artificial
ornaments of discourse, invented by human wisdom. Lest the cross of
Christ should be made of none effect - The whole effect of St. Paul's
preaching was owing to the power of God accompanying the plain
declaration of that great truth, "Christ bore our sins upon the cross."
But this effect might have been imputed to another cause, had he come
with that wisdom of speech which they admired.

[1 Corinthians 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 1:18</span></span>

To them that perish - By obstinately rejecting the only name whereby
they can be saved. But to us who are saved - Now saved from our sins,
and in the way to everlasting salvation, it is the great instrument of
the power of God.

[1 Corinthians 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co1 1:19</span></span>

For it is written - And the words are remarkably applicable to this
great event. [Isa 29:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#014.md)

[1 Corinthians 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co1 1:20</span></span>

Where is the wise? &c. - The deliverance of Judea from Sennacherib is
what Isaiah refers to in these words; in a bold and beautiful allusion
to which, the apostle in the clause that follows triumphs over all the
opposition of human wisdom to the victorious gospel of Christ. What
could the wise men of the gentiles do against this? or the Jewish
scribes? or the disputers of this world? - Those among both, who, proud
of their acuteness, were fond of controversy, and thought they could
confute all opponents. Hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this
world - That is, shown it to be very foolishness. [Isa
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#018.md)

[1 Corinthians 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co1 1:21</span></span>

For since in the wisdom of God - According to his wise disposals,
leaving them to make the trial. The world - Whether Jewish or gentile,
by all its boasted wisdom knew not God - Though the whole creation
declared its Creator, and though he declared himself by all the
prophets; it pleased God, by a way which those who perish count mere
foolishness, to save them that believe.

[1 Corinthians 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co1 1:22</span></span>

For whereas the Jews demand of the apostles, as they did of their Lord,
more signs still, after all they have seen already; and the Greeks, or
gentiles, seek wisdom - The depths of philosophy, and the charms of
eloquence.

[1 Corinthians 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co1 1:23</span></span>

We go on to preach, in a plain and historical, not rhetorical or
philosophical, manner, Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumblingblock -
Just opposite to the "signs" they demand. And to the Greeks foolishness
- A silly tale, just opposite to the wisdom they seek.

[1 Corinthians 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co1 1:24</span></span>

But to them that are called - And obey the heavenly calling. Christ -
With his cross, his death, his life, his kingdom. And they experience,
first, that he is the power, then, that he is the wisdom, of God.

[1 Corinthians 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">co1 1:25</span></span>

Because the foolishness of God - The gospel scheme, which the world
judge to be mere foolishness, is wiser than the wisdom of men; and, weak
as they account it, stronger than all the strength of men.

[1 Corinthians 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">co1 1:26</span></span>

Behold your calling - What manner of men they are whom God calls. That
not many wise men after the flesh - In the account of the world. Not
many mighty - Men of power and authority.

[1 Corinthians 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">co1 1:28</span></span>

Things that are not - The Jews frequently called the gentiles, "Them
that are not," 2 Esdras vi. 56, 57. In so supreme contempt did they hold
them. The things that are - In high esteem.

[1 Corinthians 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">co1 1:29</span></span>

That no flesh - A fit appellation. Flesh is fair, but withering as
grass. May glory before God - In God we ought to glory.

[1 Corinthians 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">co1 1:30</span></span>

Of him - Out of his free grace and mercy. Are ye Engrafted into Christ
Jesus, who is made unto us that believe wisdom, who were before utterly
foolish and ignorant. Righteousness - The sole ground of our
justification, who were before under the wrath and curse of God.
Sanctification - A principle of universal holiness, whereas before we
were altogether dead in sin. And redemption - That is, complete
deliverance from all evil, and eternal bliss both of soul and body.

[1 Corinthians 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">co1 1:31</span></span>

Let him glory in the Lord - Not in himself, not in the flesh, not in the
world. [Jer 9:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#023.md)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 2](co1002.md)

</div>
