<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2.md)  
  [Previous](co1016)  [Next](co2002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001.md)

[2 Corinthians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 1:1</span></span>

Timotheus our brother - St. Paul writing to Timotheus styled him his
son; writing of him, his brother.

[2 Corinthians 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 1:3</span></span>

Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ - A solemn and
beautiful introduction, highly suitable to the apostolical spirit. The
Father of mercies, and God of all comfort - Mercies are the fountain of
comfort; comfort is the outward expression of mercy. God shows mercy in
the affliction itself. He gives comfort both in and after the
affliction. Therefore is he termed, the God of all comfort. Blessed be
this God!

[2 Corinthians 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co2 1:4</span></span>

Who comforteth us in all our affliction, that we may be able to comfort
them who are in any affliction - He that has experienced one kind of
affliction is able to comfort others in that affliction. He that has
experienced all kinds of affliction is able to comfort them in all.

[2 Corinthians 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 1:5</span></span>

For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us - The sufferings endured on
his account. So our comfort also aboundeth through Christ - The
sufferings were many, the comfort one; and yet not only equal to, but
overbalancing, them all.

[2 Corinthians 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 1:6</span></span>

And whether we are afflicted, it is for your comfort and salvation - For
your present comfort, your present and future salvation. Or whether we
are comforted, it is for your comfort - That we may be the better able
to comfort you. Which is effectual in the patient enduring the same
sufferings which we also suffer - Through the efficacy of which you
patiently endure the same kind of sufferings with us.

[2 Corinthians 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 1:7</span></span>

And our hope concerning you - Grounded on your patience in suffering for
Christ's sake, is steadfast.

[2 Corinthians 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 1:8</span></span>

We would not have you ignorant, brethren, of the trouble which befell us
in Asia - Probably the same which is described in Acts 19. The
Corinthians knew before that he had been in trouble: he now declares the
greatness and the fruit of it. We were exceedingly pressed, above our
strength - Above the ordinary strength even of an apostle.

[2 Corinthians 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 1:9</span></span>

Yea, we had the sentence of death in ourselves - We ourselves expected
nothing but death.

[2 Corinthians 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 1:10</span></span>

We trust that he will still deliver - That we may at length be able to
come to you.

[2 Corinthians 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 1:11</span></span>

You likewise - As well as other churches. Helping with us by prayer,
that for the gift - Namely, my deliverance. Bestowed upon us by means of
many persons - Praying for it, thanks may be given by many.

[2 Corinthians 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 1:12</span></span>

For I am the more emboldened to look for this, because I am conscious of
my integrity; seeing this is our rejoicing - Even in the deepest
adversity. The testimony of our conscience - Whatever others think of
us. That in simplicity - Having one end in view, aiming singly at the
glory of God. And godly sincerity - Without any tincture of guile,
dissimulation, or disguise. Not with carnal wisdom, but by the grace of
God - Not by natural, but divine, wisdom. We have had our conversation
in the world - In the whole world; in every circumstance.

[2 Corinthians 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 1:14</span></span>

Ye have acknowledged us in part - Though not so fully as ye will do.
That we are you rejoicing - That ye rejoice in having known us. As ye
also are ours - As we also rejoice in the success of our labours among
you; and we trust shall rejoice therein in the day of the Lord Jesus.

[2 Corinthians 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co2 1:15</span></span>

In this confidence - That is, being confident of this.

[2 Corinthians 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co2 1:17</span></span>

Did I use levity - Did I lightly change my purpose? Do I purpose
according to the flesh - Are my purposes grounded on carnal or worldly
considerations? So that there should be with me yea and nay - Sometimes
one, sometimes the other; that is, variableness and inconstancy.

[2 Corinthians 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co2 1:18</span></span>

Our word to you - The whole tenor of our doctrine. Hath not been yea and
nay - Wavering and uncertain.

[2 Corinthians 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co2 1:19</span></span>

For Jesus Christ, who was preached by us - That is, our preaching
concerning him. Was not yea and nay - Was not variable and inconsistent
with itself. But was yea in him - Always one and the same, centering in
him.

[2 Corinthians 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co2 1:20</span></span>

For all the promises of God are yea and amen in him - Are surely
established in and through him. They are yea with respect to God
promising; amen, with respect to men believing; yea, with respect to the
apostles; amen, with respect to their hearers.

[2 Corinthians 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co2 1:21</span></span>

I say, to the glory of God - For it is God alone that is able to fulfil
these promises. That establisheth us - Apostles and teachers. With you -
All true believers. In the faith of Christ; and hath anointed us - With
the oil of gladness, with joy in the Holy Ghost, thereby giving us
strength both to do and suffer his will.

[2 Corinthians 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co2 1:22</span></span>

Who also hath sealed us - Stamping his image on our hearts, thus marking
and sealing us as his own property. And given us the earnest of his
Spirit - There is a difference between an earnest and a pledge. A pledge
is to be restored when the debt is paid; but an earnest is not taken
away, but completed. Such an earnest is the Spirit. The first fruits of
it we have [Rom 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023.md); and we wait for
all the fulness.

[2 Corinthians 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co2 1:23</span></span>

I call God for a record upon my soul - Was not St. Paul now speaking by
the Spirit? And can a more solemn oath be conceived? Who then can
imagine that Christ ever designed to forbid all swearing? That to spare
you I came not yet to Corinth - Lest I should be obliged to use
severity. He says elegantly to Corinth, not to you, when be is
intimating his power to punish.

[2 Corinthians 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co2 1:24</span></span>

Not that we have dominion over your faith - This is the prerogative of
God alone. But are helpers of your joy - And faith from which it
springs. For by faith ye have stood - To this day. We see the light in
which ministers should always consider themselves, and in which they are
to be considered by others. Not as having dominion over the faith of
their people, and having a right to dictate by their own authority what
they shall believe, or what they shall do; but as helpers of their joy,
by helping them forward in faith and holiness. In this view, how amiable
does their office appear! and how friendly to the happiness of mankind!
How far, then, are they from true benevolence, who would expose it to
ridicule and contempt!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 2](co2002.md)

</div>
