<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2.md)  
  [Previous](co2002)  [Next](co2004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001.md)

[2 Corinthians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 3:1</span></span>

Do we begin again to recommend ourselves - Is it needful? Have I nothing
but my own word to recommend me? St. Paul chiefly here intends himself;
though not excluding Timotheus, Titus, and Silvanus. Unless we need - As
if he had said, Do I indeed want such recommendation?

[2 Corinthians 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 3:2</span></span>

Ye are our recommendatory letter - More convincing than bare words could
be. Written on our hearts - Deeply engraven there, and plainly legible
to all around us.

[2 Corinthians 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 3:3</span></span>

Manifestly declared to be the letter of Christ - Which he has formed and
published to the world. Ministered by us - Whom he has used herein as
his instruments, therefore ye are our letter also. Written not in tables
of stone - Like the ten commandments. But in the tender, living tables
of their hearts - God having taken away the hearts of stone and given
them hearts of flesh.

[2 Corinthians 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co2 3:4</span></span>

Such trust have we in God - That is, we trust in God that this is so.

[2 Corinthians 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 3:5</span></span>

Not that we are sufficient of ourselves - So much as to think one good
thought; much less, to convert sinners.

[2 Corinthians 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 3:6</span></span>

Who also hath made us able ministers of the new covenant - Of the new,
evangelical dispensation. Not of the law, fitly called the letter, from
God's literally writing it on the two tables. But of the Spirit - Of the
gospel dispensation, which is written on the tables of our hearts by the
Spirit. For the letter - The law, the Mosaic dispensation. Killeth -
Seals in death those who still cleave to it. But the Spirit - The
gospel, conveying the Spirit to those who receive it. Giveth life - Both
spiritual and eternal: yea, if we adhere to the literal sense even of
the moral law, if we regard only the precept and the sanction as they
stand in themselves, not as they lead us to Christ, they are doubtless a
killing ordinance, and bind us down under the sentence of death.

[2 Corinthians 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 3:7</span></span>

And if the ministration of death - That is, the Mosaic dispensation,
which proves such to those who prefer it to the gospel, the most
considerable part of which was engraven on those two stones, was
attended with so great glory.

[2 Corinthians 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 3:8</span></span>

The ministration of the Spirit - That is, the Christian dispensation.

[2 Corinthians 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 3:9</span></span>

The ministration of condemnation - Such the Mosaic dispensation proved
to all the Jews who rejected the gospel whereas through the gospel
(hence called the ministration of righteousness) God both imputed and
imparted righteousness to all believers. But how can the moral law
(which alone was engraven on stone) be the ministration of condemnation,
if it requires no more than a sincere obedience, such as is proportioned
to our infirm state? If this is sufficient to justify us, then the law
ceases to be a ministration of condemnation. It becomes (flatly contrary
to the apostle's doctrine) the ministration of righteousness.

[2 Corinthians 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 3:10</span></span>

It hath no glory in this respect, because of the glory that excelleth -
That is, none in comparison of this more excellent glory. The greater
light swallows up the less.

[2 Corinthians 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 3:11</span></span>

That which remaineth - That dispensation which remains to the end of the
world; that spirit and life which remain for ever.

[2 Corinthians 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 3:12</span></span>

Having therefore this hope - Being fully persuaded of this.

[2 Corinthians 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 3:13</span></span>

And we do not act as Moses did, who put a veil over his face - Which is
to be understood with regard to his writings also. So that the children
of Israel could not look steadfastly to the end of that dispensation
which is now abolished - The end of this was Christ. The whole Mosaic
dispensation tended to, and terminated in, him; but the Israelites had
only a dim, wavering sight of him, of whom Moses spake in an obscure,
covert manner.

[2 Corinthians 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 3:14</span></span>

The same veil remaineth on their understanding unremoved - Not so much
as folded back, (so the word implies,) so as to admit a little,
glimmering light. On the public reading of the Old Testament - The veil
is not now on the face of Moses or of his writings, but on the reading
of them, and on the heart of them that believe not. Which is taken away
in Christ - That is, from the heart of them that truly believe on him.

[2 Corinthians 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co2 3:16</span></span>

When it - Their heart. Shall turn to the Lord - To Christ, by living
faith. The veil is taken away - That very moment; and they see, with the
utmost clearness, how all the types and prophecies of the law are fully
accomplished in him.

[2 Corinthians 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co2 3:17</span></span>

Now the Lord - Christ is that Spirit of the law whereof I speak, to
which the letter was intended to lead. And where the Spirit of the Lord,
Christ, is, there is liberty - Not the veil, the emblem of slavery.
There is liberty from servile fear, liberty from the guilt and from the
power of sin, liberty to behold with open face the glory of the Lord.

[2 Corinthians 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co2 3:18</span></span>

And, accordingly, all we that believe in him, beholding as in a glass -
In the mirror of the gospel. The glory of the Lord - His glorious love.
Are transformed into the same image - Into the same love. From one
degree of this glory to another, in a manner worthy of his almighty
Spirit. What a beautiful contrast is here! Moses saw the glory of the
Lord, and it rendered his face so bright, that he covered it with a
veil; Israel not being able to bear the reflected light. We behold his
glory in the glass of his word, and our faces shine too; yet we veil
them not, but diffuse the lustre which is continually increasing, as we
fix the eye of our mind more and more steadfastly on his glory displayed
in the gospel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 4](co2004.md)

</div>
