<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan001)  [Next](dan003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001)

[Daniel 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 2:1</span></span>

In the second year - This was properly in the fifth year of that king's
reign, but in the second year after Daniel had been brought before the
king. Dreams - It was one dream, but of many parts.

[Daniel 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">dan 2:2</span></span>

The astrologers - Who pretended great skill in natural, and supernatural
things. The sorcerers - Or necromancers, who used diabolical arts.
Chaldeans - This name the magicians assumed as being national, and most
noble.

[Daniel 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">dan 2:3</span></span>

To know - He remembered the fact in general, but could not repeat it
perfectly. Yet it had left such an impression on him, as put him in
great perplexity. The Lord hath ways to affright the greatest men in the
world, in the midst of their security.

[Daniel 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 2:4</span></span>

In Syriack - That is in the Chaldee tongue, for Syria or Aram is
sometimes taken in a large sense, containing, Assyria, Babylon,
Mesopotamia, Phoenicia, Palestine, [Kg2
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#026). From hence all is written in
the Chaldee language, to the eighth chapter.

[Daniel 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">dan 2:9</span></span>

But one decree - I will not retract my sentence.

[Daniel 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">dan 2:13</span></span>

Daniel and his fellows - Daniel and his fellows were not called, because
of their youth, which the Chaldeans despised. Here it is observable: The
magicians confessed, that knowledge and revelation must come from God,
and therefore what Daniel did, was not of any human strength. That the
Lord held the governor's hands, so that he did not slay Daniel presently
with the first. That Daniel by his prudence and piety, saved all the
magicians lives.

[Daniel 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">dan 2:21</span></span>

He changeth - God can make the sun go back or stand still, as in Ahaz
and Joshua's time, it is the great part of God's power and prerogative
to change times. Daniel here attributes that to God, which Heathens
attributed to nature, or chance. God only, that made all by his power,
doth rule, and over - rule all by his providence.

[Daniel 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">dan 2:26</span></span>

Belteshazzar - By this name of Belteshazzar he had given Daniel, he took
courage as if he might expect some great thing from him: for the word
signifies the keeper of secret treasure.

[Daniel 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">dan 2:28</span></span>

What shall be - Observe the prophet's wisdom, he does not fall abruptly
upon the dream, but first prepares this lofty king for it, and by
degrees labours to win him to the knowledge of the true God.

[Daniel 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">dan 2:30</span></span>

But - But that the interpretation may be manifest to the king, and that
thou mayest be better instructed and satisfied in thy mind.

[Daniel 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">dan 2:36</span></span>

And we - By this word we appears Daniel's piety and modesty, or he
declares by it, that he and his companions had begged this skill from
God, and therefore he did not arrogate it to himself.

[Daniel 2:38](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">dan 2:38</span></span>

Made thee ruler - He hath given thee absolute dominion of all creatures,
men and beasts within the bounds of thy vast kingdom. Thou - He was
first in order, as the head is before the other parts, and the vision
began in him, and descended downwards to the other three monarchies. He
was the head of gold, because of the vast riches wherein this monarchy
abounded, and because it stood longest, five hundred years, and was
fortunate and flourishing to the last.

[Daniel 2:39](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">dan 2:39</span></span>

Another kingdom - This was that of the Medes and Persians, inferior in
time for it lasted not half so long as the Assyrian in prosperity and
tranquillity; yet, was this wonderful, rich and large for a time. Third
kingdom - This was the Grecian monarchy under Alexander the great,
called brass, because coarser than the other. Over all the earth -
Alexander marched even to the Indies, and was said to conquer the world.

[Daniel 2:40](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">dan 2:40</span></span>

Fourth kingdom - This is the kingdom of the Romans, and was to last not
only to Christ's first coming, but under antichrist, to his second
coming. This did break in pieces all other kingdoms, being too strong
for them, and brought all into subjection to it, 'till the stone fell
upon it.

[Daniel 2:41](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">dan 2:41</span></span>

Divided - Partly strong, and partly weak; the Roman kingdom was divided,
partly by their civil wars, partly when conquered provinces and kingdoms
cast off the Roman yoke, and set up king's of their own, and so the
empire was divided into ten kingdoms or toes.

[Daniel 2:42](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">dan 2:42</span></span>

Broken - This was plain in the civil wars of the Romans, and the falling
off of some countries, especially towards the end of it.

[Daniel 2:43](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">dan 2:43</span></span>

Mingle themselves - By marriage, but they shall never knit well
together, because ambition is stronger than affinity.

[Daniel 2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">dan 2:44</span></span>

In the days of these kings - While the iron kingdom stood, for Christ
was born in the reign of Augustus Caesar. And this kingdom is not
bounded by any limits, as worldly empires are, but is truly universal.
And it shall be for ever, never destroyed or given to others, as the
rest were.

[Daniel 2:45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">dan 2:45</span></span>

And the gold - This denotes the small beginning of Christ's visible
kingdom, and the different rise of Christ from all other; his conception
by the Holy Ghost, without father and mother, respectively as to his two
natures. This stone, falling from the mountain, brake the image in
pieces; for Christ is a stone that grinds to powder those it falls on:
and he is a growing stone even to a mountain, and therefore will fill
the earth.

[Daniel 2:46](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">dan 2:46</span></span>

That they should offer - This was strange, that so great a monarch
should thus worship his vassal, which he did in consternation and
admiration. But doubtless Daniel put a stop to it: though he could not
hinder the king in his prostration, and in his word of command. And the
king being instructed of Daniel, gives God all the glory in the next
words.

[Daniel 2:47](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">dan 2:47</span></span>

God of gods - The supreme God of all the world, above Baal and all other
gods. Lord of kings - The word in the Syriack signifies, high Lord,
seeing he is the highest king of all the earth.

[Daniel 2:49](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">dan 2:49</span></span>

And he set - He substituted them as lieutenants for the king's service
under Daniel, but Daniel sat in the king's gate to be ready for the
king's chief business.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 3](dan003)

</div>
