<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu012)  [Next](deu014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 13:1</span></span>

A dreamer of dreams - One that pretends God hath revealed himself to him
by visions or dreams. Giveth a sign or wonder - That is, shall foretell
some strange and wonderful thing.

[Deuteronomy 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 13:3</span></span>

Thou shalt not hearken to that prophet - Not receive his doctrine,
though the sign come to pass. For although when such a sign or wonder
foretold did not follow or come to pass, it was a sign of a false
prophet, yet when it did come to pass, it was no sufficient sign of a
true one, especially, in such a case. There are many things, which may
be wrought by evil spirits, God so permitting it for wise and just
reasons, not only for the trial of the good, but also for the punishment
of ungodly men. Proveth you - That is, trieth your faith and love and
obedience. To know - Namely, judicially, or in a publick manner, so as
both you and others may know and see it, that so the justice of his
judgments upon you may be more evident and glorious.

[Deuteronomy 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 13:5</span></span>

To thrust - This phrase notes the great force and power of seducers to
corrupt men's minds. So shalt thou put the evil away - Thou shalt remove
the guilt, by removing the guilty.

[Deuteronomy 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 13:6</span></span>

The son of thy mother - This is added, to restrain the signification of
the word brother, which is often used generally for one near a - kin,
and to express the nearness of the relation, the mother's, side being
usually the ground of the most fervent affection. Thy daughter - Thy
piety must overcome both thy affection, and thy compassion to the weaker
sex. The father and mother are here omitted, because they are
sufficiently contained in the former examples.

[Deuteronomy 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 13:8</span></span>

Conceal him - That is, smother his fault, hide or protect his person,
but shalt accuse him to the magistrate, and demand justice upon him.

[Deuteronomy 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 13:9</span></span>

Thou shalt kill him - Not privately, which pretence would have opened
the door to innumerable murders, but by procuring his death by the
sentence of the magistrate. Thou shalt cast the first stone at him, as
the witness was to do.

[Deuteronomy 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 13:13</span></span>

Children of Belial - It signifies properly persons without yoke, vile
and wretched miscreants, lawless and rebellious, that will suffer no
restraint, that neither fear God, nor reverence man. From among you -
That is, from your church and religion. It notes a separation from them,
not in place (as appears by their partnership with their fellow citizens
both in the sin and punishment) but in heart, doctrine and worship.

[Deuteronomy 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 13:14</span></span>

Enquire - This is, meant of the magistrate, to whose office this
properly belongs, and of whom he continues to speak in the same manner,
thou, [Deu 13:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#015). The Jewish
writers say, the defection of a city is to be tried by the great
sanhedrim. If it appear, that they are thrust away to idolatry, they
send two learned men, to admonish them. If they repent, all is well: is
not, all Israel must go up and execute this sentence. Tho' we do not
find this law put in execution, in all the history of the Jewish church,
yet for neglecting the execution of it on inferior cities, God himself
by the army of the Chaldeans, executed it on Jerusalem, the head city,
which was utterly destroyed, and lay in ruins for seventy years.

[Deuteronomy 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 13:15</span></span>

The inhabitants - Namely, all that are guilty, not the innocent part,
such as disowned this apostacy, who doubtless by choice, at least upon
warning, would come out of so wicked a place. Utterly - The very same
punishment which was, inflicted upon the cities of the cursed
Canaanites, to whom having made themselves equal in sin, it is but just
God should equal them in punishment.

[Deuteronomy 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 13:16</span></span>

For the Lord - For the satisfaction of God's justice, the maintainance
of his honour and authority, and the pacification of his offended
majesty. It shall not be built - It shall be an eternal monument of
God's justice, and terror to after ages.

[Deuteronomy 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 13:17</span></span>

Multiply thee - So thou shalt have no loss of thy numbers by cutting off
so many people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 14](deu014)

</div>
