<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu022)  [Next](deu024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 23:1</span></span>

He that is wounded - A phrase denoting an eunuch. Shall not enter into
the congregation of the Lord - Shall not be admitted to honours and
offices either in the church or commonwealth of Israel; and so the
congregation of the Lord doth not here signify, the body of the people,
but the society of the elders or rulers of the people. Add to this, that
the Hebrew word, Kahal, generally signifies a congregation or company of
men met together; and therefore this cannot so conveniently be meant of
all the body of the people, which could never meet in one place, but of
the chief rulers, which frequently did so. Nor is it strange that
eunuchs are excluded from government, both because such persons are
commonly observed to want that courage which is necessary for a
governor, because as such persons ordinarily were despicable, so the
authority in their hands was likely to be exposed to the same contempt.

[Deuteronomy 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 23:2</span></span>

The congregation - Taking the word as in the former verse.

[Deuteronomy 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 23:3</span></span>

For ever - This seems to note the perpetuity of this law, that it should
be inviolably observed in all succeeding ages.

[Deuteronomy 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 23:4</span></span>

They met you not with bread and water - As the manner of those times was
to wait and provide for strangers and travellers, which was the more
necessary, because in those times and countries, there were no public
houses of entertainment. Their fault then was unmercifulness to
strangers and afflicted persons, which was aggravated both by their
relation to the Israelites, as being the children of Lot, and by the
special kindness of God, and of the Israelites to them, in not fighting
against them.

[Deuteronomy 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 23:6</span></span>

Thou shalt not seek their peace - That is, make no contracts either by
marriages or leagues, or commerce with them, but rather constantly keep
a jealous eye over them, as enemies who will watch every opportunity to
ensnare or disturb thee. This counsel was now the more necessary,
because a great part of the Israelites lived beyond Jordan in the
borders of those people, and therefore God sets up this wall of
partition betwixt them, as well knowing the mischief of bad neighbours,
and Israel's proneness to receive infection from them. Each particular
Israelite is not hereby forbidden to perform any office of humanity to
them, but the body of the nation are forbidden all familiar conversation
with them.

[Deuteronomy 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 23:7</span></span>

Thou wast a stranger - And didst receive habitation, protection and
provision from them a long time, which kindness thou must not forget for
their following persecution. It is ordinary with men, that one injury
blots out the remembrance of twenty courtesies; but God doth not deal so
with us, nor will he have us to deal so with others, but commands us to
forget injuries, and to remember kindnesses.

[Deuteronomy 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 23:8</span></span>

In their third generation - Supposing their grandfather, or great -
grandfather turned proselyte, and the children continue in that faith
received by such ancestors.

[Deuteronomy 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 23:9</span></span>

Keep from every wicked thing - Then especially take heed, because that
is a time of confusion and licentiousness; when the laws of God and man
cannot be heard for the noise of arms; because the success of thy arms
depends upon God's blessing, which wicked men have no reason to expect;
and because thou dost carry thy life in thy hand, and therefore hast
need to be well prepared for death and judgment.

[Deuteronomy 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 23:13</span></span>

Cover - To prevent the annoyance of ourselves or others; to preserve and
exercise modesty and natural honesty; and principally that by such
outward rites they might be innured to the greater reverence of the
Divine Majesty, and the greater caution to avoid all real and moral
uncleanness.

[Deuteronomy 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 23:15</span></span>

The servant - Of such as belonged to the Canaanites, or other
neighbouring nations, because if he had lived in remote countries, it is
not probable that he would flee so far to avoid his master, or that his
master would follow him so far to recover him. For the Canaanites this
sentence was most just, because both they and theirs were all forfeited
to God and Israel, and whatsoever they enjoyed was by special
indulgence. And for the other neighbours it may seem just also, because
both masters and servants of these and other nations are unquestionably
at the disposal of the Lord their maker and sovereign ruler. Understand
it likewise of such as upon enquiry appear to have been unjustly
oppressed by their masters. Now it is not strange if the great God, who
hates all tyranny, and styles himself the refuge of the oppressed doth
interpose his authority to rescue such persons from their cruel masters.

[Deuteronomy 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 23:17</span></span>

No whore - No common prostitute, such as were tolerated and encouraged
by the Gentiles, and used even in their religious worship. Not that such
practices were allowed to the strangers among them, as is evident from
many scriptures and reasons, but that it was in a peculiar manner, and
upon special reasons, forbidden to them, as being much more odious in
them than in strangers.

[Deuteronomy 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 23:18</span></span>

The hire of a whore - This is opposed to the practice of the Gentiles,
who allowed both such persons and the oblations they made out of their
infamous gains; and some of them kept lewd women, who prostituted
themselves in the temples, to the honour of their false Gods, and
offered part of their profit to them. Or the price of a dog - It seems
to mean, of a whoremonger or sodomite. Such are called dogs, [Rev
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#015). And it is not improbable they
are called so here. From these God would not accept of any offering.

[Deuteronomy 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 23:19</span></span>

Thou shalt not lend upon usury to thy brother - To an Israelite. They
held their estates immediately from God, who while he distinguished them
from all other people, might have ordered, had he pleased, that they
should have all things in common. But instead of that, and in token of
their joint interest in the good land he had given them, he only
appointed them, as there was occasion, to lend to one another without
interest. This among them would be little or no loss to the lender,
because their land was so divided, their estates so settled, and there
was so little a merchandise among them, that it was seldom or never they
had occasion to borrow any great sums, but only for the subsistence of
their family, or some uncommon emergence. But they might lend to a
stranger upon usury, who was supposed to live by trade, and therefore
got by what he borrowed: in which case 'tis just, the lender should
share in the gain. This usury therefore is not oppressive: for they
might not oppress a stranger.

[Deuteronomy 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 23:21</span></span>

Not slack - Not delay: because delays may make them both unable to pay
it, and unwilling too.

[Deuteronomy 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">deu 23:23</span></span>

A free - will - offering - Which though thou didst really make, yet
being made, thou art no longer free, but obliged to perform it.

[Deuteronomy 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">deu 23:24</span></span>

At thy pleasure - Which was allowed in those parts, because of the great
plenty and fruitfulness of vines there.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 24](deu024)

</div>
