<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu004)  [Next](deu006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#001.md)

[Deuteronomy 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 5:1</span></span>

All Israel - Namely by their elders, who were to impart it to the rest.

[Deuteronomy 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 5:3</span></span>

Not with our fathers - Only: but with us, who are all alive - He saith
not, that all who made the covenant at Sinai are now alive, but this
covenant was made with all that are now alive; which is most true, for
it was made with the elders in their persons, and with the rest in their
parents, who covenanted for them.

[Deuteronomy 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 5:4</span></span>

Face to face - Personally and immediately, not by the mouth or ministry
of Moses; plainly and certainly, as when two men talk face to face;
freely and familiarly, so as not to overwhelm and confound you.

[Deuteronomy 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 5:5</span></span>

Between the Lord and you - As a mediator between you, according to your
desire. The word of the Lord - Not the ten commandments, which God
himself uttered, but the following statutes and judgments.

[Deuteronomy 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 5:7</span></span>

There being little said, concerning the spiritual sense of the Ten
Commandments, in the notes on the twentieth of Exodus, I think it
needful to add a few questions here, which the reader may answer between
God and his own soul. Thou shalt have none other gods before me - Hast
thou worshipped God in spirit and in truth? Hast thou proposed to
thyself no end besides him? Hath he been the end of all thy actions?
Hast thou sought for any other happiness, than the knowledge and love of
God? Dost thou experimentally know the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom he hath sent? Dost thou love God? Dost thou love him with all thy
heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy strength; so as to love
nothing else but in that manner and degree which tends to increase thy
love of him? Hast thou found happiness in God? Is he the desire of thine
eyes, the joy of thy heart? If not, thou hast other gods before him.

[Deuteronomy 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 5:8</span></span>

Thou shalt not make any graven image - Hast thou not formed any gross
image of God in thy mind? Hast thou always thought of him as a pure
spirit, whom no man hath seen, nor can see? And hast thou worshipped him
with thy body, as well as with thy spirit, seeing both of them are
God's?

[Deuteronomy 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 5:11</span></span>

Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain - Hast thou
never used the name of God, unless on solemn and weighty occasions? Hast
thou then used it with the deepest awe? Hast thou duly honoured his
word, his ordinances, his ministers? Hast thou considered all things as
they stand in relation to him, and seen God in all? Hast thou looked
upon heaven as God's throne? Up on earth as God's footstool? On every
thing therein as belonging to the great king? On every creature as full
of God?

[Deuteronomy 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 5:12</span></span>

Keep the sabbath - day, to sanctify it - Dost thou do no work on this
day, which can be done as well on another? Art thou peculiarly careful
on this day, to avoid all conversation, which does not tend to the
knowledge and love of God? Dost thou watch narrowly over all that are
within thy gates, that they too may keep it holy? And dost thou try
every possible means, to bring all men, wherever you are, to do the
same?

[Deuteronomy 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 5:16</span></span>

Honour thy father and mother - Hast thou not been irreverent or
undutiful to either? Hast thou not slighted their advice? Hast thou
chearfully obeyed all their lawful commands? Hast thou loved and
honoured their persons? Supplied their wants, and concealed their
infirmities? Hast thou wrestled for them with God in prayer? Hast thou
loved and honoured thy prince, and avoided as fire all speaking evil of
the ruler of thy people? Have ye that are servants done all things as
unto Christ? Not with eye - service, but in singleness of heart? Have ye
who are masters, behaved as parents to your servants, with all
gentleness and affection? Have ye all obeyed them that watch over your
souls, and esteemed them highly in love for their work's sake?

[Deuteronomy 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 5:17</span></span>

Thou shalt not kill - Have you not tempted any one, to what might
shorten his life? Have you tempted none to intemperance? Have you
suffered none to be intemperate under your roof, or in your company?
Have you done all you could in every place, to prevent intemperance of
all kinds! Are you guilty of no degree of self - murder? Do you never
eat or drink any thing because you like it, although you have reason to
believe, it is prejudicial to your health? Have you constantly done
whatever you had reason to believe was conducive to it? Have you not
hated your neighbour in your heart? Have you reproved him that committed
sin in your sight? If not, you have in God's account hated him, seeing
you suffered sin upon him. Have you loved all men as your own soul? As
Christ loved us? Have you done unto all men, as in like circumstances,
you would they should do to you? Have you done all in your power to help
your neighbours, enemies as well as friends? Have you laboured to
deliver every soul you could from sin and misery? Have you shewed that
you loved all men as yourself, by a constant, earnest endeavour, to fill
all places with holiness and happiness, with the knowledge and love of
God?

[Deuteronomy 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 5:18</span></span>

Neither shalt thou commit adultery - If thou hast not been guilty of any
act of uncleanness, hath thy heart conceived no unclean thought? Hast
thou not looked on a woman so as to lust after her? Hast thou not
betrayed thy own soul to temptation, by eating and drinking to the full,
by needless familiarities, by foolish talking, by levity of dress or
behaviour? Hast thou used all the means which scripture and reason
suggest, to prevent every kind and degree of unchastity? Hast thou
laboured, by watching, fasting, and prayer, to possess thy vessel in
sanctification and honour?

[Deuteronomy 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 5:19</span></span>

Neither shalt thou steal - Have you seriously considered, that these
houses, lands, money, or goods, which you are used to call your own, are
not your own, but belong to another, even God? Have you ever considered,
that God is the sole proprietor of heaven and earth? The true owner of
every thing therein? Have you considered, that he has only lent them to
you? That you are but a steward of your Lord's goods? And that he has
told you expressly the uses and purposes for which he intrusts you with
them? Namely, for the furnishing first yourselves, and then as many
others as you can, with the things needful for life and godliness? Have
you considered, that you have no right at all, to apply any part of them
to any other purpose? And that if you do, you are as much a robber of
God, as any can be a robber of you?

[Deuteronomy 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 5:20</span></span>

Neither shalt thou bear false witness against thy neighbour - Have you
not been guilty of evil - speaking? Of needlessly repeating the real
fault of your neighbour? If I see a man do an evil thing, and tell it to
another, unless from a full and clear conviction, that it is necessary
to mention it just then, for the glory of God, the safety or good of
some other person, or for the benefit of him that hath done amiss; and
unless I then do it only so far, as is necessary to these ends, that is
evil - speaking. O beware of this! It is scattering abroad arrows, fire
- brands, and death.

[Deuteronomy 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 5:21</span></span>

Neither shalt thou covet any thing that is thy neighbour's - The plain
meaning of this is, thou shalt not desire any thing that is not thy own,
any thing which thou hast not. Indeed why shouldst thou? God hath given
thee whatever tends to thy one end, holiness. Thou canst not deny it,
without making him a liar: and: when any thing else will tend thereto,
he will give thee that also. There is therefore no room to desire any
thing which thou hast not. Thou hast already every thing that is really
good for thee, wouldst thou have more money, more pleasure, more praise
still? Why this is not good for thee. God has told thee so, by
withholding it from thee. O give thyself up to his wise and gracious
disposal!

[Deuteronomy 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 5:22</span></span>

Out of the midst of the fire, of the cloud, and of the thick darkness -
That was a dispensation of terror, designed to make the gospel of grace
the more welcome, and to be a specimen of the terrors of the judgment -
day. He added no more - He ceased for that time to speak immediately,
and with that loud voice unto the people; for the rest were delivered to
Moses, and by him communicated unto them. This he did to shew the
preeminence of that law above the rest, and its everlasting obligation.

[Deuteronomy 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">deu 5:25</span></span>

Why should we die? - For though God hath for this season kept us alive,
yet we shall never be able to endure any farther discourse from him in
such a terrible manner, but shall certainly sink under the burden of it.

[Deuteronomy 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 5:26</span></span>

Flesh - Is here put for man in his frail, corruptible, and mortal state.

[Deuteronomy 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">deu 5:29</span></span>

O that there were such an heart in them! - A heart to fear God, and keep
his commandments forever! The God of heaven is truly and earnestly
desirous of the salvation of poor sinners. He has given abundant proof
that he is so: he gives us time and space to repent; by his mercies
invites us to repentance, and waiteth to be gracious: has sent his son
to redeem us, published a general offer of pardon, promised his spirit
to those that pray for him; and has said, yea and sworn, that he hath no
pleasure in the death of a sinner!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 6](deu006.md)

</div>
