<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu017)  [Next](deu019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 18:1</span></span>

His inheritance - The Lord's portion or inheritance, which God had
reserved to himself, as tithes and first fruits, and other oblations
distinct from those which were made by fire.

[Deuteronomy 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 18:3</span></span>

The maw - The Hebrew word here rendered maw or stomach, may have another
signification, and some render it the breast, others take it for the
part, which lies under the breast.

[Deuteronomy 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 18:6</span></span>

With all the desire of his mind - With full purpose to fix his abode,
and to spend his whole time and strength in the service of God. It
seems, the several priests were to come from their cities to the temple
by turns, before David's time; and it is certain they did so after it.
But if any of them were not contented with this attendance upon God in
his tabernacle, or temple, and desired more entirely and constantly to
devote himself to God's service there, he was permitted so to do,
because this was an eminent act of piety joined with self - denial, to
part with those great conveniences which he enjoyed in the city of his
possession.

[Deuteronomy 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 18:8</span></span>

Like portions - With their brethren who were in actual ministration: as
they share with them in the work, so shall they in the encouragements.
Beside that which cometh - The reason of this law was, because he that
waited on the altar, ought to live by the altar: and because it was fit
he should keep his money, wherewith he might redeem what he sold, if
afterwards he saw occasion for it. Mr. Henry adds a remarkable note
here: especially considering he wrote threescore years ago. "A hearty,
pious zeal to serve God and his church, tho' it may a little encroach
upon a settled order, and there may be somewhat in it that looks
irregular, yet ought to be gratified, and not discouraged. He that loves
dearly to be employed in the service of the sanctuary: in God's name let
him minster. He shall be as welcome to God as the Levites, whose course
it was to minister, and should be so to them."

[Deuteronomy 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 18:10</span></span>

Useth divination - Foretelleth things secret or to come, by unlawful
arts and practices. An observer of times - Superstitiously pronouncing
some days lucky, and others unlucky. Or, an observer of the clouds or
heavens, one that divineth by the motions of the clouds, by the stars,
or by the flying or chattering of birds, all which Heathens used to
observe. An inchanter - Or, a conjecturer, that discovers hidden things
by a superstitious use of words or ceremonies, by observation of water
or smoke or any contingencies. A witch - One that is in covenant with
the devil.

[Deuteronomy 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 18:11</span></span>

A charmer - One that charmeth serpents or other cattle. Or, a fortune -
teller, that foretelleth the events of men's lives by the conjunctions
of the stars. Spirits - Whom they call upon by certain words or rites. A
wizard - Heb. a knowing man, who by any forbidden way's undertakes the
revelation of secret things. A necromancer - One that calleth up and
enquireth of the dead.

[Deuteronomy 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 18:13</span></span>

Perfect - Sincerely and wholly his, seeking him and cleaving to him and
to his word alone, and therefore abhorring all commerce and
conversations with devils.

[Deuteronomy 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 18:14</span></span>

Hath not suffered thee so to do - Hath not suffered thee to follow these
superstitious and diabolical practices, as he hath suffered other
nations to do, but hath instructed thee better by his word and spirit,
and will more fully instruct thee by a great prophet.

[Deuteronomy 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 18:15</span></span>

Will raise up - Will produce and send into the world in due time. A
prophet like unto me - Christ was truly, and in all commendable parts
like him, in being both a prophet and a king and a priest and mediator,
in the excellency of his ministry and work, in the glory of his
miracles, in his familiar and intimate converse with God.

[Deuteronomy 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 18:19</span></span>

I will require it - I will punish him severely for it. The sad effect of
this threatning the Jews have felt for above sixteen hundred years
together.

[Deuteronomy 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 18:22</span></span>

If the thing - Which he gives as a sign of the truth of his prophecy.
The falsehood of his prediction shews him to be a false prophet.
Presumptuously - Impudently ascribing his own vain and lying fancies to
the God of truth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 19](deu019)

</div>
