<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc.md)  
  [Previous](pro031)  [Next](ecc002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001.md)

[Ecclesiastes 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ecc 1:1</span></span>

The preacher - Who was not only a king, but also a teacher of God's
people: who having sinned grievously in the eyes of all the world,
thought himself obliged to publish his repentance, and to give publick
warning to all, to avoid those rocks upon which he had split.

[Ecclesiastes 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ecc 1:2</span></span>

Vanity - Not only vain, but vanity in the abstract, which denotes
extreme vanity. Saith - Upon deep consideration and long experience, and
by Divine inspiration. This verse contains the general proposition,
which he intends particularly to demonstrate in the following book. All
- All worldly things. Is vanity - Not in themselves for they are God's
creatures and therefore good in their kinds, but in reference to that
happiness, which men seek and expect to find in them. So they are
unquestionably vain, because they are not what they seem to be, and
perform not what they promise, but instead of that are the occasions of
innumerable cares, and fears, and sorrows, and mischiefs. Nay, they are
not only vanity but vanity of vanities, the vainest vanity, vanity in
the highest degree. And this is redoubled, because the thing is certain,
beyond all possibility of dispute.

[Ecclesiastes 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ecc 1:3</span></span>

What profit - What real and abiding benefit? None at all. All is
unprofitable as to the attainment of that happiness which all men are
enquiring after. His labour - Heb. his toilsome labour, both of body and
mind in the pursuit of riches, or pleasures, or other earthly things.
Under the sun - In all worldly matters, which are usually transacted in
the day time, or by the light of the sun. By this restriction he implies
that the happiness which in vain is sought for in this lower world, is
really to be found in heavenly places and things.

[Ecclesiastes 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ecc 1:4</span></span>

Passeth - Men continue but for one, and that a short age, and then they
leave all their possessions, and therefore they cannot be happy here,
because happiness must needs be unchangeable and eternal; or else the
certain knowledge of the approaching loss of all these things will rob a
man of solid contentment in them. Abideth - Through all successive
generations of men; and therefore man is more mutable than the very
earth upon which he stands, and which, together with all the comforts
which he enjoyed in it, he leaves behind to be possessed by others.

[Ecclesiastes 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ecc 1:5</span></span>

The sun - The sun is in perpetual motion, rising, setting, and rising
again, and so constantly repeating its course in all succeeding days,
and years, and ages; and the like he observes concerning the winds and
rivers, [Ecc 1:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#006.md), and the design of
these similitudes seem to be; to shew the vanity of all worldly things,
and that man's mind can never be satisfied with them, because there is
nothing in the world but a constant repetition of the same things, which
is so irksome, that the consideration thereof hath made some persons
weary of their lives; and there is no new thing under the sun, as is
added in the foot of the account, [Ecc
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#009.md), which seems to be given us as a
key to understand the meaning of the foregoing passages. And this is
certain from experience that the things of this world are so narrow, and
the mind of man so vast, that there must be something new to satisfy the
mind; and even delightful things by too frequent repetition, are so far
from yielding satisfaction, that they grow tedious and troublesome.

[Ecclesiastes 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ecc 1:6</span></span>

The wind - The wind also sometimes blows from one quarter of the world,
and sometimes from another; successively returning to the same quarters
in which it had formerly been.

[Ecclesiastes 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ecc 1:7</span></span>

Is not full - So as to overflow the earth. Whereby also he intimates the
emptiness of mens minds, notwithstanding all the abundance of creature
comforts. Rivers come - Unto the earth in general, from whence they come
or flow into the sea, and to which they return by the reflux of the sea.
For he seems to speak of the visible and constant motion of the waters,
both to the sea and from it, and then to it again in a perpetual
reciprocation.

[Ecclesiastes 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ecc 1:8</span></span>

All things - Not only the sun, and winds, and rivers, but all other
creatures. Labour - They are in continual restlessness and change, never
abiding in the same state. Is not satisfied - As there are many things
in the world vexatious to men, so even those things which are
comfortable, are not satisfactory, but men are constantly desiring some
longer continuance or fuller enjoyment of them, or variety in them. The
eye and ear are here put for all the senses, because these are most
spiritual and refined, most curious and inquisitive, most capable of
receiving satisfaction, and exercised with more ease and pleasure than
the other senses.

[Ecclesiastes 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ecc 1:9</span></span>

There is - There is nothing in the world but a continued and tiresome
repetition of the same things. The nature and course of the beings and
affairs of the world, and the tempers of men, are the same that they
ever were and shall ever be; and therefore, because no man ever yet
received satisfaction from worldly things, it is vain for any person
hereafter to expect it. No new thing - In the nature of things, which
might give us hopes of attaining that satisfaction which hitherto things
have not afforded.

[Ecclesiastes 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ecc 1:11</span></span>

No remembrance - This seems to be added to prevent the objection, There
are many inventions and enjoyments unknown to former ages. To this he
answers, This objection is grounded only upon our ignorance of ancient
times which if we exactly knew or remembered, we should easily find
parallels to all present occurrences. There are many thousands of
remarkable speeches and actions done in this and the following ages
which neither are, nor ever will be, put into the publick records or
histories, and consequently must unavoidably be forgotten in succeeding
ages; and therefore it is just and reasonable to believe the same
concerning former ages.

[Ecclesiastes 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ecc 1:12</span></span>

I was king - Having asserted the vanity of all things in the general, he
now comes to prove his assertion in those particulars wherein men
commonly seek, and with greatest probability expect to find, true
happiness. He begins with secular wisdom. And to shew how competent a
judge he was of this matter, he lays down this character, That he was
the preacher, which implies eminent knowledge; and a king, who therefore
had all imaginable opportunities and advantages for the attainment of
happiness, and particularly for the getting of wisdom, by consulting all
sorts of books and men, by trying all manner of experiments; and no
ordinary king, but king over Israel, God's own people, a wise and an
happy people, whose king he was by God's special appointment and
furnished by God, with singular wisdom for that great trust; and whose
abode was in Jerusalem where were the house of God and the most wise and
learned of the priests attending upon it, and the seats of justice, and
colleges or assemblies of the wisest men of their nation. All these
concurring in him, which rarely do in any other men, make the argument
drawn from his experience more convincing.

[Ecclesiastes 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ecc 1:13</span></span>

I gave my heart - Which phrase denotes his serious and fixed purpose,
and his great industry in it. To search - To seek diligently and
accurately. By wisdom - By the help of that wisdom wherewith God had
endowed me. Concerning - Concerning all the works of God and men in this
lower world; the works of nature; the works of Divine providence; and
the works and depths of human policy. This travel - This difficult and
toilsome work of searching out these things, God hath inflicted as a
just punishment upon man for his eating of the tree of knowledge. To be
exercised - To employ themselves in the painful study of these things.

[Ecclesiastes 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ecc 1:14</span></span>

Seen - Diligently observed. Vanity - Not only unsatisfying, but also an
affliction or breaking to a man's spirit.

[Ecclesiastes 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ecc 1:15</span></span>

Crooked - All our knowledge serves only to discover our miseries, but is
utterly insufficient to remove them; it cannot rectify those disorders
which are either in our own hearts and lives, or in the men and things
of the world. Wanting - In our knowledge. Or, counted out to us from the
treasures of human learning. But what is wanting, will still be so. And
that which is wanting in our own knowledge, is so much that it cannot be
numbered. The more we know, the more we see of our own ignorance.

[Ecclesiastes 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ecc 1:16</span></span>

Communed - I considered within myself. Great - In wisdom. Have gotten -
As I had a large stock of wisdom infused into me by God, so I have
greatly improved it by conversation, and study, and experience. Than all
- Whether governors, or priests, or private persons. In Jerusalem -
Which was then the most eminent place in the world for wisdom.

[Ecclesiastes 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ecc 1:17</span></span>

To know - That I might throughly understand the nature and difference of
truth and error, of virtue and vice.

[Ecclesiastes 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ecc 1:18</span></span>

Grief - Or, displeasure within himself, and against his present
condition. Sorrow - Which he does many ways, because he gets his
knowledge with hard and wearisome labour, both of mind and body, with
the consumption of his spirits, and shortening of his life; because he
is often deceived with knowledge falsely so called, and often mistakes
error for truth, and is perplexed with manifold doubts, from which
ignorant men are wholly free; because he hath the clearer prospect into,
and quicker sense of his own ignorance, and infirmities, and disorders,
and withal how vain and ineffectual all his knowledge is for the
prevention or removal of them; and because his knowledge is very
imperfect and unsatisfying, yet increasing his thirst after more
knowledge; lastly, because his knowledge quickly fades and dies with
him, and then leaves him in no better, and possibly in a much worse
condition than the meanest and most unlearned man in the world.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 2](ecc002.md)

</div>
