<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ephesians Index](eph.md)  
  [Previous](eph003)  [Next](eph005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001.md)

[Ephesians 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eph 4:1</span></span>

I therefore, the prisoner of the Lord - Imprisoned for his sake and for
your sakes; for the sake of the gospel which he had preached amongst
them. This was therefore a powerful motive to them to comfort him under
it by their obedience.

[Ephesians 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eph 4:3</span></span>

Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit - That mutual union and
harmony, which is a fruit of the Spirit. The bond of peace is love.

[Ephesians 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eph 4:4</span></span>

There is one body - The universal church, all believers throughout the
world. One Spirit, one Lord, one God and Father - The ever - blessed
Trinity. One hope - Of heaven.

[Ephesians 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eph 4:5</span></span>

One outward baptism.

[Ephesians 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eph 4:6</span></span>

One God and Father of all - That believe. Who is above all - Presiding
over all his children, operating through them all by Christ, and
dwelling in all by his Spirit.

[Ephesians 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eph 4:7</span></span>

According to the measure of the gift of Christ - According as Christ is
pleased to give to each.

[Ephesians 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eph 4:8</span></span>

Wherefore he saith - That is, in reference to which God saith by David,
Having ascended on high, he led captivity captive - He triumphed over
all his enemies, Satan, sin, and death, which had before enslaved all
the world: alluding to the custom of ancient conquerors, who led those
they had conquered in chains after them. And, as they also used to give
donatives to the people, at their return from victory, so he gave gifts
to men - Both the ordinary and extraordinary gifts of the Spirit. [Psa
68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018.md).

[Ephesians 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eph 4:9</span></span>

Now this expression, He ascended, what is it, but that he descended -
That is, does it not imply, that he descended first? Certainly it does,
on the supposition of his being God. Otherwise it would not: since all
the saints will ascend to heaven, though none of them descended thence.
Into the lower parts of the earth - So the womb is called, [Psa
139:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#015.md); the grave, [Psa
63:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#009.md).

[Ephesians 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eph 4:10</span></span>

He that descended - That thus amazingly humbled himself. Is the same
that ascended - That was so highly exalted. That he might fill all
things - The whole church, with his Spirit, presence, and operations.

[Ephesians 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eph 4:11</span></span>

And, among other his free gifts, he gave some apostles - His chief
ministers and special witnesses, as having seen him after his
resurrection, and received their commission immediately from him. And
same prophets, and some evangelists - A prophet testifies of things to
come; an evangelist of things past: and that chiefly by preaching the
gospel before or after any of the apostles. All these were extraordinary
officers. The ordinary were. Some pastors - Watching over their several
flocks. And some teachers - Whether of the same or a lower order, to
assist them, as occasion might require.

[Ephesians 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eph 4:12</span></span>

In this verse is noted the office of ministers; in [Eph
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013.md), the aim of the saints; in [Eph
4:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014.md), the way of growing in grace.
And each of these has three parts, standing in the same order. For the
perfecting the saints - The completing them both in number and their
various gifts and graces. To the work of the ministry - The serving God
and his church in their various ministrations. To the edifying of the
body of Christ - The building up this his mystical body in faith, love,
holiness.

[Ephesians 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eph 4:13</span></span>

Till we all - And every one of us. Come to the unity of the faith, and
knowledge of the Son of God - To both an exact agreement in the
Christian doctrine, and an experimental knowledge of Christ as the Son
of God. To a perfect man - To a state of spiritual manhood both in
understanding and strength. To the measure of the stature of the fulness
of Christ - To that maturity of age and spiritual stature wherein we
shall be filled with Christ, so that he will be all in all.

[Ephesians 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eph 4:14</span></span>

Fluctuating to and fro - From within, even when there is no wind. And
carried about with every wind - From without; when we are assaulted by
others, who are unstable as the wind. By the sleight of men - By their
"cogging the dice;" so the original word implies.

[Ephesians 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eph 4:15</span></span>

Into him - Into his image and Spirit, and into a full union with him.

[Ephesians 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eph 4:16</span></span>

From whom the whole mystical body fitly joined together - All the parts
being fitted for and adapted to each other, and most exactly harmonizing
with the whole. And compacted - Knit and cemented together with the
utmost firmness. Maketh increase by that which every joint supplieth -
Or by the mutual help of every joint. According to the effectual working
in the measure of every member - According as every member in its
measure effectually works for the support and growth of the whole. A
beautiful allusion to the human body, composed of different joints and
members, knit together by various ligaments, and furnished with vessels
of communication from the head to every part.

[Ephesians 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eph 4:17</span></span>

This therefore I say - He returns thither where he begun, [Eph
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001.md). And testify in the Lord - In the
name and by the authority of the Lord Jesus. In the vanity of their mind
- Having lost the knowledge of the true God, [Rom
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021.md). This is the root of all evil
walking.

[Ephesians 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eph 4:18</span></span>

Having their understanding darkened, through the ignorance that is in
them - So that they are totally void of the light of God, neither have
they any knowledge of his will. Being alienated from the life of God -
Utter strangers to the divine, the spiritual life. Through the hardness
of their hearts - Callous and senseless. And where there is no sense,
there can be no life.

[Ephesians 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eph 4:19</span></span>

Who being past feeling - The original word is peculiarly significant. It
properly means, past feeling pain. Pain urges the sick to seek a remedy,
which, where there is no pain, is little thought of. Have given
themselves up - Freely, of their own accord. Lasciviousness is but one
branch of uncleanness, which implies impurity of every kind.

[Ephesians 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eph 4:20</span></span>

But ye have not so learned Christ - That is, ye cannot act thus, now ye
know him, since you know the Christian dispensation allows of no sin.

[Ephesians 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eph 4:21</span></span>

Seeing ye have heard him - Teaching you inwardly by his Spirit. As the
truth is in Jesus - According to his own gospel.

[Ephesians 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eph 4:22</span></span>

The old man - That is, the whole body of sin. All sinful desires are
deceitful; promising the happiness which they cannot give.

[Ephesians 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eph 4:23</span></span>

The spirit of your mind - The very ground of your heart.

[Ephesians 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eph 4:24</span></span>

The new man - Universal holiness. After - In the very image of God.

[Ephesians 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eph 4:25</span></span>

Wherefore - Seeing ye are thus created anew, walk accordingly, in every
particular. For we are members one of another - To which intimate union
all deceit is quite repugnant.

[Ephesians 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eph 4:26</span></span>

Be ye angry, and sin not - That is, if ye are angry, take heed ye sin
not. Anger at sin is not evil; but we should feel only pity to the
sinner. If we are angry at the person, as well as the fault, we sin. And
how hardly do we avoid it. Let not the sun go down upon your wrath -
Reprove your brother, and be reconciled immediately. Lose not one day. A
clear, express command. Reader, do you keep it?

[Ephesians 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">eph 4:27</span></span>

Neither give place to the devil - By any delay.

[Ephesians 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">eph 4:28</span></span>

But rather let him labour - Lest idleness lead him to steal again. And
whoever has sinned in any kind ought the more zealously to practise the
opposite virtue. That he may have to give - And so be no longer a burden
and nuisance, but a blessing, to his neighbours.

[Ephesians 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">eph 4:29</span></span>

But that which is good - Profitable to the speaker and hearers. To the
use of edifying - To forward them in repentance, faith, or holiness.
That it may minister grace - Be a means of conveying more grace into
their hearts. Hence we learn, what discourse is corrupt, as it were
stinking in the nostrils of God; namely, all that is not profitable, not
edifying, not apt to minister grace to the hearers.

[Ephesians 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">eph 4:30</span></span>

Grieve not the Holy Spirit - By any disobedience. Particularly by
corrupt discourse; or by any of the following sins. Do not force him to
withdraw from you, as a friend does whom you grieve by unkind behaviour.
The day of redemption - That is, the day of judgment, in which our
redemption will be completed.

[Ephesians 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">eph 4:31</span></span>

Let all bitterness - The height of settled anger, opposite to kindness,
[Eph 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#032.md). And wrath - Lasting
displeasure toward the ignorant, and them that are out of the way,
opposite to tenderheartedness. And anger - The very first risings of
disgust at those that injure you, opposite to forgiving one another. And
clamour - Or bawling. "I am not angry," says one; "but it is my way to
speak so." Then unlearn that way: it is the way to hell. And evil
speaking - Be it in ever so mild and soft a tone, or with ever such
professions of kindness. Here is a beautiful retrogradation, beginning
with the highest, and descending to the lowest, degree of the want of
love.

[Ephesians 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">eph 4:32</span></span>

As God, showing himself kind and tenderhearted in the highest degree,
hath forgiven you.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Chapter 5](eph005.md)

</div>
