<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ephesians Index](eph.md)  
  [Previous](eph001)  [Next](eph003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001.md)

[Ephesians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eph 2:1</span></span>

And he hath quickened you - In [Eph
1:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#019.md), St. Paul spoke of God's
working in them by the same almighty power whereby he raised Christ from
the dead. On the mention of this he, in the fulness of his heart, runs
into a flow of thought concerning the glory of Christ's exaltation in
the three following verses. He here resumes the thread of his discourse.
Who were dead - Not only diseased, but dead; absolutely void of all
spiritual life; and as incapable of quickening yourselves, as persons
literally dead. In trespasses and sins - Sins seem to be spoken chiefly
of the gentiles, who knew not God; trespasses, of the Jews, who had his
law, and yet regarded it not, [Eph
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#005.md). The latter herein obeyed the
flesh; the former, the prince of the power of the air.

[Ephesians 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eph 2:2</span></span>

According to the course of this world - The word translated course
properly means a long series of times, wherein one corrupt age follows
another. According to the prince of the power of the air - The effect of
which power all may perceive, though all do not understand the cause of
it: a power unspeakably penetrating and widely diffused; but yet, as to
its baneful influences, beneath the orb of believers. The evil spirits
are united under one head, the seat of whose dominion is in the air.
Here he sometimes raises storms, sometimes makes visionary
representations, and is continually roving to and fro. The spirit that
now worketh - With mighty power; and so he did, and doth in all ages. In
the sons of disobedience - In all who do not believe and obey the
gospel.

[Ephesians 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eph 2:3</span></span>

Among whom we - Jews. Also, formerly had our conversation: doing the
will of the flesh - In gross, brutal sins. And of the mind - By
spiritual, diabolical wickedness. In the former clause, flesh denotes
the whole evil nature; in the latter, the body opposed to the soul. And
were by nature - That is, in our natural state. Children of wrath -
Having the wrath of God abiding on us, even as the gentiles. This
expression, by nature, occurs also, [Gal
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#008.md); [Rom
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#014.md); and thrice in [Rom
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#024.md). But in none of these places
does it signify, by custom, or practice, or customary practice, as a
late writer affirms. Nor can it mean so here For this would make the
apostle guilty of gross tautology, their customary sinning having been
expressed already, in the former part of the verse. But all these
passages agree in expressing what belongs to the nature of the persons
spoken of.

[Ephesians 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eph 2:4</span></span>

Mercy removes misery: love confers salvation.

[Ephesians 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eph 2:5</span></span>

He hath quickened us together with Christ - In conformity to him, and by
virtue of our union with him. By grace ye are saved - Grace is both the
beginning and end. The apostle speaks indifferently either in the first
or second person; the Jews and gentiles being in the same circumstance,
both by nature and by grace. This text lays the axe to the very root of
spiritual pride, and all glorying in ourselves. Therefore St. Paul,
foreseeing the backwardness of mankind to receive it, yet knowing the
absolute necessity of its being received, again asserts the very same
truth, [Eph 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#008.md), in the very same
words.

[Ephesians 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eph 2:6</span></span>

And hath raised us up together - Both Jews and gentiles already in
spirit; and ere long our bodies too will be raised. And made us all sit
together in heavenly places - This is spoken by way of anticipation.
Believers are not yet possessed of their seats in heaven; but each of
them has a place prepared for him.

[Ephesians 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eph 2:7</span></span>

The ages to come - That is, all succeeding ages.

[Ephesians 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eph 2:8</span></span>

By grace ye are saved through faith - Grace, without any respect to
human worthiness, confers the glorious gift. Faith, with an empty hand,
and without any pretence to personal desert, receives the heavenly
blessing. And this is not of yourselves - This refers to the whole
preceding clause, That ye are saved through faith, is the gift of God.

[Ephesians 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eph 2:9</span></span>

Not by works - Neither this faith nor this salvation is owing to any
works you ever did, will, or can do.

[Ephesians 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eph 2:10</span></span>

For we are his workmanship - Which proves both that salvation is by
faith, and that faith is the gift of God. Created unto good works - That
afterwards we might give ourselves to them. Which God had before
preprepared - The occasions of them: so we must still ascribe the whole
to God. That we might walk in them - Though not be justified by them.

[Ephesians 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eph 2:11</span></span>

Wherefore remember - Such a remembrance strengthens faith, and increases
gratitude. That ye being formerly gentiles in the flesh - Neither
circumcised in body nor in spirit. Who were accordingly called the
uncircumcision - By way of reproach. By that which is called the
circumcision - By those who call themselves the circumcised, and think
this a proof that they are the people of God; and who indeed have that
outward circumcision which is performed by hands in the flesh.

[Ephesians 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eph 2:12</span></span>

Were at that time without Christ - Having no faith in, or knowledge of,
him. Being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel - Both as to their
temporal privileges and spiritual blessings. And strangers to the
covenants of promise - The great promise in both the Jewish and
Christian covenant was the Messiah. Having no hope - Because they had no
promise whereon to ground their hope. And being without God - Wholly
ignorant of the true God, and so in effect atheists. Such in truth are,
more or less, all men, in all ages, till they know God by the teaching
of his own Spirit. In the world - The wide, vain world, wherein ye
wandered up and down, unholy and unhappy.

[Ephesians 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eph 2:13</span></span>

Far off - From God and his people. Nigh - Intimately united to both.

[Ephesians 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eph 2:14</span></span>

For he is our peace - Not only as he purchased it, but as he is the very
bond and centre of union. He who hath made both - Jews and gentiles, one
church. The apostle describes, The conjunction of the gentiles with
Israel, [Eph 2:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014.md). And, The
conjunction of both with God, [Eph
2:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#015.md). Each description is
subdivided into two parts. And the former part of the one, concerning
abolishing the enmity, answers the former part of the other; the latter
part of the one, concerning the evangelical decrees, the latter part of
the other. And hath broken down the middle wall of partition - Alluding
to that wall of old, which separated the court of Israel from the court
of the gentiles. Such a wall was the ceremonial law, which Christ had
now taken away.

[Ephesians 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eph 2:15</span></span>

Having abolished by his suffering in the flesh the cause of enmity
between the Jews and gentiles, even the law of ceremonial commandments,
through his decrees - Which offer mercy to all; see [Col
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014.md). That he might form the two - Jew
and gentile. Into one new man - one mystical body.

[Ephesians 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eph 2:16</span></span>

In one body - One church. Having slain - By his own death on the cross.
The enmity - Which had been between sinners and God.

[Ephesians 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eph 2:17</span></span>

And he came - After his resurrection. And preached peace - By his
ministers and his Spirit. To you - Gentiles. That were afar off - At the
utmost distance from God. And to them that were nigh - To the Jews, who
were comparatively nigh, being his visible church.

[Ephesians 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eph 2:18</span></span>

For through him, we both - Jews and gentiles. Have access - Liberty of
approaching, by the guidance and aid of one Spirit to God as our Father.
Christ, the Spirit, and the Father, the three - one God, stand
frequently in the same order.

[Ephesians 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eph 2:19</span></span>

Therefore ye are no longer strangers, but citizens of the heavenly
Jerusalem; no longer foreigners, but received into the very family of
God.

[Ephesians 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eph 2:20</span></span>

And are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets - As the
foundation sustains the building, so the word of God, declared by the
apostles and prophets, sustains the faith of all believers. God laid the
foundation by them; but Christ himself is the chief corner - stone of
the foundation. Elsewhere he is termed the foundation itself, [Co1
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011.md).

[Ephesians 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eph 2:21</span></span>

On whom all the building fitly framed together - The whole fabric of the
universal church rises up like a great pile of living materials. Into an
holy temple in the Lord - Dedicated to Christ, and inhabited by him, in
which he displays his presence, and is worshipped and glorified. What is
the temple of Diana of the Ephesians, whom ye formerly worshipped, to
this?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Chapter 3](eph003.md)

</div>
