<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ephesians Index](eph.md)  
  [Previous](eph005)  [Next](phi001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001.md)

[Ephesians 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eph 6:1</span></span>

Children, obey your parents - In all things lawful. The will of the
parent is a law to the child. In the Lord - For his sake. For this is
right - Manifestly just and reasonable.

[Ephesians 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eph 6:2</span></span>

Honour - That is, love, reverence, obey, assist, in all things. The
mother is particularly mentioned, as being more liable to be slighted
than the father. Which is the first commandment with a promise - For the
promise implied in the second commandment does not belong to the keeping
that command in particular, but the whole law. [Exo
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#012.md)

[Ephesians 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eph 6:3</span></span>

That thou mayest live long upon the earth - This is usually fulfilled to
eminently dutiful children; and he who lives long and well has a long
seed - time for the eternal harvest. But this promise, in the Christian
dispensation, is to be understood chiefly in a more exalted and
Spiritual sense.

[Ephesians 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eph 6:4</span></span>

And, ye fathers - Mothers are included; but fathers are named, as being
more apt to be stern and severe. Provoke not your children to wrath - Do
not needlessly fret or exasperate them. But bring them up - With all
tenderness and mildness. In the instruction and discipline of the Lord -
Both in Christian knowledge and practice.

[Ephesians 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eph 6:5</span></span>

Your masters according to the flesh - According to the present state of
things: afterward the servant is free from his master. With fear and
trembling - A proverbial expression, implying the utmost care and
diligence. In singleness of heart - With a single eye to the providence
and will of God.

[Ephesians 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eph 6:6</span></span>

Not with eye - service - Serving them better when under their eye than
at other times. But doing the will of God from the heart - Doing
whatever you do, as the will of God, and with your might.

[Ephesians 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eph 6:7</span></span>

Unto the Lord, and not to men - That is, rather than to men; and by
making every action of common life a sacrifice to God; having an eye to
him in all things, even as if there were no other master.

[Ephesians 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eph 6:8</span></span>

He shall receive the same - That is, a full and adequate recompence for
it.

[Ephesians 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eph 6:9</span></span>

Do the same things to them - That is, act toward them from the same
principle. Forbearing threatening - Behaving with gentleness and
humanity, not in a harsh or domineering way.

[Ephesians 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eph 6:10</span></span>

Brethren - This is the only place in this epistle where he uses this
compellation. Soldiers frequently use it to each other in the field. Be
strong - Nothing less will suffice for such a fight: to be weak, and
remain so, is the way to perish. In the power of his might - A very
uncommon expression, plainly denoting what great assistance we need as
if his might would not do, it must be the powerful exertion of his
might.

[Ephesians 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eph 6:11</span></span>

Put on the whole armour of God - The Greek word means a complete suit of
armour. Believers are said to put on the girdle, breastplate, shoes; to
take the shield of faith, and sword of the Spirit. The whole armour - As
if the armour would scarce do, it must be the whole armour. This is
repeated, [Eph 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#013.md), because of the
strength and subtilty of our adversaries, and because of an "evil day"
of sore trial being at hand.

[Ephesians 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eph 6:12</span></span>

For our wrestling is not only, not chiefly, against flesh and blood -
Weak men, or fleshly appetites. But against principalities, against
powers - The mighty princes of all the infernal legions. And great is
their power, and that likewise of those legions whom they command.
Against the rulers of the world - Perhaps these principalities and
powers remain mostly in the citadel of their kingdom of darkness. But
there are other evil spirits who range abroad, to whom the provinces of
the world are committed. Of the darkness - This is chiefly spiritual
darkness. Of this age - Which prevails during the present state of
things. Against wicked spirits - Who continually oppose faith, love,
holiness, either by force or fraud; and labour to infuse unbelief,
pride, idolatry malice, envy, anger, hatred. In heavenly places - Which
were once their abode, and which they still aspire to, as far as they
are permitted.

[Ephesians 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eph 6:13</span></span>

In the evil day - The war is perpetual; but the fight is one day less,
another more, violent. The evil day is either at the approach of death,
or in life; may be longer or shorter and admits of numberless varieties.
And having done all, to stand - That ye may still keep on your armour,
still stand upon your guard, still watch and pray; and thus ye will be
enabled to endure unto the end, and stand with joy before the face of
the Son of Man.

[Ephesians 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eph 6:14</span></span>

Having your loins girt about - That ye may be ready for every motion.
With truth - Not only with the truths of the gospel, but with "truth in
the inward parts;" for without this all our knowledge of divine truth
will prove but a poor girdle "in the evil day." So our Lord is
described, [Isa 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#005.md). And as a girded
man is always ready to go on, so this seems to intimate an obedient
heart, a ready will. Our Lord adds to the loins girded, the lights
burning, [Luk 12:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#035.md); showing that
watching and ready obedience are the inseparable companions of faith and
love. And having on the breastplate of righteousness - The righteousness
of a spotless purity, in which Christ will present us faultless before
God, through the merit of his own blood. With this breastplate our Lord
is described, [Isa 59:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#017.md). In the
breast is the seat of conscience, which is guarded by righteousness. No
armour for the back is mentioned. We are always to face our enemies.

[Ephesians 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eph 6:15</span></span>

And your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel - Let this be
always ready to direct and confirm you in every step. This part of the
armour, for the feet, is needful, considering what a journey we have to
go; what a race to run. Our feet must be so shod, that our footsteps
slip not. To order our life and conversation aright, we are prepared by
the gospel blessing, the peace and love of God ruling in the heart, [Col
3:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#014.md). By this only can we tread the
rough ways, surmount our difficulties, and hold out to the end.

[Ephesians 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eph 6:16</span></span>

Above or over all - As a sort of universal covering to every other part
of the armour itself, continually exercise a strong and lively faith.
This you may use as a shield, which will quench all the fiery darts, the
furious temptations, violent and sudden injections of the devil.

[Ephesians 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eph 6:17</span></span>

And take for an helmet the hope of salvation - [Th1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#008.md). The head is that part which is
most carefully to be defended. One stroke here may prove fatal. The
armour for this is the hope of salvation. The lowest degree of this hope
is a confidence that God will work the whole work of faith in us; the
highest is a full assurance of future glory, added to the experimental
knowledge of pardoning love. Armed with this helmet, the hope of the joy
set before him, Christ "endured the cross, and despised the shame," [Heb
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002.md). And the sword of the Spirit, the
word of God - This Satan cannot withstand, when it is edged and wielded
by faith. Till now our armour has been only defensive. But we are to
attack Satan, as well as secure ourselves; the shield in one hand, and
the sword in the other. Whoever fights with the powers of hell will need
both. He that is covered with armour from head to foot, and neglects
this, will be foiled after all. This whole description shows us how
great a thing it is to be a Christian. The want of any one thing makes
him incomplete. Though he has his loins girt with truth, righteousness
for a breastplate, his feet shod with the preparation of the gospel, the
shield of faith, the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit;
yet one thing he wants after all. What is that? It follows,

[Ephesians 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eph 6:18</span></span>

Praying always - At all times, and on every occasion, in midst of all
employments, inwardly praying without ceasing. By the Spirit - Through
the influence of the Holy Spirit. With all prayer - With all sort of
prayer, public, private, mental, vocal. Some are careful in respect of
one kind of prayer, and negligent in others. If we would have the
petitions we ask, let us use all. Some there are who use only mental
prayer or ejaculations, and think they are in a state of grace, and use
a way of worship, far superior to any other: but such only fancy
themselves to be above what is really above them; it requiring far more
grace to be enabled to pour out a fervent and continued prayer, than to
offer up mental aspirations. And supplication - Repeating and urging our
prayer, as Christ did in the garden. And watching - Inwardly attending
on God, to know his will, to gain power to do it, and to attain to the
blessings we desire. With all perseverance - Continuing to the end in
this holy exercise. And supplication for all the saints - Wrestling in
fervent, continued intercession for others, especially for the faithful,
that they may do all the will of God, and be steadfast to the end.
Perhaps we receive few answers to prayer, because we do not intercede
enough for others.

[Ephesians 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eph 6:19</span></span>

By the opening my mouth - Removing every inward and every outward
hinderance.

[Ephesians 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eph 6:20</span></span>

An ambassador in bonds - The ambassadors of men usually appear in great
pomp. How differently does the ambassador of Christ appear!

[Ephesians 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eph 6:21</span></span>

Ye also - As well as others.

[Ephesians 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eph 6:22</span></span>

That he might comfort your hearts - By relating the supports I find from
God, and the success of the gospel.

[Ephesians 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eph 6:23</span></span>

Peace - This verse recapitulates the whole epistle.

[Ephesians 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eph 6:24</span></span>

In sincerity - Or in incorruption; without corrupting his genuine
gospel, without any mixture of corrupt affections. And that with
continuance, till grace issue in glory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians Chapter 1](phi001.md)

</div>
