<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo004)  [Next](exo006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#001.md)

[Exodus 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 5:1</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Let my people go - Moses, in treating
with the elders of Israel, is directed to call God the God of their
fathers; but, in treating with Pharaoh, they call him the God of Israel,
and it is the first time we find him called so in scripture. He is
called the God of Israel, the person, [Gen
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#020.md), but here it is Israel the
people. They are just beginning to be formed into a people when God is
called their God. Let my people go - They were God's people, and
therefore Pharaoh ought not to detain them in bondage. And he expected
services and sacrifices from them, and therefore they must have leave to
go where they could freely exercise their religion, without giving
offence to, or receiving offence from, the Egyptians.

[Exodus 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 5:2</span></span>

Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice? - Being summoned to
surrender, he thus hangs out the flag of defiance. Who is Jehovah? I
neither know him nor care for him; neither value nor fear him. It is a
hard name that he never heard of before, but he resolves it shall be no
bugbear to him. Israel was now a despised, oppressed people, and by the
character they bore he makes his estimate of their God, and concludes
that he made no better figure among the gods, than his people did among
the nations.

[Exodus 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 5:3</span></span>

We pray thee, let us go three days journey into the desert - And that on
a good errand, and unexceptionable: we will sacrifice to the Lord our
God - As other people do to theirs; lest if we quite cast off his
worship, he fall upon us - With one judgment or other, and then Pharaoh
will lose his vassals.

[Exodus 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 5:5</span></span>

The people are many - Therefore your injury to me is the greater, in
attempting to make them rest from their labours.

[Exodus 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 5:6</span></span>

The task - masters, were Egyptians, the officers were Israelites
employed under them.

[Exodus 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 5:7</span></span>

Straw - To mix with the clay, or to burn the brick with.

[Exodus 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 5:8</span></span>

They are idle - The cities they built for Pharaoh, were witnesses for
them that they were not idle; yet he thus basely misrepresents them,
that he might have a pretence to increase their burdens.

[Exodus 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 5:9</span></span>

Vain words - Those of Moses and Aaron.

[Exodus 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 5:14</span></span>

In thy own people - For if they had given us straw, we should have
fulfilled our task.

[Exodus 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 5:21</span></span>

The Lord look upon you, and judge - They should have humbled themselves
before God, but instead of that they fly in the face of their best
friends. Those that are called to public service for God and their
generation, must expect to be tried not only by the threats of proud
enemies, but by the unjust and unkind censures of unthinking friends. To
put a sword in their hand to slay us - To give them the occasion they
have long sought for.

[Exodus 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 5:22</span></span>

He expostulated with him. He knew not how to reconcile the providence
with the promise, and the commission he had received. Is this God's
coming down to deliver Israel? Must I who hoped to be a blessing to them
become a scourge to them? By this attempt to get them out of the pit,
they are but sunk the farther into it. Wherefore hast thou so evil
entreated this people - Even when God is coming towards his people in
ways of mercy, yet sometimes he takes such methods that they may think
themselves but ill - treated: when they think so, they should go to God
by prayer, and that is the way to have better treatment in God's good
time. Why is it that thou hast sent me - Pharaoh has done evil to this
people, and not one step seems to be taken towards their deliverance. It
cannot but sit very heavy upon the spirits of those whom God employs for
him, to see that their labour doth no good, and much more to see that it
doth hurt, eventually, though not designedly.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 6](exo006.md)

</div>
