<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo027)  [Next](exo029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#001)

[Exodus 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 28:1</span></span>

Aaron and his sons - Hitherto every master of a family was priest to his
own family. But now the families of Israel began to be incorporated into
a nation, and a tabernacle of the congregation was to be erected, as a
visible centre of their unity, it was requisite there should be a
publick priesthood instituted. Moses, who had hitherto officiated, and
is therefore reckoned among the priests of the Lord, [Psa
99:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#006), had enough to do as their
prophet, to consult the oracle for them, and as their prince, to judge
among them. Nor was he desirous to ingross all the honours to himself,
or to entail that of the priesthood, which alone was hereditary, upon
his own family; but was very well pleased to see his brother Aaron
invested with this office, and his sons after him; while (how great
soever he was) his sons after him would be but common Levites. It is an
instance of the humility of that great man, and an evidence of his
sincere regard to the glory of God, that he had so little regard to the
preferment of his own family. Aaron, that had humbly served as a prophet
to his younger brother Moses, and did not decline the office, is now
advanced to be a priest to God. God had said to Israel in general, that
they should be to him a kingdom of priests; but because it was requisite
that those who ministered at the altar should give themselves wholly to
the service, God here chose from among them one to be a family of
priests, the father and his four sons; and from Aaron's loins descended
all the priests of the Jewish church, whom we read of both in the Old
Testament and in the New.

[Exodus 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 28:2</span></span>

The priests garments were made for glory and beauty - Some of the
richest materials were to be provided, and the belt artists employed in
making them, whose skill God, by a special gift, would improve to a very
high degree. Eminency, even in common arts, is a gift of God; it comes
from him, and, ought to be used for him. The garments appointed were,
Four, which both the high - priest and the inferior priests wore, viz.
The linen breeches, the linen coat, the linen girdle which fastened it
to them, and the bonnet; that which the high - priest wore is called a
mitre. Four more which were peculiar to the high - priest, the ephod,
with the curious girdle of it, the breast - plate of judgment, the long
robe, and the golden plate on his forehead. These glorious garments,
were appointed, That the priests themselves might be minded of the
dignity of their office. That the people might thereby be possessed with
a holy reverence of that God whose ministers appeared in such grandeur.
That the priests might be types of Christ, and of all Christians who
have the beauty of holiness put upon them.

[Exodus 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 28:6</span></span>

The ephod, was the outmost garment of the high - priest; linen ephods
were worn by the inferior priests, but this, which the high - priest
wore, was called a golden ephod, because there was a great deal of gold
woven into it. It was a short coat without sleeves, buttoned close to
him with a curious girdle of the same stuff. The shoulder pieces were
buttoned together with two precious stones set in gold, one on each
shoulder. In allusion to this, Christ our high priest appeared to John,
girt about the paps with a golden girdle, such as was the curious girdle
of the ephod, [Rev 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013). Righteousness
is the girdle of his loins. He is girt with strength for the work of our
salvation. And as Aaron had the names of all Israel upon his shoulders
in precious stones, so He presents to himself and to his Father a
glorious church, [Eph 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027). He bears
them before the Lord for a memorial, in token of his appearing before
God as the representative of all Israel, and an advocate for them.

[Exodus 28:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 28:11</span></span>

Ouches - Hollow places, such as are made in gold rings, to receive and
hold the precious stones.

[Exodus 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 28:15</span></span>

The most considerable of the ornaments of the high priest was this
breast - plate, a rich piece of cloth curiously wrought with gold and
purple, two spans long, and a span broad; so that, being doubled, it was
a span square. In this breast - plate, the tribes of Israel were
recommended to God's favour in twelve precious stones. Some question
whether Levi had a precious stone with his name on or no; if not Ephraim
and Manasseh were reckoned distinct, as Jacob had said they should be,
and the high priest himself being head of the tribe of Levi,
sufficiently represented that tribe. Aaron was to bear their names for a
memorial before the Lord continually, being ordained for men, to
represent them in things pertaining to God; herein typifying our great
High Priest, who always appears in the presence of God for us. The name
of each tribe was engraven in a precious stone, to signify how precious,
in God's sight, believers are, and how honourable, [Isa
43:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#004). The high priest had the names of
the tribes both on his shoulders and on his breast, noting both the
power and the love with which our Lord Jesus interceeds for us. How near
should Christ's name lie to our hearts, since he is pleased to lay our
names so near his? And what a comfort is it to us, in all our addresses
to God, that the great High Priest of our profession has the names of
all his Israel upon his breast, before the Lord, for a memorial,
presenting them to God?

[Exodus 28:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">exo 28:30</span></span>

The Urim and Thummim - By which the will of God was made known in
doubtful cases, was put in this breast - plate, which is therefore
called the breast - plate of judgment. Urim and Thummim signify light
and integrity: many conjectures there are among the learned what they
were: we have no reason to think they were any thing that Moses was to
make, more than what was before ordered; so that either God made them
himself, and gave them to Moses, for him to put into the breast - plate
when other things were prepared; or, no more is meant but a declaration
of the farther use of what was already ordered to be made. The words may
be read thus, And thou shalt give, or add, to the breast - plate of
judgment, the illuminations and perfections, and they shall be upon the
heart of Aaron - That is, he shall be endued with a power of knowing and
making known the mind of God in all difficult cases relating either to
the civil or ecclesiastical state. Their government was a theocracy; God
was their king, the high priest was, under God, their ruler, this Urim
and Thummim were his cabinet council: probably Moses wrote upon the
breast - plate, or wove into it, these words, Urim and Thummim, to
signify, that the high - priest, having on him this breast - plate, and
asking council of God in any emergency, should be directed to those
measures, which God would own. If he were standing before the ark,
probably he received instructions from off the mercy - seat, as Moses
did, [Exo 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#022). If he were at a
distance from the ark, as Abiathar was when he enquired of the Lord for
David, [Sa1 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#006), then the answer was
given either by a voice from heaven, or by an impulse upon the mind of
the high priest, which last is perhaps intimated in that expression, he
shall bear the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart. This
oracle was of great use to Israel, Joshua consulted it. [Num
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#021), and it is likely, the judges
after him. It was lost in the captivity, and never retrieved after. It
was a shadow of good things to come, and the substance is Christ. He is
our oracle; by him God in these last days, makes known himself and his
mind to us. Divine revelation centers in him, and comes to us through
him; he is the light, the true light, the faithful witness; and from him
we receive the Spirit of truth, who leads into all truth. The joining of
the breast - plate to the ephod notes, that his prophetical office was
founded on his priesthood; and it was by the merit of his death that he
purchased this honour for himself, and this favour for us. It was the
Lamb that had been slain that was worthy to take the book and to open
the seals. [Rev 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009). The judgment -
The breast - plate of judgment: That breast - plate which declared the
judgment or mind of God to the Israelites.

[Exodus 28:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 28:31</span></span>

The robe of the ephod - This was next under the ephod, and reached down
to the knees, without sleeves, and was put on over their head, having
holes on the sides to put the arms through, or, as Maimonides describes
it, was not sewn together on the sides at all. The hole on the top
through which the head was put was carefully bound about, that it might
not tear in the putting on. The bells gave notice to the people in the
outer court, when he went into the holy place to burn incense, that they
might then apply themselves to their devotions at the same time, [Luk
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#010), in token of their concurrence
with him, and their hopes of the ascent of their prayers to God in the
virtue of the incense he offered. Aaron must come near to minister in
the garments that were appointed him, that he die not. 'Tis at his peril
if he attend otherwise than according to the institution.

[Exodus 28:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">exo 28:32</span></span>

An habergeon - A coat of armour.

[Exodus 28:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">exo 28:33</span></span>

Pomegranates - The figures of Pomegranates, but flat and embroidered.

[Exodus 28:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">exo 28:36</span></span>

On the golden plate fixed upon Aaron's forehead, like an half coronet,
reaching, as the Jews say, from ear to ear, must be engraven, Holiness
to the Lord - Aaron must hereby be minded, that God is holy, and that
his priests must be holy. The high priest must be consecrated to God,
and so must all his ministrations. All that attend in God's house must
have holiness to the Lord engraven upon their foreheads, that is, they
must he holy, devoted to the Lord, and designing his glory in all they
do. This must appear in their forehead, in an open profession of their
relation to God, as those that are not ashamed to own it, and in a
conversation answerable to it. It must likewise be engraven like the
engravings of a signet, so deep, so durable; not painted, so as it may
he washed off, but sincere and lasting.

[Exodus 28:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">exo 28:38</span></span>

Aaron must have this upon his forehead, that he may bear the iniquity of
the holy things, and that they may be accepted before the Lord - Herein
he was a type of Christ, the great Mediator between God and man. Thro'
him what is amiss in our services is pardoned: even this would be our
ruin, if God should enter into judgment with us: but Christ our high
priest bears this iniquity; bears it for us, so as to bear it from us.
Thro' him likewise what is good is accepted; our persons, our
performances are pleasing to God upon the account of Christ's
intercession, and not otherwise. His being holiness to the Lord,
recommends all those to the divine favour that believe in him. Having
such a high priest, we come boldly to the throne of grace.

[Exodus 28:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">exo 28:39</span></span>

The embroidered coat of fine linen - Was the innermost of the priestly
garments, it reached to the feet, and the sleeves to the wrists, and was
bound to the body with a girdle or sash of needlework. The mitre or
diadem was of linen, such as kings anciently wore in the east, typifying
the kingly office of Christ.

[Exodus 28:43](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">exo 28:43</span></span>

It shall be a statute for ever - That is, It is to continue as long as
the priesthood continues. And it is to have its perpetuity in the
substance, of which these things were the shadows.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 29](exo029)

</div>
