<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo036)  [Next](exo038) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 37](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#001)

[Exodus 37:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 37:1</span></span>

These several ornaments where with the tabernacle was furnished, the
people were not admitted to see, but the priests only; and therefore it
was requisite they should be thus largely described, particularly to
them. And Moses would thus shew the great care which he and his workmen
took to make every thing exactly according to the pattern shewed him in
the mount. Thus he appeals to every reader concerning his fidelity to
him that appointed him, in all his house. And thus he teacheth us to
have respect to all God's commandments, even to every jot and tittle of
them. In these verses we have an account of the making of the ark with
its glorious and significant appurtenances, the mercy - seat and the
cherubim. Consider these three together, and they represent the glory of
a holy God, the sincerity of a holy heart, and the communion that is
between them by a Mediator. It is the glory of a holy God that he
dwelleth between the cherubim, that is, is continually attended by the
blessed angels, whose swiftness was signified by the wings of the
cherubim, and their unanimity in their services, by their faces being
one towards another. It is the character of an upright heart, that, like
the ark of the testimony, it hath the law of God hid and kept in it. By
Jesus Christ the great propitiation there is reconciliation made, and a
communion settled, between us and God: he interposeth between us and
God's displeasure; and through him we become entitled to God's favour.

[Exodus 37:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 37:10</span></span>

Observe how much the dispensation of the gospel exceeds that of the law.
Tho' here was a table furnished, it was only with shew - bread, bread to
be looked upon, not to be fed upon, while it was on the table, and
afterwards only by the priests: but to the table Christ has spread in
the new covenant all good Christians are invited guests, and to them it
is said, Eat, O friends, come eat of my bread. What the law gave but a
sight of at a distance, the gospel gives the enjoyment of.

[Exodus 37:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 37:17</span></span>

This candlestick, which was not of wood overlaid with gold, but all
beaten - work of pure gold only, signified that light of divine
revelation with which God's church upon earth (which is his tabernacle
among men) hath always been enlightened, being always supplied with
fresh oil from Christ the good olive, [Zac
4:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#002). The bible is a golden
candlestick, it is of pure gold; from it light is diffused to every part
of God's tabernacle, that by it the spiritual priests may see to do the
service of his sanctuary. The candlestick has not only its bowls for
necessary use, but its knops and flowers for ornament; many things which
God saw fit to beautify his word with, which we can no more give a
reason for than for these knops and flowers, and yet must be sure they
wert added for good purpose. Let us bless God for this candlestick, have
an eye to it continually, and dread the removal of it out of its place!

[Exodus 37:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 37:25</span></span>

The incense burnt on this altar daily, signified both the prayers of
saints, and the intercession of Christ, to which is owing the
acceptableness of them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 38](exo038)

</div>
