<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo022)  [Next](exo024.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#001.md)

[Exodus 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 23:1</span></span>

Thou shalt not raise, the margin reads, Thou shalt not receive a false
report, for sometimes the receiver in this case is as bad as the thief;
and a backbiting tongue would not do so much mischief, if it were not
countenanced. Sometimes we cannot avoid hearing a false report, but we
must not receive it, we must not hear it with pleasure, nor easily give
credit to it.

[Exodus 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 23:2</span></span>

Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil - General usage will never
excuse us in any ill practice; nor is the broad way ever the safer for
its being crowded. We must inquire what we ought to do, not what the
most do; because we must be judged by our master, not our fellow
servants; and it is too great a compliment, to be willing to go to hell
for company.

[Exodus 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 23:7</span></span>

Keep thee far from a false matter - From assisting or abetting an ill
thing. Yea, keep thee far from it, dread it as a dangerous snare. I will
not justify the wicked - That is, I will condemn him that unjustly
condemns others.

[Exodus 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 23:9</span></span>

Thou shalt not oppress the stranger - Though aliens might not inherit
lands among them; yet they must have justice done them. It was an
instance of the equity of our law, that if an alien be tried for any
crime except treason, the one half of his jury, if he desire it, shall
be foreigners; a kind provision that strangers may not be oppressed. For
ye know the heart of a stranger - You know something of the griefs and
fears of a stranger by sad experience.

[Exodus 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 23:10</span></span>

The institution of the sabbatical year was designed, To shew what a
plentiful land that was, into which God was bringing them, that so
numerous a people could have rich maintenance out of the products of so
small a country, without foreign trade, and yet could spare the increase
of every seventh year. To teach them a confidence in the Divine
Providence, while they did their duty, That as the sixth day's manna
served for two days meat, so the sixth year's increase should serve for
two years subsistence.

[Exodus 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 23:13</span></span>

In all things that I have said unto you be circumspect - We are in
danger of missing our way on the right hand and on the left, and it is
at our peril if we do, therefore we have need to look about us. A man
may ruin himself through mere carelessness, but he cannot save himself
without great care and circumspection; particularly since idolatry was a
sin they were much addicted to, and would be greatly tempted to, they
must endeavour to blot out the remembrance of the gods of the heathen,
and must disuse all their superstitious forms of speech, and never
mention them but with detestation. In Christian schools and academies
(for it is in vain to think of re - forming the play - houses) it were
to be wished that the names and stories of the heathen deities or demons
rather were not so commonly and familiarly used.

[Exodus 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 23:14</span></span>

The Passover, Pentecost, and feast of Tabernacles, in spring, summer,
and autumn, were the three times appointed for their attendance; not in
winter, because travelling was then uncomfortable; nor in the midst of
their harvest.

[Exodus 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 23:17</span></span>

All thy males - All that were of competent years, and health and
strength, and at their own disposal. 'Tis probable, servants were
exempt: for none was to appear without an offering: but most of these
had nothing to offer.

[Exodus 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 23:19</span></span>

Some of the Gentiles, at the end of their harvest, seethed a kid in it's
dam's milk, and sprinkled that milk - pottage in a magical way upon
their gardens and fields, to make them fruitful. But Israel must abhor
such foolish customs. Is not this rather forbidden, as having some
appearance of cruelty?

[Exodus 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 23:20</span></span>

Behold, I send an angel before thee - The angel of the covenant:
Accordingly the Israelites in the wilderness are said to tempt Christ.
It is promised that this blessed anger should keep them in the way,
though it lay through a wilderness first, and afterwards through their
enemies country; and thus Christ has prepared a place for his followers.

[Exodus 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 23:21</span></span>

Beware of him, and obey his voice; provoke him not - It is at your peril
if you do; for my name - My nature, my authority is in him.

[Exodus 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 23:25</span></span>

He shall bless thy bread and thy water - And God's blessing will make
bread and water more refreshing and nourishing, than a feast of fat
things, and wines on the lees, without that blessing. And I will take
sickness away - Either prevent it or remove it. Thy land shall not be
visited with epidemical diseases, which are very dreadful, and sometimes
have laid countries waste.

[Exodus 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">exo 23:26</span></span>

The number of thy days I will fulfill - And they shall not be cut off in
the midst by untimely deaths. Thus hath godliness the promise of the
life that now is.

[Exodus 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 23:27</span></span>

I will send my fear before thee - And they that fear will soon flee.
Hosts of hornets also made way for the hosts of Israel; such mean
creatures can God make use of for the chastising of his people's
enemies.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 24](exo024.md)

</div>
