<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo032)  [Next](exo034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 33](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#001)

[Exodus 33:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 33:5</span></span>

I will come up - As if he had said, ye deserve that I should do so. Put
off thine ornaments, that I may know what to do with thee - That is, put
thyself into the posture of a penitent, that the dispute may be
determined in thy favour, and mercy may rejoice against judgment.

[Exodus 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 33:6</span></span>

And Israel stript themselves of their ornaments, by the mount; or, as
some read it, at a distance from the mount - Stand afar off, like the
publican, [Luk 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013). God bid them lay
aside their ornaments, and they did so; both to shew in general their
deep mourning, and in particular to take a holy revenge upon themselves
for giving their ear - rings to make the golden calf of.

[Exodus 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 33:7</span></span>

And Moses took the tabernacle - The tent wherein he gave audience, heard
causes, and inquired of God, and pitched it without, afar off from the
camp - To signify to them that they were unworthy of it. Perhaps this
tabernacle was a model of the tabernacle that was afterwards to be
erected, a hasty draught from the pattern shewed him in the mount,
designed for direction to the workman, and used in the mean time as a
tabernacle of meeting between God and Moses about public affairs.

[Exodus 33:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 33:8</span></span>

And when Moses went out to the tabernacle, the people looked after him -
In token of their respect to him whom before they had slighted, and
their dependence upon his mediation. By this it appeared, that they were
full of concern what would be the issue.

[Exodus 33:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 33:10</span></span>

And when they saw the cloudy pillar, that symbol of God's presence, give
Moses the meeting, they all worshipped every man at his tent door -
Thereby they signified, Their humble adoration of the divine majesty.
Their thankfulness to God, that he was pleased to shew them this token
for good, for if he had been pleased to kill them he would not have
shewed them such things as these. And their hearty concurrence with
Moses as their advocate, in every thing he should promise for them.

[Exodus 33:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 33:11</span></span>

And the Lord spake to Moses face to face as a man speaketh to his friend
- Which intimates not only that God revealed himself to Moses with
greater clearness than to any other of the prophets, but also with
greater expressions of particular kindness than to any other. He spake
not as a prince to a subject, but as a man to his friend, whom he loves,
and with whom he takes sweet counsel. And he turned again into the camp
- To tell the people what hopes he had of bringing this business to a
good issue. But because he intended speedily to return to the
tabernacle, he left Joshua there.

[Exodus 33:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 33:12</span></span>

Moses now returned to the door of the tabernacle, as an important
supplicant for two favours, and prevails for both: herein he was a type
of Christ the great intercessor, whom the Father heareth always. He is
earnest with God for a grant of his presence with Israel in the rest of
their march to Canaan. Thou sayst, bring up this people - Lord, it is
thou thyself that employest me, and wilt thou not own me? I am in the
way of my duty, and shall I not have thy presence with me in that way?
Yet, Thou hast said, I know thee by name, as a particular friend, and
thou hast also found grace in my sight, above any other.

[Exodus 33:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 33:13</span></span>

Now therefore, if I have found grace in thy sight, shew me thy way -
What favour God had expressed to the people they had forfeited the
benefit of; and therefore Moses lays the stress of his plea upon what
God had said to him. By this therefore he takes hold on God, Lord, if
thou wilt do any thing for me, do this for the people. Thus our Lord
Jesus, in his intercession, presents himself to the Father, as one in
whom he is always well - pleased, and so obtains mercy for us with whom
he is justly displeased, Shew me thy way, that I may know thee, that I
may find grace in thy sight - He insinuates that the people also, though
most unworthy, yet were in some relation to God; consider that this
nation is thy people; a people that thou hast done great things for,
redeemed to thyself, and taken into covenant with thyself; Lord, they
are thy own, do not leave them.

[Exodus 33:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 33:15</span></span>

And he said, If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence - He
speaks as one that dreaded the thought of going forward without God's
presence.

[Exodus 33:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 33:16</span></span>

Wherein shall it be known to the nations that have their eyes upon us,
that I, and thy people, have found grace in thy sight; so as to be
separated from all people upon earth? Is it not that thou goest with us?
Nothing short of that can answer these characters.

[Exodus 33:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 33:17</span></span>

I will do this thing also that thou hast spoken - See the power of
prayer! See the riches of God's goodness! See in type the prevalency of
Christ's intercession, which he ever lives to make for all those that
come to God by him! And the ground of that prevalency, is purely in his
own merit, it is because thou hast found grace in my sight. And now God
is perfectly reconciled to them, and his presence in the pillar of cloud
returns to them.

[Exodus 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 33:18</span></span>

I beseech thee shew me thy glory - Moses had lately been in the mount
with God, and had had as intimate communion with God, as ever any man
had on this side heaven, and yet he is still desiring a farther
acquaintance. Shew me thy glory - Make me to see it; so the word is:
make it some way or other visible, and enable me to bear the sight of
it. Not that he was so ignorant as to think God's essence could be seen
with bodily eyes, but having hitherto only heard a voice out of a pillar
of cloud or fire, he desired to see some representation of the divine
glory, such as God saw fit to gratify him with.

[Exodus 33:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 33:20</span></span>

Thou canst not see my face - A full discovery of the glory of God would
quite overpower the faculties of any mortal man. I will make all my
goodness pass before thee - He had given him wonderful instances of his
goodness in being reconciled to Israel; but that was only goodness in
the stream, he would shew him goodness in the spring. This was a
sufficient answer to his request: Shew me thy glory, saith Moses; I will
shew thee my goodness, saith God. God's goodness is his glory; and he
will have us to know him by the glory of his mercy, more than by the
glory of his majesty. And I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious
- In bestowing his gifts, and is not debtor to any, nor accountable to
any; all his reasons of mercy are fetched from within himself, not from
any merit in his creatures, and I will shew mercy on whom I will shew
mercy - For his grace is always free. He never damns by prerogative, but
by prerogative he saves.

[Exodus 33:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 33:22</span></span>

I will put thee in a cleft of the rock - In that he was to be sheltered
from the dazzling light, and devouring fire of God's glory. This was the
rock in Horeb, out of which water was brought, of which it is said, That
rock was Christ, [Co1 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004). 'Tis in
the clefts of this rock that we are secured from the wrath of God, which
otherwise would consume us: God himself will protect those that are thus
hid: and it is only through Christ that we have the knowledge of the
glory of God. None can see that to their comfort, but those that stand
upon this rock, and take shelter in it.

[Exodus 33:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 33:23</span></span>

And I will take away my hand - Speaking after the manner of men. And
thou shalt see my back - parts - The face in man is the seat of majesty,
and men are known by their faces, in them we take a full view of men;
that sight of God Moses might not have, but such a sight as we have of a
man who is gone past us, so that we only see his back. Now Moses was
allowed to see this only, but when he was a witness to Christ's
transfiguration, he saw his face shine as the sun.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 34](exo034)

</div>
