<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo021)  [Next](exo023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001)

[Exodus 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 22:1</span></span>

Five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep - More for an ox than
for a sheep, because the owner, besides all the other profit, lost the
daily labour of his ox. If we were not able to make restitution, he must
be sold for a slave: the court of judgment was to do it, and it is
likely the person robbed received the money. Thus with us in some cases,
felons are transported to the Plantations, where only, Englishmen know
what slavery is. But let it be observed, the sentence is not slavery,
but banishment: nor can any Englishman be sold, unless he first indent
himself to the captain that carries him over.

[Exodus 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 22:2</span></span>

If a thief broke a house in the night, and was killed in the doing it,
his blood was upon his own head. But if it were in the day - time that
the thief was killed, he that killed him was accountable for it, unless
it were in the necessary defence of his own life.

[Exodus 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 22:3</span></span>

For he should make full restitution - This the law determined: not that
he should die.

[Exodus 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 22:4</span></span>

In his hand alive - Not killed, nor sold, as [Exo
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001), so that the owner recover it
with less charge and trouble.

[Exodus 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 22:5</span></span>

He that wilfully put his cattle into his neighbour's field, must make
restitution of the best of his own. The Jews hence observed it as a
general rule, that restitution must always be made of the best; and that
no man should keep any cattle that were likely to trespass upon his
neighbour, or do him any damage.

[Exodus 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 22:6</span></span>

He that designed only the burning of thorns might become accessary to
the burning of corn, and should not be held guiltless. If the fire did
mischief, he that kindled it must answer for it, though it could not be
proved that he designed the mischief. Men must suffer for their
carelessness, as well as for their malice. It will make us very careful
of ourselves, if we consider that we are accountable not only for the
hurt we do, but for the hurt we occasion through inadvertency.

[Exodus 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 22:7</span></span>

If a man deliver goods, suppose to a carrier to be conveyed, or to a
warehouse - keeper to be preserved, or cattle to a farmer to be fed upon
a valuable consideration, and a special confidence reposed in the person
they are lodged with; in case these goods be stolen or lost, perish or
be damaged, if it appear that it was not by any fault of the trustee,
the owner must stand to the loss, otherwise he that has been false to
his trust must be compelled to make satisfaction.

[Exodus 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 22:14</span></span>

If a man (suppose) lent his team to his neighbour, if the owner were
with it, or were to receive profit for the loan of it, whatever harm
befel the cattle the owner must stand to the loss of it: but if the
owner were so kind to the borrower as to lend it him gratis, and put
such a confidence in him as to trust it from under his own eye, then, if
any harm happened, the borrower must make it good. Learn hence to be
very careful not to abuse any thing that is lent to us; it is not only
unjust but base and disingenuous, we should much rather chuse to lose
ourselves, than that any should sustain loss by their kindness to us.

[Exodus 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 22:17</span></span>

If the father refused, he shall pay money - This shews how ill a thing
it is, and by no means to be allowed, that children should marry without
their parents consent: even here where the divine law appointed the
marriage, both as a punishment to him that had done wrong, and a
recompence to her that had suffered wrong, yet there was an express
reservation for the father's power; if he denied his consent, it must be
no marriage.

[Exodus 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 22:18</span></span>

Witchcraft not only gives that honour to the devil which is due to God
alone, but bids defiance to the divine providence, wages war with God's
government, puts his work into the devil's hand expecting him to do good
and evil. By our law, consulting, covenanting with, invocating or
employing any evil spirit to any intent whatever, and exercising any
enchantment, charm, or sorcery, whereby hurt shall be done to any
person, is made felony, without benefit of clergy; also pretending to
tell where goods lost or stolen may be found, is an iniquity punishable
by the judge, and the second offence with death. This was the case in
former times. But we are wiser than our fore - fathers. We believe, no
witch ever did live! At least, not for these thousand years.

[Exodus 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 22:21</span></span>

A stranger must not be abused, not wronged in judgment by the
magistrates, not imposed upon in contracts, nor any advantage taken of
his ignorance or necessity, no, nor must he be taunted, or upbraided
with his being a stranger; for all these were vexations. For ye were
strangers in Egypt - And knew what it was to be vexed and oppressed
there. Those that have themselves been in poverty and distress, if
Providence enrich and enlarge them, ought to shew a particular
tenderness towards those that are now in such circumstances as they were
in formerly, now doing to them as they then wished to be done by.

[Exodus 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 22:22</span></span>

Ye shall not afflict the widow or fatherless child - That is, ye shall
comfort and assist them, and be ready upon all occasions to shew them
kindness. In making just demands from them, their condition must be
considered who have lost those that should protect them: they are
supposed to be unversed in business, destitute of advice, timorous, and
of a tender spirit; and therefore must be treated with kindness and
compassion, and no advantage taken against them, nor any hardship put
upon them, which a husband or a father would have sheltered them from.

[Exodus 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 22:25</span></span>

If thou lend - They must not receive use for money from any that
borrowed for necessity. And such provision the law made for the
preserving estates to their families by the year of Jubilee, that a
people who had little concern in trade could not be supposed to borrow
money but for necessity; therefore it was generally forbidden among
themselves; but to a stranger they were allowed to lend upon usury. This
law therefore in the strictness of it seems to have been peculiar to the
Jewish state; but in the equity of it, it obligeth us to shew mercy to
those we have advantage against, and to be content to share with those
we lend to in loss as well as profit, if Providence cross them: and upon
this condition it seems as lawful to receive interest for my money,
which another takes pains with, and improves, as it is to receive rent
for my land, which another takes pains with, and improves, for his own
use. They must not take a poor man's bed - clothes in pawn; but if they
did, must restore them by bed - time.

[Exodus 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">exo 22:28</span></span>

Thou shalt not revile the gods - That is, the judges and magistrates.
Princes and magistrates are our fathers, whom the fifth commandment
obligeth us to honour, and forbids us to revile. St. Paul applies this
law to himself, and owns that he ought not to speak evil of the ruler of
his people, no, not though he was then his most unrighteous persecutor,
[Act 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#005).

[Exodus 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 22:29</span></span>

The first - born of thy sons shalt thou give unto me - And much more
reason have we to give ourselves and all we have to God, who spared not
his own Son, but delivered him up for us all. The first ripe of their
corn they must not delay to offer; there is danger if we delay our duty,
lest we wholly omit it; and by slipping the first opportunity in
expectation of another, we suffer Satan to cheat us of all our time.

[Exodus 22:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 22:31</span></span>

Ye shall be holy unto me - And one mark of that honourable distinction
is appointed in their diet, which was, that they should not eat any
flesh that was torn of beasts - Both because the blood was not duly
taken out of it, and because the clean beast was ceremonially defiled,
by the touch of the unclean.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 23](exo023)

</div>
