<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo016)  [Next](exo018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001)

[Exodus 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 17:1</span></span>

They journeyed according to the commandment of the Lord, led by the
pillar of cloud and fire, and yet they came to a place where there was
no water for them to drink - We may be in the way of our duty, and yet
meet with troubles, which Providence brings us into for the trial of our
faith.

[Exodus 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 17:5</span></span>

Go on before the people - Though they spake of stoning him. He must take
his rod with him, not to summon some plague to chastise them, but to
fetch water for their supply. O the wonderful patience and forbearance
of God towards provoking sinners! He maintains those that are at war
with him, and reaches out the hand of his bounty to those that lift up
the heel against him. If God had only shewed Moses a fountain of water
in the wilderness, as he did to Hagar, not far from hence, [Gen
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#019), that had been a great favour;
but that he might shew his power as well as his pity, and make it a
miracle of mercy, he gave them water out of a rock. He directed Moses
whither to go, appointed him to take of the elders of Israel with him,
to be witnesses of what was done, ordered him to smite the rock, which
he did, and immediately water came out of it in great abundance, which
ran throughout the camp in streams and rivers, [Psa
78:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#015), and followed them wherever
they went in that wilderness: God shewed his care of his people in
giving them water when they wanted it; his own power in fetching it out
of a rock, and put an honour upon Moses in appointing the water to flow
out upon his smiting of the rock. This fair water that came out of the
rock is called honey and oil, [Deu
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013), because the people's thirst
made it doubly pleasant; coming when they were in extreme want. It is
probable that the people digged canals for the conveyance of it, and
pools for the reception of it. Let this direct us to live in a
dependance, Upon God's providence even in the greatest straits and
difficulties; And upon Christ's grace; that rock was Christ, [Co1
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004). The graces and comforts of the
Spirit are compared to rivers of living waters, [Joh
7:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038), [Joh
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014). These flow from Christ. And
nothing will supply the needs and satisfy the desires of a soul but
water out of this rock. A new name was upon this occasion given to the
place, preserving the remembrance of their murmuring, Massah -
Temptation, because they tempted God, Meribah - Strife, because they
chide with Moses.

[Exodus 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 17:8</span></span>

Then Amalek came and fought with Israel - The Amalekites were the
posterity of Esau, who hated Jacob because of the birth - right and
blessing. They did not boldly front them as a generous enemy, but
without any provocation given, basely fell upon their rear, and smote
them that were faint and feeble.

[Exodus 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 17:9</span></span>

I will stand on the top of the hill with the rod of God in my land - See
how God qualifies his people for, and calls them to various services for
the good of his church; Joshua fights, Moses prays, and both minister to
Israel. This rod Moses held up, not so much to Israel as to animate
them; as to God by way of appeal to him; Is not the battle the Lord's?
Is not he able to help, and engaged to help? Witness this rod! Moses was
not only a standard - bearer, but an intercessor, pleading with God for
success and victory.

[Exodus 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 17:10</span></span>

Hur is supposed to have been the husband of Miriam.

[Exodus 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 17:11</span></span>

And when Moses held vp his hand in prayer (so the Chaldee explains it)
Israel prevailed, but when he let down his hand from prayer, Amalek
prevailed - To convince Israel that the hand of Moses (with whom they
had just now been chiding) contributed more to their safety than their
own hands; the success rises and falls, as Moses lifts up or lets down
his hand. The church's cause is ordinarily more or less successful,
according as the church's friends are more or less fervent in prayer.

[Exodus 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 17:13</span></span>

Though God gave the victory, yet it is said Joshua discomfited Amalek,
because Joshua was a type of Christ, and of the same name, and in him it
is that we are more than conquerors.

[Exodus 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 17:15</span></span>

And Moses built an altar, and called it Jehovah - niffi - The Lord is my
banner. The presence and power of Jehovah was the banner under which
they were lifted, by which they were animated, and kept together, and
therefore which they erected in the day of their triumph. In the name of
our God we must always lift up our banners: He that doth all the work
should have all the praise. Write this for a memorial - This is the
first mention of writing we find in scripture; and perhaps the command
was not given till after the writing of the law on tables of stone.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 18](exo018)

</div>
