<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo039)  [Next](lev001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#001.md)

[Exodus 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 40:2</span></span>

The time for doing this is, On the first day of the first month - This
wanted but fourteen days of a year since they came out of Egypt.
Probably the work was made ready just at the end of the year, so that
the appointing this day gave no delay. In Hezekiah's time they began to
sanctify the temple on the first day of the first month, [Ch2
29:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#017.md). The new moon (which by their
computation was the first day of every month) was observed by them with
some solemnity; and therefore this first new moon of the year was thus
made remarkable.

[Exodus 40:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 40:15</span></span>

Their anointing shall be an everlasting priesthood - A seal that their
priesthood shall continue as long as the Jewish polity lasts. He
signifies that this unction should be sufficient for all succeeding
priests. None were afterwards anointed but the high - priests.

[Exodus 40:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">exo 40:34</span></span>

As when God had finished this earth, which he designed for man's
habitation, he made man, and put him in possession of it; so when Moses
had finished the tabernacle, which was designed for God's dwelling -
place among men, God came and took possession of it. By these visible
tokens of his coming among them, he testified both the return of his
favour, which they had forfeited by the golden calf, and his gracious
acceptance of their care and pains about the tabernacle. Thus God shewed
himself well - pleased with what they had done, and abundantly rewarded
them. A cloud covered the tent - The same cloud which, as the chariot or
pavilion of the Shechinah, had come up before them out of Egypt, now
settled upon the tabernacle, and hovered over it, even in the hottest
and clearest day; for it was none of those clouds which the sun
scatters. This cloud was intended to be a token of God's presence,
constantly visible day and night to all Israel. A protection of the
tabernacle: they had sheltered it with one covering upon another, but
after all, the cloud that covered it was its best guard: And a guide to
the camp of Israel in their march through the wilderness. While the
cloud continued on the tabernacle, they rested; when it removed, they
removed and followed it, as being purely under a divine conduct. And the
glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle - The Shechinah now made an
awful entry into the tabernacle, passing through the outer part of it
into the most holy place, and there seating itself between the cherubim.
It was in light and fire, and, for ought we know, no other - wise, that
the Shechinah made itself visible. With these the tabernacle was now
filled; yet as before the bush, so now the curtains were not consumed,
for, to those that have received the anointing, the majesty of God is
not destroying. Yet now so dazzling was the light, and so dreadful was
the fire, that Moses was not able to enter into the tent of the
congregation, at the door of which he attended, till the splendor was a
little abated, and the glory of the Lord retired within the veil. But
what Moses could not do, our Lord Jesus has done, whom God caused to
draw near and approach, and as the fore - runner he is for us entered,
and has invited us to come boldly even to the mercy - seat. He was able
to enter into the holy place not made with hands; he is himself the true
tabernacle, filled with the glory of God, even with that divine grace
and truth which were figured by this fire and light. In him the
Shechinah took up its rest for ever, for in him dwells all the fulness
of the Godhead bodily.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 1](lev001.md)

</div>
