<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo014)  [Next](exo016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001)

[Exodus 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 15:1</span></span>

Then sang Moses - Moses composed this song, and sang it with the
children of Israel. Doubtless he wrote it by inspiration, and sang it on
the spot. By this instance it appears that the singing of psalms, as an
act of religious worship, was used in the church of Christ before the
giving of the ceremonial law, therefore it is no part of it, nor
abolished with it: singing is as much the language of holy joy, as
praying is of holy desire. I will sing unto the Lord - All our joy must
terminate in God, and all our praises be offered up to him, for he hath
triumphed - All that love God triumph in his triumphs.

[Exodus 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 15:2</span></span>

Israel rejoiceth in God, as their strength, song, and salvation - Happy
therefore the people whole God is the Lord: They are weak themselves,
but he strengthens them, his grace is their strength: they are oft in
sorrow, but in him they have comfort, he is their song: sin and death
threaten them, but he is, and will be, their salvation. He is their
fathers God - This they take notice of, because being conscious of their
own unworthiness, they had reason to think that what God had now done
for them was for their fathers sake, [Deu
4:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#037).

[Exodus 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 15:3</span></span>

The Lord is a man of war - Able to deal with all those that strive with
their maker.

[Exodus 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 15:4</span></span>

He hath cast - With great force, as an arrow out of a bow, so the Hebrew
word signifies.

[Exodus 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 15:7</span></span>

In the greatness of thine excellency - By thy great and excellent power.

[Exodus 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 15:8</span></span>

With the blast of thy nostrils - By thine anger: The depths were
congealed - Stood still, as if they had been frozen: In the heart of the
sea - The midst of it.

[Exodus 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 15:9</span></span>

My lust - My desire both of revenge and gain.

[Exodus 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 15:11</span></span>

The gods - So called: Idols, or Princes: Glorious in holiness - In
justice, mercy and truth: Fearful in praises - To be praised with
reverence.

[Exodus 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 15:12</span></span>

The earth swallowed them - Their dead bodies sunk into the sands on
which they were thrown, which sucked them in.

[Exodus 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 15:13</span></span>

Thou in thy mercy hast led forth the People - Out of the bondage of
Egypt, and out of the perils of the Red - sea. Thou hast guided them to
thy holy habitation - Thou hast put them into the way to it, and wilt in
due time bring them to the end of that way.

[Exodus 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 15:17</span></span>

Thou shalt bring them in - If he thus bring them out of Egypt, he will
bring them into Canaan; for has he begun, and will he not make an end?
Thou wilt plant them in the place which thou hast made for thee to dwell
in - It is good dwelling where God dwells, in his church on earth, and
in his church in heaven. In the mountains - In the mountainous country
of Canaan: The sanctuary which thy hands have established - Will as
surely establish as if it was done already.

[Exodus 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 15:18</span></span>

The Lord shall reign for ever and ever - They had now seen an end of
Pharaoh's reign, but time itself shall not put a period to Jehovah's
reign, which like himself is eternal.

[Exodus 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 15:20</span></span>

Miriam (or Mary, it is the same name) presided in an assembly of the
women, who (according to the common usage of those times) with timbrels
and dances, sung this song. Moses led the psalm, and gave it out for the
men, and then Miriam for the women. Famous victories were wont to be
applauded by the daughters of Israel, [Sa1
18:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#006), so was this. When God brought
Israel out of Egypt, it is said, [Mic
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#004), he sent before them Moses, Aaron,
and Miriam; though we read not of any thing remarkable that Miriam did
but this. But those are to be reckoned great blessings to a people, that
go before them in praising God.

[Exodus 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 15:21</span></span>

And Miriam answered them - The men: They sung by turns, or in parts.

[Exodus 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 15:23</span></span>

The name of it was called Marah - That is, Bitterness.

[Exodus 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 15:25</span></span>

And he cried unto the Lord - It is the greatest relief of the cares of
magistrates and ministers, when those under their charge make them
uneasy, that they may have recourse to God by prayer; he is the guide of
the church's guides, and to the chief shepherd, the under shepherds must
on all occasions apply themselves: And the Lord directed Moses to a
tree, which he cast into the waters, and they were made sweet - Some
think this wood had a peculiar virtue in it for this purpose, because it
is said, God shewed him the tree. God is to be acknowledged, not only in
the creating things useful for man, but in discovering their usefulness.
But perhaps this was only a sign, and not a means of the cure, no more
than the brazen serpent. There he made a statute and an ordinance, and
there he proved them - That is, there he put them upon trial, admitted
them as probationers for his favour. In short he tells them, [Exo
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#026), what he expected from them, and
that was, in one word, obedience. They must diligently hearken to his
voice, and give ear to his commandments, and must take care, in every
thing, to do that which was right in God's sight, and to keep all his
statutes. Then I will put none of these diseases upon thee - That is, I
will not bring upon thee any of the plagues of Egypt. This intimates,
that if they were disobedient, the plagues which they had seen inflicted
on their enemies should be brought on them. But if thou wilt be
obedient, thou shalt be safe, the threatening is implied, but the
promise is expressed, I am the Lord that healeth thee - And will take
care of thee wherever thou goest.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 16](exo016)

</div>
