<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo008)  [Next](exo010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#001)

[Exodus 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 9:3</span></span>

The hand of the Lord - Immediately, without the stretching out of
Aaron's hand, is upon the cattle, many of which, some of all kinds,
shall die by a sort of pestilence. The hand of God is to be acknowledged
even in the sickness and death of cattle, or other damage sustained in
them; for a sparrow falls not to the ground without our father. And his
providence is to be acknowledged with thankfulness in the life of the
cattle, for he preserveth man and beast, [Psa
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006).

[Exodus 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 9:6</span></span>

All the cattle died - All that were in the field. The creature is made
subject to vanity by the sin of man, being liable, according to its
capacity, both to serve his wickedness, and to share in his punishment.
The Egyptians worshipped their cattle; it was among them that the
Israelites learned to make a god of a calf; in that therefore this
plague meets with them. But not one of the cattle of the Israelites died
- Doth God take care for oxen? Yes, he doth, his providence extends
itself to the meanest of his creatures.

[Exodus 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 9:9</span></span>

A boil breaking forth with blains - A burning scab, which quickly raised
blisters and blains.

[Exodus 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 9:10</span></span>

Ashes of the furnace - Sometimes God shews men their sin in their
punishment: they had oppressed Israel in the furnaces, and now the ashes
of the furnace are made as much a terror to them as ever their task -
masters had been to the Israelites. This is afterwards called the botch
of Egypt, [Deu 28:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#027), as if it were
some new disease, never heard of before, and known ever after by that
name.

[Exodus 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 9:11</span></span>

The magicians were forced to retreat, and could not stand before Moses -
To which the apostle refers, [Ti2 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#009),
when he saith, that their folly was manifested unto all men.

[Exodus 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 9:12</span></span>

Now the Lord hardened Pharaoh's heart - Before he had hardened his own
heart, and resisted the grace of God, and now God justly gave him up to
his own heart's lusts, to strong delusions, permitting Satan to blind
and harden him. Wilful hardness is commonly punished with judicial
hardness. Let us dread this as the sorest judgment a man can be under on
this side hell.

[Exodus 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 9:14</span></span>

I will find all my plagues upon thy heart - Hitherto thou hast not felt
my plagues on thy own person, the heart is put for the whole man.

[Exodus 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 9:16</span></span>

For this cause have I raised thee up - A most dreadful message Moses is
here ordered to deliver to him, whether he will hear, or whether he will
forbear. He must tell him, that he is marked for ruin: that he now
stands as the butt at which God would shoot all the arrows of his wrath.
For this cause have I raised thee up to the throne at this time, and
made thee to stand the shock of the plagues hitherto, to shew in thee my
power - Providence so ordered it, that Moses should have a man of such a
fierce and stubborn spirit to deal with, to make it a most signal and
memorable instance of the power God has to bring down the proudest of
his enemies; that my name, irresistable power, and my inflexible
justice, might be declared throughout all the earth - Not only to all
places, but through all ages while the earth remains. This will be the
event. But it by no means follows, that this was the design of God. We
have numberless instances in scripture of this manner of speaking, to
denote not the design, but only the event.

[Exodus 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 9:17</span></span>

As yet exaltest thou thyself against my people - Wilt thou not yet
submit?

[Exodus 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 9:18</span></span>

Since the foundation thereof - Since it was a kingdom.

[Exodus 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 9:29</span></span>

The earth - The world, the heaven and the earth.

[Exodus 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">exo 9:30</span></span>

Bolled - Grown up into a stalk.

[Exodus 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">exo 9:33</span></span>

Moses went out of the city - Not only for privacy in his communion with
God, but to shew that he durst venture abroad into the field,
notwithstanding the hail and lightning, knowing that every hail - stone
had its direction from God. Peace with God makes men thunder - proof,
for it is the voice of their father. And spread abroad his hands unto
the Lord - An outward expression of earnest desire, and humble
expectation. He prevailed with God; but he could not prevail with
Pharaoh; he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart - The prayer of
Moses opened and shut heaven, like Elijah's. And such is the power of
God's two witnesses, [Rev 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#006). Yet
neither Moses nor Elijah, nor those two witnesses, could subdue the hard
hearts of men. Pharaoh was frighted into compliance by the judgment,
but, when it was over, his convictions vanished.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 10](exo010)

</div>
