<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo038)  [Next](exo040) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 39](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#001)

[Exodus 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 39:1</span></span>

The priests garments are called here clothes of service - Those that
wear robes of honour must look upon them as clothes of service; for
those upon whom honour is put, from them service is expected. Holy
garments were not made for men to sleep in, but to do service in, and
then they are indeed for glory and beauty. These also were shadows of
good things to come, but the substance is Christ. He is our great high
priest; he put upon him the clothes of service when he undertook the
work of our redemption; arrayed himself with the gifts and graces of the
Spirit, which he received not by measure; charged himself with all God's
spiritual Israel, bare them on his shoulder, carried them in his bosom,
and presented them in the breast - plate of judgment unto his Father.
And, lastly, he crowned himself with holiness to the Lord, consecrated
his whole undertaking to the honour of his Fathers holiness. And all
true believers are spiritual priests. The clean linen with which all
their clothes of service must be made, is the righteousness of saints:
and holiness to the Lord must be so written upon their foreheads, that
all who converse with them may see they bear the image of God's
holiness.

[Exodus 39:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">exo 39:32</span></span>

Thus was all the work finished - In not much more than five months.
Though there was a great deal of fine work, such as used to be the work
of time, embroidering, and engraving, not only in gold, but in precious
stones, yet they went through with it in a little time, and with the
greatest exactness imaginable. The workmen were taught of God, and so
were kept from making blunders, which would have retarded them. And the
people were hearty and zealous in the work, and impatient till it was
finished. God had prepared their hearts, and then the thing was done
suddenly, [Ch2 29:36](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#036).

[Exodus 39:43](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">exo 39:43</span></span>

And Moses did look upon all the work - Piece by Piece, and behold they
had done it according to the pattern shewed him - For the same that
shewed him the pattern, guided their hand in the work. And Moses blessed
them - He not only praised them, but prayed for them: he blessed them as
one having authority. We read not of any wages Moses paid them for their
work, but his blessing he gave them. For though ordinarily the labourer
be worthy of his hire, yet in this case, they wrought for themselves.
The honour and comfort of God's tabernacle among them would be
recompence enough. And they had their meat from heaven on free - cost,
for themselves and their families, and their raiment waxed not old upon
them; so that they neither needed wages, nor had reason to expect any.
But indeed this blessing in the name of the Lord was wages enough for
all their work. Those whom God employs he will bless, and those whom he
blesseth, they are blessed indeed. The blessing he commands is life for
evermore.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 40](exo040)

</div>
