<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo015)  [Next](exo017.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001.md)

[Exodus 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 16:1</span></span>

A month's provision, it seems, the host of Israel took with them out of
Egypt, when they came thence on the 15th day of the first month, which,
by the 15th day of the second month, was all spent.

[Exodus 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 16:2</span></span>

Then the whole congregation murmured against Moses and Aaron - God's
viceregents among them.

[Exodus 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 16:3</span></span>

They so undervalue their deliverance, that they wish, they had died in
Egypt, nay, and died by the hand of the Lord too. That is, by some of
the plagues which cut off the Egyptians; as if it were not the hand of
the Lord, but of Moses only, that brought them into this wilderness.
'Tis common for people to say of that pain, or sickness, which they see
not second causes of, It is what pleaseth God, as if that were not so
likewise which comes by the hand of man, or some visible accident. We
cannot suppose they had any great plenty in Egypt, how largely soever
they now talk of the flesh - pots, nor could they fear dying for want in
the wilderness while they had their flocks and herds with them; but
discontent magnifies what is past, and vilifies what is present, without
regard to truth or reason. None talk more absurdly than murmurers.

[Exodus 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 16:4</span></span>

Man being made out of the earth, his Maker has wisely ordered him food
out of the earth, [Psa 104:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#014.md). But the
people of Israel typifying the church of the first - born that are
written in heaven, receiving their charters, laws and commissions from
heaven, from heaven also they received their food. See what God designed
in making this provision for them, that I may prove them whether they
will walk in my law or no - Whether they will trust me, and whether they
would serve him, and be ever faithful to so good a master.

[Exodus 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 16:5</span></span>

They shall prepare - Lay up, grind, bake or boil.

[Exodus 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 16:6</span></span>

The Lord - And not we, (as you suggest) by our own counsel.

[Exodus 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 16:10</span></span>

The glory of the Lord - An extra - ordinary and sudden brightness.

[Exodus 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 16:12</span></span>

And ye shall know that I am the Lord your God - This gave proof of his
power as the Lord, and his particular favour to them as their God; when
God plagued the Egyptians, it was to make them know that he is the Lord;
when he provided for the Israelites, it was to make them know that he
was their God.

[Exodus 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 16:13</span></span>

The quails came up, and covered the camp - So tame that they might take
up as many of them as they pleased. Next morning he rained manna upon
them, which was to be continued to them for their daily bread.

[Exodus 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 16:15</span></span>

What is this? Manna descended from the clouds. It came down in dew
melted, and yet was itself of such a consistency as to serve for
nourishing strengthening food, without any thing else: It was pleasant
food; the Jews say it was palatable to all, according as their tastes
were. It was wholesome food, light of digestion. By this spare and plain
diet we are all taught a lesson of temperance, and forbidden to desire
dainties and varieties.

[Exodus 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 16:16</span></span>

An omer - The tenth part of an Ephah: Near six pints, wine - measure.

[Exodus 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 16:19</span></span>

Let no man leave 'till morning - But let them learn to go to bed and
sleep quietly, though they had not a bit of bread in their tent, nor in
all their camp, trusting God with the following day to bring them their
daily bread. Never was there such a market of provisions as this, where
so many hundred thousand men were daily furnished without money, and
without price: never was there such an open house kept as God kept in
the wilderness for 40 years together, nor such free and plentiful
entertainment given. And the same wisdom, power and goodness that now
brought food daily out of the clouds, doth in the constant course of
nature bring food yearly out of the earth, and gives us all things
richly to enjoy.

[Exodus 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 16:23</span></span>

Here is a plain intimation of the observing a seventh day sabbath, not
only before the giving of the law upon mount Sinai, but before the
bringing of Israel out of Egypt and therefore from the beginning. If the
sabbath had now been first instituted, how could Moses have understood
what God said to him, [Exo 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#004.md),
concerning a double portion to be gathered on the sixth day, without
making any express mention of the sabbath? And how could the people so
readily take the hint, [Exo 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#022.md),
even to the surprize of the rulers, before Moses had declared that it
was done with regard to the sabbath, if they had not had some knowledge
of the sabbath before? The setting apart of one day in seven for holy
work, and in order to that for holy rest, was a divine appointment ever
since God created man upon the earth.

[Exodus 16:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">exo 16:34</span></span>

An omer of this manna was laid up in a golden pot as we are told, [Heb
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#004.md), and kept before the testimony, or
the ark, when it was afterwards made, The preservation of this manna
from waste and corruption, was a standing miracle; and therefore the
more proper memorial of this miraculous food. The manna is called
spiritual meat, [Co1 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#003.md), because it
was typical of spiritual blessings. Christ himself is the true manna,
the bread of life, of which that was a figure, [Joh
6:49-51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#049.md). The word of God is the manna
by which our souls are nourished, [Mat
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#004.md). The comforts of the Spirit are
hidden manna, [Rev 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#017.md). These
comforts from heaven as the manna did, are the support of the divine
life in the soul while we are in the wilderness of this world: it is
food for Israelites, for those only that follow the pillar of cloud and
fire: it is to be gathered; Christ in the word is to be applied to the
soul, and the means of grace used: we must every one of us gather for
ourselves. There was manna enough for all, enough for each, and none had
too much; so in Christ there is a compleat sufficiency, and no
superfluity. But they that did eat manna hungered again, died at last,
and with many of them God was not well pleased: whereas they that feed
on Christ by faith shall never hunger, and shall die no more, and with
them God will be for ever well pleased. The Lord evermore give us this
bread!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 17](exo017.md)

</div>
