<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Galatians Index](gal)  
  [Previous](gal001)  [Next](gal003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001)

[Galatians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 2:1</span></span>

Then fourteen years after - My first journey thither. I went up again to
Jerusalem - This seems to be the journey mentioned [Act
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002); several passages here referring
to that great council, wherein all the apostles showed that they were of
the same judgment with him.

[Galatians 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gal 2:2</span></span>

I went up - Not by any command from them, but by an express revelation
from God. And laid before them - The chief of the church in Jerusalem.
The gospel which I preach among the gentiles - [Act
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#004), touching justification by faith
alone; not that they might confirm me therein, but that I might remove
prejudice from them. Yet not publicly at first, but severally to those
of eminence - Speaking to them one by one. Lest I should run, or should
have run, in vain - Lest I should lose the fruit either of my present or
past labours. For they might have greatly hindered this, had they not
been fully satisfied both of his mission and doctrine. The word run
beautifully expresses the swift progress of the gospel.

[Galatians 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gal 2:3</span></span>

But neither was Titus who was with me - When I conversed with them.
Compelled to be circumcised - A clear proof that none of the apostles
insisted on the circumcising gentile believers. The sense is, And it is
true, some of those false brethren would fain have compelled Titus to be
circumcised; but I utterly refused it.

[Galatians 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gal 2:4</span></span>

Because of false brethren - Who seem to have urged it. Introduced
unawares - Into some of those private conferences at Jerusalem. Who had
slipped in to spy out our liberty - From the ceremonial law. That they
might, if possible, bring us into that bondage again.

[Galatians 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gal 2:5</span></span>

To whom we did not yield by submission - Although in love he would have
yielded to any. With such wonderful prudence did the apostle use his
Christian liberty ! circumcising Timothy, [Act
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#003), because of weak brethren, but
not Titus, because of false brethren. That the truth of the gospel -
That is, the true genuine gospel. Might continue with you - With you
gentiles. So we defend, for your sakes, the privilege which you would
give up.

[Galatians 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gal 2:6</span></span>

And they who undoubtedly were something - Above all others. What they
were - How eminent soever. It is no difference to me - So that I should
alter either my doctrine or my practice. God accepteth no man's person -
For any eminence in gifts or outward prerogatives. In that conference
added nothing to me - Neither as to doctrine nor mission.

[Galatians 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gal 2:7</span></span>

But when they saw - By the effects which I laid before them, [Gal
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#008); [Act
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#012). That I was intrusted with the
gospel of the uncircumcision - That is, with the charge of preaching it
to the uncircumcised heathens.

[Galatians 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gal 2:8</span></span>

For he that wrought effectually in Peter for the apostleship of the
circumcision - To qualify him for, and support him in, the discharge of
that office to the Jews. Wrought likewise effectually in and by me - For
and in the discharge of my office toward the gentiles.

[Galatians 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gal 2:9</span></span>

And when James - Probably named first because he was bishop of the
church in Jerusalem. And Cephas - Speaking of him at Jerusalem he calls
him by his Hebrew name. And John - Hence it appears that he also was at
the council, though he is not particularly named in the Acts. Who
undoubtedly were pillars - The principal supporters and defenders of the
gospel. Knew - After they had heard the account I gave them. The grace -
Of apostleship. Which was given me, they - In the name of all. Gave to
me and Barnabas - My fellow - labourer. The right hands of fellowship -
They gave us their hands in token of receiving us as their fellow -
labourers, mutually agreeing that we - I and those in union with me.
Should go to the gentiles - Chiefly. And they - With those that were in
union with them, chiefly to the circumcision - The Jews.

[Galatians 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gal 2:10</span></span>

Of the poor - The poor Christians in Judea, who had lost all they had
for Christ's sake.

[Galatians 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gal 2:11</span></span>

But - The argument here comes to the height. Paul reproves Peter
himself. So far was he from receiving his doctrine from man, or from
being inferior to the chief of the apostles. When Peter - Afterwards,
Came to Antioch - Then the chief of all the Gentile churches. I
withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed - For fear of
man, [Gal 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#012); for dissimulation,
[Gal 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#013); and for not walking
uprightly. [Gal 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014).

[Galatians 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gal 2:13</span></span>

And the other believing Jews - Who were at Antioch. Dissembled with him,
so that even Barnabas was carried away with their dissimulation - Was
borne away, as with a torrent, into the same ill practice.

[Galatians 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gal 2:14</span></span>

I said to Cephas before them all - See Paul single against Peter and all
the Jews! If thou being a Jew, yet livest, in thy ordinary conversation,
after the manner of the gentiles - Not observing the ceremonial law,
which thou knowest to be now abolished. Why compellest thou the gentiles
- By withdrawing thyself and all the ministers from them; either to
judaize, to keep the ceremonial law, or to be excluded from church
communion ?

[Galatians 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gal 2:15</span></span>

We - St. Paul, to spare St. Peter, drops the first person singular, and
speaks in the plural number. [Gal
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#018), he speaks in the first person
singular again by a figure; and without a figure, [Gal
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#019), &c. Who are Jews by nature - By
birth, not proselytes only. And not sinners of the gentiles - That is,
not sinful Gentiles; not such gross, enormous, abandoned sinners, as the
heathens generally were.

[Galatians 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gal 2:16</span></span>

Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law - Not even
of the moral, much less the ceremonial, law. But by the faith of Jesus
Christ - That is, by faith in him. The name Jesus was first known by the
gentiles; the name Christ by the Jews. And they are not always placed
promiscuously; but generally in a more solemn way of speaking, the
Apostle says, Christ Jesus; in a more familiar, Jesus Christ. Even we -
And how much more must the Gentiles, who have still less pretence to
depend on their own works! Have believed - Knowing there is no other
way. Because - Considering the demands of the law, and the fate of human
nature, it is evident, that by the works of the law - By such an
obedience as it requires. Shall no flesh living - No human creature, Jew
or Gentile, be justified. Hitherto St. Paul had been considering that
single question, "Are Christians obliged to observe the ceremonial law?
But he here insensibly goes farther, and, by citing this scripture,
shows that what he spoke directly of the ceremonial, included also the
moral, law. For David undoubtedly did so, when he said, [Psa
143:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#002), the place here referred to, "In
thy sight shall no man living be justified;" which the Apostle likewise
explains, [Rom 3:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#019), in such a
manner as can agree to none but the moral law.

[Galatians 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gal 2:17</span></span>

But if while we seek to be justified by Christ, we ourselves are still
found sinners - If we continue in sin, will it therefore follow, that
Christ is the minister or countenancer of sin?

[Galatians 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gal 2:18</span></span>

By no means. For if I build again - By my sinful practice. The things
which I destroyed - By my preaching, I only make myself - Or show
myself, not Christ, to be a transgressor; the whole blame lies on me,
not him or his gospel. As if he had said, The objection were just, if
the gospel promised justification to men continuing in sin. But it does
not. Therefore if any who profess the gospel do not live according to
it, they are sinners, it is certain, but not justified, and so the
gospel is clear.

[Galatians 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gal 2:19</span></span>

For I through the law - Applied by the Spirit to my heart, and deeply
convincing me of my utter sinfulness and helplessness. Am dead to the
law - To all hope of justification from it. That I may live to God - Not
continue in sin. For this very end am I, in this sense, freed from the
law, that I may be freed from sin.

[Galatians 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gal 2:20</span></span>

The Apostle goes on to describe how he is freed from sin; how far he is
from continuing therein. I am crucified with Christ - Made conformable
to his death; "the body of sin is destroyed." [Rom
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006). And I - As to my corrupt nature.
Live no longer - Being dead to sin. But Christ liveth in me - Is a
fountain of life in my inmost soul, from which all my tempers, words,
and actions flow. And the life that I now live in the flesh - Even in
this mortal body, I live by faith in the Son of God - I derive every
moment from that supernatural principle; from a divine evidence and
conviction, that "he loved me, and delivered up himself for me."

[Galatians 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gal 2:21</span></span>

Meantime I do not make void - In seeking to be justified by my own
works. The grace of God - The free love of God in Christ Jesus. But they
do, who seek justification by the law. For if righteousness is by the
law - If men might be justified by their obedience to the law, moral or
ceremonial. Then Christ died in vain - Without any necessity for it,
since men might have been saved without his death; might by their own
obedience have been both discharged from condemnation, and entitled to
eternal life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 3](gal003)

</div>
