<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Galatians Index](gal.md)  
  [Previous](gal005)  [Next](eph001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001.md)

[Galatians 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 6:1</span></span>

Brethren, if a man be overtaken in any fault - By surprise, ignorance,
or stress of temptation. Ye who are spiritual - Who continue to live and
walk by the Spirit. Restore such an one - By reproof, instruction, or
exhortation. Every one who can, ought to help herein; only in the spirit
of meekness - This is essential to a spiritual man; and in this lies the
whole force of the cure. Considering thyself - The plural is beautifully
changed into the singular. Let each take heed to himself. Lest thou also
be tempted - Temptation easily and swiftly passes from one to another;
especially if a man endeavours to cure another without preserving his
own meekness.

[Galatians 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gal 6:2</span></span>

Bear ye one another's burdens - Sympathize with, and assist, each other,
in all your weaknesses, grievances, trials. And so fulfil the law of
Christ - The law of Christ (an uncommon expression) is the law of love:
this our Lord peculiarly recommends; this he makes the distinguishing
mark of his disciples.

[Galatians 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gal 6:3</span></span>

If any one think himself to be something - Above his brethren, or by any
strength of his own. When he is nothing, he deceiveth himself - He alone
will bear their burdens, who knows himself to be nothing.

[Galatians 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gal 6:4</span></span>

But let every man try his own work - Narrowly examine all he is, and all
he doeth. And then he shall have rejoicing in himself - He will find in
himself matter of rejoicing, if his works are right before God. And not
in another - Not in glorying over others.

[Galatians 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gal 6:5</span></span>

For every one shall bear his own burden - ln that day shall give an
account of himself to God.

[Galatians 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gal 6:6</span></span>

Let him that is taught impart to him that teacheth all such temporal
good things as he stands in need of.

[Galatians 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gal 6:7</span></span>

God is not mocked - Although they attempt to mock him, who think to reap
otherwise than they sow.

[Galatians 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gal 6:8</span></span>

For he that now soweth to the flesh - That follows the desires of
corrupt nature. Shall hereafter of the flesh - Out of this very seed.
Reap corruption - Death everlasting. But he that soweth to the Spirit -
That follows his guidance in all his tempers and conversation. Shall of
the Spirit - By the free grace and power of God, reap life everlasting.

[Galatians 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gal 6:9</span></span>

But let us not be weary in well doing - Let us persevere in sowing to
the Spirit. For in due season - When the harvest is come, we shall reap,
if we faint not.

[Galatians 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gal 6:10</span></span>

Therefore as we have opportunity - At whatever time or place, and in
whatever manner we can. The opportunity in general is our lifetime; but
there are also many particular opportunities. Satan is quickened in
doing hurt, by the shortness of the time, [Rev
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#012.md). By the same consideration let
us be quickened in doing good. Let us do good - In every possible kind,
and in every possible degree. Unto all men - Neighbours or strangers,
good or evil, friends or enemies. But especially to them who are of the
household of faith. For all believers are but one family.

[Galatians 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gal 6:11</span></span>

Ye see how large a letter - St. Paul had not yet wrote a larger to any
church. I have written with my own hand - He generally wrote by an
amanuensis.

[Galatians 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gal 6:12</span></span>

As many as desire to make a fair appearance in the flesh - To preserve a
fair character. These constrain you - Both by their example and
importunity. To be circumcised - Not so much from a principle of
conscience, as lest they should suffer persecution - From the
unbelieving Jews. For the cross of Christ - For maintaining that faith
in a crucified Saviour is alone sufficient for justification.

[Galatians 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gal 6:13</span></span>

For neither they themselves keep the whole law - So far are they from a
real zeal for it. But yet they desire to have you circumcised, that they
may glory in your flesh - That they may boast of you as their
proselytes, and make a merit of this with the other Jews.

[Galatians 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gal 6:14</span></span>

But God forbid that I should glory - Should boast of anything I have,
am, or do; or rely on anything for my acceptance with God, but what
Christ hath done and suffered for me. By means of which the world is
crucified to me - All the things and persons in it are to me as nothing.
And I unto the world - I am dead to all worldly pursuits, cares,
desires, and enjoyments.

[Galatians 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gal 6:15</span></span>

For neither circumcision is anything, nor uncircumcision - Neither of
these is of any account. But a new creation - Whereby all things in us
become new.

[Galatians 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gal 6:16</span></span>

And as many as walk according to this rule - Glorying only in the cross
of Christ. Being crucified to the world. And, Created anew. Peace and
mercy be upon them, and upon the Israel, that is, the Church, of God -
Which consists of all those, and those only, of every nation and
kindred, who walk by this rule.

[Galatians 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gal 6:17</span></span>

From henceforth let none trouble me - By quarrels and disputes. For I
bear - And afflictions should not be added to the afflicted. In my body
the marks of the Lord Jesus - The scars, marks, and brands of my
sufferings for Him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Chapter 1](eph001.md)

</div>
