<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Galatians Index](gal)  
  [Previous](gal004)  [Next](gal006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#001)

[Galatians 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 5:1</span></span>

Stand fast therefore in the liberty - From the ceremonial law. Wherewith
Christ hath made us - And all believers, free; and be not entangled
again with the yoke of legal bondage.

[Galatians 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gal 5:2</span></span>

If ye be circumcised - And seek to be justified thereby. Christ - The
Christian institution. Will profit you nothing - For you hereby disclaim
Christ, and all the blessings which are through faith in him.

[Galatians 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gal 5:3</span></span>

I testify to every man - Every gentile. That is circumcised - He thereby
makes himself a debtor - Obliges.

[Galatians 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gal 5:4</span></span>

Therefore Christ is become of no effect to you - Who seek to be
justified by the law. Ye are fallen from grace - Ye renounce the new
covenant. Ye disclaim the benefit of this gracious dispensation.

[Galatians 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gal 5:5</span></span>

For we - Who believe in Christ, Who are under the gospel dispensation.
Through the Spirit - Without any of those carnal ordinances. Wait for -
in sure confidence of attaining. The hope of righteousness - The
righteousness we hope for, and full reward of it. This righteousness we
receive of God through faith; and by faith we shall obtain the reward.

[Galatians 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gal 5:6</span></span>

For in Christ Jesus - According to the institution which he hath
established, according to the tenor of the Christian covenant. Neither
circumcision - With the most punctual observance of the law. Nor
uncircumcision - With the most exact heathen morality. Availeth anything
- Toward present justification or eternal salvation. But faith - Alone;
even that faith which worketh by love - All inward and outward holiness.

[Galatians 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gal 5:7</span></span>

Ye did run well - In the race of faith. Who hath hindered you in your
course, that ye should not still obey the truth?

[Galatians 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gal 5:8</span></span>

This your present persuasion cometh not from God, who called you - to
his kingdom and glory.

[Galatians 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gal 5:9</span></span>

A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump - One troubler, [Gal
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#010), troubles all.

[Galatians 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gal 5:10</span></span>

Yet I have confidence that - After ye have read this. Ye will be no
otherwise minded - Than I am, and ye were. But he that troubleth you -
It seems to have been one person chiefly who endeavoured to seduce them.
Shall bear his judgment - A heavy burden, already hanging over his head.

[Galatians 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gal 5:11</span></span>

But if I still preach circumcision - As that troubler seems to have
affirmed, probably taking occasion from his having circumcised Timothy.
Why do I still suffer persecution? then is the offence of the cross
ceased - The grand reason why the Jews were so offended at his preaching
Christ crucified, and so bitterly persecuted him for it, was, that it
implied the abolition of the law. Yet St. Paul did not condemn the
conforming, out of condescension to the weakness of any one, even to the
ceremonial law; but he did absolutely condemn those who taught it as
necessary to justification.

[Galatians 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gal 5:12</span></span>

I would they were even cut off - From your communion; cast out of your
church, that thus trouble you.

[Galatians 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gal 5:13</span></span>

Ye have been called to liberty - From sin and misery, as well as from
the ceremonial law. Only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh -
Take not occasion from hence to gratify corrupt nature. But by love
serve one another - And hereby show that Christ has made you free.

[Galatians 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gal 5:14</span></span>

For all the law is fulfilled in this, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself - inasmuch as none can do this without loving God, [Jo1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#012); and the love of God and man
includes all perfection. [Lev 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#018).

[Galatians 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gal 5:15</span></span>

But if - On the contrary, in consequence of the divisions which those
troublers have occasioned among you, ye bite one another by evil
speaking. And devour one another - By railing and clamour. Take heed ye
be not consumed one of another - By bitterness, strife, and contention,
our health and strength, both of body and soul, are consumed, as well as
our substance and reputation.

[Galatians 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gal 5:16</span></span>

I say then - He now explains what he proposed, [Gal
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013). Walk by the Spirit - Follow his
guidance in all things. And fulfil not - In anything. The desire of the
flesh - Of corrupt nature.

[Galatians 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gal 5:17</span></span>

For the flesh desireth against the Spirit - Nature desires what is quite
contrary to the Spirit of God. But the Spirit against the flesh - - But
the Holy Spirit on his part opposes your evil nature. These are contrary
to each other - The flesh and the Spirit; there can be no agreement
between them. That ye may not do the things which ye would - - That,
being thus strengthened by the Spirit, ye may not fulfil the desire of
the flesh, as otherwise ye would do.

[Galatians 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gal 5:18</span></span>

But if ye are led by the Spirit - Of liberty and love, into all
holiness. Ye are not under the law - Not under the curse or bondage of
it; not under the guilt or the power of sin.

[Galatians 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gal 5:19</span></span>

Now the works of the flesh - By which that inward principle is
discovered. Are manifest - Plain and undeniable. Works are mentioned in
the plural because they are distinct from, and often inconsistent with,
each other. But "the fruit of the Spirit" is mentioned in the singular,
[Gal 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022), as being all consistent and
connected together. Which are these - He enumerates those "works of the
flesh" to which the Galatians were most inclined; and those parts of
"the fruit of the Spirit" of which they stood in the greatest need.
Lasciviousness - The Greek word means anything inward or outward that is
contrary to chastity, and yet short of actual uncleanness.

[Galatians 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gal 5:20</span></span>

Idolatry, witchcraft - That this means witchcraft, strictly speaking,
(not poisoning,) appears from its being joined with the worship of devil
- gods, and not with murder. This is frequently and solemnly forbidden
in the Old Testament. To deny therefore that there is, or ever was, any
such thing, is, by plain consequence, to deny the authority both of the
Old and New Testament. Divisions - In domestic or civil matters.
Heresies are divisions in religious communities.

[Galatians 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gal 5:21</span></span>

Revellings - Luxurious entertainments. Some of the works here mentioned
are wrought principally, if not entirely, in the mind; and yet they are
called "works of the flesh." Hence it is clear, the apostle does not by
"the flesh" mean the body, or sensual appetites and inclinations only,
but the corruption of human nature, as it spreads through all the powers
of the soul, as well as all the members of the body. Of which I tell you
before - Before the event, I forewarn you.

[Galatians 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gal 5:22</span></span>

Love - The root of all the rest. Gentleness - Toward all men; ignorant
and wicked men in particular. Goodness - The Greek word means all that
is benign, soft, winning, tender, either in temper or behaviour.

[Galatians 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gal 5:23</span></span>

Meekness - Holding all the affections and passions in even balance.

[Galatians 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gal 5:24</span></span>

And they that are Christ's - True believers in him. Have thus crucified
the flesh - Nailed it, as it were, to a cross whence it has no power to
break loose, but is continually weaker and weaker. With its affections
and desires - All its evil passions, appetites, and inclinations.

[Galatians 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gal 5:25</span></span>

If we live by the Spirit - If we are indeed raised from the dead, and
are alive to God, by the operation of his Spirit. Let us walk by the
Spirit - Let us follow his guidance, in all our tempers, thoughts,
words, and actions.

[Galatians 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gal 5:26</span></span>

Be not desirous of vain glory - Of the praise or esteem of men. They who
do not carefully and closely follow the Spirit, easily slide into this:
the natural effects of which are, provoking to envy them that are
beneath us, and envying them that are above us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 6](gal006)

</div>
