<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Galatians Index](gal)  
  [Previous](gal002)  [Next](gal004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001)

[Galatians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 3:1</span></span>

O thoughtless Galatians - He breaks in upon them with a beautiful
abruptness. Who hath bewitched you - Thus to contradict both your own
reason and experience. Before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath been as
evidently set forth - By our preaching, as if he had been crucified
among you.

[Galatians 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gal 3:2</span></span>

This only would I learn of you - That is, this one argument might
convince you. Did ye receive the witness and the fruit of the Spirit by
performing the works of the law, or by hearing of and receiving faith?

[Galatians 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gal 3:3</span></span>

Are ye so thoughtless - As not to consider what you have yourselves
experienced? Having begun in the Spirit - Having set out under the light
and power of the Spirit by faith, do ye now, when ye ought to be more
spiritual, and more acquainted with the power of faith, expect to be
made perfect by the flesh? Do you think to complete either your
justification or sanctification, by giving up that faith, and depending
on the law, which is a gross and carnal thing when opposed to the
gospel?

[Galatians 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gal 3:4</span></span>

Have ye suffered - Both from the zealous Jews and from the heathens. So
many things - For adhering to the gospel. In vain - So as to lose all
the blessings which ye might have obtained, by enduring to the end. If
it be yet in vain - As if he had said, I hope better things, even that
ye will endure to the end.

[Galatians 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gal 3:5</span></span>

And, at the present time, Doth he that ministereth the gift of the
Spirit to you, and worketh miracles among you, do it by the works of the
law - That is, in confirmation of his preaching justification by works,
or of his preaching justification by faith?

[Galatians 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gal 3:6</span></span>

Doubtless in confirmation of that grand doctrine, that we are justified
by faith, even as Abraham was. The Apostle, both in this and in the
epistle to the Romans, makes great use of the instance of Abraham: the
rather, because from Abraham the Jews drew their great argument, as they
do this day, both for their own continuance in Judaism, and for denying
the gentiles to be the church of God. [Gen
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006)

[Galatians 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gal 3:7</span></span>

Know then that they who are partakers of his faith, these, and these
only, are the sons of Abraham, and therefore heirs of the promises made
to him.

[Galatians 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gal 3:8</span></span>

And the scripture - That is, the Holy Spirit, who gave the scripture.
Foreseeing that God would justify the gentiles also by faith, declared
before - So great is the excellency and fulness of the scripture, that
all the things which can ever be controverted are therein both foreseen
and determined. In or through thee - As the father of the Messiah, shall
all the nations be blessed. [Gen 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003)

[Galatians 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gal 3:9</span></span>

So then all they, and they only, who are of faith - Who truly believe.
Are blessed with faithful Abraham - Receive the blessing as he did,
namely, by faith.

[Galatians 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gal 3:10</span></span>

They only receive it. For as many as are of the works of the law - As
God deals with on that footing, only on the terms the law proposes, are
under a curse; for it is written, Cursed is every one who continueth not
in all the things which are written in the law. Who continueth not in
all the things - So it requires what no man can perform, namely,
perfect, uninterrupted, and perpetual obedience. [Deu
27:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026)

[Galatians 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gal 3:11</span></span>

But that none is justified by his obedience to the law in the sight of
God - Whatever may be done in the sight of man, is farther evident from
the words of Habakkuk, The just shall live by faith - That is, the man
who is accounted just or righteous before God, shall continue in a state
of acceptance, life, and salvation, by faith. This is the way God hath
chosen. [Hab 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004).

[Galatians 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gal 3:12</span></span>

And the law is not of faith - But quite opposite to it: it does not say,
Believe; but, Do. [Lev 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005)

[Galatians 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gal 3:13</span></span>

Christ - Christ alone. The abruptness of the sentence shows an holy
indignation at those who reject so great a blessing. Hath redeemed us -
Whether Jews or gentiles, at an high price. From the curse of the law -
The curse of God, which the law denounces against all transgressors of
it. Being made a curse for us - Taking the curse upon himself, that we
might be delivered from it, willingly submitting to that death which the
law pronounces peculiarly accursed. [Deu
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#023).

[Galatians 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gal 3:14</span></span>

That the blessing of Abraham - The blessing promised to him. Might come
on the gentiles - Also. That we - Who believe, whether Jews or gentiles.
Might receive the promise of the Spirit - Which includes all the other
promises. Through faith - Not by works; for faith looks wholly to the
promise.

[Galatians 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gal 3:15</span></span>

I speak after the manner of men - I illustrate this by a familiar
instance, taken from the practice of men. Though it be but a man's
covenant, yet, if it be once legally confirmed, none - No, not the
covenanter himself, unless something unforeseen occur, which cannot be
the case with God. Disannulleth, or addeth thereto - Any new conditions.

[Galatians 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gal 3:16</span></span>

Now the promises were made to Abraham and his seed - Several promises
were made to Abraham; but the chief of all, and which was several times
repeated, was that of the blessing through Christ. He - That is, God.
Saith not, And to seeds, as of many - As if the promise were made to
several kinds of seed. But as of one - That is, one kind of seed, one
posterity, one kind of sons. And to all these the blessing belonged by
promise. Which is Christ - including all that believe in him. [Gen
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018).

[Galatians 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gal 3:17</span></span>

And this I say - What I mean is this. The covenant which was before
confirmed of God - By the promise itself, by the repetition of it, and
by a solemn oath, concerning the blessing all nations. Through Christ,
the law which was four hundred and thirty years after - Counting from
the time when the promise was first made to Abraham, [Gen
12:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#002). Doth not disannul, so as to
make the promise of no effect - With regard to all nations, if only the
Jewish were to receive it; yea, with regard to them also, if it was by
works, so as to supersede it, and introduce another way of obtaining the
blessing.

[Galatians 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gal 3:18</span></span>

And again - This is a new argument. The former was drawn from the time,
this from the nature, of the transaction. If the eternal inheritance be
obtained by keeping the law, it is no more by virtue of the free promise
- These being just opposite to each other. But it is by promise.
Therefore it is not by the law.

[Galatians 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gal 3:19</span></span>

It - The ceremonial law. Was added - To the promise. Because of
transgressions - Probably, the yoke of the ceremonial law was inflicted
as a punishment for the national sin of idolatry, [Exo
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001), at least the more grievous parts
of it; and the whole of it was a prophetic type of Christ. The moral law
was added to the promise to discover and restrain transgressions, to
convince men of their guilt, and need of the promise, and give some
check to sin. And this law passeth not away; but the ceremonial law was
only introduced till Christ, the seed to or through whom the promise was
made, should come. And it was ordained by angels in the hand of a
mediator - It was not given to Israel, like the promise to Abraham,
immediately from God himself; but was conveyed by the ministry of angels
to Moses, and delivered into his hand as a mediator between God and
them, to remind them of the great Mediator.

[Galatians 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gal 3:20</span></span>

Now the mediator is not a mediator of one - There must be two parties,
or there can be no mediator between them; but God who made the free
promise to Abraham is only one of the parties. The other, Abraham, was
not present at the time of Moses. Therefore in the promise Moses had
nothing to do. The law, wherein he was concerned, was a transaction of
quite another nature.

[Galatians 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gal 3:21</span></span>

Will it follow from hence that the law is against, opposite to, the
promises of God? By no means. They are well consistent. But yet the law
cannot give life, as the promise doth. If there had been a law which
could have given life - Which could have entitled a sinner to life, God
would have spared his own Son, and righteousness, or justification. with
all the blessings consequent upon it, would have been by that law.

[Galatians 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gal 3:22</span></span>

But, on the contrary, the scripture wherein that law is written hath
concluded all under sin - Hath shut them up together, (so the word
properly signifies,) as in a prison, under sentence of death, to the end
that all being cut off from expecting justification by the law, the
promise might be freely given to them that believe.

[Galatians 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gal 3:23</span></span>

But before faith - That is, the gospel dispensation. Came, we were kept
- As in close custody. Under the law - The Mosaic dispensation. Shut up
unto the faith which was to be revealed - Reserved and prepared for the
gospel dispensation.

[Galatians 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gal 3:24</span></span>

Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster unto Christ - It was designed to
train us up for Christ. And this it did both by its commands, which
showed the need we had of his atonement; and its ceremonies, which all
pointed us to him.

[Galatians 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gal 3:25</span></span>

But faith - That is, the gospel dispensation. Being come, we are no
longer under that schoolmaster - The Mosaic dispensation.

[Galatians 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gal 3:26</span></span>

For ye - Christians. Are all adult sons of God - And so need a
schoolmaster no longer.

[Galatians 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gal 3:27</span></span>

For as many of you as have testified your faith by being baptized in the
name of Christ, have put on Christ - Have received him as your
righteousness, and are therefore sons of God through him.

[Galatians 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gal 3:28</span></span>

There is neither Jew nor Greek - That is, there is no difference between
them; they are equally accepted through faith. There is neither male nor
female - Circumcision being laid aside, which was peculiar to males, and
was designed to put a difference, during that dispensation, between Jews
and gentiles.

[Galatians 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gal 3:29</span></span>

If ye are Christ's - That is, believers in him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 4](gal004)

</div>
