<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen032)  [Next](gen034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 33](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#001)

[Genesis 33:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 33:3</span></span>

He bowed - Though he feared Esau as an enemy, yet he did obeisance to
him as an elder brother.

[Genesis 33:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 33:4</span></span>

And Esau ran to meet him - Not in passion but in love. Embraced him,
fell on his neck and kissed him - God hath the hearts of all men in his
hands, and can turn them when and how he pleases. He can of a sudden
convert enemies into friends, as he did two Sauls, one by restraining
grace, [Sa1 26:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#021), [Sa1
26:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#025), the other by renewing grace,
[Act 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#021). And they wept - Jacob wept
for joy to be thus kindly received; Esau perhaps wept for grief and
shame to think of the ill design he had conceived against his brother.

[Genesis 33:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 33:5</span></span>

Eleven or twelve little ones followed Jacob, the eldest of them not
fourteen years old: Who are these? saith Esau. Jacob had sent him an
account of the increase of his estate, but made no mention of his
children, perhaps because he would not expose them to his rage, if he
should meet him as an enemy. Esau therefore had reason to ask who are
those with thee? To which Jacob returns a serious answer; they are the
children which God hath graciously given thy servant. Jacob speaks of
his children, As God's gifts; they are a heritage of the Lord. As choice
gifts; he hath graciously given them. Though they were many, and but
slenderly provided for, yet he accounts them great blessings.

[Genesis 33:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 33:10</span></span>

I have seen thy face as though I had seen the face of God - That is, I
have seen thee reconciled to me, and at peace with me, as I desire to
see God reconciled.

[Genesis 33:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 33:12</span></span>

Esau offers himself to be his guide and companion, in token of sincere
reconciliation. We never find that Jacob and Esau were so loving with
one another as they were now. God made Esau not only not an enemy, but a
friend. Esau is become fond of Jacob's company, courts him to mount
Seir: let us never despair of any, nor distrust God, in whose hands all
hearts are. Yet Jacob saw cause modestly to refute this offer, wherein
he shews a tender concern for his own family and flocks, like a good
shepherd and a good father. He must consider the children, and the
flocks with young, and not lead the one or drive the other too fast.
Jacob intimates to him, that it was his design to come to him to mount
Seir; and we may presume he did so, after he had settled his concerns
elsewhere, though that visit be not recorded.

[Genesis 33:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 33:15</span></span>

Esau offers some of his men to be his guard and convoy; but Jacob humbly
refuseth his offer, only desiring he would not take it amiss that he did
not accept it. What needs it? He is under the Divine protection. Those
are sufficiently guarded that have God for their guard, and are under a
convoy of his hosts, as Jacob was. Jacob adds, only let me find grace in
the sight of my lord - Having thy favour I have all I need, all I desire
from thee.

[Genesis 33:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 33:16</span></span>

And Jacob journeyed to Succoth - Having in a friendly manner parted with
Esau, who was gone to his own country, he comes to a place, where he
rested, set up booths for his cattle, and other conveniences for himself
and family. The place was afterwards known by the name of Succoth, a
city in the tribe of Gad, on the other side Jordan; it signifies booths:
that when his posterity afterwards dwelt in houses of stone, they might
remember that the Syrian ready to perish was their father, who was glad
of booths, [Deu 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#005).

[Genesis 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 33:18</span></span>

And Jacob came to Shalem, a city of Shechem - Or rather he came safe, or
in peace, to the city of Shechem. After a perilous journey, in which he
had met with many difficulties, he came safe at last, into Canaan.

[Genesis 33:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 33:20</span></span>

He erected an altar - In thankfulness to God for the good hand of his
providence over him. That he might keep up religion, and the worship of
God in his family. He dedicated this altar to the honour of El - elohe -
israel, God - the God of Israel: to the honour of God in general, the
only living and true God, the Best of beings, the First of causes: and
to the honour of the God of Israel, as a God in covenant with him. God
had lately called him by the name of Israel; and now he calls God the
God of Israel; though he be called a prince with God, God shall still be
a prince with him, his Lord and his God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 34](gen034)

</div>
