<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen042)  [Next](gen044.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 43](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#001.md)

[Genesis 43:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 43:9</span></span>

Judah's conscience had lately smitten him for what he had done a great
while ago against Joseph; and as an evidence of the truth of his
repentance, he is ready to undertake, as far as a man could do it, for
Benjamin's security. He will not only not wrong him but will do all he
can to protect him. This is such restitution as the case will admit:
when he knew not how he could retrieve Joseph, he would make some amends
for the irreparable injury he had done him, by doubling his care
concerning Benjamin.

[Genesis 43:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 43:11</span></span>

If it must be so now, take your brother - If no corn can be had but upon
those terms, as good expose him to the perils of the journey, as suffer
ourselves and families, and Benjamin among the rest, to perish for want
of bread: it is no fault, but our wisdom and duty, to alter our
resolutions when there is a good reason for so doing: constancy is a
virtue, but obstinacy is not: it is God's prerogative to make
unchangeable resolves.

[Genesis 43:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 43:12</span></span>

Take double money - As much again as they took the time before, upon
supposition that the price of corn might be risen, or that, if it should
be insisted upon, they might pay a ransom for Simeon. And he sent a
present of such things as the land afforded, and were scarce in Egypt,
the commodities that Canaan exported.

[Genesis 43:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 43:14</span></span>

God almighty give you mercy before the man! - Jacob had formerly turned
an angry brother into a kind one with a present and a prayer, and here
he betakes himself to the same tried method. Those that would find mercy
with men must seek it of God. He concludes all with this, if I be
bereaved of my children, I am bereaved - If I must part with them thus
one after another, I acquiesce and say, The will of the Lord be done.

[Genesis 43:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 43:23</span></span>

Your God, and the God of your father, has given you treasure in your
sacks - Hereby he shews that he had no suspicion of dishonesty in them:
for what we get by deceit we cannot say God gives it us. He silences
their farther enquiry about it: ask not how it came thither, providence
brought it you, and let that satisfy you. It appears by what he said,
that by his master's instructions he was brought to the knowledge of the
true God, the God of the Hebrews. He directs them to look up to God, and
acknowledge his providence in the good bargain they had. We must own
ourselves indebted to God as our God, and the God of our fathers, (a God
in covenant with us and them) for all our successes and advantages, and
the kindnesses of our friends; for every creature is that to us, and no
more, than God makes it to be.

[Genesis 43:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 43:26</span></span>

When they brought him the present, they bowed themselves before him, and
again, when they gave him an account of their father's health, they made
obeisance, and called him, Thy servant, our father - Thus were Joseph's
dreams fulfilled more and more; and even the father, by the sons, bowed
before him. Probably Jacob had directed them, if they had occasion to
speak of him to the man, the Lord of the land, to call him his servant.

[Genesis 43:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 43:29</span></span>

God be gracious unto thee, my son - Joseph's favour, though he was the
lord of the land, would do him little good, unless God were gracious to
him.

[Genesis 43:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">gen 43:33</span></span>

He placed his brethren according to their seniority, as if he could
certainly divine. Some think they placed themselves so according to
their custom; but if so, I see not why such particular notice is taken
of it, especially as a thing they marvelled at.

[Genesis 43:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">gen 43:34</span></span>

They drank and were merry - Their cares and fears were now over, and
they eat their bread with joy, concluding they were now upon good terms
with the man, the lord of the land. If God accept our works, our
present, we have reason to be chearful.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 44](gen044.md)

</div>
