<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen028)  [Next](gen030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#001)

[Genesis 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 29:2</span></span>

Providence brought him to the very field where his uncle's flock's were
to be watered, and there he met with Rachel that was to be his wife. The
Divine Providence is to be acknowledged in all the little circumstances
which concur to make a journey or other undertaking comfortable and
successful. If, when we are at a loss, we meet with those seasonably
that can direct us; if we meet with a disaster, and those are at hand
that will help us; we must not say it was by chance, but it was by
providence: our ways are ways of pleasantness, if we continually
acknowledge God in them. The stone on the well's mouth was either to
secure their property in it, for water was scarce, to save the well from
receiving damage from the heat of the sun, or to prevent the lambs of
the flock from being drowned in it.

[Genesis 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 29:9</span></span>

She kept her father's sheep - She took the care of them, having servants
under her that were employed about them when he understood that this was
his kinswoman (probably he had heard of her name before) knowing what
his errand was into that country, we may suppose it struck into his mind
immediately, that this must be his wife, as one already smitten with an
honest comely face (though it is likely, sun - burnt, and she in the
homely dress of a shepherdess) he is wonderfully officious, and ready to
serve her, [Gen 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#010), and addresses
himself to her with tears of joy, and kisses of love, [Gen
29:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#011), she runs with all haste to tell
her father, for she will by no means entertain her kinsman's address
without her father's knowledge and approbation, [Gen
29:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#012). These mutual respects at their
first interview were good presages of their being a happy couple.
Providence made that which seemed contingent and fortuitous to give a
speedy satisfaction to Jacob's mind as soon as ever he came to the place
he was bound for. Abraham's servant, when he came upon a like errand,
met with the like encouragement. Thus God guides his people with his
eye, [Psa 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#008). It is a groundless
conceit which some of the Jewish writers have, that Jacob when he kissed
Rachel wept, because he had been set upon his journey by Eliphaz the
eldest son of Esau, at the command of his father, and robbed him of all
his money and jewels, which his mother had given him when she sent him
away: it is plain it was his passion for Rachel, and the surprise of
this happy meeting that drew these tears from his eyes. Laban, though
none of the best humoured men, bid him welcome, was satisfied in the
account he gave of himself, and of the reason of his coming in such poor
circumstances. While we avoid the extreme on the one hand of being
foolishly credulous, we must take heed of falling into the other extreme
of being uncharitably jealous and suspicious. Laban owned him for his
kinsman, [Gen 29:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#014). Thou art my bone
and my flesh. Note, Those are hard - hearted indeed that are unkind to
their relations, and that hide themselves from their own flesh, [Isa
58:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007).

[Genesis 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 29:15</span></span>

Because thou art my brother - That is, kinsman. Should thou therefore
serve me for nought? - No, what reason for that? If Jacob be so
respectful as to give him his service without demanding any
consideration for it, yet Laban will not be so unjust as to take
advantage either of his necessity, or of his good nature. It appears by
computation that Jacob was now seventy years old when he bound himself
apprentice for a wife; probably Rachel was young and scarce marriageable
when Jacob came first, which made him the more willing to stay for her
till his seven years were expired.

[Genesis 29:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 29:20</span></span>

They seemed to him but a few days for the love he had to her - An age of
work will be but as a few days to those that love God, and long for
Christ's appearing.

[Genesis 29:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 29:25</span></span>

Behold it was Leah - Jacob had cheated his own father when he pretended
to be Esau, and now his father - in - law cheated him. Herein, how
unrighteous soever Laban was, the Lord was righteous.

[Genesis 29:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 29:26</span></span>

It must be so done in our country - We have reason to think there was no
such custom in his country; but if there was, and that he resolved to
observe it, he should have told Jacob so, when he undertook to serve him
for his younger daughter.

[Genesis 29:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 29:27</span></span>

We will give thee this also - Hereby he drew Jacob into the sin and
snare, and disquiet of multiplying wives. Jacob did not design it, but
to have kept as true to Rachel as his father had done to Rebekah; he
that had lived without a wife to the eighty fourth year of his age could
then have been very well content with one: but Laban to dispose of his
two daughters without portions, and to get seven years service more out
of Jacob, thus imposeth upon him, and draws him into such a strait, that
he had some colourable reason for marrying them both.

[Genesis 29:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 29:31</span></span>

When the Lord saw that Leah was hated - That is, loved less than Rachel,
in which sense it is required that we hate father and mother, in
comparison with Christ, [Luk 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#026),
then the Lord granted her a child, which was a rebuke to Jacob for
making so great a difference between those he was equally related to; a
check to Rachel, who, perhaps insulted over her sister upon that
account; and a comfort to Leah, that she might not be overwhelmed with
the contempt put upon her.

[Genesis 29:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">gen 29:32</span></span>

She appears very ambitious of her husband's love; she reckoned the want
of it her affliction, not upbraiding him with it as his fault, nor
reproaching him for it; but laying it to heart as her grief, which she
had reason to bear, because she was consenting to the fraud by which she
became his wife. She called her first - born Reuben, see a son, with
this pleasant thought, Now will my husband love me. And her third son
Levi, joined, with this expectation, Now will my husband be joined unto
me. The Lord hath heard, that is, taken notice of it, that I was hated,
he hath therefore given me this son. Her fourth she called Judah,
praise, saying, Now will I praise the Lord. And this was he, of whom, as
concerning the flesh Christ came. Whatever is the matter of our
rejoicing, ought to be the matter of our thanksgiving. And all our
praises must center in Christ, both as the matter of them, and as the
Mediator of them. He descended from him whose name was praise, for he is
our praise. Is Christ formed in my heart? Now will I praise the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 30](gen030)

</div>
