<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen017)  [Next](gen019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#001)

[Genesis 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 18:1</span></span>

This appearance of God to Abraham seems to have had in it more of
freedom and familiarity, and less of grandeur and majesty, than those we
have hitherto read of, and therefore more resembles that great visit
which in the fulness of time the Son of God was to make to the world. He
sat in the tent - door in the heat of the day - Not so much to repose
himself, as to seek an opportunity of doing good, by giving
entertainment to strangers.

[Genesis 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 18:2</span></span>

And lo three men - These three men were three spiritual heavenly beings,
now assuming human shapes, that they might be visible to Abraham, and
conversable with him. Some think they were all three created angels;
others, that one of them was the Son of God. He bowed himself towards
the ground - Religion doth not destroy but improve good manners, and
teaches us to honour all men.

[Genesis 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 18:9</span></span>

Where is Sarah thy wife? - By naming her, they gave intimation to
Abraham, that tho' they seemed strangers, yet they well knew him and his
family: by enquiring after her, they shewed a kind concern for the
family of one, whom they found respectful to them. And by speaking of
her, she over - hearing it, they drew her to listen to what was farther
to be said.

[Genesis 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 18:10</span></span>

I will certainly return unto thee - And visit thee. God will return to
those that bid him welcome.

[Genesis 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 18:12</span></span>

Sarah laughed within herself - It was not a laughter of faith, like
Abraham's, [Gen 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#017), but a laughter
of doubting and distrust. The great objection which Sarah could not get
over was her age. I am waxed old, and past child - bearing in a course
of nature, especially having been hitherto barren, and which magnifies
the difficulty, My lord is old also. Observe here, That Sarah calls
Abraham her lord, and the Holy Ghost takes notice of it to her honour,
and recommends it to the imitation of all Christian wives, [Pe1
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#006). Sarah obeyed Abraham calling him
lord, in token of respect and subjection.

[Genesis 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 18:17</span></span>

Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do - Thus doth God in his
councils express himself after the manner of men, with deliberation. The
secret of the Lord is with them that fear him. Those that by faith live
a life of communion with God, cannot but know more of his mind than
other people. They have a better insight into what is present, and a
better foresight of what is to come.

[Genesis 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 18:19</span></span>

I know Abraham that he will command his children, and his household
after him - This is a bright part of Abraham's character. He not only
prayed with his family, but he taught them, as a man of knowledge; nay,
he commanded them as a man in authority, and was prophet and king, as
well as priest, in his own house. And he not only took care of his
children, but of his household: his servants were catechized servants.
Masters of families should instruct, and inspect the manners of all
under their roof. And this is given as the reason why God would make
known to him his purpose concerning Sodom; because he was communicative
of his knowledge, and improved it for the benefit of those that were
under his charge.

[Genesis 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 18:21</span></span>

I will go down now and see - Not as if there were any thing concerning
which God is in doubt; but he is pleased thus to express himself after
the manner of men.

[Genesis 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 18:23</span></span>

Abraham drew near - This expression intimates, A holy concern. A holy
confidence; he drew near with an assurance of faith, drew near as a
prince, [Job 31:37](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#037).

[Genesis 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 18:27</span></span>

Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, who am but dust
and ashes - He speaks as one amazed at his own boldness, and the liberty
God graciously allowed him, considering God's greatness, he is the Lord;
and his own meanness, but dust and ashes. Whenever we draw near to God,
it becomes us reverently to acknowledge the vast distance that there is
between us and Him. He is the Lord of glory, we are worms of the earth.

[Genesis 18:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">gen 18:30</span></span>

Oh let not the Lord be angry - The importunity which believers use in
their addresses to God is such, that if they were dealing with a man
like themselves, they could not but fear that he would be angry with
them. But he with whom we have to do is God and not man, and he is
pleased when he is wrestled with. But why then did Abraham leave off
asking when he had prevailed so far as to get the place spared if there
were but ten righteous in it? Either, Because he owned that it deserved
to perish if there were not so many: as the dresser of the vineyard, who
consented that the barren tree should be cut down if one year's trial
more did not make it fruitful, [Luk
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#009). Or, Because God restrained his
spirit from asking any farther. When God hath determined the ruin of a
place, he forbids it to be prayed for, [Jer
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#016).

[Genesis 18:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">gen 18:33</span></span>

Abraham returned into his place - To wait what the event would be; and
it proved that his prayer was heard, and yet Sodom not spared, because
there were not ten righteous in it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 19](gen019)

</div>
