<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen026)  [Next](gen028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#001)

[Genesis 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 27:1</span></span>

Here is Isaac's design to declare Esau his heir. The promise of the
Messiah and the land of Canaan was a great trust first committed to
Abraham, inclusive and typical of spiritual and eternal blessings; this
by divine direction he transmitted to Isaac. Isaac being now old, and
either not knowing, or not duly considering the divine oracle concerning
his two sons, that the elder should serve the younger, resolves to
entail all the honour and power that was wrapt up in the promise upon
Esau, his eldest son. He called Esau - Tho' Esau, had greatly grieved
his parents by his marriage, yet they had not expelled him, but it seems
were pretty well reconciled to him.

[Genesis 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 27:2</span></span>

I am old, and know not the day of my death - How soon I may die.

[Genesis 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 27:3</span></span>

Take me some venison that I may; bless thee - Esau must go a hunting and
bring some venison. In this he designed not so much the refreshment of
his own spirits, as the receiving a fresh instance of his son's, filial
duty and affection to him, before he bestowed this favour upon him. That
my soul may bless thee before I die - Prayer is the work of the soul,
and not of the lips only; as the soul must be employed in blessing God,
[Psa 103:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#001), so it must be in blessing
ourselves and others: the blessing will not go to the heart, if it do
not come from the heart.

[Genesis 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 27:6</span></span>

Rebekah is here contriving to procure the blessing for Jacob, which was
designed for Esau. If the end was good, the means were bad, and no way
justifiable. If it were not a wrong to Esau to deprive him of the
blessing, he himself having forfeited it by selling the birth right, yet
it was a wrong to Isaac, taking advantage of his infirmity, to impose
upon him: it was a wrong to Jacob, whom she taught to deceive, by
putting a lie in his mouth. If Rebekah, when she heard Isaac promise the
blessing to Esau, had gone to him, and with humility and seriousness put
him in remembrance of that which God had said concerning their sons; if
she had farther shewed him how Esau had forfeited the blessing, both by
selling his birth - right, and by marrying of strange wives; 'tis
probable Isaac would have been prevailed with to confer the blessing
upon Jacob, and needed not thus to have been cheated into it. This had
been honourable and laudable, and would have looked well in history; but
God left her to herself to take this indirect course, that he might have
the glory of bringing good out of evil.

[Genesis 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 27:19</span></span>

And Jacob said, I am Esau - Who would have thought this plain man could
have played such a part? His mother having put him in the way of it, he
applies himself to those methods which he had never accustomed himself
to, but had always conceived an abhorrence of. But lying is soon
learned. I wonder how honest Jacob could so readily turn his tongue to
say, I am Esau thy first - born: and when his father asked him, [Gen
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#024). Art thou my very son Esau? to
reply I am. How could he say, I have done as thou badst me, when he had
received no command from his father, but was doing as his mother bid
him? How could he say, Eat of my venison, when he knew it came not from
the field, but from the fold? But especially I wonder how he could have
the forehead to father it upon God, and to use his name in the cheat.

[Genesis 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 27:20</span></span>

The Lord thy God brought it to me - Is this Jacob? It is certainly
written not for our imitation, but our admonition, Let him that,
standeth, take heed lest he fall. Now let us see how Isaac gave Jacob
his blessing.

[Genesis 27:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 27:27</span></span>

He kissed him; in token of particular affection to him. Those that are
blessed of God are kissed with the kisses of his mouth, and they do by
love and loyalty kiss the son, [Psa
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012). 2. He praised him. Upon occasion
of the sweet smell of his garments he said, See the smell of my son is
as the smell of a field which the Lord hath blessed - That is, like that
of the most fragrant flowers and spices. Three things Jacob is here
blessed with, Plenty, [Gen 27:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#028).
Heaven and earth concurring to make him rich. Power, [Gen
27:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#029). Particularly dominion over his
brethren, viz. Esau and his posterity. Prevalency with God, and a great
interest in heaven, Cursed be every one that curseth thee - Let God be a
friend to all thy friends, and an enemy to all thine enemies. Now,
certainly more is comprised in this blessing than appears at first; it
must amount to an entail of the promise of the Messiah: that was in the
patriarchal dialect the blessing; something spiritual doubtless is
included in it. First, That from him should come the Messiah, that
should have a sovereign dominion on earth. See [Num
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#019). Out of Jacob shall come he that
shall have dominion, the star and scepter, [Num
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017). Jacob's dominion over Esau was
to be only typical of this, [Gen
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010). Secondly, That from him should
come the church that should be particularly owned and favoured by
Heaven. It was part of the blessing of Abraham when he was first called
to be the father of the faithful, [Gen
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003). I will bless them that bless
thee; therefore when Isaac afterwards confirmed the blessing to Jacob,
he called it the blessing of Abraham, [Gen
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#004).

[Genesis 27:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">gen 27:33</span></span>

Isaac trembled exceedingly - Those that follow the choice of their own
affections rather than the dictates of the Divine will, involve
themselves in such perplexities as these. But he soon recovers himself,
and ratifies the blessing he had given to Jacob, I have blessed him, and
he shall be blessed - He might have recalled it, but now at last he is
sensible he was in an error when he designed it for Esau. Either
recollecting the Divine oracle, or having found himself more than
ordinarily filled with the Holy Ghost when he gave the blessing to
Jacob, he perceived that God did as it were say Amen to it.

[Genesis 27:39](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">gen 27:39</span></span>

Esau likewise obtained a blessing: yet it was far short of Jacob's. In
Jacob's blessing the dew of heaven is put first, as that which he most
valued and desired: in Esau's the fatness of the earth is put first, for
that was it which he had the principal regard to. Esau hath these, but
Jacob hath them from God's hand. God give thee the dew of heaven, [Gen
27:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#028). It was enough to have the
possession, but Jacob desired it by promise. Jacob shall have dominion
over his brethren, for the Israelites often ruled over the Edomites.
Esau shall have dominion, he shall gain some power, but shall never have
dominion over his brother: we never find that the Jews were sold into
the hands of the Edomites, or that they oppressed them. But the great
difference is, that there is nothing in Esau's blessing that points at
Christ, nothing that brings either him or his into the church, and
without that the fatness of the earth, and the plunder of the field,
will stand him in little stead. Thus Isaac by faith blessed them both,
according as their lot should be.

[Genesis 27:45](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">gen 27:45</span></span>

Why should I be deprived of you both? - Not only of the murdered, but of
the murderer, who either by the magistrate, or by the immediate hand of
God would be sacrificed to justice.

[Genesis 27:46](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">gen 27:46</span></span>

If Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth - As Esau has done. More
artifice still. This was not the thing she was afraid of. But if we use
guile once, we shall be very ready to use it again. It should be
carefully observed, That altho' a blessing came on his posterity by
Jacob's vile lying and dissimulation, yet it brought heavy affliction
upon himself, and that for a long term of years. So severely did God
punish him personally, for doing evil that good might come.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 28](gen028)

</div>
