<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen009)  [Next](gen011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#001)

[Genesis 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 10:2</span></span>

Moses begins with Japhet's family, either because he was the eldest, or
because that lay remotest from Israel, and had least concern with them,
at that time when Moses wrote; and therefore he mentions that race very
briefly; hastening to give account of the posterity of Ham, who were
Israel's enemies, and of Shem, who were Israel's ancestors: for it is
the church that the scripture designed to be the history of, and of the
nations of the world only as they were some way or other interested in
the affairs of Israel.

[Genesis 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 10:5</span></span>

The posterity of Japheth were allotted to the isles of the Gentiles,
which were solemnly, by lot, after a survey, divided among them, and
probably this island of ours among the rest. All places beyond the sea,
from Judea, are called isles, [Jer
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#022), and this directs us to
understand that promise, [Isa 42:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#004),
the isles shall wait for his law, of the conversion of the Gentiles to
the faith of Christ.

[Genesis 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 10:8</span></span>

Began to be mighty on the earth - That is, whereas those that went
before him were content to stand upon the same level with their
neighbours, Nimrod could not rest in this parity, but he would top his
neighbours, and lord over them. The same spirit that the giants before
the flood were acted by, [Gen 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#004), now
revived in him; so soon was that tremendous judgment, which the pride
and tyranny of those mighty men brought upon the world, forgotten.

[Genesis 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 10:9</span></span>

Nimrod was a mighty hunter - This he began with, and for this became
famous to a proverb. Some think he did good with his hunting, served his
country by ridding it of wild beasts, and so insinuated himself into the
affections of his neighbours, and got to be their prince. And perhaps,
under pretence of hunting, he gathered men under his command, to make
himself master of the country. Thus he became a mighty hunter, a violent
invader of his neighbour's rights and properties. And that, before the
Lord - Carrying all before him, and endeavouring to make all his own by
force and violence. He thought himself a mighty prince; but before the
Lord, that is, in God's account, he was but a mighty hunter. Note, Great
conquerers are but great hunters. Alexander and Caesar would not make
such a figure in scripture history as they do in common history. The
former is represented in prophecy but as a he - goat pushing, [Dan
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#005). Nimrod was a mighty hunter
against the Lord, so the seventy; that is, he set up idolatry, as
Jeroboam did, for the confirming of his usurped dominion; that he might
set up a new government, he set up a new religion upon the ruin of the
primitive constitution of both.

[Genesis 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 10:10</span></span>

The beginning of his kingdom was Babel - Some way or other, he got into
power: and so laid the foundations of a monarchy which was afterwards a
head of gold. It doth not appear that he had any right to rule by birth;
but either his fitness for government recommended him, or by power and
policy he gradually advanced into the throne. See the antiquity of civil
government, and particularly that form of it which lodges the
sovereignty in a single person.

[Genesis 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 10:15</span></span>

The account of the posterity of Canaan, and the land they possessed is
more particular than of any other in this chapter, because these were
the nations that were to be subdued before Israel, and their land was to
become Immanuel's land. And by this account, it appears that the
posterity of Canaan was both numerous and rich, and very pleasantly
seated, and yet Canaan was under a curse. Canaan here has a better land
than either Shem or Japheth and yet they have a better lot, for they
inherit the blessing.

[Genesis 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 10:21</span></span>

Two things especially are observable in this account of the posterity of
Shem. The description of Shem, [Gen
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#021), we have not only his name,
Shem, which signifies a name; but two titles to distinguish him by.

He was the father of all the children of Eber. Eber was his great
grandson, but why should he be called the father of all his children,
rather than of all Arphaxad's or Salah's? Probably because Abraham and
his seed, not only descended from Heber, but from him were called
Hebrews. Eber himself, we may suppose, was a man eminent for religion in
a time of general apostasy; and the holy tongue being commonly called
from him the Hebrew, it is probable he retained it in his family in the
confusion of Babel, as a special token of God's favour to him. He was
the brother of Japheth the elder; by which it appears, that though Shem
be commonly put first, yet he was not Noah's first - born, but Japheth
was elder. But why should this also be put as part of Shem's
description, that he was the brother of Japheth, since that had been
said before? Probably this is intended to signify the union of the
Gentiles with the Jews in the church. He had mentioned it as Shem's
honour, that he was the father of the Hebrews; but lest Japheth's seed
should therefore be looked upon as shut out from the church, he here
minds us, that he was the brother of Japheth, not in birth only, but in
blessing, for Japheth was to dwell in the tents of Shem.

The reason of the name of Peleg, [Gen
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#025), because, in his days, (that is,
about the time of his birth) was the earth divided among the children of
men that were to inhabit it; either when Noah divided it, by an orderly
distribution of it, as Joshua divided the land of Canaan by lot, or
when, upon their refusal to comply with that division, God, in justice,
divided them by the confusion of tongues.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 11](gen011)

</div>
