<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen044)  [Next](gen046.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 45](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#001.md)

[Genesis 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 45:1</span></span>

Judah and his brethren were waiting for an answer, and could not but be
amazed to discover, instead of the gravity of a judge, the natural
affection of a father or brother.

\[1.\] Cause every man to go out - The private conversations of friends
are the most free. When Joseph would put on love, he puts off state,
which it was not fit his servants should be witnesses of. Thus Christ
graciously manifests himself and his loving kindness to his people, out
of the sight and hearing of the world.

\[2.\] V. 2. Tears were the introduction to his discourse. He had dammed
up this stream a great while, and with much ado, but now it swelled so
high that he could no longer contain, but he wept aloud, so that those
whom he had forbid to see him could not but hear him. These were tears
of tenderness and strong affection, and with these he threw off that
austerity, with which he had hitherto carried himself towards his
brethren; for he could bear it no longer. This represents the Divine
compassion towards returning penitents, as much as that of the father of
the prodigal, [Luk 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#020.md); [Hos
11:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#008.md).

\[3.\] V. 3. He abruptly tells them; I am Joseph - They knew him only by
his Egyptian name, Zaphnath - paaneah, his Hebrew name being lost and
forgot in Egypt; but now he teaches them to call him by that, I am
Joseph: nay, that they might not suspect it was another of the same
name, he explains himself. I am Joseph your brother. This would both
humble them yet more for their sin in selling him, and encourage them to
hope for kind treatment. This word, at first, startled Joseph's
brethren, they started back through fear, or at least stood still
astonished: but Joseph called kindly and familiarly to them. Come near,
I pray you. Thus, when Christ manifests himself to his people he
encourages them to draw near to him with a true heart. Perhaps being
about to speak of their selling of him, he would not speak aloud, lest
the Egyptians should overhear, and it should make the Hebrews to be yet
more an abomination to them; therefore he would have them come near,
that he might whisper with them, which, now the tide of his passion was
a little over, he was able to do, whereas, at first, he could not but
cry out.

\[4.\] He endeavours to sweep their grief for the injuries they had done
him, by shewing them, that, whatever they designed, God meant it for
good, and had brought much good out of it.

[Genesis 45:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 45:5</span></span>

Be not grieved or angry with yourselves - Sinners must grieve, and be
angry with themselves for their sins; yea, though God, by his power,
bring good out of them, for that is no thanks to the sinner: but true
penitents should be greatly affected with it, when they see God bringing
good out of evil. Though we must not with this consideration extenuate
our own sins, and so take off the edge of our repentance; yet it may do
well thus to extenuate the sins of others, and so take off the edge of
our angry resentments. Thus Joseph doth here. His brethren needed not to
fear that he would revenge upon them an injury which God's providence
had made to turn so much to his advantage, and that of his family. Now
he tells them how long the famine was likely to last, five years yet,
[Gen 45:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#006.md), and what a capacity he was
in of being kind to his relations, which is the greatest satisfaction
that wealth and power can give to a good man.

[Genesis 45:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 45:8</span></span>

See what a favourable colour he puts upon the injury they had done him,
God sent me before you - God's Israel is the particular care of God's
providence. Joseph reckoned that his advancement was not so much
designed to save a whole kingdom of Egyptians, as to preserve a small
family of Israelites; for the Lord's portion is his people: whatever
goes with others, they shall be secured. How admirable are the projects
of Providence! How remote its tendencies! What wheels are there within
wheels; and yet all directed by the eyes in the wheels, and the Spirit
of the living Creature!

\[5.\] He promises to take care of his father and all his family, during
the rest of the years of famine.

\[1.\] He desires that his father might speedily be made glad with the
tidings of his life and honour. His brethren must hasten to Canaan, and
acquaint Jacob that his son Joseph was lord of all Egypt - He knew it
would be a refreshing oil to his hoary head, and a sovereign cordial to
his spirits. He desires them to give themselves, and take with them to
their father, all possible satisfaction of the truth of these surprising
tidings.

[Genesis 45:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 45:12</span></span>

Your eyes see that it is my mouth - If they could recollect themselves,
they might remember something of his features and speech, and be
satisfied.

(2.) He is very earnest that his father and all his family should come
to him to Egypt. Come down unto me, tarry not - He allots his dwelling
in Goshen, that part of Egypt which lay towards Canaan, that they might
be mindful of the country from which they were to come out. He promiseth
to provide for him, I will nourish - Our Lord Jesus being, like Joseph,
exalted to the highest honours and powers of the upper world, it is his
will that all that are his should be with him where he is. This is his
commandment, that we be with him now in faith and hope, and a heavenly
conversation; and this is his promise, that we shall be for ever with
him.

[Genesis 45:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 45:24</span></span>

See that ye fall not out by the way - He knew they were but too apt to
be quarrelsome; and what had lately passed, which revived the
remembrance of what they had done formerly against their brother, might
give them occasion to quarrel. Now Joseph having forgiven them all, lays
this obligation upon them, not to upbraid one another. This charge our
Lord Jesus has given to us, that we love one another, that we live in
peace, that whatever occurs, or whatever former occurrences are
remembered, we fall not out. For, We are brethren, we have all one
father. We are his brethren; and we shame, our relation to him, who is
our peace, if we fall out. We are all guilty, verily guilty, and instead
of quarrelling with one another, have a great deal of reason to fall out
with ourselves. We are forgiven of God, whom we have all offended, and
therefore should be ready to forgive one another. We are by the way, a
way that lies through the land of Egypt, where we have many eyes upon
us, that seek occasion and advantage against us; a way that leads to
Canaan, where we hope to be for ever in perfect peace.

[Genesis 45:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 45:26</span></span>

We have here the good news brought to Jacob. When, without any preamble,
his sons came in crying Joseph is yet alive. The very mention of
Joseph's name revived his sorrow, so that his heart fainted. It was a
good while before he came to himself. He was in such care and fear about
the rest of them, that at this time it would have been joy enough to him
to hear that Simeon is released, and Benjamin is come safe home; for he
had been ready to despair concerning both these; but to bear that Joseph
is alive, is too good news to be true; he faints, for he believes it
not.

[Genesis 45:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 45:27</span></span>

When he saw the waggons his spirit revived - Now Jacob is called Israel,
for he begins to recover his wonted vigour. It pleases him to think that
Joseph is alive. He saith nothing of Joseph's glory, which they had told
him of; it was enough to him that Joseph was alive: it pleases him to
think of going to see him. Though he was old, and the journey long, yet
he would go to see Joseph, because Joseph's business would not permit
him to come to him. Observe, He will go see him, not I will go live with
him; Jacob was old, and did not expect to live long: but I will go see
him before I die, and then let me depart in peace; let my eyes be
refreshed with this sight before they are closed, and then it is enough,
I need no more to make me happy in this world.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 46](gen046.md)

</div>
