<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen035)  [Next](gen037) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 36](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#001)

[Genesis 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 36:1</span></span>

Who is Edom - That name perpetuated the remembrance of the foolish
bargain he made, when he sold his birth - right for that red pottage.

[Genesis 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 36:6</span></span>

Esau had begun to settle among his wife's relations in Seir, before
Jacob came from Padan - aram, [Gen
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#003). Isaac it is likely, had sent him
thither, that Jacob might have the clearer way to the possession of the
promised land: yet probably during the life of Isaac, Esau had still
some effects remaining in Canaan; but after his death, he wholly
withdrew to mount Seir, took with him what came to his share of his
father's personal estate, and left Canaan to Jacob, not only because he
had the promise of it, but because he saw, if they should both continue
to thrive, as they had begun, there would not be room for both.

[Genesis 36:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 36:8</span></span>

Thus dwelt Esau in mount Seir - Whatever opposition may be made, God's
word will take place, and even those that have opposed it will see
themselves, some time or other, under a necessity of yielding to it.
Esau had struggled for Canaan, but now he retires to mount Seir; for
God's counsels shall certainly stand concerning the times before
appointed, and the bounds of our habitation.

[Genesis 36:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 36:10</span></span>

These are the names - Observe here, That only the names of Esau's sons
and grand - sons are recorded: not their history, for it is the church
that Moses preserves the records of, not of those that were without. The
elders only that lived by faith obtained a good report. Nor doth the
genealogy go any farther than the third and fourth generation, the very
names of all after are buried in oblivion; it is only the pedigree of
the Israelites who were to be the heirs of Canaan, and of whom were to
come the promised seed, and the holy seed, that is drawn out to any
length, as far as there was occasion for it, even of all the tribes till
Canaan was divided among them, and of the royal line 'till Christ came.
That the sons and grand - sons of Esau are called dukes. Probably they
were military commanders, dukes or captains that had soldiers under
them; for Esau and his family lived by the sword, [Gen
27:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#040). We may suppose those dukes had
numerous families of children and servants. God promised to multiply
Jacob and to enrich him, yet Esau increases and is enriched first. God's
promise to Jacob began to work late, but the effect of it remained
longer, and it had its compleat accomplishment in the spiritual Israel.

[Genesis 36:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 36:20</span></span>

These are the sons of Seir - In the midst of the genealogy of the
Edomites is inserted the genealogy of the Horites, those Canaanites, or
Hittites, (compare [Gen 26:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#034),) that
were the natives of mount Seir. Mention is made of them, [Gen
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#006), and of their interest in mount
Seir before the Edomites took possession of it, [Deu
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#012), [Deu
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#022). This comes in here, not only to
give light to the story, but to be a standing reflexion upon the
Edomites for intermarrying with them, by which it is likely they learned
their way, and corrupted themselves. Esau having sold his birth - right,
and lost his blessing and entered into alliance with the Hittites, his
posterity and the sons of Seir are here reckoned together. Those that
treacherously desert God's church are justly numbered with those that
were never in it: apostate Edomites stand on the same ground with
accursed Horites. Notice is taken of one Anah, who fed the asses of
Zibeon his father, [Gen 36:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#020), and yet
is called duke Anah, [Gen 36:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#029). Those
that expect to rise high should begin low. An honourable descent should
not keep men from an honest employment, nor a mean employment baulk any
man's preferment.

[Genesis 36:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 36:24</span></span>

This Anah was not only industrious in his business, but ingenious too,
and successful, for he found mules, or, (as some read it) waters, hot
baths in the wilderness. Those that are diligent in their business
sometimes find more advantages than they expected.

[Genesis 36:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 36:31</span></span>

By degrees the Edomites worked out the Horites, and got full possession
of the country. They were ruled by kings who governed the whole country,
and seem to have come to the throne by election, and not by lineal
descent: these kings reigned in Edom before there reigned any king over
the children of Israel - That is, before Moses's time, for he was king
in Jeshurun. God had lately promised Jacob that kings shall come out of
his loins: yet Esau's blood becomes royal long before any of Jacob's
did. Probably it was a trial to the faith of Israel, to hear of the
power of the kings of Edom, while they were bond - slaves in Egypt: but
those that look for great things from God must be content to wait for
them. God's time is the best time. They were afterward's governed by
dukes again, here named, who, I suppose, ruled all at the same time in
several places in the country. They set up this form of government,
either in conformity to the Horites, who had used it, [Gen
36:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#029), or God's providence reduced
them to it, as some conjecture, to correct them for their unkindness to
Israel, in refusing them passage through their country, [Num
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#018).

[Genesis 36:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">gen 36:43</span></span>

Mount Seir is called the land of their possession - While the Israelites
dwelt in the house of bondage, and their Canaan was only the land of
promise, the Edomites dwelt in their own habitations, and Seir was in
their possession. The children of this world have their all in hand, and
nothing in hope, while the children of God have often their all in hope,
and next to nothing in hand. But, all things considered, it is better to
have Canaan in promise than mount Seir in possession.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 37](gen037)

</div>
