<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen047)  [Next](gen049) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 48](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#001)

[Genesis 48:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 48:3</span></span>

God blessed me - And let that blessing be entailed upon them. God had
promised him two things, a numerous issue, and Canaan for an
inheritance. And Joseph's sons, pursuant hereunto, should each of them
multiply into a tribe, and each of them have a distinct lot in Canaan,
equal with Jacob's own sons. See how he blessed them by faith in that
which God had said to him [Heb 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#021).

[Genesis 48:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 48:7</span></span>

Mention is made of the death and burial of Rachel, Joseph's mother, and
Jacob's best beloved wife. The removal of dear relations from us is an
affliction, the remembrance of which cannot but abide with us a great
while. Strong affections in the enjoyment cause long afflictions in the
loss.

[Genesis 48:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 48:11</span></span>

I had not thought to see thy face, (having many years given him up for
lost) and lo God hath shewed me also thy seed? - See here, How these two
good men own God in their comforts. Joseph saith, They are my sons whom
God has given me - And to magnify the favour he adds, in this place of
my banishment, slavery and imprisonment. Jacob saith here, God hath
shewed me thy seed - Our comforts are then doubly sweet to us, when we
see them coming from God's hand.

[Genesis 48:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 48:15</span></span>

The God who fed me all my life long unto this day - As long as we have
lived in this world we have had continual experience of God's goodness
to us in providing for the support of our natural life. Our bodies have
called for daily food, and we have never wanted food convenient. He that
has fed us all our life long will not fail us at last.

[Genesis 48:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 48:16</span></span>

The angel who redeemed me from all evil - A great deal of hardship he
had known in his time, but God had graciously kept him from the evil of
his troubles. Christ, the angel of the covenant is he that redeems us
from all evil. It becomes the servants of God, when they are old and
dying, to witness for our God that they have found him gracious. Joseph
had placed his children so, as that Jacob's right - hand should be put
on the head of Manasseh the eldest, [Gen
48:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#012), but Jacob would put it on
the head of Ephraim the youngest, [Gen
48:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#014). This displeased Joseph, who was
willing to support the reputation of his first - born and would
therefore have removed his father's hands, [Gen
48:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#017), but Jacob gave him to
understand that he knew what he did, and that he did it neither by
mistake nor in a humour, nor from a partial affection to one more than
the other, but from a spirit of prophecy.

[Genesis 48:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 48:19</span></span>

Ephraim shall he greater - When the tribes were mustered in the
wilderness Ephraim was more numerous than Manasseh, and had the standard
of that squadron, [Num 1:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#032), Num.
1:35-2:18, [Num 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#020), and is named
first, [Psa 80:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#002). Joshua was of that
tribe. The tribe of Manasseh was divided, one half on one side Jordan,
the other half on the other side, which made it the less powerful and
considerable. God, in bestowing his blessings upon his people, gives
more to some than to others, more gifts, graces and comforts, and more
of the good things of this life. And he often gives most to those that
are least likely: he chuseth the weak things of the world, raiseth the
poor out of the dust. Grace observes not the order of nature, nor doth
God prefer those whom we think fittest to be preferred but as it
pleaseth him.

[Genesis 48:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 48:21</span></span>

I die, but God shall be with you, and bring you again - This assurance
was given them, and carefully preserved among them, that they might
neither love Egypt too much when it favoured them, nor fear it too much
when it frowned upon them. These words of Jacob furnish us with comfort
in reference to the death of our friends: But God shall be with us, and
his gracious presence is sufficient to make up the loss. They leave us,
but he will never fail us. He will bring us to the land of our fathers,
the heavenly Canaan, whither our godly fathers are gone before us. If
God be with us while we stay behind in this world, and will receive us
shortly to be with them that are gone before to a better world, we ought
not to sorrow as those that have no hope.

[Genesis 48:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 48:22</span></span>

He bestowed one portion upon him above his brethren. The lands
bequeathed are described to be those which he took out of the hand of
the Amorite with his sword and with his bow. He purchased them first,
[Jos 24:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#032), and it seems was
afterwards disseized of them by the Amorites, but retook them by the
sword, repelling force by force, and recovering his right by violence
when he could not otherwise recover it. These lands he settled upon
Joseph. Mention is made of this grant, [Joh
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#005). Pursuant to it, this parcel of
ground was given to the tribe of Ephraim as their right, and the lot was
never cast upon it: and in it Joseph's bones were buried, which perhaps
Jacob had an eye to as much as to any thing in this settlement. It may
sometimes be both just and prudent to give some children portions above
the rest: but a grave is that which we can most count upon as our own in
this earth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 49](gen049)

</div>
