<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen027)  [Next](gen029.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#001.md)

[Genesis 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 28:1</span></span>

Isaac blessed him, and charged him - Those that have the blessing must
keep the charge annexed to it, and not think to separate what God has
joined.

[Genesis 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 28:3</span></span>

Two great promises Abraham was blessed with, and Isaac here entails them
both upon Jacob. The promise of heirs, God make thee fruitful and
multiply thee. Through his loins that people should descend from Abraham
which should be numerous as the stars of heaven. Through his loins
should descend from Abraham that person in whom all the families of the
earth should be blessed. The promise of an inheritance for those heirs,
[Gen 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#004.md). That thou mayest inherit
the land of thy sojournings - (So the Hebrew) Canaan was hereby entailed
upon the seed of Jacob, exclusive of the seed of Esau. Isaac was now
sending Jacob away into a distant country to settle there for some time;
and lest this should look like disinheriting him, he here confirms the
settlement of it upon him. This promise looks as high as heaven, of
which Canaan was a type. That was the better country which Jacob, with
the other patriarchs, had in his eye when he confessed himself a
stranger and pilgrim on the earth, [Heb
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#016.md).

[Genesis 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 28:5</span></span>

Rebekah is here called Jacob's and Esau's mother - Jacob is named first,
not only because he had always been his mother's darling, but because he
was now made his father's heir, and Esau was postponed.

[Genesis 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 28:6</span></span>

This passage comes in, in the midst of Jacob's story, to shew the
influence of a good example. Esau now begins to think Jacob the better
man, and disdains not to take him for his pattern in this particular
instance of marrying with a daughter of Abraham.

[Genesis 28:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 28:11</span></span>

The stones for his pillow, and the heavens for his canopy! Yet his
comfort in the divine blessing, and his confidence in the divine
protection, made him easy, even when he lay thus exposed: being sure
that his God made him to dwell in safety, he could lie down and sleep
upon a stone.

[Genesis 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 28:12</span></span>

Behold a ladder set upon the earth, and the top of it reached heaven,
the angels ascending and descending on it, and the Lord stood above it -
This might represent The providence of God, by which there is a constant
correspondence kept up between heaven and earth. The counsels of heaven
are executed on earth, and the affairs of this earth are all known in
heaven. Providence doth his work gradually and by steps; angels are
employed as ministering spirits to serve all the designs of providence,
and the wisdom of God is at the upper end of the ladder, directing all
the motions of second causes to his glory. The angels are active
spirits, continually ascending and descending; they rest not day nor
night. They ascend to give account of what they have done, and to
receive orders; and desend to execute the orders they have received.
This vision gave seasonable comfort to Jacob, letting him know that he
had both a good guide and good guard; that though he was to wander from
his father's house, yet he was the care of Providence, and the charge of
the holy angels. The mediation of Christ. He is this ladder: the foot on
earth in his human nature, the top in heaven in his divine nature; or
the former is his humiliation, the latter is his exaltation. All the
intercourse between heaven and earth since the fall is by this ladder.
Christ is the way: all God's favours come to us, and all our services
come to him, by Christ. If God dwell with us, and we with him, it is by
Christ: we have no way of getting to heaven but by this ladder; for the
kind offices the angels do us, are all owing to Christ, who hath
reconciled things on earth and things in heaven, [Col
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#020.md).

[Genesis 28:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 28:14</span></span>

In thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed - Christ is
the great blessing of the world: all that are blessed, whatever family
they are of, are blessed in him, and none of any family are excluded
from blessedness in him, but those that exclude themselves.

[Genesis 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 28:15</span></span>

Behold I am with thee - Wherever we are, we are safe, if we have God's
favourable presence with us. He knew not, but God foresaw what hardships
he would meet with in his uncle's service, and therefore promiseth to
preserve him in all places. God knows how to give his people graces and
comforts accommodated to the events that shall be, as well as to those
that are. He was now going as an exile into a place far distant, but God
promiseth him to bring him again to this land. He seemed to be forsaken
of all his friends, but God gives him this assurance, I will not leave
thee.

[Genesis 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 28:16</span></span>

Surely the Lord is in this place, and I knew it not - God's
manifestations of himself to his people carry their own evidence along
with them. God can give undeniable demonstrations of his presence, such
as give abundant satisfaction to the souls of the faithful, that God is
with them of a truth; satisfaction not communicable to others, but
convincing to themselves. We sometimes meet with God there, where we
little thought of meeting with him. He is there where we did not think
he had been, is found there where we asked not for him.

[Genesis 28:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 28:17</span></span>

He was afraid - So far was he from being puffed up. The more we see of
God, the more cause we see for holy trembling and blushing before him.
Those whom God is pleased to manifest himself to, are laid and kept very
low in their own eyes, and see cause to fear even the Lord and his
goodness, [Hos 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005.md). And said, How
dreadful is this place! - That is, the appearance of God in this place
is to be thought of, but with a holy awe and reverence; I shall have a
respect for this place, and remember it by this token as long as I live.
Not that he thought the place itself any nearer the divine visions than
any other places; but what he saw there at this time was, as it were,
the house of God, the residence of the Divine Majesty, and the gate of
heaven, that is, the general rendezvous of the inhabitants of the upper
world; as the meetings of a city were in their gates; or, the angels
ascending and descending were like travellers passing and repassing
through the gates of a city.

[Genesis 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 28:18</span></span>

He set up the stone for a pillar - To mark the place again, if he came
back, and erect a lasting monument of God's favour to him: and because
he had not time now to build an altar here, as Abraham did in the places
where God appeared to him, [Gen 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#007.md),
he therefore poured oil on the top of this stone, which probably was the
ceremony then used in dedicating their altars, as an earnest of his
building an altar when he should have conveniencies for it, as
afterwards he did, in gratitude to God, [Gen
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#007.md). Grants of mercy call for our
returns of duty and the sweet communion we have with God ought ever to
be remembered.

[Genesis 28:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 28:19</span></span>

It had been called Luz, an almond - tree, but he will have it henceforth
called Beth - el, the house of God. This gracious appearance of God to
him made it more remarkable than all the almond - trees that flourished
there.

[Genesis 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 28:20</span></span>

And Jacob vowed a vow - By religious vows we give glory to God, and own
our dependance upon him, and we lay a bond upon our own souls, to engage
and quicken our obedience to him. Jacob was now in fear and distress,
and in times of trouble it is seasonable to make vows, or when we are in
pursuit of any special mercy, [Jon
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#016.md); [Psa
66:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#013.md); [Sa1
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#011.md); [Num
21:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#001.md). Jacob had now had a gracious
visit from heaven, God had renewed his covenant with him, and the
covenant is mutual; when God ratifies his promises to us, it is proper
for us to repeat our promises to him. If thou wilt be with me and keep
me - We need desire no more to make us easy and happy wherever we are,
but to have God's presence with us, and to be under his protection. It
is comfortable in a journey to have a guide in an unknown way, a guard
in a dangerous way, to be well carried, well provided for, and to have
good company in any way; and they that have God with them, have all this
in the best manner. Then shall the Lord be my God - Then I will rejoice
in him as my God, then I will be the more strongly engaged to abide with
him. And this pillar shall be God's house - That is, an altar shall be
erected here to the honour of God. And of all that thou shalt give me I
will surely give the tenth unto thee - To be spent either upon God's
altar or upon his poor, which are both his receivers in the world. The
tenth is a very fit proportion to be devoted to God, and employed for
him; though as circumstances vary, it may be more or less, as God
prospers us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 29](gen029.md)

</div>
