<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen034)  [Next](gen036.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#001.md)

[Genesis 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 35:1</span></span>

Arise go to Bethel - Here God minds Jacob of his vow at Beth - el, and
sends him thither to perform it, Jacob had said in the day of his
distress, If I come again in peace, this stone shall be God's house,
[Gen 28:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#022.md). God had performed his
part, had given Jacob more than bread to eat, and raiment to put on; but
it should seem he had forgotten his vow, or, at least, deferred the
performance of it. And dwell there - That is, Not only go himself, but
take his family with him, that they might join with him in his
devotions. Put away the strange Gods - Strange God's in Jacob's family!
Could such a family, that was taught the knowledge of the Lord, admit
them? Could such a master, to whom God had appeared twice, and oftner,
connive at them? And be clean, and change your garments - These were
ceremonies signifying the purification and change of the heart.

[Genesis 35:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 35:4</span></span>

And they gave to Jacob - His servants, and even the retainers to his
family, gave him all the strange gods, and the ear - rings they wore
either as charms, or to the honour of their gods. Jacob took care to
bury their images, we may suppose, in some place unknown to them, that
they might not afterwards find and return to them.

[Genesis 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 35:5</span></span>

And the terror of God was upon the cities - Though the Canaanites were
much exasperated against the sons of Jacob for their barbarous usage of
the Shechemites; yet they were so restrained by a divine power, that
they could not take this fair opportunity to avenge their neighbours
quarrel. God governs the world more by secret terrors on men's minds
than we are aware of.

[Genesis 35:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 35:7</span></span>

He built an altar - And no doubt offered sacrifice upon it, perhaps the
tenth of his cattle, according to his vow, I will give the tenth unto
thee. And he called the place, That is, the altar, El - beth - el, the
God of Beth - el. As when he made a thankful acknowledgement of the
honour God had done him in calling him Israel, he worshipped God by the
name of El - elohe - israel, so now he was making a grateful recognition
of God's former favour at Beth - el, he worships God by the name of El -
beth - el, the God of Beth - el, because there God appeared to him.

[Genesis 35:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 35:8</span></span>

There he buried Deborah, Rebekah's nurse - We have reason to think that
Jacob, after he came to Canaan, while his family dwelt near Shechem,
went himself to visit his father Isaac at Hebron. Rebekah probably was
dead, but her old nurse (of whom mention is made [Gen
24:59](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#059),.md) survived her, and Jacob took
her to his family. While they were at Beth - el she died, and died
lamented, so much lamented, that the oak under which she was buried, was
called Allon - bachuth, the oak of weeping.

[Genesis 35:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 35:10</span></span>

God now confirmed the change of his name. It was done before by the
angel that wrestled with him, [Gen
32:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#028.md), and here it was ratified by the
divine majesty, to encourage him against the fear of the Canaanites. Who
can be too hard for Israel, a prince with God?

[Genesis 35:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 35:11</span></span>

He renewed and ratified the covenant with him, by the name of El -
Shaddai, I am God Almighty. God All - sufficient, able to make good the
promise in due time, and to support thee and provide for thee. Two
things are promised him. That he should be the father of a great nation:
great in number, a company of nations shall be of thee - Every tribe of
Israel was a nation, and all the twelve, a company of nations: great in
honour and power, kings shall come out of thy loins. That he should be
master of a good land, [Gen 35:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#012.md). The
land that was given to Abraham and Isaac is here entailed on Jacob and
his seed. These two promises had also a spiritual signification, which
we may suppose Jacob himself had some notion of: for without doubt
Christ is the promised seed, and heaven is the promised land; the former
is the foundation, and the latter the top - stone of all God's favours.

[Genesis 35:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 35:13</span></span>

And God went up from him - Or, from over him - In some visible display
of glory, which had hovered over him, while he talked with him.

[Genesis 35:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 35:14</span></span>

And Jacob set up a pillar - When he was going to Padan - aram he set up
that stone which he had laid his head on for a pillar; but now he took
time to erect one more stately, and durable, probably inserting that
stone into it. And in token of his intending it for a sacred memorial of
his communion with God, he poured oil, and the other ingredients of a
drink - offering upon it. This stone shall be God's house, that is,
shall be set up for his honour, as houses to the praise of their
builders; and here he performs it. And he confirmed the name he had
formerly given to the place, Beth - el, the house of God. Yet this very
place afterwards lost the honour of its name, and became Beth - aven, a
house of iniquity, for here it was that Jeroboam set up one of his
calves. It is impossible for the best men to entail so much as the
profession and form of religion upon a place.

[Genesis 35:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 35:16</span></span>

She had hard labour - Harder than usual.

[Genesis 35:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 35:17</span></span>

Rachel had said when she bore Joseph, God shall give me another son,
which now the midwife remembers, and tells her, her words were made
good. Yet this did not avail; unless God command away fear, no one else
can. We are apt in extreme perils to comfort ourselves and our friends
with the hopes of a temporal deliverance, in which we may be
disappointed; we had better ground our comforts on that which cannot
fail us, the hope of eternal life. Rachel had passionately said, Give me
children, or else I die; and now she had children (for this was her
second) she died.

[Genesis 35:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 35:18</span></span>

Her dying lips calls her new - born soon Benoni, the son of my sorrow.
But Jacob because he would not renew the sorrowful remembrance of his
mother's death every time he called his son by name, changed his name,
and called him Benjamin, the son of my right hand - That is, very dear
to me; set on my right hand for a right hand blessing; the support of my
age, like the staff in my right hand. Jacob buried her near the place
where she died. If the soul be at rest after death, the matter is not
great where the body lies. In the place where the tree falls, there let
it lie. The Jewish writers say, The death of Deborah and Rachel was to
expiate the murder of the Shechemites, occasioned by Dinah, a daughter
of the family.

[Genesis 35:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 35:20</span></span>

And Jacob set up a pillar upon her grave - So that it was known long
after to be Rachel's sepulchre, [Sa1
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#002.md), and Providence so ordered it,
that this place afterwards fell in the lot of Benjamin. Jacob set up a
pillar in remembrance of his joys [Gen
35:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#014.md), and here he set up one in
remembrance of his sorrows; for as it may be of use to ourselves to keep
both in mind, so it may be of use to others to transmit the memorials of
both.

[Genesis 35:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 35:21</span></span>

Israel, a prince with God, yet dwells in tents; the city is reserved for
him in the other world.

[Genesis 35:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 35:22</span></span>

When Israel dwelt in that land - As if he were then absent from his
family, which might be the unhappy occasion of these disorders. Though
perhaps Bilhah was the greater criminal, yet Reuben's crime was so
provoking that for it he lost his birth - right and blessing, [Gen
49:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#004.md). And Israel heard it - No more is
said, that is enough; he heard it with the utmost grief and shame,
horror and displeasure.

[Genesis 35:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 35:27</span></span>

And Jacob came unto Isaac his father - We may suppose he had visited him
before since his return, for he sore longed after his father's house,
but never 'till now brought his family to settle with him, or near him.
Probably he did this now upon the death of Rebekah, by which Isaac was
left solitary.

[Genesis 35:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 35:28</span></span>

The age and death of Isaac are here recorded, though it appears by
computation that he died not 'till many years after Joseph was sold into
Egypt, and much about the time that he was preferred there. Isaac, a
mild quiet man, lived the longest of all the patriarchs, for he was one
hundred and eighty years old: Abraham was but one hundred and seventy -
five. Isaac lived about forty years after he had made his will, [Gen
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#002.md). We shall not die an hour the
sooner, but abundance the better, for our timely setting of our heart
and house in order. Particular notice is taken of the amicable agreement
of Esau and Jacob in solemnizing their father's funeral, [Gen
35:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#029.md), to shew how God had wonderfully
changed Esau's mind, since he vowed his brother's murder, upon his
father's death, [Gen 27:41](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#041.md). God has
many ways of preventing ill men from doing the mischief they in tended;
he can either tie their hands, or turn their hearts.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 36](gen036.md)

</div>
