<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen015)  [Next](gen017.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#001.md)

[Genesis 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 16:1</span></span>

We have here the marriage of Abram to Hagar, who was his secondary wife.
Herein, though he may be excused, he cannot be justified; for from the
beginning it was not so: and when it was so, it seems to have proceeded
from an irregular desire to build up their families, for the speedier
peopling of the world. But now we must not do so? Christ has reduced
this matter to the first institution, and makes the marriage union to be
between one man and one woman only.

[Genesis 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 16:4</span></span>

We have here the ill consequences of Abram's marriage to Hagar: a deal
of mischief it made presently. Hagar no sooner perceives herself with
child, but she looks scornfully upon her mistress; upbraids her perhaps
with her barrenness, and insults over her. Sarai falls upon Abram, and
very unjustly charges him with the injury, suspecting that he
countenanced Hagar's insolence: and as one not willing to hear what
Abram had to say she rashly appeals to God. The Lord judge between me
and thee, as if Abram had refused to right her. When passion is upon the
throne, reason is out of doors, and is neither heard nor spoken. Those
are not always in the right that are most forward in appealing to God.
Rash and bold imprecations are commonly evidences of guilt and a bad
cause.

[Genesis 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 16:6</span></span>

Thy maid is in thy hand - Though she was his wife, he would not
countenance her in any thing disrespectful to Sarai. Those who would
keep up peace and love, must return first answers to hard accusations;
husbands and wives particularly should endeavour not to be both angry
together. And when Sarai dealt hardly with her - Making her to serve
with rigour; she fled from her face - She not only avoided her wrath for
the present, but totally deserted her service.

[Genesis 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 16:7</span></span>

Here is the first mention we have in scripture of an angel's appearance,
who arrested her in her flight. It should seem she was making towards
her own country, for she was in the way to Shur, which lay towards
Egypt. 'Twere well if our afflictions would make us think of our home,
the better county. But Hagar was now out of the way of her duty, and
going farther astray, when the angel found her. It is a great mercy to
be stopt in a sinful way, either by conscience or providence.

[Genesis 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 16:8</span></span>

And he said, Hagar, Sarai's maid - As a check to her pride. Though she
was Abram's wife, yet he calls her Sarai's maid to humble her. As a
rebuke to her flight. Sarai's maid ought to be in Sarai's tent, and not
wandering in the wilderness. Whence comest thou - Consider that thou art
running away both from the duty thou wast bound to, and the privileges
thou wast blest with, in Abram's tent. And Whither wilt thou go? - Thou
art running thyself into sin in Egypt; if she return to that people, she
will return to their gods. And she said, I flee from the face of my
mistress - She acknowledges her fault in fleeing from her mistress; and
yet, excuses it, that it was from the face, or displeasure, of her
mistress.

[Genesis 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 16:9</span></span>

And the angel said, Return to thy mistress, and submit thyself under her
hand - Go home and humble thyself for what thou hast done amiss, and
resolve for the future to behave thyself better.

[Genesis 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 16:10</span></span>

I will multiply thy seed exceedingly - Heb. multiplying I will multiply
it, that is, multiply it in every age, so as to perpetuate it. 'Tis
supposed that the Turks at this day descended from Ishmael, and they are
a great people.

[Genesis 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 16:11</span></span>

Ishmael, that is, God will hear; and the reason is, because the Lord
hath heard: he hath, and therefore he will. The experience we have had
of God's seasonable kindness in distress should encourage us to hope for
the like help in the like exigencies. Even there, where there is little
cry of devotion, the God of pity hears the cry of affliction: tears
speak as well as prayers.

[Genesis 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 16:12</span></span>

He will be a wild man - A wild ass of a man, so the word is: rude, and
bold and fearing no man; untamed, untractable, living at large, and
impatient of service and restraint. His hand will be against every man -
That is his sin, and every man's hand against him - That is his
punishment. Note, Those that have turbulent spirits have commonly
troublesome lives: they that are provoking, and injurious to others,
must expect to be repaid in their own coin. And yet, he shall dwell in
the presence of all his brethren - Though threatened and insulted by all
his neighbours, yet he shall keep his ground, and, for Abram's sake more
than his own, shall be able to make his part good with them. Accordingly
we read, [Gen 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#018.md), that he died, as
he lived, in the presence of all his brethren.

[Genesis 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 16:13</span></span>

And she called the name of the Lord that spake unto her - That is, thus
she made confession of his name, Thou God seest me - This should be with
her, his name for ever, and this his memorial, by which she will know
him, and remember him while she lives, Thou God seest me. Thou seest my
sorrow and affliction. This Hagar especially refers to: when we have
brought ourselves into distress by our own folly, yet God has not
forsaken us. Thou seest the sincerity of my repentance. Thou seest me,
if in any instance I depart from thee. This thought should always
restrain us from sin, and excite us to duty, Thou God seest me. Have I
here also looked after him that seeth me? - Probably she knew not who it
was that talked with her till he was departing, and then looking after
him, with a reflexion like that of the two disciples, [Luk
24:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#031.md). Here also - Not only in
Abram's tent, and at his altar, but here also, in this wilderness: here,
where I never expected it, where I was out of the way of my duty?

[Genesis 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 16:14</span></span>

The well was called Beer - lahai - roi - The well of him that lives and
sees me. 'Tis likely Hagar put this name upon it, and it was retained
long after. This was the place where the God of glory manifested the
special care he took of a poor woman in distress. Those that are
graciously admitted into communion with God, and receive seasonable
comforts from him, should tell others what he has done for their souls,
that they also may be encouraged to seek him and trust in him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 17](gen017.md)

</div>
