<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen007)  [Next](gen009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#001)

[Genesis 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 8:1</span></span>

And God remembered Noah and every living thing - This is an expression
after the manner of men, for not any of his creatures, much less any of
his people are forgotten of God. But the whole race of mankind, except
Noah and his family, was now extinguished, and gone into the land of
forgetfulness, so that God's remembering Noah was the return of his
mercy to mankind, of whom he would not make a full end. Noah himself,
tho' one that had found grace in the eyes of the Lord, yet seemed to be
forgotten in the ark; but at length God returned in mercy to him, and
that is expressed by his remembering him.

[Genesis 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 8:3</span></span>

The waters returned from off the earth continually - Heb. they were
going and returning; a gradual departure. The heat of the sun exhaled
much, and perhaps the subterraneous caverns soaked in more.

[Genesis 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 8:4</span></span>

And the ark rested - upon the mountains of Ararat - Or, Armenia, whether
it was directed, not by Noah's prudence, but the wise providence of God.

[Genesis 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 8:5</span></span>

The tops of the mountains were seen - Like little islands appearing
above water. They felt ground above forty days before they saw it,
according to Dr. Lightfoots's computation, whence he infers that if the
waters decreased proportionably, the ark drew eleven cubits in water.

[Genesis 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 8:7</span></span>

Noah sent forth a raven through the window of the ark, which went forth,
as the Hebrew phrase is, going forth and returning, that is, flying
about, but returning to the ark for rest; probably not in it, but upon
it. This gave Noah little satisfaction: therefore,

[Genesis 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 8:8</span></span>

He sent forth a dove - Which returned the first time with no good news,
but probably wet and dirty; but the second time she brought an olive
leaf in her bill, which appeared to be fresh plucked off; a plain
indication that now the trees began to appear above water. Note here,
that Noah set forth the dove the second time, seven days after the first
time, and the third time was after seven days too: and probably the
first sending of her out was seven days after the sending forth of the
raven. The olive branch is an emblem of peace.

[Genesis 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 8:13</span></span>

Noah removed the covering of the ark - Not the whole covering, but so
much as would suffice to give him a prospect of the earth about it: and
behold the face of the ground was dry.

[Genesis 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 8:14</span></span>

The earth was dried - So as to be a fit habitation for Noah.

[Genesis 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 8:20</span></span>

And Noah builded an altar - Hitherto he had done nothing without
particular instructions and commands from God but altars and sacrifices
being already of Divine institution, he did not stay for a particular
command thus to express his thankfulness. And he offered on the altar,
of every clean beast and of every clean fowl - One, the odd seventh that
we read of, [Gen 7:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#002).

[Genesis 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 8:21</span></span>

And God smelled a sweet savour - Or a savour of rest from it, as it is
in the Hebrew. He was well pleased with Noah's pious zeal, and these
hopeful beginnings of the new world, as men are with fragrant and
agreeable smells. I will not again curse the ground, Heb. I will not add
to curse the ground any more - God had cursed the ground upon the first
entrance of sin, [Gen 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#017), when he
drowned it he added to that curse: but now he determines not to add to
it any more. Neither will I again smite any more every living thing -
That is, it was determined that whatever ruin God might bring upon
particular persons, families or countries, he would never again destroy
the whole world, 'till the day when time shall be no more. But the
reason of this resolve is surprising; for it seems the same with the
reason given for the destruction of the world, [Gen
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#005). Because the imagination of man's
heart is evil from his youth. But there is this difference: there it is
said, the imagination of man's heart is evil continually, that is, his
actual transgressions continually cry against him; here it is said, that
it is evil from his youth or childhood; he brought it into the world
with him, he was shapen and conceived in it. Now one would think it
should follow, therefore that guilty race shall be wholly extinguished:
No; therefore I will no more take this severe method; for he is rather
to be pitied: and it is but what might be expected from such a
degenerate race. So that if he be dealt with according to his deserts,
one flood must succeed another 'till all be destroyed. God also
promises, that the course of nature should never be discontinued. While
the earth remaineth, and man upon it, there shall be summer and winter,
not all winter, as had been this last year; day and night, not all
night, as probably it was while the rain was descending. Here it is
plainly intimated that this earth is not to remain always; it and all
the works therein must shortly be burnt up. But as long as it doth
remain, God's providence will carefully preserve the regular succession
of times and seasons. To this we owe it, that the world stands, and the
wheel of nature keeps its tack. See here how changeable the times are,
and yet how unchangeable! 1. The course of nature always changing. As it
is with the times, so it is with the events of time, they are subject to
vicissitudes, day and night, summer and winter counterchanged. In heaven
and hell it is not so; but on earth God hath set the one over against
the other. 2. Yet never changed; it is constant in this inconstancy;
these seasons have never ceased, nor shall cease while the sun continues
such a steady measurer of time, and the moon such a faithful witness in
heaven. This is God's covenant of the day and of the night, the
stability of which is mentioned for the confirming our faith in the
covenant of grace, which is no less inviolable, [Jer
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#020). We see God's promises to the
creatures made good, and thence may infer that his promises to believers
shall be so.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 9](gen009)

</div>
