<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen023)  [Next](gen025.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#001.md)

[Genesis 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 24:1</span></span>

Abraham's pious care concerning his son was, that he should not marry
with a daughter of Canaan, but with one of his kindred because he saw,
the Canaanites were degenerating into great wickedness, and knew, that
they were designed for ruin: would not marry his son among them, lest
they should be either a snare to his soul, or, at least, a blot to his
name. Yet he would not go himself among his kindred, lest he should be
tempted to settle there: this caution is given, [Gen
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#006.md), and repeated, [Gen
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#008.md). Parents, in disposing of their
children, should carefully consult their furtherance in the way to
heaven.

[Genesis 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 24:2</span></span>

His eldest servant - Probably Eliezer of Damascus, one whose conduct and
affection he had had long experience of: he trusted him with this great
affair, and not Isaac himself, because he would not have Isaac go at all
into that country, but marry thither by proxy; and no proxy so fit as
the steward of his house. This matter is settled between the master and
the servant with a great deal of care and solemnity. The servant is
bound by an oath to do his utmost to get a wife for Isaac among his
relations, [Gen 24:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#003.md). Abraham swears
him to it, both for his own satisfaction, and for the engagement of his
servant to all possible care and diligence. Thus God swears his servants
to their work, that, having sworn, they may perform it. Swearing being
an ordinance, not peculiar to the church, but common to mankind, is to
be performed by such signs as are the common usages of our country.

[Genesis 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 24:7</span></span>

God's angels are ministering spirits, sent forth, not only for the
protection, but guidance of the heirs of promise, [Heb
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014.md). He shall send his angel before
thee - And then thou shalt speed well.

[Genesis 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 24:11</span></span>

He made his camels kneel down - Perhaps to unload them.

[Genesis 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 24:12</span></span>

Send me good speed this day - We have leave to be particular in
recommending our affairs to the care of Divine providence. Those that
would have good speed must pray for it this day, in this affair. Thus we
must, in all our ways acknowledge God.

[Genesis 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 24:14</span></span>

Let it come to pass - He prays God, that be would please to make his way
plain and clear before him, by the concurrence of minute circumstances
in his favour. It is the comfort, as well as the belief, of a good man,
that God's providence extends itself to the smallest occurrences, and
admirably serves its own purposes by them. And it is our wisdom, in all
our affairs, to follow providence. Yea, it is very desirable, and that
which we may lawfully pray for, while, in the general, we set God's will
before us as our rule, that he will, by hints of providence, direct us
in the way of our duty, and give us indications what his mind is. Thus
he guides his people with his eye, and leads them in a plain path.

[Genesis 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 24:15</span></span>

And before he had done speaking, behold Rebekah came out - Who in all
respects, answered the characters he wished for in the woman that was to
be his master's wife, handsome and healthful, humble and industrious,
courteous and obliging to a stranger. And providence so ordered it, that
she did that which exactly answered his sign. She not only gave him
drink, but, which was more than could have been expected, she offered
her service to give his camels drink, which was the very sign he
proposed. God, in his providence, doth sometimes wonderfully own the
prayer of faith, and gratify the innocent desires of his praying people
even in little things, that he may shew the extent of his care, and may
encourage them at all times, to seek him, and trust in him; yet we must
take heed of being over bold in prescribing to God, lest the event
should weaken our faith rather than strengthen it. And the concurrence
of providences, and their minute circumstances, for the furtherance of
our success in any business, ought to be particularly observed with
wonder and thankfulness to the glory of God. We have been wanting to
ourselves both in duty and comfort, by neglecting to observe providence.

[Genesis 24:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 24:27</span></span>

Blessed be the Lord God of my master Abraham - Observe here, He had
prayed for good speed, and now he had sped well, he gives thanks. As
yet, he was not certain what the issue might prove, yet he gives thanks.
When God's favours are coming towards us; we must meet them with our
praises. The Lord led me to the house of my master's brethren - Those of
them that were come out of Ur of the Chaldees, though they were not come
to Canaan, but staid in Haran. They were not idolaters, but worshippers
of the true God, and inclinable to the religion of Abraham's family.

[Genesis 24:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 24:29</span></span>

We have here the making up of the marriage between Isaac and Rebekah,
related largely and particularly. Thus we are directed to take notice of
God's providence in the little common occurrences of human life, and in
them also to exercise our own prudence, and other graces: for the
scripture was not intended only for the use of philosophers and
statesmen, but to make us all wise and virtuous in the conduct of
ourselves and families.

[Genesis 24:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 24:31</span></span>

Come in thou blessed of the Lord - Perhaps, because they heard from
Rebekah, of the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth, they
concluded him a good man, and therefore blessed of the Lord.

[Genesis 24:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">gen 24:34</span></span>

I am Abraham' servant - Abraham's name, no doubt, was well known among
them, and respected; and we may suppose them not altogether ignorant of
his state, for Abraham knew theirs, [Gen
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#020.md).

[Genesis 24:45](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">gen 24:45</span></span>

Before I had done speaking in my heart - Which perhaps he mentions, lest
it should be suspected that Rebekah had overheard his prayer, and
designedly humoured it; no, saith he, I spake it in my heart, so that
none heard it but God, to whom thoughts are words, and from him the
answer came.

[Genesis 24:50](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#050.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">gen 24:50</span></span>

The thing proceedeth from the Lord - Providence smiles upon it, and we
have nothing to say against it. A marriage is then likely to be
comfortable when it appears to proceed from the Lord.

[Genesis 24:52](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#052.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">gen 24:52</span></span>

He worshipped the Lord - As his good success went on, he went on to
bless God: those that pray without ceasing should in every thing give
thanks, and own God in every step of mercy.

[Genesis 24:55](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#055.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">gen 24:55</span></span>

Let her abide a few days, at least ten - They had consented to the
marriage, and yet were loth to part with her. It is an instance of the
vanity of this world, that there is nothing in it so agreeable but has
its allay. They were pleased that they had matched a daughter of their
family so well, and yet it was with reluctancy that they sent her away.

[Genesis 24:57](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#057.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">gen 24:57</span></span>

Call the damsel, and enquire at her mouth - As children ought not to
marry without their parents consent, so parents ought not to marry them
without their own. Before the matter is resolved on, ask at the damsel's
mouth, she is a party principally concerned; and therefore ought to be
principally consulted.

[Genesis 24:61](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#061.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_061">gen 24:61</span></span>

And her damsels - It seems then, when she went to the well for water, it
was not because she had no servants at command, but because she took
pleasure in the instances of humanity and industry.

[Genesis 24:63](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#063.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_063">gen 24:63</span></span>

He went out to meditate (or pray) in the field at the even tide - Some
think he expected his servants about this time, and went out on purpose
to meet them. But it should seem he went out to take the advantage of a
silent evening, and a solitary field, for mediation and prayer. Our
walks in the field are then truly pleasant, when in them we apply
ourselves to meditation and prayer we there have a free and open
prospect of the heavens above us, and the earth around us, and the hosts
and riches of both, by the view of which we should he led to the
contemplation of the Maker and Owner of all. Merciful providences are
then doubly comfortable, when they find us in the way of our duty: some
think Isaac was now praying for good success in this affair, and
meditating upon that which was proper to encourage his hope in God
concerning it; and now when he sets himself, as it were, upon his watch
- tower, to see what God would answer him, he sees the camels coming.

[Genesis 24:64](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#064.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_064">gen 24:64</span></span>

She lighted off her camel, and took a vail and covered herself - In
token of humility, modesty and subjection.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 25](gen025.md)

</div>
