<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen010)  [Next](gen012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#001.md)

[Genesis 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 11:1</span></span>

And the whole earth was of one language - Now while they all understood
one another, they would be the more capable of helping one another, and
the less inclinable to separate.

[Genesis 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 11:2</span></span>

And they found a plain in the land of Shinar - A spacious plain, able to
contain them all.

[Genesis 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 11:3</span></span>

Go to, let us make brick, let us build us a city - The country being a
plain, yielded neither stone nor morter, yet that did not discourage
them, but they made brick to serve instead of stone, and slime, or
pitch, instead of morter.

Some think they intended hereby to secure themselves against the waters
of another flood, but if they had, they would have chosen to build upon
a mountain rather than upon a plain. But two things it seems they aimed
at in building. To make them a name: they would do something to be
talked of by posterity. But they could not gain this point; for we do
not find in any history the name of so much as one of these Babel -
builders. Philo Judeus saith they engraved every one his name upon a
brick; yet neither did that serve their purpose. They did it to prevent
their dispersion; lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the earth
- It was done (saith Josephus) in disobedience to that command, [Gen
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#001.md), replenish the earth. God orders
them to scatter. No, say they, we will live and die together. In order
hereunto they engage themselves and one another in this vast
undertaking. That they might unite in one glorious empire, they resolve
to build this city and tower, to be the metropolis of their kingdom, and
the center of their unity.

[Genesis 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 11:5</span></span>

And the Lord came down to see the city - 'Tis an expression after the
manner of men, he knew it as clearly as men know that which they come
upon the place to view. And the tower which the children of men builded
- Which speaks, Their weakness and frailty, it was a foolish thing for
the children of men, worms of the earth, to defy heaven. Their
sinfulness, they were the sons of Adam, so it is in the Hebrew; nay, of
that Adam, that sinful disobedient Adam, whose children are by nature
children of disobedience. Their distinction from the children of God,
from whom those daring builders had separated themselves, and built this
tower to support and perpetuate the separation.

[Genesis 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 11:6</span></span>

And the Lord said, Behold the people is one, and they have all one
language - And if they continue one, much of the earth will be left
uninhabited, and these children of men, if thus incorporated, will
swallow up the little remnant of God's children, therefore it is decreed
they must not be one. And now nothing will be restrained from them - And
this is a reason why they must be crossed, in their design.

[Genesis 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 11:7</span></span>

Go to, let us go down and there confound their language - This was not
spoken to the angels, as if God needed either their advice or their
assistance, but God speaks it to himself, or the Father to the Son and
Holy Ghost. That they may not understand one another's speech - Nor
could they well join hands when their tongues were divided: so that this
was a proper means, both to take them off from their building, for if
they could not understand one another, they could not help one another;
and to dispose them to scatter, for when they could not understand one
another, they could not enjoy one another. Accordingly three things were
done, Their language was confounded. God, who when he made man taught
him to speak, now made those builders to forget their former language;
and to speak a new one, which yet was the same to those of the same
tribe or family, but not to others: those of one colony could converse
together, but not with those of another. We all suffer hereby to this
day: in all the inconveniences we sustain by the diversity of languages,
and all the trouble we are at to learn the languages we have occasion
for, we smart for the rebellion of our ancestors at Babel; nay, and
those unhappy controversies, which are strifes of words, and arise from
our misunderstanding of one another's languages, for ought I know, are
owing to this confusion of tongues. The project of some to frame an
universal character in order to an universal language, how desirable
soever it may seem, yet I think is but a vain thing for it is to strive
against a divine sentence, by which the languages of the nations will be
divided while the world stands. We may here lament the loss of the
universal use of the Hebrew tongue, which from henceforth was the vulgar
language of the Hebrews only, and continued so till the captivity in
Babylon, where, even among them, it was exchanged for the Syriac. As the
confounding of tongues divided the children of men, and scattered them
abroad, so the gift of tongues bestowed upon the Apostles, [Act
2:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004.md), contributed greatly to the
gathering together of the children of God, which were scattered abroad,
and the uniting of them in Christ, that with one mind and mouth they
might glorify God, [Rom 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#006.md). (The
imagination of a late writer, that God did not confound their tongues,
but their religious worship, is grounded on criticisms concerning the
meaning of the Hebrew word, which are absolutely false. Beside, would
God confound their religious worship? Surely, He is a God of order, and
not of confusion. Their building was stopped, they left off to build the
city - This was the effect of the confusion of their tongue's; for it
not only disabled them from helping one another, but probably struck a
damp upon their spirits, since they saw the hand of the Lord gone out
against them. The builders were scattered abroad from thence upon the
face of the whole earth - They departed in companies after their
families and after their tongues, [Gen
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#005.md), [Gen
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#020.md), [Gen
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#031.md), to the several countries and
places allotted to them in the division that had been made, which they
knew before, but would not go to take possession of, 'till now they were
forced to it. Observe

The very thing which they feared came upon them; that dispersion which
they thought to evade. That it was God's work; the Lord scattered them;
God's hand is to be acknowledged in all scattering providences; if the
family be scattered, relations scattered, churches scattered, it is the
Lord's doing. That they left behind them a perpetual memorandum of their
reproach in the name given to the place; it was called Babel, confusion.
The children of men were now finally scattered, and never will come all
together again 'till the great day. when the Son of Man shall sit upon
the throne of his glory, and all nations shall be gathered before him,
[Mat 25:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#031.md).

[Genesis 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 11:10</span></span>

Observe here, That nothing is left upon record concerning those of this
line, but their names and ages; the Holy Ghost seeming to hasten thro'
them to the story of Abraham. How little do we know of those that are
gone before us in this world, even those that lived in the same places
where we live! Or indeed of those who are our contemporaries, but in
distant places. That there was an observable gradual decrease in the
years of their lives. Shem reached to 600 years, which yet fell short of
the age of the patriarchs before the flood; the three next came short of
500, the three next did not reach to 300, and after them we read not of
any that attained to 200 but Terah; and not many ages after this, Moses
reckoned 70 or 80 to be the utmost men ordinarily arrive at. When the
earth began to be replenished, mens lives began to shorten so that the
decrease is to be imputed to the wise disposal of providence, rather
than to any decay of nature. That Eber, from whom the Hebrews were
denominated, was the longest lived of any that were born after the
flood; which perhaps was the reward of his strict adherence to the ways
of God.

[Genesis 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 11:27</span></span>

Here begins the story of Abram. We have here, His country: Ur of the
Chaldee's - An idolatrous country, where even the children of Eber
themselves degenerated. His relations, mentioned for his sake, and
because of their interest in he following story. His father was Terah,
of whom it is said, [Jos 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#002.md), that he
served other gods on the other side the flood; so early did idolatry
gain footing in the world. Enough it is said, [Gen
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#026.md), that when Terah was seventy
years old he begat Abram, Nabor and Haran, which seems to tell us that
Abram was the eldest son of Terah, and born in the 70th year; yet by
comparing [Gen 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#032.md), which makes
Terah to die in his 205th year, with [Act
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#004.md), where it is said that Abram
removed from Haran when his father was dead, and [Gen
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#004.md), where it is said that he was but
75 years old when he removed from Haran, it appears that he was born in
the 130th year of Terah, and probably was his youngest son. We have,
Some account of his brethren Nahor, out of whole family both Isaac and
Jacob had their wives. Haran, the father of Lot, of whom it is here
said, [Gen 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#028.md), that he died before
his father Terah. 'Tis likewise said that he died in Ur of the Chaldees,
before that happy remove of the family out of that idolatrous country.
His wife was Sarai, who, tho' some think was the same with Iscah the
daughter of Haran. Abram himself saith, she was the daughter of his
father, but not the daughter of his mother, [Gen
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#012.md). She was ten years younger than
Abram. His departure out of Ur of the Chaldees, with his father Terah,
and his nephew Lot, and the rest of his family, in obedience to the call
of God. This chapter leaves them in Haran or Charran, a place about the
mid - way between Ur and Canaan, where they dwelt 'till Terah's head was
laid; probably because the old man was unable, through the infirmities
of age, to proceed in his journey.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 12](gen012.md)

</div>
