<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen019)  [Next](gen021.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001.md)

[Genesis 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 20:1</span></span>

And Abraham sojourned in Gerar - We are not told upon what occasion he
removed, whether terrified by the destruction of Sodom, or, as some of
the Jewish writers say, because he was grieved at Lot's incest with his
daughters, and the reproach which the Canaanites cast upon him for his
kinsman's sake. The king of Gerar sent and took her - To his house, in
order to the taking of her to his bed.

[Genesis 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 20:3</span></span>

But God came to Abimelech in a dream - It appears by this that God
revealed himself by dreams, which evidenced themselves to be divine and
supernatural, not only to his servants the prophets, but even to those
that were out of the pale of the church; but then usually it was with
some regard to God's own people.

[Genesis 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 20:4</span></span>

Wilt thou slay also a righteous nation - Not such a nation as Sodom.

[Genesis 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 20:6</span></span>

I withheld thee from sinning against me - It is God that restrains men
from doing the ill they would do; it is not from him that there is sin,
but it is from him that there is not more sin, either by his influence
on mens minds checking their inclination to sin, or by his providence
taking away the opportunity. It is a great mercy to be hindered from
committing sin, which God must have the glory of whoever is the
instrument.

[Genesis 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 20:9</span></span>

Thou hast done deeds that ought not to be done - Equivocation and
dissimulation, however they may be palliated, are very ill things, and
by no means to be admitted in any case. He takes it as a very great
injury to himself and his family, that Abraham had thus exposed them to
sin, What have I offended thee? - If I had been thy worst enemy, thou
couldst not have done me a worse turn, nor taken a more effectual course
to be avenged on me. Note, We ought to reckon, that those do us the
greatest dislikedness in the world, that any way tempt us or expose us
to sin, though they may pretend friendship, and offer that which is
grateful enough to the corrupt nature. He challenges him to assign any
just cause he had to suspect them as a dangerous people for an honest
man to live among.

[Genesis 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 20:10</span></span>

What sawest thou that thou hast done this thing - What reason hadst thou
to think, that if we had known her to be thy wife, thou wouldst have
been exposed to any danger by it?

[Genesis 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 20:11</span></span>

I thought surely the fear of God is not in this place, and they will
slay me - There are many places and persons that have more of the fear
of God in them than we think they have; perhaps they are not called by
our name, they do not wear our badges, they do not tie themselves to
that which we have an opinion of; and therefore we conclude they have
not the fear of God in their hearts!

[Genesis 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 20:13</span></span>

When God caused me to wander from my father's house - Then we settled
this matter. It may be, that God denied Abraham and Sarah the blessing
of children so long to punish them for this sinful compact they had made
to deny one another: if they will not own their marriage, why should God
own it? But we may suppose, that alter this reproof they agreed never to
do so again, and then presently we read, [Gen
21:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#001.md), that Sarah conceived.

[Genesis 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 20:16</span></span>

Thy brother is to thee a covering of the eyes - Thou must look at no
other, nor desire to be looked at by any other. Yoke - fellows must be
to each other for a covering of the eyes. The marriage - covenant is a
covenant with the eyes, like Job's, [Job
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#001.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 21](gen021.md)

</div>
