<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen041)  [Next](gen043.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 42](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#001.md)

[Genesis 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 42:1</span></span>

Jacob saw that there was corn - That is, he saw the corn that his
neighbours had bought there and brought home.

[Genesis 42:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 42:2</span></span>

Get you down thither - Masters of families must not only pray for daily
bread for their families, but must with care and industry provide it.

[Genesis 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 42:7</span></span>

We may well wonder that Joseph, during the twenty years he had been in
Egypt, especially during the last seven years that he had been in power
there, never sent to his father to acquaint him with his circumstances;
nay, 'tis strange that he who so oft went throughout all the land of
Egypt, never made a step to Canaan, to visit his aged father. When he
was in the borders of Egypt that lay next to Canaan, perhaps it would
not have been above three or four days journey for him in his chariot.
'Tis a probable conjecture, that his whole management of himself in this
affair was by special direction from heaven, that the purpose of God,
concerning Jacob and his family, might be accomplished. When Joseph's
brethren came, he knew them by many a good token, but they knew not him,
little thinking to find him there.

[Genesis 42:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 42:9</span></span>

He remembered the dreams, but they had forgot them. The laying up of
God's oracles in our hearts will be of excellent use to us in all our
conduct. Joseph had an eye to his dreams, which he knew to be divine, in
his carriage towards his brethren, and aimed at the accomplishment of
them, and the bringing his brethren to repentance; and both those points
were gained. He shewed himself harsh with them: the very manner of his
speaking, considering the post he was in, was enough to frighten them,
for he spake roughly to them - He charged them with ill designs against
the government, treated them as dangerous persons, ye are spies,
protesting by the life of Pharaoh that they were so. Some make that an
oath, others make it no more but a vehement asseveration; however, it
was more than yea, yea, and nay, nay, and therefore came of evil. They
hereupon were very submissive; they spoke to him with all respect; nay,
my lord. They modestly deny the charge, we are no spies; they tell him
their business, they came to buy food, they give a particular account of
themselves and their family, [Gen
42:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#013.md), and that was it he wanted. He
clapt them all up in prison three days. He concluded with them at last,
that one of them should be left as a hostage, and the rest should go
home and fetch Benjamin. It was a very encouraging word he said, I fear
God; q.d. You may assure yourselves, I will do you no wrong, I dare not,
for I know that as high as I am, there is one higher than I. With those
that fear God we have reason to expect fair dealing: the fear of God
will be a check upon those that are in power, to restrain them from
abusing their power to oppression and tyranny:

[Genesis 42:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 42:21</span></span>

We are very guilty concerning our brother - We do not read that they
said this during their three days imprisonment; but now when the matter
was come to some issue, and they saw themselves still embarrassed, they
began to relent. Perhaps Joseph's mention of the fear of God, put them
upon consideration, and extorted this reflexion.

[Genesis 42:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 42:24</span></span>

He took Simeon - He chose him for the hostage, probably because he
remembered him to have been his most bitter enemy, or because he
observed him now to be least humbled and concerned. He bound him before
their eyes, to affect them all.

[Genesis 42:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 42:28</span></span>

Their heart failed them, and they were afraid, saying one to another,
What is this that God hath done to us? - They knew that the Egyptians
abhorred a Hebrew, [Gen 43:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#032.md), and
therefore, since they could not expect to receive any kindness from
them, they concluded that this was done with a design to pick a quarrel
with them, the rather because the man, the lord of the land, had charged
them as spies. Their own conscience were awake, and their sins set in
order before them, and this puts them into confusion. When the events of
providence concerning us are surprising, it is good to enquire what it
is that God has done and is doing with us?

[Genesis 42:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">gen 42:38</span></span>

My son shall not go down with you - He plainly intimates a distrust of
them, remembering that he never saw Joseph since he had been with them;
therefore Benjamin shall not go with you.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 43](gen043.md)

</div>
