<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](plm001)  [Next](heb002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

[Hebrews 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 1:1</span></span>

God, who at sundry times - The creation was revealed in the time of
Adam; the last judgment, in the time of Enoch: and so at various times,
and in various degrees, more explicit knowledge was given. In divers
manners - In visions, in dreams, and by revelations of various kinds.
Both these are opposed to the one entire and perfect revelation which he
has made to us by Jesus Christ. The very number of the prophets showed
that they prophesied only "in part." Of old - There were no prophets for
a large tract of time before Christ came, that the great Prophet might
be the more earnestly expected. Spake - A part is put for the whole;
implying every kind of divine communication. By the prophets - The
mention of whom is a virtual declaration that the apostle received the
whole Old Testament, and was not about to advance any doctrine in
contradiction to it. Hath in these last times - Intimating that no other
revelation is to be expected. Spoken - All things, and in the most
perfect manner. By his Son - Alone. The Son spake by the apostles. The
majesty of the Son of God is proposed, Absolutely, by the very name of
Son, [Heb 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001), and by three glorious
predicates, - "whom he hath appointed," "by whom he made," who "sat
down;" whereby he is described from the beginning to the consummation of
all things, [Heb 1:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002) Comparatively
to angels, [Heb 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#004). The proof of this
proposition immediately follows: the name of Son being proved, [Heb
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#005); his being "heir of all things,"
[Heb 1:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006); his making the worlds,
[Heb 1:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#010) his sitting at God's
right hand, [Heb 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#013), &c.

[Hebrews 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">heb 1:2</span></span>

Whom he hath appointed heir of all things - After the name of Son, his
inheritance is mentioned. God appointed him the heir long before he made
the worlds, [Eph 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#011); [Pro
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022), &c. The Son is the firstborn,
born before all things: the heir is a term relating to the creation
which followed, [Heb 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006). By whom he
also made the worlds - Therefore the Son was before all worlds. His
glory reaches from everlasting to everlasting, though God spake by him
to us only "in these last days."

[Hebrews 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">heb 1:3</span></span>

Who sat down - The third of these glorious predicates, with which three
other particulars are interwoven, which are mentioned likewise, and in
the same order, [Col 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015), [Col
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#017), [Col
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#020). Who, being - The glory which he
received in his exaltation at the right hand of the Father no angel was
capable of; but the Son alone, who likewise enjoyed it long before. The
brightness of his glory - Glory is the nature of God revealed in its
brightness. The express image - Or stamp. Whatever the Father is, is
exhibited in the Son, as a seal in the stamp on wax. Of his person - Or
substance. The word denotes the unchangeable perpetuity of divine life
and power. And sustaining all things - Visible and invisible, in being.
By the word of his power - That is, by his powerful word. When he had by
himself - Without any Mosaic rites or ceremonies. Purged our sins - In
order to which it was necessary he should for a time divest himself of
his glory. In this chapter St. Paul describes his glory chiefly as he is
the Son of God; afterwards, [Heb 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#006),
&c., the glory of the man Christ Jesus. He speaks, indeed, briefly of
the former before his humiliation, but copiously after his exaltation;
as from hence the glory he had from eternity began to be evidently seen.
Both his purging our sins, and sitting on the right hand of God, are
largely treated of in the seven following chapters. Sat down - The
priests stood while they ministered: sitting, therefore, denotes the
consummation of his sacrifice. This word, sat down, contains the scope,
the theme, and the sum, of the epistle.

[Hebrews 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">heb 1:4</span></span>

This verse has two clauses, the latter of which is treated of, [Heb
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#005); the former, [Heb
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#013). Such transpositions are also
found in the other epistles of St. Paul, but in none so frequently as in
this. The Jewish doctors were peculiarly fond of this figure, and used
it much in all their writings. The apostle therefore, becoming all
things to all men, here follows the same method. All the inspired
writers were readier in all the figures of speech than the most
experienced orators. Being - By his exaltation, after he had been lower
than them, [Heb 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009). So much higher
than the angels - It was extremely proper to observe this, because the
Jews gloried in their law, as it was delivered by the ministration of
angels. How much more may we glory in the gospel, which was given, not
by the ministry of angels, but of the very Son of God! As he hath by
inheritance a more excellent name - Because he is the Son of God, he
inherits that name, in right whereof he inherits all things His
inheriting that name is more ancient than all worlds; his inheriting all
things, as ancient as all things. Than they - This denotes an immense
pre - eminence. The angels do not inherit all things, but are themselves
a portion of the Son's inheritance, whom they worship as their Lord.

[Hebrews 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">heb 1:5</span></span>

Thou art my Son - God of God, Light of Light. This day have I begotten
thee - I have begotten thee from eternity, which, by its unalter able
permanency of duration, is one continued, unsuccessive day. I will be to
him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son - I will own myself to be his
Father, and him to be my Son, by eminent tokens of my peculiar love The
former clause relates to his natural Sonship, by an eternal,
inconceivable generation; the other, to his Father's acknowledgment and
treatment of him as his incarnate Son. Indeed this promise related
immediately to Solomon, but in a far higher sense to the Messiah. [Psa
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007); [Sa2
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014)

[Hebrews 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">heb 1:6</span></span>

And again - That is, in another scripture. He - God. Saith, when he
bringeth in his first - begotten - This appellation includes that of
Son, together with the rights of primogeniture, which the first -
begotten Son of God enjoys, in a manner not communicable to any
creature. Into the world - Namely, at his incarnation. He saith, Let all
the angels of God worship him - So much higher was he, when in his
lowest estate, than the highest angel. [Psa
97:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#007).

[Hebrews 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">heb 1:7</span></span>

Who maketh his angels - This implies, they are only creatures, whereas
the Son is eternal, [Heb 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#008); and the
Creator himself, [Heb 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#010). Spirits
and a flame of fire - Which intimates not only their office, but also
their nature; which is excellent indeed, the metaphor being taken from
the most swift, subtle, and efficacious things on earth; but
nevertheless infinitely below the majesty of the Son. [Psa
104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004).

[Hebrews 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">heb 1:8</span></span>

O God - God, in the singular number, is never in scripture used
absolutely of any but the supreme God. Thy reign, of which the sceptre
is the ensign, is full of justice and equity. [Psa
45:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006).

[Hebrews 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">heb 1:9</span></span>

Thou hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity - Thou art infinitely
pure and holy. Therefore God - Who, as thou art Mediator, is thy God.
Hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness - With the Holy Ghost, the
fountain of joy. Above thy fellows - Above all the children of men.

[Hebrews 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">heb 1:10</span></span>

Thou - The same to whom the discourse is addressed in the preceding
verse. [Psa 102:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#025)

[Hebrews 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">heb 1:12</span></span>

As a mantle - With all ease. They shall be changed - Into new heavens
and a new earth. But thou art eternally the same.

[Hebrews 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">heb 1:13</span></span>

[Psa 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001).

[Hebrews 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">heb 1:14</span></span>

Are they not all - Though of various orders. Ministering spirits, sent
forth - Ministering before God, sent forth to men. To attend on them -
In numerous offices of protection, care, and kindness. Who - Having
patiently continued in welldoing, shall inherit everlasting salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 2](heb002)

</div>
