<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Hebrews Index](heb.md)  
  [Previous](heb008)  [Next](heb010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#001.md)

[Hebrews 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 9:1</span></span>

The first covenant had ordinances of outward worship, and a worldly - a
visible, material sanctuary, or tabernacle. Of this sanctuary he treats,
[Heb 9:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#002.md). Of those ordinances, [Heb
9:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#006.md).

[Hebrews 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">heb 9:2</span></span>

The first - The outward tabernacle. In which was the candlestick, and
the table - The shewbread, shown continually before God and all the
people, consisting of twelve loaves, according to the number of the
tribes, was placed on this table in two rows, six upon one another in
each row. This candlestick and bread seem to have typified the light and
life which are more largely dispensed under the gospel by Him who is the
Light of the world, and the Bread of life.

[Hebrews 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">heb 9:3</span></span>

The second veil divided the holy place from the most holy, as the first
veil did the holy place from the courts.

[Hebrews 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">heb 9:4</span></span>

Having the golden censer - Used by the high priest only, on the great
day of atonement. And the ark, or chest, of the covenant - So called
from the tables of the covenant contained therein. Wherein was the manna
- The monument of God's care over Israel. And Aaron's rod - The monument
of the regular priesthood. And the tables of the covenant - The two
tables of stone, on which the ten commandments were written by the
finger of God the most venerable monument of all.

[Hebrews 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">heb 9:5</span></span>

And over it were the cherubim of glory - Over which the glory of God
used to appear. Some suppose each of these had four faces, and so
represented the Three - One God, with the manhood assumed by the Second
Person. With out - spread wings shadowing the mercy - seat - Which was a
lid or plate of gold, covering the ark.

[Hebrews 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">heb 9:6</span></span>

Always - Every day. Accomplishing their services - Lighting the lamps,
changing the shewbread, burning incense, and sprinkling the blood of the
sin offerings.

[Hebrews 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">heb 9:7</span></span>

Errors - That is, sins of ignorance, to which only those atonements
extended.

[Hebrews 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">heb 9:8</span></span>

The Holy Ghost evidently showing - By this token. That the way into the
holiest - Into heaven. Was not made manifest - Not so clearly revealed.
While the first tabernacle, and its service, were still subsisting - And
remaining in force.

[Hebrews 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">heb 9:9</span></span>

Which - Tabernacle, with all its furniture and services. Is a figure -
Or type, of good things to come Which cannot perfect the worshipper -
Neither the priest nor him who brought the offering. As to his
conscience - So that he should be no longer conscious of the guilt or
power of sin. Observe, the temple was as yet standing.

[Hebrews 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">heb 9:10</span></span>

They could not so perfect him, with all their train of precepts relating
to meats and drinks, and carnal, gross, external ordinances; and were
therefore imposed only till the time of reformation - Till Christ came.

[Hebrews 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">heb 9:11</span></span>

An high priest of good things to come - Described, [Heb
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015.md). Entered through a greater, that
is, a more noble, and perfect tabernacle - Namely, his own body. Not of
this creation - Not framed by man, as that tabernacle was.

[Hebrews 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">heb 9:12</span></span>

The holy place - Heaven. For us - All that believe.

[Hebrews 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">heb 9:13</span></span>

If the ashes of an heifer - Consumed by fire as a sin - offering, being
sprinkled on them who were legally unclean. Purified the flesh - Removed
that legal uncleanness, and re - admitted them to the temple and the
congregation. [Num 19:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#017.md).

[Hebrews 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">heb 9:14</span></span>

How much more shall the blood of Christ. - The merit of all his
sufferings. Who through the eternal Spirit - The work of redemption
being the work of the whole Trinity. Neither is the Second Person alone
concerned even in the amazing condescension that was needful to complete
it. The Father delivers up the kingdom to the Son; and the Holy Ghost
becomes the gift of the Messiah, being, as it were, sent according to
his good pleasure. Offered himself - Infinitely more precious than any
created victim, and that without spot to God. Purge our conscience - Our
inmost soul. From dead works - From all the inward and outward works of
the devil, which spring from spiritual death in the soul, and lead to
death everlasting. To serve the living God - In the life of faith, in
perfect love and spotless holiness.

[Hebrews 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">heb 9:15</span></span>

And for this end he is the Mediator of a new covenant, that they who are
called - To the engagements and benefits thereof. Might receive the
eternal inheritance promised to Abraham: not by means of legal
sacrifices, but of his meritorious death. For the redemption of the
transgressions that were under the first covenant - That is, for the
redemption of transgressors from the guilt and punishment of those sins
which were committed in the time of the old covenant. The article of his
death properly divides the old covenant from the new.

[Hebrews 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">heb 9:16</span></span>

I say by means of death; for where such a covenant is, there must be the
death of him by whom it is confirmed - Seeing it is by his death that
the benefits of it are purchased. It seems beneath the dignity of the
apostle to play upon the ambiguity of the Greek word, as the common
translation supposes him to do.

[Hebrews 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">heb 9:17</span></span>

After he is dead - Neither this, nor after men are dead is a literal
translation of the words. It is a very perplexed passage.

[Hebrews 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">heb 9:18</span></span>

Whence neither was the first - The Jewish covenant, originally
transacted without the blood of an appointed sacrifice.

[Hebrews 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">heb 9:19</span></span>

He took the blood of calves - Or heifers. And of goats, with water, and
scarlet wool, and hyssop - All these circumstances are not particularly
mentioned in that chapter of Exodus, but are supposed to be already
known from other passages of Moses. And the book itself - Which
contained all he had said. And sprinkled all the people - Who were near
him. The blood was mixed with water to prevent its growing too stiff for
sprinkling; perhaps also to typify that blood and water, [Joh
19:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034.md). [Exo
24:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#007.md)

[Hebrews 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">heb 9:20</span></span>

Saying, This is the blood of the covenant which God hath enjoined me to
deliver unto you - By this it is established. [Exo
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#008.md).

[Hebrews 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">heb 9:21</span></span>

And in like manner he ordered the tabernacle - When it was made, and all
its vessels, to be sprinkled with blood once a year.

[Hebrews 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">heb 9:22</span></span>

And almost all things - For some were purified by water or fire. Are
according to the law purified with blood - Offered or sprinkled. And
according to the law, there is no forgiveness of sins without shedding
of blood - All this pointed to the blood of Christ effectually cleansing
from all sin, and intimated, there can be no purification from it by any
other means.

[Hebrews 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">heb 9:23</span></span>

Therefore - That is, it plainly appears from what has been said. It was
necessary - According to the appointment of God. That the tabernacle and
all its utensils, which were patterns, shadowy representations, of
things in heaven, should be purified by these - Sacrifices and
sprinklings. But the heavenly things themselves - Our heaven - born
spirits: what more this may mean we know not yet. By better sacrifices
than these - That is, by a better sacrifice, which is here opposed to
all the legal sacrifices, and is expressed plurally, because it includes
the signification of them all, and is of so much more eminent virtue.

[Hebrews 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">heb 9:24</span></span>

For Christ did not enter into the holy place made with hands - He never
went into the holy of holies at Jerusalem, the figure of the true
tabernacle in heaven, [Heb 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#002.md). But
into heaven itself, to appear in the presence of God for us - As our
glorious high priest and powerful intercessor.

[Hebrews 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">heb 9:26</span></span>

For then he must often have suffered from the foundation of the world -
This supposes, That by suffering once he atoned for all the sins which
had been committed from the foundation of the world. That he could not
have atoned for them without suffering. At the consummation of the ages
- The sacrifice of Christ divides the whole age or duration of the world
into two parts, and extends its virtue backward and forward, from this
middle point wherein they meet to abolish both the guilt and power of
sin.

[Hebrews 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">heb 9:27</span></span>

After this, the judgment - Of the great day. At the moment of death
every man's final state is determined. But there is not a word in
scripture of a particular judgment immediately after death.

[Hebrews 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">heb 9:28</span></span>

Christ having once died to bear the sins - The punishment due to them.
Of many - Even as many as are born into the world. Will appear the
second time - When he comes to judgment. Without sin - Not as he did
before, bearing on himself the sins of many, but to bestow everlasting
salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 10](heb010.md)

</div>
