<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Hebrews Index](heb.md)  
  [Previous](heb007)  [Next](heb009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#001.md)

[Hebrews 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 8:1</span></span>

We have such an high priest - Having finished his description of the
type in Melchisedec, the apostle begins to treat directly of the
excellency of Christ's priesthood, beyond the Levitical. Who is set down
- Having finished his oblation. At the right hand of the Majesty - Of
God.

[Hebrews 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">heb 8:2</span></span>

A minister - Who represents his own sacrifice, as the high priest did
the blood of those sacrifices once a year. Of the sanctuary - Heaven,
typified by the holy of holies. And of the true tabernacle - Perhaps his
human nature, of which the old tabernacle was a type. Which the Lord
hath fixed - Forever. Not man - As Moses fixed the tabernacle.

[Hebrews 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">heb 8:4</span></span>

But if he were on earth - If his priesthood terminated here. He could
not be a priest - At all, consistently with the Jewish institutions.
There being other priests - To whom alone this office is allotted.

[Hebrews 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">heb 8:5</span></span>

Who serve - The temple, which was not yet destroyed. After the pattern
and shadow of heavenly things - Of spiritual, evangelical worship, and
of everlasting glory. The pattern - Somewhat like the strokes pencilled
out upon a piece of fine linen, which exhibit the figures of leaves and
flowers, but have not yet received their splendid colours and curious
shades. And shadow - Or shadowy representation, which gives you some dim
and imperfect idea of the body, but not the fine features, not the
distinguishing air; none of those living graces which adorn the real
person. Yet both the pattern and shadow lead our minds to something
nobler than themselves: the pattern, to that holiness and glory which
complete it; the shadow, to that which occasions it. [Exo
25:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#040.md).

[Hebrews 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">heb 8:6</span></span>

And now he hath obtained a more excellent ministry - His priesthood as
much excels theirs, as the promises of the gospel (whereof he is a
surety) excels those of the law. These better promises are specified,
[Heb 8:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#010.md): those in the law were
mostly temporal promises.

[Hebrews 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">heb 8:7</span></span>

For if the first had been faultless - If that dispensation had answered
all God's designs and man's wants, if it had not been weak and
unprofitable unable to make anything perfect, no place would have been
for a second.

[Hebrews 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">heb 8:8</span></span>

But there is; for finding fault with them - Who were under the old
covenant he saith, I make a new covenant with the house of Israel - With
all the Israel of God, in all ages and nations. It is new in many
respects, though not as to the substance of it: Being ratified by the
death of Christ. Freed from those burdensome rites and ceremonies.
Containing a more full and clear account of spiritual religion. Attended
with larger influences of the Spirit Extended to all men. And, Never to
be abolished. [Jer 31:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031.md), &c.

[Hebrews 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">heb 8:9</span></span>

When I took them by the hand - With the care and tenderness of a parent.
And just while this was fresh in their memory, they obeyed; but
presently after they shook off the yoke. They continued not in my
covenant, and I regarded them not - So that covenant was soon broken in
pieces.

[Hebrews 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">heb 8:10</span></span>

This is the covenant I will make after those days - After the Mosaic
dispensation is abolished. I will put my laws in their minds - I will
open their eyes, and enlighten their understanding, to see the true,
full, spiritual meaning thereof. And write them on their hearts - So
that they shall inwardly experience whatever I have commanded. And I
will be to them a God - Their all - sufficient portion, and exceeding
great reward. And they shall be to me a people - My treasure, my
beloved, loving, and obedient children.

[Hebrews 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">heb 8:11</span></span>

And they who are under this covenant (though in other respects they will
have need to teach each other to their lives' end, yet) shall not need
to teach every one his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall
all know me - All real Christians. From the least to the greatest - In
this order the saving knowledge of God ever did and ever will proceed;
not first to the greatest, and then to the least. But "the Lord shall
save the tents," the poorest, "of Judah first, that the glory of the
house of David," the royal seed, "and the glory of the inhabitants of
Jerusalem," the nobles and the rich citizens, "do not magnify
themselves," [Zac 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#007.md).

[Hebrews 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">heb 8:12</span></span>

For I will justify them, which is the root of all true knowledge of God.
This, therefore, is God's method. First, a sinner is pardoned: then he
knows God, as gracious and merciful then God's laws are written on his
heart: he is God's, and God is his.

[Hebrews 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">heb 8:13</span></span>

In saying, A new covenant, he hath antiquated the first - Hath shown
that it is disannulled, and out of date. Now that which is antiquated is
ready to vanish away - As it did quickly after, when the temple was
destroyed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 9](heb009.md)

</div>
