<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb004)  [Next](heb006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#001)

[Hebrews 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 5:1</span></span>

For every high priest being taken from among men - Is, till he is taken,
of the same rank with them. And is appointed - That is, is wont to be
appointed. In things pertaining to God - To bring God near to men, and
men to God. That he may offer both gifts - Out of things inanimate, and
animal sacrifices.

[Hebrews 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">heb 5:2</span></span>

Who can have compassion - In proportion to the offence: so the Greek
word signifies. On the ignorant - Them that are in error. And the
wandering - Them that are in sin. Seeing himself also is compassed with
infirmity - Even with sinful infirmity; and so needs the compassion
which he shows to others.

[Hebrews 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">heb 5:4</span></span>

The apostle begins here to treat of the priesthood of Christ. The sum of
what he observes concerning it is, Whatever is excellent in the
Levitical priesthood is in Christ, and in a more eminent manner; and
whatever is wanting in those priests is in him. And no one taketh this
honour - The priesthood. To himself, but he that is called of God, as
was Aaron - And his posterity, who were all of them called at one and
the same time. But it is observable, Aaron did not preach at all;
preaching being no part of the priestly office.

[Hebrews 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">heb 5:5</span></span>

So also Christ glorified not himself to be an high priest - That is, did
not take this honour to himself, but received it from him who said, Thou
art my Son, this day have I begotten thee - Not, indeed, at the same
time; for his generation was from eternity. [Psa
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007).

[Hebrews 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">heb 5:6</span></span>

[Psa 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004).

[Hebrews 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">heb 5:7</span></span>

The sum of the things treated of in the seventh and following chapters
is contained, [Heb 5:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007); and in this
sum is admirably comprised the process of his passion, with its inmost
causes, in the very terms used by the evangelists. Who in the days of
his flesh - Those two days, in particular, wherein his sufferings were
at the height. Having offered up prayers and supplications - Thrice.
With strong crying and tears - In the garden. To him that was able to
save him from death - Which yet he endured, in obedience to the will of
his Father. And being heard in that which he particularly feared - When
the cup was offered him first, there was set before him that horrible
image of a painful, shameful, accursed death, which moved him to pray
conditionally against it: for, if he had desired it, his heavenly Father
would have sent him more than twelve legions of angels to have delivered
him. But what he most exceedingly feared was the weight of infinite
justice; the being "bruised" and "put to grief" by the hand of God
himself. Compared with this, everything else was a mere nothing; and
yet, so greatly did he ever thirst to be obedient to the righteous will
of his Father, and to "lay down" even "his life for the sheep," that he
vehemently longed to be baptized with this baptism, [Luk
12:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#050). Indeed, his human nature needed
the support of Omnipotence; and for this he sent up strong crying and
tears: but, throughout his whole life, he showed that it was not the
sufferings he was to undergo, but the dishonour that sin had done to so
holy a God, that grieved his spotless soul. The consideration of its
being the will of God tempered his fear, and afterwards swallowed it up;
and he was heard not so that the cup should pass away, but so that he
drank it without any fear.

[Hebrews 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">heb 5:8</span></span>

Though he were a Son - This is interposed. lest any should be offended
at all these instances of human weakness. In the garden, how frequently
did he call God his Father! [Mat
26:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039), &c. And hence it most evidently
appears that his being the Son of God did not arise merely from his
resurrection. Yet learned he - The word learned, premised to the word
suffered, elegantly shows how willingly he learned. He learned
obedience, when be began to suffer; when he applied himself to drink
that cup: obedience in suffering and dying.

[Hebrews 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">heb 5:9</span></span>

And being perfected - By sufferings, [Heb
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#010); brought through all to glory. He
became the author - The procuring and efficient cause. Of eternal
salvation to all that obey him - By doing and suffering his whole will.

[Hebrews 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">heb 5:10</span></span>

Called - The Greek word here properly signifies surnamed. His name is,
"the Son of God." The Holy Ghost seems to have concealed who Melchisedec
was, on purpose that he might be the more eminent type of Christ. This
only we know, - that he was a priest, and king of Salem, or Jerusalem.

[Hebrews 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">heb 5:11</span></span>

Concerning whom - The apostle here begins an important digression,
wherein he reproves, admonishes, and exhorts the Hebrews. We - Preachers
of the gospel. Have many things to say, and hard to be explained -
Though not so much from the subject - matter, as from your slothfulness
in considering, and dulness in apprehending, the things of God.

[Hebrews 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">heb 5:12</span></span>

Ye have need that one teach you again which are the first principles of
religion. Accordingly these are enumerated in [Heb
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#001). And have need of milk - The first
and plainest doctrines.

[Hebrews 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">heb 5:13</span></span>

Every one that useth milk - That neither desires, nor can digest,
anything else: otherwise strong men use milk; but not milk chiefly, and
much less that only. Is unexperienced in the word of righteousness - The
sublimer truths of the gospel. Such are all who desire and can digest
nothing but the doctrine of justification and imputed righteousness.

[Hebrews 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">heb 5:14</span></span>

But strong meat - These sublimer truths relating to "perfection," [Heb
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#001). Belong to them of full age, who
by habit - Habit here signifies strength of spiritual understanding,
arising from maturity of spiritual age. By, or in consequence of, this
habit they exercise themselves in these things with ease, readiness,
cheerfulness, and profit.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 6](heb006)

</div>
