<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Hosea Index](hos.md)  
  [Previous](dan012)  [Next](hos002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001.md)

[Hosea 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">hos 1:2</span></span>

Go take - This was, probably, done in vision, and was to be told to the
people, as other visions were: it was parabolically proposed to them,
and might have been sufficient to convince the Jews, would they have
considered it, as David considered Nathan's parable. A wife of whoredoms
and children - Receive and maintain the children she had before.

[Hosea 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hos 1:4</span></span>

The blood - The slaughters made by Jehu's hand or by his order, in
Jezreel. The house of Jehu - Which had now possessed the throne, through
the reigns of Jehoahaz, Jehoash, and Jeroboam; but the usurper, and his
successors adhering to the idolatry of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and
adding other sins to it, had now provoked God to declare a sudden
extirpation of the family: all this came to pass when Shallum conspiring
against Zechariah, slew him, [Kg2
15:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#008.md). The kingdom - After one and
forty years tottering it fell to utter ruin and hath so continued to
this day.

[Hosea 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">hos 1:5</span></span>

At that day - When my vengeance hath overtaken the house of Jehu. Break
- Weaken and by degrees quite break. The bow - All their warlike
provision, power and skill. Jezreel - In this valley it is probable the
bloodiest battles in the civil wars were fought; the reason whereof
might be, because whoever carried the victory in this place, were soon
masters of Samaria and Jezreel, and consequently of the kingdom.

[Hosea 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">hos 1:6</span></span>

Lo - ruhamah - Not pitied. Israel's name had been through many ages
Ruhamah, that is, pitied. God had pitied them, and saved them from their
enemies. But now Israel should be no more pitied, God would throw them
up to the rage of usurpers, and conspirators.

[Hosea 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">hos 1:7</span></span>

Save them - I will preserve them, that violence do not swallow them up,
nor length of captivity wear them out; and this preserved remnant shall
return and be planted in their own land, and there kept in safety. By
the Lord - Particularly in that extraordinary deliverance of Hezekiah
and Jerusalem, from Sennacherib.

[Hosea 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hos 1:9</span></span>

Loammi - That is, not my people. Tho' once you were a peculiar people,
you are so no more; you are cast off as you deserved. I will not be your
God - I will be a God to you, no more than to any of the Heathen
nations. This God executed when he gave them up into the hands of
Salmaneser, who sent them where none now can find them.

[Hosea 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">hos 1:10</span></span>

The children of Israel - Not Israel after the flesh, not those very
families that are carried captive. In the place - In those places, were
a people dwelt who were not his people, there shall be a people of God.
The living God - Who is the fountain of life to all his children, and
who enables them to offer living sacrifices to the living God.

[Hosea 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">hos 1:11</span></span>

Then - This verse has both an historical and a spiritual sense; the one
referring to the return out of Babylon, the other to a more glorious
deliverance from a more miserable captivity. Judah - The two tribes, who
adhered to the house of David. Israel - Some of the ten tribes who were
incorporated with the kingdom of Judah, and so carried captive with
them. But this is spiritually to be understood of the whole Israel of
God. One head - Zerubbabel, who was appointed by Cyrus, yet with full
approbation of the people. And so Christ is appointed by the Father,
head of his church, whom believers heartily accept. Come up - Literally
out of Babylon, spiritually out of captivity to sin and to Satan. Great
- Good, joyous and comfortable. Of Jezreel - Israel is here called
Jezreel, the seed of God. This seed is now sown in the earth, and buried
under the clods; but great shall be its day, when the harvest comes.
Great was the day of the church, when there were daily added to it such
as should be saved.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 2](hos002.md)

</div>
