<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa020)  [Next](isa022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001)

[Isaiah 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 21:1</span></span>

The plain - Of Babylon, which lay in a very plain country. And the title
of the sea might well be given to the waters of Babylon, because of the
great plenty and multitude of them. South - In those parts which lay
southward from Judea, where there were many and great deserts. Pass
through - As meeting with no opposition. It - The burden or judgment.
Desert - From Media and Persia; a great desert lay between them and
Chaldea. A terrible land - From the Medes, a warlike and formidable
people.

[Isaiah 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 21:2</span></span>

A vision - A vision or prophecy, containing dreadful calamities which
were to fall upon Babylon. The spoiler - The Medes and Persians used
treachery as well as force against Babylon. Elam - Persia, so called,
because Elam was an eminent province of Persia, bordering upon the
Medes. Besiege - Namely, Babylon, [Isa
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#009). The sighing - The sighing and
groaning of God's people, and other nations under the oppressions of
that cruel empire.

[Isaiah 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 21:3</span></span>

My loins - Which he mentions with respect to the following similitude of
child - bearing. Pangs - Sharp and grievous pains.

[Isaiah 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 21:4</span></span>

The night - In which I used to have sweet repose. He seems to have had
this vision in a night. But withal this signified that horror and
destruction, which should befal the Babylonians in a night of feasting
and jollity. He - God, who shewed him that vision.

[Isaiah 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 21:5</span></span>

Prepare - Furnish it with meats and drinks. The prophet foretells what
the Babylonians would be doing when their enemies were at their doors.
Watch - To give us notice of any approaching danger, that in the
meantime we may more securely indulge ourselves. Princes - Of Babylon:
arise from the table and run to your arms. Shield - Prepare yourselves
and your arms for the approaching battle. The shield is put for all
their weapons of offence and defence. They used to anoint their shields
with oil, to preserve and polish them, and to make them slippery.

[Isaiah 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 21:6</span></span>

Go set - This was now done only in a vision, but it signified what
should be done really afterwards.

[Isaiah 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 21:7</span></span>

A chariot - Hereby he signifies the variety and abundance of warlike
provisions which the Medes and Persians should have for their
expedition, and particularly of chariots, whereof some were for the
carriage of necessary things, and others for the battle.

[Isaiah 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 21:8</span></span>

A lion - The watchmen cried out, I see also a lion marching before the
horsemen and chariots: which they suppose to represent Cyrus or Darius
marching in the head of their armies. My lord - The watchman speaks to
the prophet, who had set him in this station. Whole nights - According
to thy command I have stood, and do yet stand continually, both day and
night, upon my watch - tower.

[Isaiah 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 21:9</span></span>

Men - Not fitted with goods, but provided with men to fight. He - The
prophet, who here gives an explication of the vision. He - God, by the
hands of Cyrus.

[Isaiah 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 21:10</span></span>

Threshing - Threshing is put for the corn threshed; and the corn
threshed for people sorely afflicted. This is probably spoken of
Babylon. The corn - Which I will cause to be threshed upon the floor.
You - Unto you my people; for all the prophecies, even concerning other
nations, were published to them, and for their use and comfort.

[Isaiah 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 21:11</span></span>

Dumah - Of Edom or Idumea. He - The people of Dumah, one of them in the
name and by the appointment of the rest. Me - To the watchman: the
prophet delivers his prophecy in the form of a dialogue between the
people and the watchman. Seir - Out of Edom, which is frequently called
Seir. Watchman - The watchman of Edom, whom they had set as people use
to do in times of great danger. Night - The people are supposed to come
to him very early in the morning, to enquire what had happened in the
night; which shews a state of great perplexity and fear. Night - The
repetition of the words, shew the greatness of their solicitude.

[Isaiah 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 21:12</span></span>

The night - The night is past without any mischief, and the light of the
morning is approaching; but tho' the morning is coming, it will be gone,
and the night will return, and your fears with it. Come - If you will
enquire, enquire: I perceive your danger is not past, and there will be
occasion for farther enquiries. Therefore return, come - Come to me the
next morning, and so from morning to morning.

[Isaiah 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 21:13</span></span>

Forest - Not as you used to do, in the houses or tents of the Arabians:
whereby he implies, that that populous country should be a wilderness.
Companies - In those parts travellers then did, and still do, go
together in companies. Dedanim - These were merchants, who used to trade
with Tyre, and their way lay thro' Arabia.

[Isaiah 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 21:14</span></span>

Tema - A part of Arabia. Fled - Whereby he implies, that those other
Arabians, against whom this prophecy is principally directed, should be
reduced to great scarcity, and forced to flee for their lives, from a
bloody enemy.

[Isaiah 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 21:16</span></span>

A year - From the time of this prophecy: an exact year. Glory - Their
power, and riches, and all things wherein they used to glory. This was
executed by the Assyrians.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 22](isa022)

</div>
