<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa062)  [Next](isa064) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 63](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001)

[Isaiah 63:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 63:1</span></span>

Who - The church makes enquiry, and that with admiration, who it is that
appears in such a habit or posture? Edom - Idumea, where Esau dwelt. It
is put for all the enemies of the church. Bozrah - The capital city of
Idumea. Here is also an allusion to the garments of this conqueror, Edom
signifying red, and Bozrah a vintage. Glorious - Such as generals march
before their armies in. Righteousness - Here Christ gives an answer,
wherein he both asserts his fidelity, that he will faithfully perform
what he hath promised, and that he will truly execute justice. Mighty -
I have power to accomplish salvation.

[Isaiah 63:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 63:3</span></span>

Trodden - I have destroyed the enemies of my people, I have crushed them
as grapes are crushed, this being an usual metaphor to describe the
utter destruction of a people.

[Isaiah 63:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 63:4</span></span>

Of vengeance - To take vengeance on the enemies of my church.

[Isaiah 63:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 63:5</span></span>

None to help - Not that he needed it, but to see what men would do, in
regard his people needed it; therefore the standing, or not standing by
his people, is the same thing with standing, or not standing by him.
Uphold - A metaphor, taken from a staff, that is an help to one that
leans on it.

[Isaiah 63:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 63:6</span></span>

Drunk - They go as it were to and fro, not knowing what to do with
themselves. Bring down - Whatever it is wherein their strength lies, he
will bring to the very dust, to nothing.

[Isaiah 63:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 63:7</span></span>

Mention - Here begins a new matter, which contains the prophet's prayer,
to the end of chap. 64, wherein he begins with mentioning the great
kindnesses that God had shewn the Jews, and that emphatically, setting
them forth with the greatest advantages.

[Isaiah 63:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 63:8</span></span>

He said - When he made a covenant with our fathers, and brought them out
of Egypt. Not lie - That will keep my covenant. So he - Not Cyrus,
Zerubbabel, or Nehemiah, but Christ himself.

[Isaiah 63:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 63:9</span></span>

The angel - The same that conducted them through the wilderness; the
Lord Jesus Christ, who appeared to Moses in the bush. Saved them - From
the house of bondage. Carried - He carried them in the arms of his
power, and on the wings of his providence. And he is said to do it of
old, To remember his ancient kindness for many generations past.

[Isaiah 63:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 63:11</span></span>

He remembered - This relates, either To the people, and then he is
collectively taken, and so it looks like the language of the people in
Babylon, and must be read, he shall remember. Or, It may look back to
their condition in the wilderness, and thus they may properly say, Where
is he? Or that God who delivered his people of old, to do the like for
us now? There is a like phrase used by God, as it were recollecting
himself, Where is he? Where am I with my former bowels, that moved me to
help them of old? His people - What great things he had done for them by
Moses. The sea - Here God speaks of himself, as in the former clause,
that divided the sea for them. Shepherds - Moses and Aaron. Holy spirit
- Those abilities and gifts, wherewith God furnished Moses, as properly
proceeding from the Spirit.

[Isaiah 63:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 63:13</span></span>

As an horse - With as much ease and tenderness, as an horse led by the
bridle. Not stumble - That, tho' the sea were but newly divided, yet it
was dried and smoothed by the wind, that God sent, as it were to prepare
the way before them.

[Isaiah 63:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 63:14</span></span>

The valley - A laden beast goeth warily and gently down the hill. Rest -
Led them easily, that they should not be over - travelled, or fall down,
through weariness; thus Jeremiah expresses it, [Jer
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#002), and thus God gave them rest from
their enemies, drowning them in the sea, and in their safe conduct, that
they could not annoy or disturb them, leading them 'till he found them a
place for resting; the word for leading, and resting, being much of a
like notion, [Zac 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#006), pointing at
their several rests by the way, [Num
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#033), or it may be read by way of
interrogation, as all the foregoing words, and be the close of that
enquiry, And where is the spirit, that caused then to rest? Or, he led
them to Canaan the place of their rest.

[Isaiah 63:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 63:15</span></span>

Look - Now the prophet begins to expostulate with God, and to argue both
from the goodness of his nature, and from the greatness of his works.
God sees every where, and every thing, but he is said to look down from
heaven, because there is his throne whereon he sits in majesty. Behold -
Not barely see, but behold with regard, and respect thy poor people.
Where - What is become of that love, which of old would not let thee
suffer thy people to be wronged? Strength - That power of thine
manifested in those great acts? The founding - This is spoken of God
after the manner of men.

[Isaiah 63:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 63:16</span></span>

Abraham - He who was our father after the flesh, though he be dead, and
so ignorant of our condition. Redeemer - This is urged as another
argument for pity; because their Father was their Redeemer. From
everlasting - Thou hast been our Redeemer of old.

[Isaiah 63:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 63:17</span></span>

Made us - Suffered us to err. Hardened - Suffered it to be hardened. Thy
fear - The fear of thee. Servants sake - For our sakes, that little
remnant that are thy servants. Inheritance - The land of Canaan, which
God gave them as an inheritance.

[Isaiah 63:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 63:18</span></span>

People - The people set apart for his servants. A little while -
Comparatively to the promise, which was for ever. Sanctuary - The
temple.

[Isaiah 63:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 63:19</span></span>

Thine - We continue so; we are in covenant, which they never were; and
thus it is an argument they use with God to look upon them. Never - Not
in that manner thou didst over us. They - Neither owned thee, nor were
owned by thee.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 64](isa064)

</div>
