<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa017)  [Next](isa019.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 18:1</span></span>

The lord - Either Ethiopia beyond Egypt; or of Egypt. Wings - The title
of wings is given, in scripture, to divers things which have some kind
of resemblance to wings, as to the battlements of an house or temple, to
an army, and to the sails of a ship, as this word is here commonly
understood. And shadowing with wings is nothing else but overspread or
filled with them. Which title may be given either to Ethiopia or Egypt,
in regard of the great numbers either of their armies, or of their ships
or vessels sailing upon the sea or rivers. Besides - Situated on both
sides of the Nile. Rivers - Called rivers, in the plural number, either
for its greatness, or for the many rivulets that run into it, or for the
various streams into which it is divided.

[Isaiah 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 18:2</span></span>

Sendeth - That at this time are sending ambassadors, to strengthen
themselves with alliances. Bulrushes - Both the Egyptians and
Ethiopians, used boats of rushes or reeds, which were more convenient
for them than those of wood, because they were both cheaper and swifter,
and lighter for carriage from place to place. These seem to be the words
of the prophet, who having pronounced a woe against the land hitherto
described, here continues his speech, and gives a commission from God to
these messengers, to go to this nation scattered, &c. Then he calls to
all nations to be witnesses of the message sent, [Isa
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#003.md), and then the message follows in
the succeeding verses. Messengers - Whom I have appointed for this work,
and tell them what I am about to do with them. Scattered - Not by
banishment but in their habitations. Which agrees well to the
Ethiopians, for the manner of their habitation, which is more scattered
than that of other people. Peeled - Having their hair plucked off. This
is metaphorically used in scripture, for some great calamity, whereby
men are stripped of all their comforts. And this title may be given to
them prophetically, to signify their approaching destruction. Terrible -
Such were the Egyptians, and Ethiopians, as appears both from sacred and
profane histories. Meted - Meted out as it were with lines to
destruction. Trodden - By Divine sentence, and to be trodden down by
their enemies. The rivers - Which may be understood of the Assyrians or
Babylonians breaking in upon them like a river, and destroying their
land and people.

[Isaiah 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 18:3</span></span>

When - When God shall gather together the nations, as it were by the
lifting up of an ensign, or by the sound of a trumpet, to execute his
judgments upon this people.

[Isaiah 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 18:4</span></span>

Rest - I will not bestir myself, to help this people. God is said in
scripture to rest, or sit still, when he doth not work on the behalf of
a person or people. Dwelling - place - In heaven, the place where God
dwells. Harvest - The sense is, that God would look upon them with as
uncomfortable an influence as the sun with a clear heat upon the herbs,
which are scorched and killed by it; and as a cloud of the dew, which
brings dew or rain, in the heat of harvest, when it is unwelcome and
hurtful.

[Isaiah 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 18:5</span></span>

For - Before they receive the end of their hopes. When - When the bud or
flower is turned into a grape, which gives hopes of good vintage. He -
The Lord. The branches - Instead of gathering the grapes, shall cut down
the tree, and throw it into the fire.

[Isaiah 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 18:6</span></span>

Thy - The branches being cut down and thrown upon the ground, with the
unripe grapes upon them. Left - They shall lie upon the earth, so that
either birds or beasts may shelter themselves with them, or feed on
them, both summer and winter.

[Isaiah 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 18:7</span></span>

In that time - At or after that time, when the judgment shall be
compleatly executed. A people - The people of whom I am speaking shall
present themselves, and their sacrifices, to the true God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 19](isa019.md)

</div>
