<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa010)  [Next](isa012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)

[Isaiah 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 11:1</span></span>

And - And having said that the Assyrian yoke should be destroyed because
of the anointing, he now explains who that anointed person was. The stem
- Or, stump: for the word signifies properly a trunk cut off from the
root. By which he clearly implies, that the Messiah should be born of
the royal house of David, at that time when it was in a most forlorn
condition, like a tree cut down, and whereof nothing is left but a stump
or root under ground. Of Jesse - He doth not say of David, but of Jesse,
who was a private and mean person, to intimate, that at the time of
Christ's birth the royal family should be reduced to its primitive
obscurity.

[Isaiah 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 11:2</span></span>

Wisdom - It is not needful, exactly to distinguish these two gifts; it
is sufficient that they are necessary qualifications for a governor, and
a teacher, and it is evident they signify perfect knowledge of all
things necessary for his own and peoples good, and a sound judgment, to
distinguish between things that differ. Counsel - Of prudence, to give
good counsel; and of might and courage, to execute it. Knowledge - Of
the perfect knowledge of the whole will and counsel of God, as also of
all secret things, yea of the hearts of men. Fear - A fear of reverence,
a care to please him, and lothness to offend him.

[Isaiah 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 11:3</span></span>

In the fear - He shall not judge rashly and partially, but considerately
and justly, as the fear of God obliges all judges to do. Judge - Of
persons or causes. After the sight - According to outward appearance, as
men do, because they cannot search mens hearts. Reprove - Condemn or
pass sentence against a person. His ears - By uncertain rumours or
suggestions.

[Isaiah 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 11:4</span></span>

Judge - Defend and deliver them. Reprove - Or condemn their malicious
enemies. Thy rod - With his word, which is his scepter, and the rod of
his power, [Psa 110:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#002), which is
sharper than a sword, [Heb 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012), by
the preaching whereof he subdued the world to himself, and will destroy
his enemies, [Th2 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008). This he adds
farther, to declare the nature of Christ's kingdom, that it is not of
this world.

[Isaiah 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 11:5</span></span>

The girdle - It shall adorn him, and be the glory of his government, as
a girdle was used for an ornament, [Isa
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#024), and as an ensign of power, [Job
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#018), and it shall constantly cleave
to him in all his administrations, as a girdle cleaveth to a man's
loins.

[Isaiah 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 11:6</span></span>

The wolf - The creatures shall be restored to that state of innocency in
which they were before the fall of man. Men of fierce, and cruel
dispositions, shall be so transformed by the grace of Christ, that they
shall become gentle, and tractable. A child - They will submit their
rebellious wills to the conduct of the meanest persons that speak to
them in Christ's name.

[Isaiah 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 11:7</span></span>

Feed - Together, without any danger or fear. Straw - The grass of the
earth, as they did at first, and shall not devour other living
creatures.

[Isaiah 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 11:9</span></span>

My holy mountain - In Zion, in my church. The sea - The channel of the
sea.

[Isaiah 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 11:10</span></span>

A root - A branch growing upon the root. Ensign - Shall grow up into a
great tree, shall become an eminent ensign. The people - Which not only
the Jews, but all nations, may discern, and to which they shall resort.
Rest - His resting - place, his temple or church, the place of his
presence and abode. Glorious - Shall be filled with greater glory than
the Jewish tabernacle and temple were; only this glory shall be
spiritual, consisting in the plentiful effusions of the gifts, and
graces, of the Holy Spirit.

[Isaiah 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 11:11</span></span>

The second - The first time, to which this word second relates, seems to
be the deliverance out of Babylon: and then this second deliverance must
be in the days of the Messiah. To recover - From all places far and
near, into which either the ten tribes or the two tribes were carried
captives. Pathros was a province in Egypt.

[Isaiah 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 11:12</span></span>

Nations - All nations, Jews and Gentiles. Out - casts - That were driven
out of their own land, into foreign parts. Israel - Of the ten tribes.

[Isaiah 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 11:13</span></span>

Ephraim - Of the ten tribes, frequently called by the name of Ephraim.
Of enemies they shall be made friends. The adversaries - Not the body of
Ephraim, for they are supposed to be reconciled, and they shall not be
cut off, but live in love with Judah, as we see by the next clause; but
those few of them who continue in their enmity together with all the
rest of their adversaries.

[Isaiah 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 11:14</span></span>

Fly - It is a metaphor from birds and beasts of prey. Spoil - They shall
subdue them, which is to be understood of the spiritual victory which
the Messiah shall obtain by his apostles and ministers over all nations.

[Isaiah 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 11:15</span></span>

Destroy - Shall not only divide it, as of old, but dry it up, that it
may be an high - way. The sea - The Red Sea, which may well be called
the Egyptian sea, both because it borders upon Egypt, and because the
Egyptians were drowned in it, which is called a tongue in the Hebrew
text, [Jos 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#002), [Jos
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#005), as having some resemblance with
a tongue: for which reason the name of tongue hath been given by
geographers to promontories of land which shoot forth into the sea, as
this sea did shoot out of the main ocean into the land. Rivers - Nile.
Seven streams - For which it is famous in all authors.

[Isaiah 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 11:16</span></span>

As it was - As there was another high - way from Egypt. All impediments
shall be removed, and a way made for the return of God's Israel from all
parts of the world. He mentions Assyria, because thither the ten tribes
were carried, whose case seemed to be most desperate.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 12](isa012)

</div>
