<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa064)  [Next](isa066.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 65](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah 65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 65:1</span></span>

I am, &c. - This in the primary sense of this text, is a prophecy of the
conversion of the Gentiles, upon the rejection of the Jews; for their
contempt and crucifying of Christ, cannot be doubted by any, who will
not arrogate to themselves a greater ability to interpret the prophesies
of the Old Testament, than St. Paul had, who, [Rom
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#020.md), expressly so interprets it, and
applies it, which shews the vanity of the Jews in their other
interpretations of it. Sought - The word signifies properly a diligent
enquiry in things relating to God. Asked not - That in times past made
no enquiry after me; l am now found by them that formerly sought me not.
I said - I invited whole nations by the preaching of my gospel to behold
me, and that with importunity, doubling my words upon them, and this I
did unto a nation not called by my name, with whom I was not in
covenant.

[Isaiah 65:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 65:2</span></span>

I have spread - Applied to the Jews, [Rom
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#021.md). I have stretched out my hands,
I have used all means to reduce them, I have stretched out the hands of
a passionate orator to persuade them, of a liberal benefactor to load
them with my benefits; this I have done continually in the whole course
of my providence with them.

[Isaiah 65:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 65:3</span></span>

To my face - With the utmost impudence, not taking notice of God's
omnipresence, and omniscience. In gardens, &c. - Directly contrary to
the divine rule.

[Isaiah 65:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 65:4</span></span>

Remain - They remained among the graves, there consulting with devils,
who were thought to delight in such places; or to practice necromancy,
all which were forbidden, [Deu 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#011.md);
[Isa 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#019.md). Monuments - Some interpret
it of idol temples, some of caves and dens, in which the Heathens used
to worship their idols. Broth of abominable things - Of such flesh as
was to the Jews unclean by the law.

[Isaiah 65:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 65:5</span></span>

Holier - Thus they esteemed themselves holier than others, though all
their holiness lay in rituals, and those too, such as God never
commanded. Of these God saith, These are a smoak in my nostrils, a fire
that burneth all the day; that is, a continual provocation to me: as
smoak is an offence to our noses.

[Isaiah 65:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 65:6</span></span>

Behold - They may think I take no notice of these things; but I will as
certainly remember them, as princes or great men that record things in
writing which they would not forget.

[Isaiah 65:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 65:7</span></span>

Together - Yea, and when I reckon with them, I will punish them, not
only for their personal sins, but for the sins of their parents, which
they have made their own, by imitation. Their former - I will not only
punish the late sins that they have committed, but the former sins of
this kind, which those that went before did commit, and they have
continued in.

[Isaiah 65:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 65:8</span></span>

Thus, &c. - These word's may be conceived as a gracious answer from God
to the prophet, pleading God's covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Israel.
To this God replies, that he intended no such severity. His threatening
should be made good upon the generality of this people. Blessing - But
yet, as in a vineyard, which is generally unfruitful, there may be some
vine that brings forth fruit, and has the hopes of new wine in the
cluster, and as to such, the gardener bids his servant destroy it not,
for there is in them what speaks God's blessing. So - So (saith God)
will I do for my servants sake, that I may not destroy them all, for the
sake of my servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

[Isaiah 65:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 65:9</span></span>

Judah - God farther promises to bring out of Judah, an inheritor of his
mountains which refers to the Jews return out of the captivity of
Babylon to Jerusalem, to worship God in his temple, upon mount Zion.
Mine elect - My chosen ones. The term signifies such as are dignified
with some special favour. The whole nation of the Jews are called a
chosen people.

[Isaiah 65:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 65:10</span></span>

A fold - Sharon was a place of great fruitfulness for pastures. It was
become like a wilderness, God here promises that it should again be a
place for the flocks.

[Isaiah 65:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 65:11</span></span>

Forget - To forget God's holy mountains, signifies not to regard the
true worship of God. God calls Zion his holy mountain. That troop - The
idols of the ten tribes, and of the Assyrians, were a troop, where as
the God of Israel was one God. By preparing a table, here seems to be
meant, the feasts they made upon their sacrifices in imitation of what
the true God had commanded his people. Furnish - God had appointed drink
offerings for his honour, but the people had paid their homage to idols.
Number - The multitude of their idols.

[Isaiah 65:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 65:12</span></span>

To the sword - A great number of you shall perish by the sword; or
possibly the term number may refer to all in the next phrase, so that
none of them should escape. God saith he will number them, tell them out
one by one to the sword. Bow down - As you have bowed down to idols. I
called - By my prophets, you did not answer by doing the things which I
enjoined. Chuse - You sinned deliberately chusing sinful courses, the
things which I hated.

[Isaiah 65:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 65:15</span></span>

A curse - They shall use your names as examples, of the eminent wrath of
God upon sinners. Another name - He will not suffer his own people to be
called by a name by which idolaters are known.

[Isaiah 65:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 65:16</span></span>

God of truth - Because they shall see what God promised is fulfilled.
Are hid - That is, they are at an end.

[Isaiah 65:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 65:17</span></span>

I create - I am about wholly to change the state not only of my people,
but to bring a new face upon the world, which shall abide until a new
heavens and earth appear, in which shall dwell nothing but
righteousness. Not be remembered - That state of things shall be so
glorious, that the former state of my people shall not be remembered.

[Isaiah 65:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 65:18</span></span>

You - The church, as well under the gospel, as under the law.

[Isaiah 65:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 65:20</span></span>

An infant - Those that were now children, shall die at a great age. But
- Yet none of these things shall be of any advantage to wicked men, but
if any of them shall live to be an hundred years old, yet they shall die
accursed.

[Isaiah 65:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 65:23</span></span>

With them - Is blessed with them.

[Isaiah 65:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 65:24</span></span>

Before they call - God promised, [Isa
58:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#009.md), to answer them, when they
called: here he promises to answer the words, as soon as they should be
formed in their hearts before they could get them out of their lips.
While - Yea, while they were speaking.

[Isaiah 65:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 65:25</span></span>

The wolf, &c. - God here promises to take off the fierceness of the
spirits of his peoples enemies, so that they shall live quietly and
peaceably together. And dust - God promises a time of tranquility to his
church under the metaphor of serpents eating the dust, their proper
meat, [Gen 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#014.md), instead of flying
upon men: it signifies such a time, when wicked men shall no more eat up
the people of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 66](isa066.md)

</div>
