<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa065)  [Next](jer001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 66](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah 66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 66:1</span></span>

The heaven - The highest heaven, is the place where I shew myself in my
majesty. So [Psa 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004.md), [Psa
103:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#019.md); [Mat
5:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034.md). Hence we are taught to pray; our
father which art in heaven. And the earth is my footstool - Or a place
wherein I set my feet, [Mat 5:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#035.md). The
house - Can there be an house built, that will contain me? My rest - Or
where is the place wherein I can be said to rest in a proper sense?

[Isaiah 66:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 66:2</span></span>

Have been - They were not only made by God, but kept in being by him.
Look - Yet God will look with a favourable eye to him that hath a broken
and contrite spirit, whose heart is subdued to the will of God, and who
is poor, and low in his own eyes. Trembleth - Who trembleth when he
hears God's threatening words, and hears every revelation of his will
with reverence.

[Isaiah 66:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 66:3</span></span>

He that, &c. - Solomon, [Pro 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#008.md),
gives a full commentary on the whole verse; The sacrifice of the wicked
is an abomination to the Lord. As if - From hence it is plain, that the
prophet is not here reflecting upon idolatrous worship, but formal
worship: upon those who in a formality worshipped the true God, and by
acts which he had appointed. God by the prophet declares, that these
mens services were no more acceptable to him than murder, idolatry, or
the most horrid profanation of his name. Own ways - They live as they
lust. Delight - They take pleasure in their sins.

[Isaiah 66:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 66:4</span></span>

Chuse - They have chosen to mock and delude me, I will chuse to suffer
them to delude themselves; they have chosen to work wickedness, I will
chuse the effect. Their fears - That is, the things which they feared.
Did not hear - God accounts that those do not hear, who do not obey his
will.

[Isaiah 66:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 66:5</span></span>

You - That truly fear God. Your brethren - By nation. Cast you out -
That cast you out of their synagogues, cast you out of their city, and
some of you out of the world. For my names sake - For my sake; for your
adherence to my law. Glorified - Thinking they did God good service,
[Joh 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#002.md).

[Isaiah 66:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 66:6</span></span>

A voice - The expression of a prophetical extasy, as if he said, I hear
a sad and affrighting noise; it comes not from the city only, but from
the temple, wherein these formalists have so much gloried. There is a
noise of soldiers slaying, and of the poor people shrieking or crying
out. Of the Lord - A voice of the Lord, not in thunder, but that
rendereth recompence to his enemies. Thus he seems to express the
destruction of the Jews by the Roman armies, as a thing at that time
doing.

[Isaiah 66:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 66:7</span></span>

Before - The whole verse is expressive of a great and sudden salvation,
which God would work for his church, like the delivery of a woman, and
that of a man - child, before her travail, and without pain. Doubtless
it refers to the coming of Christ, and the sudden propagation of the
gospel.

[Isaiah 66:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 66:8</span></span>

For - As soon as the voice of the gospel put the church of the Jews into
her travail, in Christ's and the Apostles time, it presently brought
forth.

[Isaiah 66:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 66:9</span></span>

Shall I - I, that in the ordinary course of my providence use to give a
birth to women, to whom I have given a power to conceive, shall I not
give a birth to my people, whom by my promises I have made to conceive
such expectations? And shut - Nor shall Zion once only bring forth, but
she shall go on, her womb shall not be shut, she shall every day bring
forth more and more children, and my presence shall be with my church,
to the end of the world.

[Isaiah 66:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 66:11</span></span>

Consolations - The gospel doctrine was their breasts of consolation. Her
glory - Christ was the glory of the people of Israel, though he was also
a light to the Gentiles.

[Isaiah 66:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 66:12</span></span>

Like a river - It is plain this prophecy relates to a farther conversion
of the Jews than hath been yet seen. Ye - Ye Jews also. Her sides - The
Gentiles were borne upon the sides of Jerusalem and dandled upon her
knees, as first hearing from the Apostles (who were members of the
Jewish church) the glad tidings of salvation.

[Isaiah 66:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 66:13</span></span>

As one whom, &c. - That is, in the most tender, and compassionate way.

[Isaiah 66:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 66:14</span></span>

Rejoice - The peace of the church and the propagation of the kingdom of
Christ, is always the cause of an heart rejoicing to such as fear God,
so that they flourish like an herb in the spring. The hand - The power,
protection, and influence of God.

[Isaiah 66:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 66:15</span></span>

With fire - With terrible judgments, or with fire in a proper sense,
understanding it of the fire with which enemies use to consume places
brought under their power. Whirlwind - With a sudden sweeping judgment.
Fury - That is, with fervour; for fury properly taken is not in God.
Rebukes - They had contemned the rebukes of the law, now God will rebuke
them with fire, and sword.

[Isaiah 66:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 66:16</span></span>

Plead - God at first pleads with sinners by words, but if he cannot so
prevail, he will plead with them in a way by which he will overcome; by
fire, pestilence and blood. All flesh - Thus he threatens to do with all
the wicked Jews. The slain - Those whom God should cause to be slain.

[Isaiah 66:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 66:17</span></span>

Gardens - In which they worshipped idols. In the midst - Behind one of
the trees, or one by one behind the trees. The abominations - All those
beasts forbidden the Jews for meat. God will not only destroy gross
idolaters, but all those who make no conscience of yielding obedience to
the law of God in such things as seemed to them of a minute nature, and
such as they easily might have obeyed.

[Isaiah 66:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 66:18</span></span>

Come - It shall come to pass that I will cast them off, and then l will
gather all nations, &c. My glory - My oracles, my ordinances, which
hitherto have been locked up in the church of the Jews, and been their
glory, shall be published to the Gentiles.

[Isaiah 66:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 66:19</span></span>

A sign - By this may be understood Christ, [Luk
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#034.md), or the ministry of the word
attended with miracles, these were set up among the Jews first, then
among the Gentiles. Afar off - To all the quarters of the world. They
shall - This was eminently made good after the destruction of Jerusalem,
when the believers among the Jews, as well as the apostles went about
publishing the gospel to all people, which was declaring the Lord's
glory.

[Isaiah 66:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 66:20</span></span>

Your brethren - Those who are the children of Abraham, not considered as
the father of the Jewish nation only, but considered as the father of
many nations, and as the father of the faithful, and so are your
brethren, shall be brought out of all nations for an offering to the
Lord. Holy mountain - And they shall be brought into the church, which
began at Jerusalem. As - And they shall come with as much joy and
gladness, with as much sincerity and holiness, as the Godly Jews do when
they bring their offerings in clean vessels.

[Isaiah 66:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 66:21</span></span>

For priests - God will find among the converted Gentiles those who
though they are not of the tribe of Levi, yet shall do the true work of
priests and Levites.

[Isaiah 66:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 66:22</span></span>

The new heavens - The new state of the church to be raised up under the
Messiah. Remain - As I intend that shall abide, so there shall be a
daily succession of true believers for the upholding of it.

[Isaiah 66:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 66:23</span></span>

And, &c. - In the gospel - church there shall be as constant and settled
a course of worship (though of another nature) as ever was in the Jewish
church: Christians are not bound to keep the Jewish sabbaths or new -
moons. But New Testament worship is expressed by Old Testament phrases.
The Jews were only obliged to appear three times in a year at Jerusalem,
but (saith the prophet) the gospel - church shall worship God from one
sabbath to another.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 1](jer001.md)

</div>
