<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa023)  [Next](isa025.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 24:1</span></span>

The land - Of Canaan. Waste - He will shortly make it waste, first by
the Assyrians, and then by the Chaldeans. Turneth - Brings it into great
disorder and confusion.

[Isaiah 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 24:2</span></span>

It shall be - The approaching calamity shall be universal, without any
distinction of persons or ranks; the priests themselves having been
partakers of the peoples sins, shall also partake with them in their
plagues. The seller - The purchaser of lands shall have no more left
than he that hath sold all his patrimony; and all persons shall be made
equal in beggary and slavery.

[Isaiah 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 24:4</span></span>

The world - The land of Judea. The majesty - Not only common people, but
the high and lofty ones.

[Isaiah 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 24:5</span></span>

Defiled - By the wickedness of its people. The laws - The laws of God.
Ordinance - God's ordinances concerning his worship and service; the
singular being put for the plural. Covenant - The covenant made between
God and Abraham, and all his posterity, which was everlasting, both on
God's part, who, upon the conditions therein expressed, engaged himself
to be a God to them and to their seed forever; and on Israel's part, who
were obliged thereby to constant and perpetual obedience thro' all
generations.

[Isaiah 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 24:6</span></span>

The curse - The curse of God threatened to transgressors. Burned - Are
consumed by the wrath of God, which is commonly compared to fire.

[Isaiah 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 24:7</span></span>

Mourneth - Because there are none to drink it. Grief is ascribed to
senseless creatures by a figure usual in all authors. Languisheth -
Because there are no people left to dress it, or gather its grapes. The
merry - hearted - That made their hearts merry with wine.

[Isaiah 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 24:8</span></span>

Tabrets - Which they used in their feasts. The noise - The word properly
signifies a confused clamour, such as drunken men make.

[Isaiah 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 24:9</span></span>

Bitter - Because of the fears and miseries wherewith it is mixed.

[Isaiah 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 24:10</span></span>

The city - Jerusalem, and other cities; for the singular word may be
here taken collectively. A city of confusion or disorder, breaking all
the laws and orders which God had established among them. Shut up -
Because the inhabitants are either dead, or gone into captivity.

[Isaiah 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 24:11</span></span>

A crying - Such was their gross sensuality and sottishness, that instead
of crying for their sins, they did only howl for their corn, and wine,
and oil, [Hos 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#014.md).

[Isaiah 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 24:13</span></span>

When - When this judgment shall be executed, there shall be left a
remnant; as there are some few olives or grapes left after the vintage
is over.

[Isaiah 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 24:14</span></span>

They - The remnant shall sing for the glorious power and goodness of
God, manifested in their deliverance. The sea - From the isles of the
sea; from those parts beyond the sea into which, they were carried
captive.

[Isaiah 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 24:15</span></span>

In distress - When you are in the furnace of affliction. In the isles -
In remote countries, beyond the sea, which in scripture are commonly
called isles.

[Isaiah 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 24:16</span></span>

From - From all the parts of the earth in which the Jews are or shall
be. Songs - Of joy and praise. Glory - Or, glory be to the righteous.
The Lord, the righteous one. But - In the midst of these joyful tidings,
I discern something which gives me cause of lamentation. My leanness - I
faint and pine away for grief, for the following reason. Treacherously -
The Jews, who have been frequently guilty of great perfidiousness
towards God, are now acting the same part. Even the Hebrew doctors
expound this place of the perfidiousness of some Jews in the times of
the Messiah. And it is not strange that so sad a sight made the prophet
cry out, My leanness, &c. He repeats it to shew the horridness of the
crime.

[Isaiah 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 24:17</span></span>

The snare - Great and various judgments, some actually inflicted, and
others justly feared.

[Isaiah 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 24:18</span></span>

Fleeth - Upon the report of some terrible evil. The foundations - Both
heaven and earth conspire against him. He alludes to the deluge of
waters which God poured down from heaven, and to the earthquakes which
he often causes below.

[Isaiah 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 24:19</span></span>

The earth - This is repeated again, to shew the dreadfulness and,
certainty of these judgments, and to awaken the stupid Israelites.

[Isaiah 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 24:20</span></span>

A tent - Which is easily and commonly carried from place to place.

[Isaiah 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 24:22</span></span>

Gathered - By God's special providence, in order to their punishment.
And thus the unbelieving Jews were generally gathered together at
Jerusalem, to their solemn feast, when Titus came and besieged, and
destroyed them. Shut up - As malefactors, which are taken in several
places, are usually brought to one common prison. After - After the
apostate Jews shall have been shut up in unbelief, and in great
tribulations for many ages together, they shall be convinced of their
sin in crucifying the Messiah, and brought home to God and Christ by
true repentance.

[Isaiah 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 24:23</span></span>

The sun - All earthly powers and glories shall be obscured with the far
greater splendor of Christ, the king of kings, at whose feet even the
kings of the earth shall fall down and worship. The Lord - The Messiah,
who, tho' man, yet is also God, and the Lord of hosts. Shall reign -
Shall come in the flesh, and set up his kingdom, first in Jerusalem, and
afterward in all other nations. Before - Before his ministers, who are
in some sort the courtiers of the King of Glory. But the ancients are
here put for the whole church, in whose name and for whose service they
act.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 25](isa025.md)

</div>
