<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jude Index](jde.md)  
  [Previous](jo3001)  [Next](rev001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jude Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#001.md)

[Jude 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jde 1:1</span></span>

Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ - The highest glory which any, either
angel or man, can aspire to. The word servant, under the old covenant,
was adapted to the spirit of fear and bondage that clave to that
dispensation. But when the time appointed of the Father was come, for
the sending of his Son to redeem them that were under the law, the word
servant (used by the apostles concerning themselves and all the children
of God) signified one that, having the Spirit of adoption, is made free
by the Son of God. His being a servant is the fruit and perfection of
his being a son. And whenever the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be
in the new Jerusalem, then will it be indeed that "his servants shall
serve him," [Rev 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#003.md). The brother of
James - St. James was the more eminent, usually styled, "the brother of
the Lord." To them that are beloved - The conclusion, [Jde
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#021.md), exactly answers the
introduction. And preserved through Jesus Christ - So both the spring
and the accomplishment of salvation are pointed out. This is premised,
lest any of them should be discouraged by the terrible things which are
afterwards mentioned. And called - To receive the whole blessing of God,
in time and eternity.

[Jude 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jde 1:3</span></span>

When I gave all diligence to write to you of the common salvation -
Designed for all, and enjoyed by all believers. Here the design of the
epistle is expressed; the end of which exactly answers the beginning. It
was needful to exhort you to contend earnestly - Yet humbly, meekly, and
lovingly; otherwise your contention will only hurt your cause, if not
destroy your soul. For the faith - All the fundamental truths. Once
delivered - By God, to remain unvaried for ever.

[Jude 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jde 1:4</span></span>

There are certain men crept in, who were of old described before - Even
as early as Enoch; of whom it was foretold, that by their wilful sins
they would incur this condemnation. Turning the grace of God - Revealed
in the gospel. Into lasciviousness - Into an occasion of more abandoned
wickedness.

[Jude 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jde 1:5</span></span>

He afterwards destroyed - The far greater part of that very people whom
he had once saved. Let none therefore presume upon past mercies, as if
he was now out of danger.

[Jude 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jde 1:6</span></span>

And the angels, who kept not their first dignity - Once assigned them
under the Son of God. But voluntarily left their own habitation - Then
properly their own, by the free gift of God. He reserved - Delivered to
be kept. In everlasting chains under darkness - O how unlike their own
habitation! When these fallen angels came out of the hands of God, they
were holy; else God made that which was evil: and being holy, they were
beloved of God; else he hated the image of his own spotless purity. But
now he loves them no more; they are doomed to endless destruction. (for
if he loved them still, he would love what is sinful:) and both his
former love, and his present righteous and eternal displeasure towards
the same work of his own hands, are because he changeth not; because he
invariably loveth righteousness, and hateth iniquity. [Pe2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#004.md).

[Jude 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jde 1:7</span></span>

The cities which gave themselves over to fornication - The word here
means, unnatural lusts. Are set forth as an example, suffering the
vengeance of eternal fire - That is, the vengeance which they suffered
is an example or a type of eternal fire.

[Jude 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jde 1:8</span></span>

In like manner these dreamers - Sleeping and dreaming all their lives.
Despise authority - Those that are invested with it by Christ, and made
by him the overseers of his flock. Rail at dignities - The apostle does
not seem to speak of worldly dignities. These they had "in admiration
for the sake of gain," [Jde 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#016.md); but
those holy men, who for the purity of their lives, the soundness of
their doctrine, and the greatness of their labours in the work of the
ministry, were truly honourable before God and all good men; and who
were grossly vilified by those who turned the grace of God into
lasciviousness. Probably they were the impure followers of Simon Magus,
the same with the Gnostics and Nicolaitans, [Rev
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#015.md). [Pe2
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#010.md).

[Jude 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jde 1:9</span></span>

Yet Michael - It does not appear whether St. Jude learned this by any
revelation or from ancient tradition. It suffices, that these things
were not only true, but acknowledged as such by them to whom he wrote.
The archangel - This word occurs but once more in the sacred writings,
[Th1 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016.md). So that whether there be
one archangel only, or more, it is not possible for us to determine.
When he disputed with the devil - At what time we know not. Concerning
the body of Moses - Possibly the devil would have discovered the place
where it was buried, which God for wise reasons had concealed. Durst not
bring even against him a railing accusation - Though so far beneath him
in every respect. But simply said, (so great was his modesty!) The Lord
rebuke thee - I leave thee to the Judge of all.

[Jude 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jde 1:10</span></span>

But these - Without all shame. Rail at the things of God which they know
not - Neither can know, having no spiritual senses. And the natural
things, which they know - By their natural senses, they abuse into
occasions of sin.

[Jude 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jde 1:11</span></span>

Woe unto them - Of all the apostles St. Jude alone, and that in this
single place, denounces a woe. St. Peter, to the same effect, pronounces
them "cursed children." For they have gone in the way of Cain - The
murderer. And ran greedily - Literally, have been poured out, like a
torrent without banks. After the error of Balaam - The covetous false
prophet. And perished in the gainsaying of Korah - Vengeance has
overtaken them as it did Korah, rising up against those whom God had
sent.

[Jude 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jde 1:12</span></span>

These are spots - Blemishes. In your feasts of love - Anciently observed
in all the churches. Feeding themselves without fear - Without any fear
of God, or jealousy over themselves. Twice dead - In sin, first by
nature, and afterwards by apostasy. Plucked up by the roots - And so
incapable of ever reviving.

[Jude 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jde 1:13</span></span>

Wandering stars - Literally, planets, which shine for a time, but have
no light in themselves, and will be soon cast into utter darkness. Thus
the apostle illustrates their desperate wickedness by comparisons drawn
from the air, earth, sea, and heavens.

[Jude 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jde 1:14</span></span>

And of these also - As well as the antediluvian sinners Enoch - So early
was the prophecy referred to, [Jde
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#004.md). The seventh from Adam - There
were only five of the fathers between Adam and Enoch, [Ch1
1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001.md). The first coming of Christ was
revealed to Adam; his second, glorious coming, to Enoch; and the seventh
from Adam foretold the things which will conclude the seventh age of the
world. St. Jude might know this either from some ancient book, or
tradition, or immediate revelation. Behold - As if it were already done,
the Lord cometh!

[Jude 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jde 1:15</span></span>

To execute judgment - Enoch herein looked beyond the flood. Upon all -
Sinners, in general. And to convict all the ungodly, in particular, of
all the grievous things which ungodly sinners (a sinner is bad; but the
ungodly who sin without fear are worse) have spoken against him, [Jde
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#008.md), [Jde
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#010.md), though they might not think, all
those speeches were against him.

[Jude 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jde 1:16</span></span>

These are murmurers - Against men. Complainers - Literally, complainers
of their fate, against God. Walking - With regard to themselves. After
their own foolish and mischievous desires. Having men's persons in
admiration for the sake of gain - Admiring and commending them only for
what they can get.

[Jude 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jde 1:17</span></span>

By the apostles - He does not exempt himself from the number of
apostles. For in the next verse he says, they told you, not us.

[Jude 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jde 1:19</span></span>

These are they who separate themselves, sensual, not having the Spirit -
Having natural senses and understanding only, not the Spirit of God;
otherwise they could not separate. For that it is a sin, and a very
heinous one, "to separate from the church," is out of all question. But
then it should be observed, That by the church is meant a body of living
Christians, who are "an habitation of God through the Spirit:" That by
separating is understood, renouncing all religious intercourse with
them; no longer joining with them in solemn prayer, or the other public
offices of religion: and, That we have no more authority from scripture
to call even this schism, than to call it murder.

[Jude 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jde 1:20</span></span>

But ye, beloved, not separating, but building yourselves up in your most
holy faith - Than which none can be more holy in itself, or more
conducive to the most refined and exalted holiness. Praying through the
Holy Spirit - Who alone is able to build you up, as he alone laid the
foundation. In this and the following verse St. Jude mentions the
Father, Son, and Spirit, together with faith, love, and hope.

[Jude 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jde 1:21</span></span>

By these means, through his grace, keep yourselves in the love of God,
and in the confident expectation of that eternal life which is purchased
for you, and conferred upon you, through the mere mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

[Jude 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jde 1:22</span></span>

Meantime watch over others, as well as yourselves, and give them such
help as their various needs require. For instance, Some, that are
wavering in judgment, staggered by others' or by their own evil
reasoning, endeavour more deeply to convince of the whole truth as it is
in Jesus. Some snatch, with a swift and strong hand, out of the fire of
sin and temptation. On others show compassion in a milder and gentler
way; though still with a jealous fear, lest yourselves be infected with
the disease you endeavour to cure.See, therefore, that while you love
the sinners, ye retain the utmost abhorrence of their sins, and of any
the least degree of, or approach to, them.

[Jude 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jde 1:24</span></span>

Now to him who alone is able to keep them from falling - Into any of
these errors or sins. And to present them faultless in the presence of
his glory - That is, in his own presence, when he shall be revealed in
all his glory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 1](rev001.md)

</div>
