<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg004)  [Next](jdg006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#001)

[Judges 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 5:1</span></span>

Deborah - The composer of this song.

[Judges 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 5:2</span></span>

The Lord - Give him the praise who hath done the work. The people -
Chiefly Zebulun and Naphtali. Offered themselves - When neither Deborah
nor Barak had any power to compel them.

[Judges 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 5:3</span></span>

The princes - You especially that live near, and have evil designs
against Israel, know this for your caution, and terror too, if you
presume to molest them. God of Israel - Who, as you see by this plain
instance, is both able and resolved to defend them from all their
enemies.

[Judges 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 5:4</span></span>

Edom - Seir and Edom are the same place; and these two expressions note
the same thing, even God's marching in the head of his people, from Seir
or Edom, towards the land of Canaan: while the Israelites were
encompassing mount Seir, there were none of the following effects; but
when once they had done that, and got Edom on their backs, then they
marched directly forward towards the land of Canaan. The prophetess
being to praise God for the present mercies, takes her rise higher, and
begins her song with the commemoration of the ancient deliverances
afforded by God to his people, the rather because of the great
resemblance this had with them, in the miraculous manner of them. The
earth trembled - God prepared the way for his people, and struck a dread
into their enemies, by earth - quakes as well as by other terrible
signs. Dropped water - That is, thou didst send storms and tempests,
thunder and lightning, and other tokens of thy displeasure upon thine
enemies.

[Judges 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jdg 5:5</span></span>

Melted - Or, flowed, with floods of water powered out of the clouds upon
them, and from them flowing down in a mighty stream upon the lower
grounds, and carrying down part of the mountains with it. Sinai - She
slides into the mention of a more ancient appearance of God for his
people in Sinai; it being usual in scripture repetitions of former
actions, to put divers together in a narrow compass. The sense is, No
wonder that the mountains of the Amorites and Canaanites melted and
trembled, when thou didst lead thy people toward them; for even Sinai
itself could not bear thy presence, but melted in like manner before
thee.

[Judges 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 5:6</span></span>

Jael - Jael, though an illustrious woman, effected nothing for the
deliverance of God's people, 'till God raised me up. By - ways - Because
of the Philistines and Canaanites, who, besides the public burdens which
they laid upon them, waited for all opportunities to do them mischief
secretly; their soldiers watching for travellers in common roads, as is
usual with such in times of war; and, because of the robbers even of
their own people, who having cast off the fear of God, and there being
no king in Israel to punish them, broke forth into acts of injustice and
violence, even against their own brethren.

[Judges 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 5:7</span></span>

Ceased - The people forsook all their unfortified towns, not being able
to protect them from military insolence. A mother - That is, to be to
them as a mother, to instruct, and rule, and protect them, which duties
a mother owes to her children.

[Judges 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 5:8</span></span>

Chose - They did not only submit to idolatry when they were forced to it
by tyrants, but they freely chose it. New gods - New to them, and
unknown to their fathers, and new in comparison of the true and
everlasting God of Israel, being but of yesterday. The gates - That is,
in their walled cities, which have gates and bars; gates are often put
for cities; then their strong holds fell into the hands of their
enemies. Was there a shield - There was not, the meaning is not, that
all the Israelites had no arms, but, either they had but few arms among
them, being many thousands of them disarmed by the Canaanites and
Philistines, or that they generally neglected the use of arms, as being
without all hope of recovering their liberty.

[Judges 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jdg 5:9</span></span>

My heart is toward - I honour and love those, who being the chief of the
people in wealth and dignity, did not withdraw themselves from the work,
as such usually do; but exposed themselves to the same hazards, and
joined with their brethren in this noble but dangerous attempt. The Lord
- Who inclined their hearts to this undertaking, and gave them success
in it. As she gives instruments their due, so she is careful the
sovereign cause lose not his glory.

[Judges 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jdg 5:10</span></span>

Speak - Celebrate the praise of our mighty God. That ride on white asses
- That is, magistrates and nobles, who used to do so, [Jdg
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#004), [Jdg
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#014). That walk - That is, you that
can safely travel in those high ways, which before you durst neither
ride nor walk in: so great and mean persons are jointly excited to
praise God.

[Judges 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jdg 5:11</span></span>

From the noise - From the triumphant noise and shout of archers,
rejoicing when they meet with their prey. Of drawing water - At those
pits or springs of water, which were precious in those hot countries, to
which the people's necessities forced them to resort, and nigh unto
which the archers usually lurked, that they may shoot at them, and kill
and spoil them. There - When they come to those places with freedom and
safety, which before they could not, they shall with thankfulness
rehearse this righteous and gracious work of God, in rescuing his
people. Of the villages - Whom she mentions, because as their danger was
greater, [Jdg 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#007), so was their
deliverance. Gates - Of their cities, which were the chief places to
which both city and country resorted for public business and matters of
justice, from which they they had been debarred by their oppressors; but
now they had free access and passage, either in or out of the gates, as
their occasions required; and they who had been driven from their
cities, now returned to them in peace and triumph; so the citizens
deliverance is celebrated here, as the country - mens is in the
foregoing words.

[Judges 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 5:12</span></span>

Awake - Stir up thyself and all that is within thee, to admire and
praise the Lord. This work needs and well deserves the utmost liveliness
and vigour of soul. Lead captivity captive - How could this be done,
when there was none of them left? [Jdg
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#016). None were left to make head
against them. None is often put for few, and those few might be taken
after the battle, and carried captive, and led in triumph.

[Judges 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 5:13</span></span>

He made him, &c. - Thus God did not only preserve the poor and despised
remnant of his people, from the fury of the oppressor, and from the
destruction which Sisera designed, but also gave them the victory, and
thereby the dominion over the nobles of Canaan, who were combined
against them. Me - Tho' but a weak woman.

[Judges 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jdg 5:14</span></span>

Ephraim - Now she relates the carriage of the several tribes in the
expedition; and she begins with Ephraim. A root - Of the Ephraimites. By
root she seems to mean a branch, as that word is sometimes used. By
which also she may note the fewness of those that came out of Ephraim,
yielding but one branch or an handful of men to this service. Amalek -
The constant enemy of the Israelites, who were confederate with their
last oppressors the Moabites, [Jdg
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#013), and in all probability took
their advantage now against the Israelites in the southern or middle
parts of Canaan, while their main force was drawn northward against
Jabin and Sisera. Against these therefore Ephraim sent forth a party,
and so did Benjamin. Benjamin - Benjamin followed Ephraim's example. The
people - Among the people of Benjamin, with whom these few Ephraimites
united themselves in this expedition. Machir - That is, out of the tribe
of Manasseh, which are elsewhere called by the name of Machir, namely,
out of the half tribe which was within Jordan; for of the other she
speaks, [Jdg 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#017). Governors - Either
civil governors, princes and great persons, who were as ready to hazard
themselves, as the meanest: or military officers, valiant and expert
commanders, such as some of Machir's posterity are noted to have been.
Writer - That is, even the Scribes, who gave themselves to study and
writing, whereby they were exempted from military service, did
voluntarily enter into this service.

[Judges 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jdg 5:15</span></span>

With Deborah - Ready to assist her. Issachar - Heb. and Issachar, that
is, the tribe or people of Issachar, following the counsel and example
of their princes. Barak - That is, they were as hearty and valiant as
Barak their general; and as he marched on foot against their enemies
horses and chariots, and that into the valley, where the main use of
horses and chariots lies; so did they with no less courage and
resolution. Divisions - Or, separations, not so much one from another,
(for they seem to be all so well agreed in abiding at home with their
sheep) as all from their brethren, from whom they were divided no less
in their designs and affections, than in their situation by the river
Jordan: and they would not join their interests and forces with them in
this common cause. Great thoughts - Or, great searchings, great and sad
thoughts, and debates, and perplexities of mind among the Israelites, to
see themselves deserted by so great and potent a tribe as Reuben was.

[Judges 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 5:16</span></span>

Why abodest - Why wast thou so unworthy and cowardly, that thou wouldest
not engage thyself in so just, so necessary, and so noble a cause, but
didst prefer the care of this sheep, and thy own ease and safety, before
this generous undertaking? Reuben thought neutrality their wisest
course; being very rich in cattle, [Num
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001). They were loath to run the
hazard of so great a loss, by taking up arms against so potent an enemy
as Jabin: and the bleatings of their sheep were so loud in their ears,
that they could not hear the call of Deborah and Barak.

[Judges 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jdg 5:17</span></span>

Gilead - Sometimes taken strictly for that part of the land beyond
Jordan which fell to the half - tribe of Manasseh, and sometimes both
for that part of Manasseh's, and for Gad's portion, as [Jos
13:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#024), [Jos
13:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#029), and so it seems to be
understood here; and the land Gilead is here put for the people or
inhabitants of it, Gad and Manasseh. Beyond Jordan - In their own
portions, and did not come over Jordan to the help of the Lord, and of
his people, as they ought to have done. In ships - Dan, whose coast was
near the sea, was wholly intent upon his merchandise, and therefore
could not join in this land expedition. Sea - shore - Where their lot
lay. His breaches - Either in the creeks of the sea, or, in their broken
and craggy rocks and caves.

[Judges 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 5:18</span></span>

Jeoparded - Heb. despised, comparatively; they chose rather to venture
upon a generous and honourable death, than to enjoy a shameful and
servile life. High - places - That is, upon that large and eminent plain
in the top of mount Tabor, where they put themselves in battle array,
and expected the enemy; though when they saw they did not come up to
them, they marched down to meet them.

[Judges 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jdg 5:19</span></span>

The kings - There were divers petty kings in those parts who were
subject to Jabin. Megiddo - Taanah and Megiddo were two eminent cities,
not far from mount Tabor, nor from the river Kishon. No gain - They
fought without pay, whether from mere hatred of the Israelites, and a
desire to be revenged upon them: or from a full hope and confidence of
paying themselves abundantly out of Israel's spoils.

[Judges 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jdg 5:20</span></span>

From heaven - Or, they from heaven, or the heavenly host fought, by
thunder, and lightning, and hail - stones, possibly mingled with fire.
The stars - Raising these storms by their influences, which they do
naturally. Courses - Or, from their paths, or stations. As soldiers
fight in their ranks and places assigned them, so did these.

[Judges 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jdg 5:21</span></span>

River of Kishon - Which, though not great in itself, was now much
swelled by the foregoing storm and rain, and therefore drowned those who
being pursued by the hand of God, and by the Israelites, were forced
into it, and thought to pass over it, as they did before. Ancient river
- So called, either, first, in opposition to those rivers which are of a
later date, being made by the hand and art of man. Or, secondly, because
it was a river anciently famous for remarkable exploits, for which it
was celebrated by the ancient poets or writers, though not here
mentioned. Trodden down - Thou, O Deborah, though but a weak woman, hast
by God's assistance subdued a potent enemy. Such abrupt speeches are
frequent in poetical scriptures.

[Judges 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 5:22</span></span>

Horses hoofs - Their horses, in which they put most confidence, had
their hoofs, which are their support and strength, broken, either by
dreadful hail - stones, or rather, by their swift and violent running
over the stony grounds, when they fled with all possible speed from God
and from Israel. Pransings - Or because of their fierce or swift
courses. Mighty ones - Of their strong and valiant riders, who forced
their horses to run away as fast as they could.

[Judges 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 5:23</span></span>

Meroz - A place then, no doubt, eminent and considerable, tho' now there
be no remembrance of it left, which possibly might be the effect of this
bitter curse; as God curseth Amalek in this manner, that he would
utterly blot out their remembrance. And this place above all others may
be thus severely cursed; because it was near the place of the fight, and
therefore had the greatest opportunity and obligation to assist their
brethren. The angel, &c. - She signifies, that this curse proceeded not
from her ill - will towards that place, but from divine inspiration; and
that if all the rest of the song should be taken but for the breathings
of a pious soul, but liable to mistake, yet this branch of it was
immediately directed to her by the Lord, the angel of the covenant. Of
the Lord - Of the Lord's people: for God takes what is done for, or
against his people, as if it was done to himself. The cause between God
and the mighty, the principalities and powers of the kingdom of
darkness, will not admit of a neutrality.

[Judges 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jdg 5:24</span></span>

Blessed - Celebrated, and endowed with all sorts of blessings more than
they. In the tent - In her tent or habitation, in her house and family,
and all her affairs: for she and hers dwelt in tents. The tent is here
mentioned as an allusion to the place where the fact was done.

[Judges 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jdg 5:25</span></span>

Butter - Or, cream, that is, the choicest of her milk: so the same thing
is repeated in different words. Lordly dish - Which you are not to
understand of such a costly dish as the luxury of after ages brought in,
which is not agreeable to the simplicity either of this family, or of
those ancient times; but of a comely and convenient dish, the best which
she had, and such as the better sort of persons then used. Probably Jael
at that time intended him no other than kindness, 'till God by an
immediate impulse on her mind, directed her to do otherwise.

[Judges 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jdg 5:28</span></span>

Looked out - Expecting to see him returning: for she concluded, that he
went forth not so much to fight, as to take the spoil.

[Judges 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jdg 5:30</span></span>

Have they not, &e. - That is, it is certain they have got the prey, only
they tarry to distribute it, according to every man's quality and merit.

[Judges 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jdg 5:31</span></span>

So let - That is, so suddenly, so surely, so effectual and
irrecoverably. Deborah was a prophetess and this prayer was a
prediction, that in due time all God's enemies shall perish. In his
might - When he first riseth, and so goeth on in his course, which he
doth with great might, even as a strong man that runneth a race, and so
as no creature can stop, or hinder him; even so irresistible let thy
people be. Such shall be the honour and such the joy of all that love
God in sincerity, and they shall shine for ever as the sun in the
kingdom of their father.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 6](jdg006)

</div>
