<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg014)  [Next](jdg016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#001)

[Judges 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 15:1</span></span>

Wheat harvest - Which was the proper season for what follows. With a kid
- As a token of reconciliation. Into the chamber - Into her chamber,
which the women had separate from the mens.

[Judges 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 15:2</span></span>

Hated her - Because thou didst desert her: but this was no sufficient
cause; for he should have endeavored a reconciliation, and not have
disposed of another man's wife without his consent.

[Judges 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 15:3</span></span>

Now shall I, &c. - Because they have first provoked me by an irreparable
injury: but although this may look like an act of private revenge; yet
it is plain Samson acted as a judge (for so he was) and as an avenger of
the publick injuries of his people.

[Judges 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 15:4</span></span>

Foxes - Of which there were great numbers in Canaan. But it is not said
that Samson caught them all, either at one time, or by his own hands;
for being so eminent a person, and the judge of Israel, he might require
assistance of as many persons as he pleased. And it must be allowed,
that the God who made the world, and by his singular providence watched
over Israel, and intended them deliverance at this time, could easily
dispose things so that they might be taken. He chose to do this not by
his brethren, whom he would preserve from the hatred and mischief which
it might have occasioned them, but by brute creatures, thereby to add
scorn to their calamity, and particularly by foxes; partly, because they
were fittest for the purpose, being creatures very fearful of fire; and
having such tails as the fire - brands might most conveniently be tied
to; and not going directly forward, but crookedly, whereby the fire
would be dispersed in more places. Fire - brands - Made of such matter
as would quickly take fire, and keep it for a long time; which was easy
to procure. And put, &c. - That the foxes might not make too much haste,
nor run into their holes, but one of them might delay another, and so
continue longer in the places where they were to do execution.

[Judges 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jdg 15:5</span></span>

Let them go - Successively at several times; and in divers places, so
that they might not hinder one another, nor all run into the same field;
but being dispersed in all parts, might spread the plague farther; and
withal might be kept at a distance from the fields and vineyards of the
Israelites.

[Judges 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 15:6</span></span>

Burnt her - For the mischief which she had occasioned them; thus she
brought upon herself that mischief which she studied to avoid. The
Philistines had threatened to burn her and her father's house with fire.
To avoid this she betrayed her husband. And now the very thing she
feared comes upon her!

[Judges 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 15:8</span></span>

Hip and thigh - It seems to be a phrase, to express a desperate attack,
attended with the utmost hurry and confusion: and perhaps intimates,
that they all fled before him. So he smote them in the hinder parts.
Rock Etam - A natural fortress, where he waited to see what steps the
Philistines would take.

[Judges 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jdg 15:11</span></span>

Unto us - Thou hast by these actions punished not them only, but us, who
are sure to smart for it.

[Judges 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 15:12</span></span>

Bind thee - Why not rather, to fight under thy banner? Because sin
dispirits men, nay, it infatuates them, and hides from their eyes the
things that belong to their peace. Swear - Not that he feared them, or
could not as easily have conquered them, as he did the host of the
Philistines; but because he would be free from all temptation of doing
them harm, though it were in his own defence.

[Judges 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 15:13</span></span>

And they bound him - Thus was he a type of Christ, who yielded himself
to be bound, yea and led as a lamb to the slaughter. Never were men so
besotted as these men of Judah, except those who thus treated our
blessed Saviour. The rock - That is, from the cave in the rock, in which
he had secured himself, out of which he was first brought up, and then
carried down from the rock to the plain.

[Judges 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jdg 15:14</span></span>

Shouted - Because they had now their enemy, as they supposed, in their
hands. Loosed - Heb. were melted; that is, were dissolved, as things
which are melted in the fire. This typified the resurrection of Christ,
by the power of the Spirit of holiness. In this he loosed the bands of
death, it being impossible he should be holden of them. And thus he
triumphed over the powers of darkness, which had shouted against him.

[Judges 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jdg 15:15</span></span>

New jaw - bone - And therefore the more tough and strong.

[Judges 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 15:16</span></span>

Slain a thousand men - What could be too hard for him to do, on whom the
Spirit of the Lord came mightily? It was strange the men of Judah did
now at least come in to his assistance. But he was to be a type of him,
who trod the wine - press alone.

[Judges 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jdg 15:17</span></span>

Ramath - Lehi - That is, the lifting up of the jaw - bone; by
contraction Lehi, [Jdg 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#014), as Salem
is put for Jerusalem.

[Judges 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 15:18</span></span>

Sore a thirst - A natural effect of the great pains he had taken. And
perhaps there was the hand of God therein, to chastise him for not
making mention of God in his song, and to keep him from being proud of
his strength. One would have thought that the men of Judah would have
met him with bread and wine: but they so little regarded him, that he is
fainting for want of a draught of water! Thus are the greatest slights
often put upon those that do the greatest services! Shall I die - Wilt
thou not finish what thou hast begun? Wilt thou undo what thou hast
done.

[Judges 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jdg 15:19</span></span>

In the Jaw - Either causing the jaw - bone to send forth water, as the
rock formerly did, causing a spring to break forth in that Lehi,
mentioned [Jdg 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#014), for Lehi is both
the name of a place, and a jaw - bone. En - hakkore - That is, the
fountain of him that cried for thirst; or, that called upon God for
deliverance; that is, the fountain which was given in answer to my
prayer. In Lehi - According to this translation, Lehi is the name of a
place.

[Judges 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jdg 15:20</span></span>

He judged - That is, he pleaded their cause, and avenged them against
the Philistines. Of the Philistines - That is, whilst the Philistines
had the power and dominion, from which he was not fully to deliver, but
only to begin to deliver them. From this place it is manifest, that in
the computation of the times of the judges, the years of servitude or
oppression are not to be separated from the years of the judges, but
added to them, and are comprehended within them; which proposition is of
great importance for clearing this difficult part of scripture -
chronology.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 16](jdg016)

</div>
