<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg003)  [Next](jdg005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#001)

[Judges 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 4:2</span></span>

Of Canaan - That is, of the land where most of the Canaanites, strictly
so called, now dwelt, which seems to be in the northern part of Canaan.
This seems to be of the posterity of that Jabin, whom Joshua slew, [Jos
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#011), who watched all opportunities
to recover his ancient possessions, and to revenge his own and his
father's quarrel. In Hazor - In the territory or the kingdom of Hazor,
which might now be restored to its former largeness and power. Of the
Gentiles - So called, because it was much frequented and inhabited by
the Gentiles; either by the Canaanites, who being beaten out of their
former possessions, seated themselves in those northern parts; or by
other nations coming there for traffick, whence Galilee, where this was,
is called Galilee of the Gentiles.

[Judges 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 4:3</span></span>

Mightily oppressed - More than former tyrants; from his malice and
hatred against the Israelites; and from God's just judgment, the growing
punishment being suitable to their aggravated wickedness.

[Judges 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 4:4</span></span>

A prophetess - As there were men - prophets, so there were also women -
prophetesses, as Miriam, [Exo 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020).
Huldah, [Kg2 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#014), and divers others;
but the word prophets or prophetesses is ambiguous, sometimes being used
of persons extraordinarily inspired by God, and endowed with the power
of working miracles, and foretelling things to come; and sometimes of
persons endowed with special gifts or graces, for the better
understanding and discoursing about the word and mind of God. Of this
sort were the sons of the prophets, or such as were bred in the schools
of the prophets. who are often called prophets, as [Sa1
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005), [Sa1
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#010). And because we read nothing of
Deborah's miraculous actions, perhaps she was only a woman of eminent
holiness, and knowledge of the holy scriptures, by which she was
singularly qualified for judging the people according to the laws of
God. Judged Israel - That is, determined causes and controversies
arising among the Israelites, as is implied, [Jdg
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#005). And this Jabin might suffer to be
done, especially by a woman. Yet the frequent discharge of this part of
the judge's office, whereby she gained great power and authority with
the people, did notably (though not observed by the tyrant) prepare the
way for her sliding into the other part of her office, which was to
defend and rescue the people from their enemies.

[Judges 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jdg 4:5</span></span>

And she dwelt - Or, she sat: she had her judgment - seat in the open
air, under the shadow of that tree; which was an emblem of the justice
she administered there: thriving and growing against opposition, as the
palm - tree does under pressures. Came to her - To have their suits and
causes determined by her sentence.

[Judges 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 4:6</span></span>

Called Barak - By virtue of that power which God had given her, and the
people owned in her. Kedesh Naphtali - So called, to distinguish it from
other places of that name, one in Judah, and another in Issachar. Hath
not the Lord, &c. - That is, assuredly God hath commanded thee; this is
not the fancy of a weak woman, which peradventure thou mayst despise;
but the command of the great God by my mouth. Mount Tabor - A place most
fit for his purpose, as being in the borders of divers tribes, and
having a large plain at the top of it, where he might conveniently
marshal and discipline his army. Naphtali and Zebulun - These she names
because they were nearest and best known to Barak, and therefore soonest
brought together, because they were nearest to the enemy, and therefore
might speedily be assembled, whilst the other tribes, being at a
distance, had better opportunity of gathering forces for their succour;
and because these had most smarted under this oppressor, who was in the
heart of their country; but these are not named exclusively, as appears
by the concurrence of some other tribes.

[Judges 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 4:7</span></span>

Draw to Thee - By my secret and powerful providence, ordering and over -
ruling his inclinations that way. In fixing the very place, she gave him
a sign, which might confirm his faith, when he came to engage.

[Judges 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 4:8</span></span>

I will not go - His offer to go with her, shews the truth of his faith,
for which he is praised, [Heb 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#032),
but his refusal to go without her, shews the weakness of his faith, that
he could not trust God's bare word, as he ought to have done, without
the pledge of the presence of his prophetess.

[Judges 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jdg 4:10</span></span>

Ten thousand at his feet - That is, who followed him; possibly he
intimates that they were all foot - men; and so this is emphatically
added, to signify by what contemptible means God overthrew Sisera's
great host.

[Judges 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jdg 4:11</span></span>

Heber - The husband of Jael. Of Hobab - Called also Jethro. The Kenites
- From the rest of his brethren, who lived in the wilderness of Judah.
His tent - That is, his dwelling, which probably was in tents, as
shepherds used.

[Judges 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 4:12</span></span>

They - That is, this people dwelling there, or his spies.

[Judges 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jdg 4:14</span></span>

Up - Heb. arise, delay not. If we have ground to believe, that God goes
before us, we may well go on with courage and cheerfulness. Gone before
thee - Namely, as general of thine army, to fight for thee. Went down -
He doth not make use of the advantage which he had of the hill, where he
might have been out of the reach of his iron chariots, but boldly
marcheth down into the valley, to give Sisera the opportunity of using
all his horses and chariots, that so the victory might he more glorious.

[Judges 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jdg 4:15</span></span>

Discomfited - With great terror and noise, as the word signifies,
probably with thunder and lightning, and hail - stones, poured upon them
from heaven, as is implied, [Jdg 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#020).
Edge of the sword - That is, by the sword of Barak and his army, whose
ministry God used; but so, that they had little else to do, but to kill
those whom God by more powerful arms had put to flight. On his feet -
That he might flee away more secretly in the quality of a common
soldier, whereas his chariot would have exposed him to more observation.

[Judges 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 4:16</span></span>

Left - In the field; for there were some who fled away, as Sisera did.

[Judges 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jdg 4:17</span></span>

The tent of Jael - For women had their tents apart from their husbands.
And here he thought to lurk more securely than in her husband's tent.
Peace - Not a covenant of friendship, which they were forbidden to make
with that cursed people, but only a cessation of hostilities, which he
afforded them because they were peaceable people, abhorring war, and
wholly minding pasturage, and were not Israelites, with whom his
principal quarrel was; and especially by God's over - ruling disposal of
his heart to favour them who were careful to keep themselves uncorrupted
with Israel's sins, and therefore preserved from their plagues.

[Judges 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 4:18</span></span>

Fear not - This was a promise of security, and therefore she cannot be
excused from dissimulation and treachery.

[Judges 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jdg 4:19</span></span>

A bottle of milk - As a signification of greater respect. Covered him -
Upon pretence of hiding him.

[Judges 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jdg 4:21</span></span>

A nail of the tent - Wherewith they used to fasten the tent, which
consequently was long and sharp. This might seem a very bold attempt,
but it must be considered, that she was encouraged to it, by observing
that the heavens and all the elements conspired against him, as one
devoted to destruction. In the following son, Deborah doth not commend
Jael's words, [Jdg 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#018). Turn in my
Lord, fear not; but only her action: touching which, this one
consideration may abundantly suffice to stop the mouths of objectors. It
cannot be denied, that every discourse which is recorded in scripture,
is not divinely inspired, because some of them were uttered by the
devil, and others by holy men, but mistaken. This being so, the worst
that any can infer from this place is, that this song, tho' indited by a
good woman, was not divinely inspired, but only composed by a person
transported with joy for the deliverance of God's people, but subject to
mistake; who therefore, out of zeal to commend the instrument of so
great a deliverance, might overlook the indirectness of the means, and
commend that which should have been disliked, And if they farther
object, that it was composed by a prophetess, and therefore must be
divinely inspired; it may be replied, that every expression of a true
prophet was not divinely inspired; as is evident from Samuel's mistake
concerning Eliab, whom he thought to be the Lord's anointed, [Sa1
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#006). This is said upon supposition
that Jael acted deceitfully in this affair; but if we suppose, which is
much more likely, that Jael fully intended to afford Sisera the shelter
and protection which he sought of her, but was afterwards by the
immediate direction of heaven ordered to kill him, the whole difficulty
vanishes, and the character both of Jael and of Deborah remains
unimpeached.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 5](jdg005)

</div>
