<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Judges Index](jdg.md)  
  [Previous](jdg011)  [Next](jdg013.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#001.md)

[Judges 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 12:1</span></span>

Northward - Over Jordan, where Jephthah was, in the northern part of the
land beyond Jordan. And said - Through pride and envy, contending with
him as they did before with Gideon. Over - Not over Jordan, for there he
was already; but over the borders of the Israelites land beyond Jordan.

[Judges 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 12:2</span></span>

When I called - Hence it appears, that he had craved their assistance,
which they had denied; though that be not elsewhere expressed.

[Judges 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 12:3</span></span>

Put my life - That is, I exposed myself to the utmost danger; as a man
that carries a brittle and precious thing in his hand, which may easily
either fall to the ground, or be snatched from him. Wherefore - Why do
you thus requite my kindness in running such hazards to preserve you and
yours?

[Judges 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 12:4</span></span>

Ye Gileadites - These words are a contemptuous expression of the
Ephraimites concerning the Gileadites, whom they call fugitives of
Ephraim; the word Ephraim being here taken largely, as it comprehends
the other neighbouring tribes, of which Ephraim was the chief; and
especially their brethren of Manasseh, who lived next to them, and were
descended from the same father, Joseph. By Gileadites here they seem
principally to mean the Manassites beyond Jordan, who dwelt in Gilead.
And although other Gileadites were joined with them, yet they vent their
passion against these; principally, because they envied them most; as
having had a chief hand in the victory. These they opprobriously call
fugitives, that is, such as had deserted their brethren of Ephraim and
Manasseh, planted themselves beyond Jordan, at a distance from their
brethren, and were alienated in affection from them.

[Judges 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jdg 12:5</span></span>

Said Nay - To avoid the present danger.

[Judges 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 12:6</span></span>

Shibboleth - Which signifies a stream or river, which they desired to
pass over: so it was a word proper for the occasion, and gave them no
cause to suspect the design, because they were required only to express
their desire to go over the Shibboleth or river. Sibboleth - It is well
known, that not only divers nations, but divers provinces, or parts of
the same nation who use the same language, differ in their manner of
pronunciation. Could not frame - Or rather, he did not frame to speak
right; so as he was required to do it. The Hebrew text doth not say,
that he could not do it, but that he did it not, because suspecting not
the design he uttered it speedily according to his manner of expression.
There fell - Not in that place, but in that expedition, being slain
either in the battle, or in the pursuit, or at Jordan. See the justice
of God! They had gloried, that they were Ephraimites: But how soon are
they afraid to own their country? They had called the Gileadites,
fugitives: And now they are in good earnest become fugitives themselves.
It is the same word, [Jdg 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#005.md), used
of the Ephraimites that fled, which they had used in scorn of the
Gileadites. He that rolls the stone, or reproach unjustly on another, it
may justly return upon himself.

[Judges 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jdg 12:9</span></span>

Took in - That is, took them home for wives to his sons. What a
difference between his and his predecessor's family! Ibzan had sixty
children, and all married: Jephthah but one, and she dies unmarried.
Some are increased, others diminished: all is the Lord's doing.

[Judges 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jdg 12:15</span></span>

Mount of the Amalekites - So called from some remarkable exploit, done
by, or upon the Amalekites in that place. It is strange, that in the
history of all these judges, there is not so much as once mention of the
high - priest, or of any other priest or Levite, appearing either for
council or action in any public affair, from Phinehas to Eli, which may
well be computed two hundred and fifty years! Surely this intimates,
that the institution was chiefly intended to be typical, and that the
benefits which were promised by it, were to be chiefly looked for in its
anti - type, the everlasting priesthood of Christ, in comparison of
which that priesthood had no glory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 13](jdg013.md)

</div>
