<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg015)  [Next](jdg017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#001)

[Judges 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 16:1</span></span>

And saw - Going into an house of publick entertainment to refresh
himself. He there saw this harlot accidentally; and by giving way to
look upon her, was ensnared, [Gen 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#006).

[Judges 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 16:2</span></span>

In the morning - This they chose to do, rather than to seize upon him in
his bed by night; either, because they knew not certainly in what house
he was; or, because they thought that might cause great terror, and
confusion, and mischief among their own people; whereas in the day -
time they might more fully discover him, and more certainly use their
weapons against him. O that all who indulge any unholy desire, might see
themselves thus surrounded, and marked for destruction by their
spiritual enemies! The more secure they are, the greater is their
danger.

[Judges 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 16:3</span></span>

Arose - Perhaps warned by God in a dream; or rather by the checks of his
own conscience. Went away - The watch - men not expecting him 'till
morning, and therefore being now retired into the sides, or upper part
of the gate - house, as the manner now is, to get some rest, to fit
themselves for their hard service intended in the morning: nor durst
they pursue him, whom they now again perceived to have such prodigious
strength, and courage; and to be so much above the fear of them, that he
did not run away with all speed, but went leisurely. Hebron - Which was
above twenty miles from Gaza. And Samson did this not out of vain
ostentation, but as an evidence of his great strength, for the
encouragement of its people to join with him vigorously; and for the
greater terror and contempt of the Philistines. It may seem strange that
Samson immediately after so foul a sin should have courage and strength
from God, for so great a work. But first, It is probable, that Samson
had in some measure repented of his sin, and begged of God pardon and
assistance. This singular strength and courage was not in itself a
grace, but a gift, and it was such a gift as did not so much depend on
the disposition of his mind, but on the right ordering of his body, by
the rule given to him, and others of that order.

[Judges 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 16:4</span></span>

Loved - Probably as an harlot: because the dreadful punishment now
inflicted upon Samson for this sin, whom God spared for the first
offence, is an intimation, that this sin was not inferior to the former.

[Judges 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jdg 16:5</span></span>

The lords - The lords of their five principal cities, who were leagued
together against him as their common enemy. Afflict - To chastise him
for his injuries done to us. They mean to punish him severely, but they
express it in mild words, lest it might move her to pity him. Pieces of
silver - Shekels, as that phrase is commonly used.

[Judges 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 16:7</span></span>

Samson said - Samson is guilty both of the sin of lying, and of great
folly in encouraging her enquiries, which he should at first have
checked: but as he had forsaken God, so God had now forsaken him,
otherwise the frequent repetition and vehement urging of this question
might easily have raised suspicion in him.

[Judges 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jdg 16:9</span></span>

With her - That is, in a secret chamber within her call. Nor is it
strange that they did not fall upon him in his sleep, because they
expected an opportunity for doing their work more certainly, and with
less danger.

[Judges 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 16:13</span></span>

Web - Or, thread which is woven about a weaver's loom: or, with a
weaver's beam. If my hair, which is all divided into seven locks, be
fastened about a weaver's beam; or interwoven with weaver's threads:
then I shall be weak as another man.

[Judges 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jdg 16:15</span></span>

Not with me - Not open to me.

[Judges 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 16:16</span></span>

Vexed - Being tormented by two contrary passions, desire to gratify her,
and fear of betraying himself. So that he had no pleasure of his life.

[Judges 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jdg 16:17</span></span>

If I be shaven - Not that his hair was in itself the cause of his
strength, but because it was the chief condition of that covenant,
whereby God was pleased to ingage himself to fit him for, and assist him
in that great work to which he called him: but upon his violation of the
condition, God justly withdraws his help. (EFN [Isa
40:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#031); [Psa
29:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#011))

[Judges 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 16:18</span></span>

And brought money in their hand - See one of the bravest men then in the
world bought and sold, as a sheep for the slaughter. How does this
instance sully all the glory of man, and forbid the strong man ever to
boast of his strength!

[Judges 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jdg 16:19</span></span>

Sleep - By some sleepy potion. Knees - Resting his head upon her knees.
To weaken or hurt, tho' he felt it not.

[Judges 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jdg 16:20</span></span>

Said - Within himself. Shake myself - That is, put forth my strength.
Knew not - Not distinctly feeling the loss of his hair, or not
considering what would follow. Many have lost the favourable presence of
God, and are not aware of it. They have provoked God to withdraw from
them; but are not sensible of their loss.

[Judges 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jdg 16:21</span></span>

His eyes - Which was done both out of revenge and policy, to disable him
from doing them harm, in case he should recover his strength; but not
without God's providence, punishing him in that part which had been
instrumental to his sinful lusts. Gaza - Because this was a great and
strong city, where he would be kept safely; and upon the sea - coast, at
sufficient distance from Samson's people; and to repair the honour of
that place, upon which he had fastened so great a scorn. God also
ordering things thus, that where he first sinned, [Jdg
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#001), there he should receive his
punishment. Grind - As slaves use to do. He made himself a slave to
harlots, and now God suffers men to use him like a slave. Poor Samson,
how art thou fallen! How is thine honour laid in the dust! Wo unto him,
for he hath sinned! Let all take warning by him, carefully to preserve
their purity. For all our glory is gone, when the covenant of our
separation to God, as spiritual Nazarites, is profaned.

[Judges 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 16:22</span></span>

The hair - This circumstance, though in itself inconsiderable, is noted
as a sign of the recovery of God's favour, and his former strength, in
some degree, upon his repentance, and renewing his vow with God, which
was allowed for Nazarites to do.

[Judges 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 16:23</span></span>

Dagon - An idol, whose upper part was like a man, and whose lower part
was like a fish: probably one of the sea - gods of the Heathens.

[Judges 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jdg 16:25</span></span>

Made sport - Either being made by them the matter of their sport and
derision, of bitter scoffs, and other indignities: or, by some proofs of
more than ordinary strength yet remaining in him, like the ruins of a
great and goodly building: whereby he lulled them asleep, until by this
complaisance he prepared the way for that which he designed.

[Judges 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jdg 16:26</span></span>

Whereon the house standeth - Whether it were a temple, or theatre, or
some slight building run up for the purpose.

[Judges 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jdg 16:27</span></span>

The roof - Which was flat, and had window's through which they might see
what was done in the lower parts of the house.

[Judges 16:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jdg 16:28</span></span>

Samson called - This prayer was not an act of malice and revenge, but of
faith and zeal for God, who was there publickly dishonoured; and
justice, in vindicating the whole common - wealth of Israel, which was
his duty, as he was judge. And God, who heareth not sinners, and would
never use his omnipotence to gratify any man's malice, did manifest by
the effect, that he accepted and owned his prayer as the dictate of his
own Spirit. And that in this prayer he mentions only his personal
injury, and not their indignities to God and his people, must be
ascribed to that prudent care which he had, upon former occasions, of
deriving the rage of the Philistines upon himself alone, and diverting
it from the people. For which end I conceive this prayer was made with
an audible voice, though he knew they would entertain it only with scorn
and laughter.

[Judges 16:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jdg 16:30</span></span>

Two pillars - Instances are not wanting of more capacious buildings than
this, that have been supported only by one pillar. Pliny in the 15th
chapter of the 36th Book of his Natural History, mentions two theatres
built by C. Curio, in Julius Caesar's time; each of which was supported
only by one pillar, tho' many thousands of people sat in it together.
Let me die - That is, I am content to die, so I can but contribute to
the vindication of God's glory, and the deliverance of God's people.
This is no encouragement to those who wickedly murder themselves: for
Samson did not desire, or procure his own death voluntarily, but by mere
necessity; he was by his office obliged to seek the destruction of these
enemies and blasphemers of God, and oppressors of his people; which in
these circumstances he could not effect without his own death. Moreover,
Samson did this by Divine direction, as God's answer to his prayer
manifests, and that he might be a type of Christ, who by voluntarily
undergoing death, destroyed the enemies of God, and of his people. They
died, just when they were insulting over an Israelite, persecuting him
whom God had smitten. Nothing fills up the measure of the iniquity of
any person or people faster, than mocking or misusing the servants of
God, yea, tho' it is by their own folly, that they are brought low.
Those know not what they do, nor whom they affront, that make sport with
a good man.

[Judges 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jdg 16:31</span></span>

Buried - While the Philistines were under such grief, and consternation,
that they had neither heart nor leisure to hinder them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 17](jdg017)

</div>
