<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer001)  [Next](jer003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#001)

[Jeremiah 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 2:2</span></span>

Go - From Anathoth to Jerusalem. Remember - I remind thee of the
kindness that was between us. The love - When I entered into covenant
with thee at the giving of the law. Wilderness - I took such care of
thee, in the howling wilderness, a land that was not sown.

[Jeremiah 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 2:3</span></span>

Holiness - A people dedicated to God. As - As the first fruits were holy
to God, so was Israel. Devour - All that were injurious to him. Offend -
Were liable to punishment. Evil - Evil was inflicted on them from the
Lord, as upon the Egyptians, Amalekites, Midianites, Canaanites.

[Jeremiah 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 2:5</span></span>

Vanity - Idols. Vain - Fools; senseless as the stocks and stones that
they made their idols of.

[Jeremiah 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 2:6</span></span>

Neither - They never concerned themselves about what God had done for
them, which should have engaged them to cleave to him. Of drought -
Where they had no water but by miracle. Death - Bringing forth nothing
that might support life, therefore nothing but death could be expected;
and besides, yielding so many venomous creatures, as many enemies that
they went in continual danger of. No man dwelt - As having in it no
accommodation for travellers, much less for habitation.

[Jeremiah 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 2:7</span></span>

My land - Consecrated to my name; by your idols and many other
abominations.

[Jeremiah 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 2:8</span></span>

They - They that should have taught others, knew as little as they, or
regarded as little, who are said here to handle the law, the priests and
Levites, who were the ordinary teachers of the law. Pastors - Either
teachers, or kings and princes. Prophets - They that should have taught
the people the true worship of God, were themselves worshippers of Baal.

[Jeremiah 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 2:9</span></span>

Plead - By his judgments, and by his prophets, as he did with their
fathers, that they may be left without excuse. Children - God often
visits the iniquities of the parents upon the children, when they
imitate their parents.

[Jeremiah 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 2:10</span></span>

Of Chittim - All the isles in the Mediterranean sea, with the
neighbouring coasts; for the Hebrews call all people, that separated
from them by the sea, islanders, because they came to them by shipping.
Kedar - Arabia that lay east - south - east of Judea, as Chittim did
more north or north - west; go from north to south, east to west, and
make the experiment; look to Chittim the most civilized, or Kedar the
most barbarous, yet neither have changed their gods.

[Jeremiah 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 2:11</span></span>

Their glory - The true God, who was their glory; and who always did them
good, giving them cause to glory in him.

[Jeremiah 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 2:12</span></span>

O ye heavens - A pathetical expression, intimating that it is such a
thing, that the very inanimate creatures, could they be sensible of it,
would be astonished. Be desolate - Lose your brightness, as the sun
seemed to do when Christ suffered.

[Jeremiah 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 2:13</span></span>

Of living waters - A metaphor taken from springs, called living, because
they never cease, or intermit; such had God's care and kindness been
over them. Cisterns - Either their idols, which are empty vain things,
that never answer expectation, or the Assyrians, and Egyptians. Indeed
all other supports, that are trusted to besides God, are but broken
vessels.

[Jeremiah 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 2:14</span></span>

A slave - Slave is here added to home - born to express the baseness of
his service, because the master had power to make those slaves who were
born of slaves in his house. Why - Why is he thus tyrannized over, as if
strangers had the same right over him as owners over their slaves?

[Jeremiah 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 2:15</span></span>

Lions - Understand the Assyrians, Babylonians, and Egyptians, called
lions from their fierceness, and young from their strength. Yelled -
Noting the terrible voice that the lion puts forth, either in seizing
the prey, or devouring it.

[Jeremiah 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 2:16</span></span>

Noph, &c. - Two of the kings of Egypt's principal seats. Noph was
sometimes called Memphis, now Cairo. Tahapanes probably took its name
from Taphanes queen of Egypt, [Kg1
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#019), called also Hanes: [Isa
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#004). The inhabitants of these cities
are called here their children.

[Jeremiah 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 2:17</span></span>

When - By the conduct of providence in the wilderness, keeping thee from
all dangers.

[Jeremiah 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 2:18</span></span>

And now - What business hast thou there? Sihor - The Nile: it signifies
black, called Melas by the Greeks, either from the blackness of the land
it passed through, or of the soil it casts up. The waters - Here and by
the same words before is meant, to seek help from either place. River -
Euphrates, often called so by way of eminency.

[Jeremiah 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 2:19</span></span>

Thy wickedness - Thy own wickedness is the cause of thy correction. Know
- Consider well, and thou canst not but be convinced.

[Jeremiah 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 2:20</span></span>

Broken - The bondage and tyranny that thou wert under in old time in
Egypt, as also divers times besides. Tree - Under these shades idolaters
thought there lay some hidden deity. Wanderest - The word properly
signifies, making hast from one tree to another, or from one idol to
another. Playing - Committing idolatry, which is a spiritual harlotry,
[Jer 3:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001).

[Jeremiah 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 2:21</span></span>

A right seed - A right seed of true believers.

[Jeremiah 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 2:22</span></span>

Nitre - Though interpreters do greatly vary in describing what is
particularly meant here by Nitre and Soap, and would be superfluous to
mention here; yet all agree, they are some materials that artists make
use of for cleansing away spots from the skin. The blot of this people
is by no art to be taken out; nor expiated by sacrifices; it is beyond
the power of all natural and artificial ways of cleansing. Marked - Thy
filthiness is so foul that it leaves a brand behind which cannot be hid
or washed out, but will abide, [Jer
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001).

[Jeremiah 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 2:23</span></span>

Baalim - The word is plural, as comprehensive of all their idols. Thy
way - The filthiness thou hast left behind thee, whereby thou mayst be
traced. Valley - Whether of Hinnom where they burnt their children in
sacrifice, or in any valleys where thou hast been frequent in thy
idolatries. Traversing - A metaphor taken from creatures that are
hunted, that keep no direct path.

[Jeremiah 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 2:24</span></span>

A wild ass - Another similitude for the more lively description of the
same thing. The wind - This creature, by the wind, smells afar off which
way her male is. In her occasion - That is, when she has an occasion to
run impetuously to her male, she bears down all opposition. In her month
- Perhaps the sense is, though Jerusalem be now madly bent upon going
after her idols, that there is no stopping her, yet the time may come,
in their afflictions, that they may grow more tame, and willing to
receive counsel.

[Jeremiah 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 2:25</span></span>

Withhold - Take not those courses that will reduce thee to poverty, to
go bare foot, and to want wherewith to quench thy thirst. No hope - We
care not since there is no remedy. Strangers - Idols.

[Jeremiah 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 2:26</span></span>

Found - Not ashamed of his sin of theft, but that he is at last found.

[Jeremiah 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 2:27</span></span>

Brought me forth - Or begotten me; so is the word used, [Gen
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#018). This denotes the sottish
stupidity of this people, to take a lifeless stock or stone to be their
maker, and to give the honour of God unto them, [Isa
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#017). Turned - They turn their faces
towards their idols.

[Jeremiah 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jer 2:28</span></span>

For - Thou hast enough of them, imitating the Heathens, who had,
according to Varro, above thirty thousand deities. Make trial if any, or
all of them together, can help thee.

[Jeremiah 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jer 2:30</span></span>

Children - Your inhabitants in every city, they being frequently called
the children of such a city. Correction - Instruction: though they were
corrected, yet they would not be instructed. Your sword - You have been
so far from receiving instruction, that you have, by the sword, and
other ways of destruction, murdered those that I have sent to reprove
you.

[Jeremiah 2:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jer 2:31</span></span>

O generation - O ye men of this generation. See - You shall see the
thing with your eyes, because your ears are shut against it. A
wilderness - Have I been like the wilderness of Arabia, have not I
accommodated you with all necessaries? A land of darkness - As it were a
land uninhabitable, because of the total want of light. Have I been a
God of no use or comfort to them, that they thus leave me? Have they had
nothing from me but misery and affliction? We - Words of pride and
boasting.

[Jeremiah 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jer 2:32</span></span>

A maid - How unlikely is it, that a maid should forget her ornaments? A
bride - Those jewels which the bridegroom was wont to present his bride
with. Forgotten - In the neglect of my worship; me, who was not only
their defence, but their glory.

[Jeremiah 2:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jer 2:33</span></span>

Trimmest - Or, deckest, [Eze 23:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#040),
thinking thereby to entice others to thy help. Taught - Nations that
have been vile enough of themselves, by thy example are become more
vile.

[Jeremiah 2:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jer 2:34</span></span>

Skirts - Of thy garments: the tokens of cruelty may be seen openly
there. Innocents - In thee is found the murder expressed here by blood
of innocent persons, murdering souls as well as bodies. Search - Heb. by
digging; as if the earth had covered the blood, or as if they had
committed their wickedness in some obscure places. These - Upon thy
garments, exposed openly to publick view.

[Jeremiah 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">jer 2:35</span></span>

Behold - I will proceed in my judgment against thee. Because - Because
thou justifiest thyself.

[Jeremiah 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">jer 2:36</span></span>

Why - Why dost thou seek auxiliaries anywhere, rather than cleave to me?
Ashamed - Egypt shall stand thee in no more stead than Assyria hath
done.

[Jeremiah 2:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">jer 2:37</span></span>

Yea - All the help thou canst procure shall not prevent thy captivity,
but from hence thou shalt go. Thy hands - An usual posture of mourning.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 3](jer003)

</div>
