<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer030)  [Next](jer032) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001)

[Jeremiah 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 31:2</span></span>

To rest - In Canaan.

[Jeremiah 31:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 31:5</span></span>

Samaria - Samaria was the metropolis of the ten tribes. Mountains are
convenient for vineyards, being free from shades and exposed to the sun.
Shall plant - God promises them a liberty to plant, and that they should
enjoy their plantations, eating them as common things, which they could
not do 'till the fifth year.

[Jeremiah 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 31:6</span></span>

Arise - This was fulfilled under the gospel; for both Galilee and
Samaria received the gospel.

[Jeremiah 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 31:9</span></span>

With weeping - Some think that it had been better translated, they went
weeping; for though the verb be the future tense in the Hebrew, yet that
tense has often the signification of the preterperfect tense, thus it
answereth, [Psa 126:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#005). He that goeth
forth weeping, bearing precious seed, shalt doubtless come again
rejoicing. There is a weeping for joy, as well as for sorrow, and thus
the text corresponds with that, [Zac
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010). I will pour upon them the
spirit of grace and supplications, and they shall look upon him whom
they have pierced, and mourn. By rivers - And they shall have no want as
they had when they came out of Egypt, through the wilderness, where they
often wanted water.

[Jeremiah 31:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 31:11</span></span>

Hath redeemed - God will as certainly do it, as if he had already done
it. In their deliverance as well from Babylon as Egypt, they were types
of the deliverance of God's people, by Christ; as well as in their
entering into Canaan, they were types of the saints, entering into
heaven.

[Jeremiah 31:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 31:12</span></span>

And sing - All the phrases in this verse signify one thing, the happy
state of the Jews, after their return from captivity. The height of Zion
means the temple. A watered garden - They shall be a beautiful,
flourishing, and growing people. Soul seems here to be taken for the
whole man. Not sorrow - In that manner they have been. But under these
expressions is also promised the spiritual joy which the true Israel of
God will have under the gospel, and the eternal joy they shall have in
heaven.

[Jeremiah 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 31:15</span></span>

In Ramah - That is, in Canaan, and particularly in Ramah, where Nebuzar
- adan, [Jer 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#001), disposed of the
prisoners he had taken, setting some at liberty, ordering others to
death, and carrying the rest away to Babylon, which caused a bitter
weeping and lamentation. Rachel - Rachel is here brought in, having been
buried near that place, as if she were risen up from the grave, and
lamented the Jewish nation which came out of her loins (for so Benjamin
did, which was one of the two tribes that made the kingdom of Judah.)
Were not - Because her children either were not absolutely, being slain
by the pestilence, the famine, and the sword of the king of Babylon, or
were no longer her children, being transplanted into Babylon. And there
was a lamentation like this, when Herod caused the infants of two years
old to be slain in Bethlehem, and in the coasts round about Bethlehem,
of which Ramah was one.

[Jeremiah 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 31:18</span></span>

I have heard - The prophet here shews the change that would be wrought
in the hearts of the Israelites preceding this return from their
captivity. As a bullock - Which ordinarily are very unruly when they are
first put into it.

[Jeremiah 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 31:19</span></span>

Surely - After God had changed our hearts, we repented. I smote - After
God had instructed us, by his prophets, by our afflictions, and by his
Holy Spirit, we smote upon our thighs in testimony of our sorrow. The
reproach - The just punishment of the sins which I had long ago
committed.

[Jeremiah 31:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 31:20</span></span>

For since - From the time I spake against him by my threatenings, I
remember him with the affection and compassion of a father.

[Jeremiah 31:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 31:21</span></span>

Set up - Thou shalt return to these cities which thou now leavest,
therefore take good notice of the way, set up marks by which thou mayest
know it again, make thee pillars or some high heaps of stones in the
way, mind well the way that the Assyrians and the Babylonians carried
thee, for thou shalt come back the same way.

[Jeremiah 31:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 31:22</span></span>

Backsliding - Running after idols; or seeking help from foreign nations,
instead of applying to God. A woman - This seems to be a promise of the
Jewish church in its time, and of the gospel - church, prevailing over
all its enemies; though, considering the fewness of the church's
members, with the multitude of its enemies, and their power, it seemed
as strange a thing, as for a woman to prevail against a strong and
mighty man.

[Jeremiah 31:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 31:23</span></span>

The Lord of hosts - These prophecies of the restoration of the Jews, are
ordinarily prefaced with these two attributes of God, the one of which
asserts his power to do the thing promised; the other his goodness to
his people.

[Jeremiah 31:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 31:25</span></span>

For - The words are a promise, that God would give his people abundance
of ease and plenty.

[Jeremiah 31:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 31:26</span></span>

Upon this I awaked - Probably this revelation was made to Jeremiah, in a
dream.

[Jeremiah 31:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 31:27</span></span>

I will sow - That is, I will exceedingly multiply them, both with men
and with cattle.

[Jeremiah 31:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jer 31:31</span></span>

Behold - And not only with the Jews, but all those who should be
ingrafted into that Olive. It is not called the new covenant, because it
was as to the substance new, for it was made with Abraham, [Gen
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007), and with the Jews, [Deu
26:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#017), but because it was revealed
after a new manner, more fully and particularly, plainly and clearly.
Nor was the ceremonial law any part of it, as it was to the Jews, a
strict observance of that. It was likewise new in regard of the efficacy
of the spirit attending it, in a much fuller and larger manner.

[Jeremiah 31:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jer 31:32</span></span>

Not according - The covenant which God made with the Jews when they came
out of the land of Egypt, was on God's part the law which he gave them,
with the promises annexed; on their part (which made it a formal
covenant) their promise of obedience to it.

[Jeremiah 31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jer 31:33</span></span>

With - That is, with those who are Jews inwardly. And write it - The
prophet's design is here to express the difference betwixt the law and
the gospel. The first shews duty, the latter brings the grace of
regeneration, by which the heart is changed, and enabled for duty. All
under the time of the law that came to salvation, were saved by this new
covenant; but this was not evidently exhibited; neither was the
regenerating grace of God so common under the time of the law, as it
hath been under the gospel.

[Jeremiah 31:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jer 31:34</span></span>

I will forgive - God makes the root of all this grace to be the free
pardon, and the remission of their sins.

[Jeremiah 31:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">jer 31:36</span></span>

Those ordinances - The ordinances of nature, which are God's
establishments for the working of natural causes in their order.

[Jeremiah 31:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">jer 31:37</span></span>

I will cast off - That is, I will never cast off all the seed of Israel.

[Jeremiah 31:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">jer 31:38</span></span>

The city - Shall be built round, as largely as ever.

[Jeremiah 31:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">jer 31:39</span></span>

The line - That is, it shall be built round about upon its old
foundations.

[Jeremiah 31:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">jer 31:40</span></span>

The valley - A valley, so called from the multitude of Sennacherib's
army slain there. Of the ashes - So called from the ashes of the
sacrifices carried thither. Holy - All these places shall be parts of
the holy city, and God's name shall be sanctified, and he shall be
worshipped in them all. For ever - If we interpret the word for ever of
a perpetuity, the church of God must here be understood, against which
the gates of hell shall never prevail.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 32](jer032)

</div>
