<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 John Index](jo1)  
  [Previous](jo1001)  [Next](jo1003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 John Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001)

[1 John 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jo1 2:1</span></span>

My beloved children - So the apostle frequently addresses the whole body
of Christians. It is a term of tenderness and endearment, used by our
Lord himself to his disciples, [Joh
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#033). And perhaps many to whom St.
John now wrote were converted by his ministry. It is a different word
from that which is translated "little children," in several parts of the
epistle, to distinguish it from which, it is here rendered beloved
children. I write these things to you, that ye may not sin - Thus he
guards them beforehand against abusing the doctrine of reconciliation.
All the words, institutions, and judgments of God are levelled against
sin, either that it may not be committed, or that it may be abolished.
But if any one sin - Let him not lie in sin, despairing of help. We have
an advocate - We have for our advocate, not a mean person, but him of
whom it was said, "This is my beloved son." Not a guilty person, who
stands in need of pardon for himself; but Jesus Christ the righteous;
not a mere petitioner, who relies purely upon liberality, but one that
has merited, fully merited, whatever he asks.

[1 John 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jo1 2:2</span></span>

And he is the propitiation - The atoning sacrifice by which the wrath of
God is appeased. For our sins - Who believe. And not for ours only, but
also for the sins of the whole world - Just as wide as sin extends, the
propitiation extends also .

[1 John 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jo1 2:3</span></span>

And hereby we know that we truly and savingly know him - As he is the
advocate, the righteous, the propitiation. If we keep his commandments -
Particularly those of faith and love.

[1 John 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jo1 2:5</span></span>

But whoso keepeth his word - His commandments. Verily in him the love of
God - Reconciled to us through Christ. Is perfected - Is perfectly
known. Hereby - By our keeping his word. We know that we are in him - So
is the tree known by its fruits. To "know him," to be "in him," to
"abide in him," are nearly synonymous terms; only with a gradation, -
knowledge, communion, constancy.

[1 John 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jo1 2:6</span></span>

He that saith he abideth in him - which implies a durable state; a
constant, lasting knowledge of, and communion with, him. Ought himself -
Otherwise they are vain words. So to walk, even as he walked - In the
world. As he, are words that frequently occur in this epistle. Believers
having their hearts full of him, easily supply his name.

[1 John 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jo1 2:7</span></span>

When I speak of keeping his word, I write not a new commandment - I do
not speak of any new one. But the old commandment, which ye had - Even
from your forefathers.

[1 John 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jo1 2:8</span></span>

Again, I do write a new commandment to you - Namely, with regard to
loving one another. A commandment which, though it also was given long
ago, yet is truly new in him and in you. It was exemplified in him, and
is now fulfilled by you, in such a manner as it never was before. For
there is no comparison between the state of the Old Testament believers,
and that which ye now enjoy: the darkness of that dispensation is passed
away; and Christ the true light now shineth in your hearts.

[1 John 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jo1 2:9</span></span>

He that saith he is in the light - In Christ, united to him. And hateth
his brother - The very name shows the love due to him. Is in darkness
until now - Void of Christ, and of all true light.

[1 John 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jo1 2:10</span></span>

He that loveth his brother - For Christ's sake. Abideth in the light -
Of God. And there is no occasion of stumbling in him - Whereas he that
hates his brother is an occasion of stumbling to himself. He stumbles
against himself, and against all things within and without; while he
that loves his brother, has a free, disencumbered journey.

[1 John 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jo1 2:11</span></span>

He that hateth his brother - And he must hate, if he does not love him:
there is no medium. Is in darkness - In sin, perplexity, entanglement.
He walketh in darkness, and knoweth not that he is in the high road to
hell.

[1 John 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jo1 2:12</span></span>

I have written to you, beloved children - Thus St. John bespeaks all to
whom he writes. But in [Jo1 2:13-27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#013),
he divides them particularly into "fathers," "young men," and "little
children." Because your sins are forgiven you - As if he had said, This
is the sum of what I have now written. He then proceeds to other things,
which are built upon this foundation.

[1 John 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jo1 2:13</span></span>

The address to spiritual fathers, young men, and little children is
first proposed in this verse, wherein he says, I write to you, fathers:
I write to you, young men: I write to you, little children: and then
enlarged upon; in doing which he says, "I have written to you, fathers,"
[Jo1 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#014). "I have written to you,
young men," [Jo1 2:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#014). "I have
written to you, little children," [Jo1
2:18-27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018). Having finished his address
to each, he returns to all together, whom he again terms, (as [Jo1
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#012),) "beloved children." Fathers, ye
have known him that is from the beginning - We have known the eternal
God, in a manner wherein no other, even true believers, know him. Young
men, ye have overcome the wicked one - In many battles, by the power of
faith. Little children, ye have known the Father - As your Father,
though ye have not yet overcome, by the Spirit witnessing with your
Spirit, that ye are the children of God."

[1 John 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jo1 2:14</span></span>

I have written to you, fathers - As if he had said, Observe well what I
but now wrote. He speaks very briefly and modestly to these, who needed
not much to be said to them, as having that deep acquaintance with God
which comprises all necessary knowledge. Young men, ye are strong - In
faith. And the word of God abideth in you - Deeply rooted in your
hearts, whereby ye have often foiled your great adversary.

[1 John 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jo1 2:15</span></span>

To you all, whether fathers, young men, or little children, I say, Love
not the world - Pursue your victory by overcoming the world. If any man
love the world - Seek happiness in visible things, he does not love God.

[1 John 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jo1 2:16</span></span>

The desire of the flesh - Of the pleasure of the outward senses, whether
of the taste, smell, or touch. The desire of the eye - Of the pleasures
of imagination, to which the eye chiefly is subservient; of that
internal sense whereby we relish whatever is grand, new, or beautiful.
The pride of life - All that pomp in clothes, houses, furniture,
equipage, manner of living, which generally procure honour from the bulk
of mankind, and so gratify pride and vanity. It therefore directly
includes the desire of praise, and, remotely, covetousness. All these
desires are not from God, but from the prince of this world.

[1 John 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jo1 2:17</span></span>

The world passeth away, and the desire thereof - That is, all that can
gratify those desires passeth away with it. But he that doeth the will
of God - That loves God, not the world. Abideth - In the enjoyment of
what he loves, for ever.

[1 John 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jo1 2:18</span></span>

My little children, it is the last time - The last dispensation of
grace, that which is to continue to the end of time, is begun. Ye have
heard that antichrist cometh - Under the term antichrist, or the spirit
of antichrist, he includes all false teachers and enemies to the truth;
yea, whatever doctrines or men are contrary to Christ. It seems to have
been long after this that the name of antichrist was appropriated to
that grand adversary of Christ, "the man of sin," [Th2
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003) Antichrist, in St. John's sense,
that is, antichristianism, has been spreading from his time till now;
and will do so, till that great adversary arises, and is destroyed by
Christ's coming.

[1 John 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jo1 2:19</span></span>

They were not of us - When they went; their hearts were before departed
from God, otherwise, they would have continued with us: but they went
out, that they might be made manifest - That is, this was made manifest
by their going out.

[1 John 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jo1 2:20</span></span>

But ye have an anointing - A chrism; perhaps so termed in opposition to
the name of antichrist; an inward teaching from the Holy Ghost, whereby
ye know all things - Necessary for your preservation from these
seducers, and for your eternal salvation. St. John here but just touches
upon the Holy Ghost, of whom he speaks more largely, [Jo1
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#024); [Jo1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#013); [Jo1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#006).

[1 John 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jo1 2:21</span></span>

I have written - Namely, [Jo1 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#013). To
you because ye know the truth - That is, to confirm you in the knowledge
ye have already. Ye know that no lie is of the truth - That all the
doctrines of these antichrists are irreconcilable to it.

[1 John 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jo1 2:22</span></span>

Who is that liar - Who is guilty of that lying, but he who denies that
truth which is the sum of all Christianity? That Jesus is the Christ;
that he is the Son of God; that he came in the flesh, is one undivided
truth. and he that denies any part of this, in effect denies the whole.
He is antichrist - And the spirit of antichrist, who in denying the Son
denies the Father also.

[1 John 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jo1 2:23</span></span>

Whosoever denieth the eternal Son of God, he hath not communion with the
Father; but he that truly and believingly acknowledgeth the Son, hath
communion with the Father also.

[1 John 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jo1 2:24</span></span>

If that truth concerning the Father and the Son, which ye have heard
from the beginning, abide fixed and rooted in you, ye also shall abide
in that happy communion with the Son and the Father.

[1 John 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jo1 2:25</span></span>

He - The Son. Hath promised us - If we abide in him.

[1 John 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jo1 2:26</span></span>

These things - From [Jo1 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#021). I have
written to you - St. John, according to his custom, begins and ends with
the same form, and having finished a kind of parenthesis, [Jo1
2:20-26](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#020), continues, [Jo1
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027), what he said in [Jo1
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#020), concerning them that would
seduce you.

[1 John 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jo1 2:27</span></span>

Ye need not that any should teach you, save as that anointing teacheth
you - Which is always the same, always consistent with itself. But this
does not exclude our need of being taught by them who partake of the
same anointing. Of all things - Which it is necessary for you to know.
And is no lie - Like that which antichrist teaches. Ye shall abide in
him - This is added both by way of comfort and of exhortation. The whole
discourse, [Jo1 2:18-27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018) is peculiarly
adapted to little children.

[1 John 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jo1 2:28</span></span>

And now, beloved children - Having finished his address to each, he now
returns to all in general. Abide in him, that we - A modest expression.
May not be ashamed before him at his coming - O how will ye, Jews,
Socinians, nominal Christians, be ashamed in that day!

[1 John 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jo1 2:29</span></span>

Every one - And none else. Who practiseth righteousness - From a
believing, loving heart. Is born of him - For all his children are like
himself.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Chapter 3](jo1003)

</div>
