<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job027)  [Next](job029.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#001.md)

[Job 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 28:1</span></span>

Surely - Job having in the last chapter discoursed of God's various
providences toward wicked men, and shewed that God doth sometimes, for a
season, give them prosperity, but afterwards calls them to a sad
account, and having shewed that God doth sometimes prosper the wicked
all their days, so they live and die without any visible token of God's
displeasure, when on the contrary, good men are exercised with many
calamities; and perceiving that his friends were, scandalized at these
methods of Divine providence, and denied the thing, because they could
not understand the reason of such dispensations: in this chapter he
declares that this is one of the depths of Divine wisdom, not
discoverable by any mortal man, and that although men had some degree of
wisdom whereby they could search out many hidden things, as the veins of
silver, and gold, yet this was a wisdom of an higher nature, and out of
man's reach. The caverns of the earth he may discover, but not the
counsels of heaven.

[Job 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 28:3</span></span>

Perfection - Whatever is deeply wrought in the deepest caverns. Stones
of darkness - The precious stones which lie hid in the dark bowels of
the earth, where no living thing can dwell.

[Job 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 28:4</span></span>

Breaketh out - While men are searching, water breaks in upon them.
Inhabitants - Out of that part of the earth which the miners inhabit.
Forgotten - Untrodden by the foot of man. Dried up - They are dried up,
(or, drawn up, by engines made for that purpose) from men, from the
miners, that they may not be hindered in their work.

[Job 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 28:5</span></span>

Fire - Coals, and brimstone, and other materials of fire. Unless this
refer, as some suppose, to a central fire.

[Job 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 28:6</span></span>

Sapphires - Of precious stones; the sapphire, is one of the most
eminent, being put for all the rest. In some parts of the earth, the
sapphires are mixed with stones, and cut out of them and polished. Hath
- The earth continueth. Dust - Distinct from that gold which is found in
the mass, both sorts of gold being found in the earth.

[Job 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 28:7</span></span>

A path - In the bowels of the earth. Vulture's eye - Whose eye is very
quick, and strong, and searcheth all places for its prey.

[Job 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 28:8</span></span>

Lion - Which rangeth all places for prey. The birds and beasts have
often led men to such places as otherwise they should never have found
out; but they could not lead them to these mines, the finding out of
them is a special gift of God.

[Job 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 28:9</span></span>

He, &c. - This and the two next verses mention other eminent works of
God, who overturneth rocks, and produceth new rivers.

[Job 28:10](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 28:10</span></span>

Seeth - Even those which no human art or industry was ever able to
discover.

[Job 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 28:12</span></span>

That wisdom - Man hath one kind of wisdom, to discover the works of
nature, and to perform the operations of art; but as for that sublime
wisdom which consists in the knowledge of God and ourselves, no man can
discover this, but by the special gift of Cod.

[Job 28:13](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 28:13</span></span>

Found - Among men upon earth, but only among those blessed spirits that
dwell above.

[Job 28:14](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 28:14</span></span>

The depth - This is not to he found in any part of the sea, though a man
may dig or dive ever so deep to find it, nor to be learned from any
creature.

[Job 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 28:20</span></span>

Whence, &c. - By a diligent inquiry, we find at length, that there is a
twofold wisdom; one hid in God, which belongs not to us, the other
revealed to man, which belongs to us and to our children.

[Job 28:21](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 28:21</span></span>

Hid - The line and plummet of human reason, can never fathom the abyss
of the Divine counsels. Who can account for the maxims, measures and
methods of God's government? Let us then be content, not to know the
future events of providence, 'till time discover them: and not to know
the secret reasons of providence, 'till eternity brings them to light.

[Job 28:22](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 28:22</span></span>

Death - The grave, the place of the dead, to 'which these things are
here ascribed, as they are to the depths, and to the sea, by a common
figure. Though they cannot give an account of it themselves yet there is
a world, on which these dark regions border, where we shall see it
clearly. Have patience, says death: I will fetch thee shortly to a place
where even this wisdom shall be found. When the veil of flesh is rent,
and the interposing clouds are scattered, we shall know what God doth,
though we know not now.

[Job 28:23](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 28:23</span></span>

God - God alone. The way - The methods which he takes in the management
of all affairs, together with its grounds and ends in them. The place -
Where it dwells, which is only in his own mind.

[Job 28:24](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 28:24</span></span>

For - He, and he only knows it, because his providence, is infinite and
universal, reaching to all places, and times, past, present, and to
come; whereas the most knowing men have narrow understandings, and the
wisdom, and justice, and beauty of God's works are not fully seen 'till
all the parts of them be laid together.

[Job 28:25](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 28:25</span></span>

Winds - God manageth them all by weight, appointing to every wind that
blows, its season, its proportion, its bounds, when, and where, and how
much, and how long each shall blow. He only doth all these things, and
he only knows why he doth them. He instanceth in some few of God's
works, and those which seem to be most trivial, and uncertain, that
thereby he might more strongly imply that God doth the same in other
things which are more considerable, that he doth all things in the most
exact order, and weight, and measure. The waters - Namely, the rain -
waters, which God layeth up in his store - houses, the clouds, and
thence draws them forth, and sends them down upon the earth in such
times and proportions as he thinks fit. Measure - For liquid things are
examined by measure, as other things are by weight: and here is both
weight and measure to signify with what perfect wisdom God governs the
world.

[Job 28:26](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 28:26</span></span>

When - At the first creation, when he settled that course and order
which should he continued. A decree - An appointment and as it were a
statute law, that it should fall upon the earth, in such times, and
places, and proportions.

[Job 28:27](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 28:27</span></span>

It - Wisdom, which is the subject of the present discourse. This God saw
within himself; he looked upon it in his own mind, as the rule by which
he would proceed in the creation and government of all things. Declare -
Or reveal it. Prepared - He had it in readiness for doing all his works,
as if he had been for a long time preparing materials for them. So it is
a speech of God after the manner of men. Searched - Not properly; for so
searching implies ignorance, and requires time and industry, all which
is repugnant to the Divine perfections; but figuratively, he did, and
doth, all things with that absolute and perfect wisdom, so exactly, and
perfectly, as if he had bestowed a long time in searching, to find them
out.

[Job 28:28](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">job 28:28</span></span>

Man - Unto Adam in the day in which he was created. And in him, to all
his posterity. Said - God spake it, at first to the mind of man, in
which he wrote this with his own finger, and afterwards by the holy
patriarchs, and prophets, and other teachers, whom he sent into the
world to teach men true wisdom. Behold - Which expression denotes the
great importance of this doctrine, and withal man's backwardness to
apprehend it. The fear of the Lord - True religion. Wisdom - In man's
wisdom, because that, and that only, is his duty, and safety, and
happiness, both for this life and for the next. Evil - From sin, which
is called evil eminently, as being the chief evil, and the cause of all
other evils. Religion consists of two branches, doing good, and
forsaking evil; the former is expressed in the former clause of this
verse, and the latter in these words; and this is the best kind of
knowledge or wisdom to which man can attain in this life. The design of
Job in this close of his discourse, is not to reprove the boldness of
his friends, in prying into God's secrets, and passing such a rash
censure upon him, and upon God's carriage towards him; but also to
vindicate himself from the imputation of hypocrisy, which they fastened
upon him, by shewing that he had ever esteemed it to be his best wisdom,
to fear God, and to depart from evil.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 29](job029.md)

</div>
