<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job037)  [Next](job039.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 38](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#001.md)

[Job 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 38:1</span></span>

Lord - The eternal word, Jehovah, the same who spake from mount Sinai.
Answered - Out of a dark and thick cloud, from which he sent a
tempestuous wind, as the harbinger of his presence. In this manner God
appears and speaks to awaken Job and his friends, to the more serious
attention to his words; and to testify his displeasure both against Job,
and them, that all of them might be more deeply humbled and prepared to
receive, and retain the instructions which God was about to give them.

[Job 38:2](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 38:2</span></span>

Counsel - God's counsel. For the great matter of the dispute between Job
and his friends, was concerning God's counsel and providence in
afflicting Job; which Job had endeavoured to obscure and misrepresent.
This first word which God spoke, struck Job to the heart. This he
repeats and echoes to, [Job 42:3](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#003.md), as
the arrow that stuck fast in him.

[Job 38:3](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 38:3</span></span>

Gird up - As warriors then did for the battle.

[Job 38:4](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 38:4</span></span>

Where - Thou art but of yesterday; and dost thou presume to judge of my
eternal counsels! When - When I settled it as firm upon its own center
as if it had been built upon the surest foundations.

[Job 38:5](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 38:5</span></span>

Measures - Who hath prescribed how long and broad and deep it should be.
Line - the measuring line to regulate all its dimensions.

[Job 38:6](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 38:6</span></span>

Foundations - This strong and durable building hath no foundations but
God's power, which hath marvelously established it upon itself.
Cornerstone - By which the several walls are joined and fastened
together, and in which, next to the foundations, the stability of a
building consists. The sense is, who was it that built this goodly
fabrick, and established it so firmly that it cannot be moved.

[Job 38:7](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 38:7</span></span>

Stars - The angels, who may well be called morning - stars, because of
their excellent lustre and glory. Sons of God - The angels called the
sons of God, because they had their whole being from him, and because
they were made partakers of his Divine and glorious image. Shouted -
Rejoiced in and blessed God for his works, whereby he intimates, that
they neither did advise or any way assist him, nor dislike or censure
any of his works, as Job had presumed to do.

[Job 38:8](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 38:8</span></span>

Doors - Who was it, that set bounds to the vast and raging ocean, and
shut it up, as it were with doors within its proper place, that it might
not overflow the earth? Break forth - From the womb or bowels of the
earth, within which the waters were for the most part contained, and out
of which they were by God's command brought forth into the channel which
God had appointed for them.

[Job 38:9](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 38:9</span></span>

The cloud - When I covered it with vapours and clouds which rise out of
the sea, and hover above it, and cover it like a garment. Darkness -
Black and dark clouds. Swaddling band - Having compared the sea to a new
- born infant, he continues the metaphor, and makes the clouds as
swaddling - bands, to keep it within its bounds: though indeed neither
clouds, nor air, nor sands, nor shores, can bound the sea, but God
alone.

[Job 38:10](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 38:10</span></span>

Break up - Made those hollow places in the earth, which might serve for
a cradle to receive and hold this great and goodly infant when it came
out of the womb. And set - Fixed its bounds as strongly as if they were
fortified with bars and doors.

[Job 38:12](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 38:12</span></span>

Morning - Didst thou create the sun, and appoint the order and
succession of day and night. Since - Since thou wast born: this work was
done long before thou wast born. To know - To observe the punctual time
when, and the point of the heavens where it should arise; which varies
every day.

[Job 38:13](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 38:13</span></span>

That - That this morning light should in a moment spread itself, from
one end of the hemisphere to the other. Shaken - From the face of the
earth. And this effect the morning - light hath upon the wicked, because
it discovers them, whereas darkness hides them; and because it brings
them to condign punishment, the morning being the usual time for
executing judgment.

[Job 38:14](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 38:14</span></span>

It - The earth. Turned - Is changed in its appearance. By the seal - The
seal makes a beautiful impression upon the clay, which in itself hath no
form, or comeliness. So the earth, which in the darkness of night lies
like a confused heap without either form or beauty, when the light
arises and shines upon it, appears in excellent order and glory. They -
The men and things of the earth, whether natural, as living creatures,
herbs and trees; or artificial, as houses or other buildings. Stand -
Present themselves to our view. Garment - Wherewith the earth is in a
manner clothed and adorned.

[Job 38:15](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 38:15</span></span>

Withheld - That light which enjoyed by others is withholden from them,
either by their own choice, because they chuse darkness rather than
light; or by the judgment of God, or the magistrate, by whom they are
cut off from the light of the living. Arms - Their great strength which
they used to the oppression of others.

[Job 38:16](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 38:16</span></span>

Springs - Heb. the tears; the several springs out of which the waters of
the sea flow as tears do from the eyes. Walked - Hast thou found out the
utmost depth of the sea, which in divers places could never be reached
by the wisest mariner? And how then canst thou fathom the depths of my
counsels?

[Job 38:17](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 38:17</span></span>

Death - Hast thou seen, or dost thou know the place and state of the
dead; the depths and bowels of that earth in which the generality of
dead men are buried. Death is a grand secret? We know not when or by
what means we shall be brought to death: by what road we must go the
way, whence we shall not return. We cannot describe what death is; how
the knot is untied between soul and body, or how the spirit goes "To be
we know not what, and live we know not how." With what dreadful
curiosity does the soul launch out into an untried abyss? We have no
correspondence with separate souls, nor any acquaintance with their
state. It is an unknown, undiscovered region, to which they are removed.
While we are here in a world of sense, we speak of the world of spirits,
as blind men do of colours, and when we remove thither, shall be amazed
to find how much we were mistaken.

[Job 38:18](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 38:18</span></span>

Breadth - The whole compass and all the parts of it?

[Job 38:19](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 38:19</span></span>

Dwelleth - Hath its constant and settled abode. Whether goes the sun
when it departs from this hemisphere? Where is the tabernacle and the
chamber in which he is supposed to rest? And seeing there was a time
when there was nothing but gross darkness upon the face of the earth,
what way came light into the world? Which was the place where light
dwelt at that time, and whence was it fetched? And whence came that
orderly constitution and constant succession of light and darkness? Was
this thy work? Or wast thou privy to it, or a counsellor, or assistant
in it?

[Job 38:20](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 38:20</span></span>

Take it - Bring or lead it: and this it refers principally to the light,
and to darkness, as the consequent of the other. Bound - Its whole
course from the place of its abode whence it is supposed to come, to the
end of its journey. Know - Where thou mayst find it, and whence thou
mayst fetch it.

[Job 38:22](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 38:22</span></span>

Treasures - Dost thou know where I have laid up those vast quantities of
snow and hail which I draw forth when I see fit?

[Job 38:23](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 38:23</span></span>

Trouble - When I intend to bring trouble upon any people for their sins.

[Job 38:24](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 38:24</span></span>

Distributed - In the air, and upon the face of the earth. This is
variously distributed in the world, shining in one place and time, when
it doth not shine in another, or for a longer time, or with greater
brightness and power than it doth in another. All which are the effects
of God's infinite wisdom and power, and such as were out of Job's reach
to understand. Which - Which light scattereth, raises the east - wind,
and causes it to blow hither and thither upon the earth? For as the sun
is called by the poets, the father of the winds, because he draws up
those exhalations which give matter to the winds, so in particular the
east - wind is often observed to rise together with the sun.

[Job 38:25](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 38:25</span></span>

Overflowing - For the showers of rain which come down orderly, and
gradually, as if they were conveyed in pipes or channels; which, without
the care of God's providence, would fall confusedly, and overwhelm the
earth. Lightning - For lightning and thunder? Who opened a passage for
them out of the cloud in which they were imprisoned? And these are
joined with the rain, because they are commonly accompanied with great
showers of rain.

[Job 38:26](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 38:26</span></span>

To cause - That the clouds being broken by lightning and thunder might
pour down rain. No man - To water those parts by art and industry, as is
usual in cultivated places.

[Job 38:27](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 38:27</span></span>

To bring forth - Hitherto God has put such questions to Job, as were
proper to convince him of his ignorance. Now he comes to convince him of
his impotence. As it is but little that he can know, and therefore he
ought not to arraign the Divine counsels, so it is but little he can do;
and therefore he ought not to oppose Divine providence.

[Job 38:28](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">job 38:28</span></span>

Father - Is there any man that can beget or produce rain at his
pleasure?

[Job 38:31](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">job 38:31</span></span>

Bind - Restrain or hinder them. Pleiades - The seven stars, which bring
in the spring. Bands - By which it binds up the air and earth, by
bringing storms of rain and hail or frost and snow. Orion - This
constellation rises in November, and brings in winter. Both summer and
winter will have their course? God indeed can change them when he
pleases, can make the spring cold, and so bind the influences of
Pleiades, and the winter warm, and so loose the bands of Orion; but we
cannot.

[Job 38:32](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">job 38:32</span></span>

Bring forth - Canst thou make the stars in the southern signs arise and
appear? Arcturus - Those in the northern. His sons - The lesser stars,
which are placed round about them; and attend upon them, as children
upon their parents.

[Job 38:33](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">job 38:33</span></span>

Ordinances - The laws which are firmly established concerning their
order, motion, or rest, and their powerful influences upon this lower
world. Didst thou give these laws? Or dost thou perfectly know them?
Canst thou - Manage and over rule their influences.

[Job 38:34](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">job 38:34</span></span>

Cover thee - Thy land when it needs rain.

[Job 38:38](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">job 38:38</span></span>

Mire - By reason of much rain.

[Job 38:39](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">job 38:39</span></span>

Hunt - Is it by thy care that the lions who live in desert places are
furnished with necessary provisions? This is another wonderful work of
God.

[Job 38:41](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">job 38:41</span></span>

Raven - Having mentioned the noblest of brute creatures, he now mentions
one of the most contemptible; to shew the care of God's providence over
all creatures, both great and small. Their young ones are so soon
forsaken by their dams, that if God did not provide for them in a more
than ordinary manner, they would be starved to death. And will he that
provides for the young ravens, fail to provide for his own children.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 39](job039.md)

</div>
