<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job004)  [Next](job006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#001)

[Job 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 5:1</span></span>

Call - Call them all as it were by their names: will not every good man
confirm what I say? If - Try if there be any one saint that will defend
thee in these bold expostulations with God. Thou mayst find fools or
wicked men, to do it: but not one of the children of God.

[Job 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 5:2</span></span>

Killeth - A man's wrath, and impatience, preys upon his spirit, and so
hastens his death; and provokes God to cut him off. The foolish - The
rash and inconsiderate man, who does not weigh things impartially. Envy,
&c. - I perceive thou art full of envy at wicked men, who seem to be in
a happier condition than thou, and of wrath against God; and this shews
thee to be a foolish and weak man. For those men, notwithstanding their
present prosperity, are doomed to great and certain misery. I have
myself seen the proof of this.

[Job 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 5:3</span></span>

Foolish - The wicked man. Root - Not only prosperous for the present,
but, as it seemed, firm and secure for the future. Suddenly - In a
moment, beyond mine, and his own, and all other mens expectation. Cursed
- l saw by the event which followed his prosperity, that he was a man
accursed of God.

[Job 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 5:4</span></span>

Children - Whose greatness he designed in all his enterprizes, supposing
his family would be established for ever. Safely - Are exposed to
dangers and calamities, and can neither preserve themselves, nor the
inheritance which their fathers left them. There is no question but he
glances here, at the death of Job's children.

[Job 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 5:5</span></span>

Harvest - Which they confidently expect to reap after all their cost and
labour, but are sadly and suddenly disappointed. The hungry - The hungry
Sabeans eat it up. Thorns - Out of the fields: in spite of all dangers
or difficulties in their way.

[Job 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 5:6</span></span>

The dust - It springs not up by merely natural causes, as herbs grow out
of the earth: but from God. Eliphaz here begins to change his voice, as
if he would atone for the hard words he had spoken.

[Job 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 5:7</span></span>

Is born - He is so commonly exposed to various troubles, as if he were
born to no other end: affliction is become natural to man, and is
transmitted from parents, to children, as their constant inheritance;
God having allotted this portion to mankind for their sins. And
therefore thou takest a wrong course in complaining so bitterly of that
which thou shouldest patiently bear, as the common lot of mankind. As -
As naturally, and as generally, as the sparks of fire fly upward. Why
then should we be surprized at our afflictions as strange, or quarrel
with them, as hard?

[Job 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 5:8</span></span>

I would - If I were in thy condition. Seek - By prayer, and humiliation,
and submission, imploring his pardon, and favour.

[Job 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 5:9</span></span>

Who, &c. - Here Eliphaz enters upon a discourse of the infinite
perfection of God's nature and works; which he doth as an argument to
enforce the exhortation to seek and commit his cause to God, [Job
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#008), because God was infinitely able
either to punish him yet far worse, if he continued to provoke him; or
to raise him from the dust, if he humbly addressed himself to him: and
that by a representation of God's excellency and glory, and of that vast
disproportion which was between God and Job, he might convince Job of
his great sin in speaking so boldly and irreverently of him. Marvellous
- Which (though common, and therefore neglected and despised, yet) are
matter of wonder to the wisest men. The works of nature are mysteries:
the most curious searches come far short of full discoveries: and the
works of Providence are still more deep and unaccountable.

[Job 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 5:10</span></span>

Rain - He begins with this ordinary work of God, in which he implies
that there is something wonderful, as indeed there is in the rise of it
from the earth, in the strange hanging of that heavy body in the air,
and in the distribution of it as God sees fit; and how much more in the
hidden paths of Divine Providence?

[Job 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 5:11</span></span>

To set up - That is, he setteth up. Another example of God's great and
wonderful works. He gives this instance to comfort and encourage Job to
seek to God, because he can raise him out of his greatest depths.

[Job 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 5:13</span></span>

The wise - Men wise to do evil, and wise in the opinion of the world, he
not only deceives in their hopes and counsels, but turns them against
themselves. Froward - Or, wrestlers: such as wind and turn every way, as
wrestlers do, and will leave no means untried to accomplish their
counsels. Is carried - Is tumbled down and broken, and that by their own
precipitation.

[Job 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 5:14</span></span>

Meet - In plain things they run into gross mistakes, and chuse those
courses which are worst for themselves. Darkness often notes misery, but
here ignorance or error. Grope - Like blind men to find their way, not
knowing what to do.

[Job 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 5:15</span></span>

Mouth - Which was ready to swallow them up.

[Job 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 5:16</span></span>

So - So he obtains what he hoped for from God, to whom he committed his
cause. Iniquity - Wicked men. Stoppeth - They are silenced and
confounded, finding that not only the poor are got out of their snares,
but the oppressors themselves are ensnared in them.

[Job 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 5:17</span></span>

Behold - Eliphaz concludes his discourse, with giving Job a comfortable
hope, if he humbled himself before God. Happy - Heb. Blessednesses
(various and great happiness) belong to that man whom God rebukes. The
reason is plain, because afflictions are pledges of God's love, which no
man can buy too dear; and are necessary to purge out sin, and thereby to
prevent infinite and eternal miseries. Without respect to this, the
proposition could not be true. And therefore it plainly shews, that good
men in those ancient times, had the belief, and hope of everlasting
blessedness. Despise not - Do not abhor it as a thing pernicious, refuse
it as a thing useless, or slight it as an unnecessary thing. But more is
designed than is exprest. Reverence the chastening of the Lord: have an
humble, aweful regard to his correcting hand, and study to answer the
design of it. The Almighty - Who is able to support and comfort thee in
thy troubles, and deliver thee out of them: and also to add more
calamities to them, if thou art obstinate and incorrigible.

[Job 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 5:18</span></span>

For he, &c. - God's usual method is, first to humble, and then to exalt.
And he never makes a wound too great, too deep for his own cure.

[Job 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 5:19</span></span>

Deliver - If thou seekest to him by prayer and repentance. Here he
applies himself to Job directly. Six - Manifold and repeated. Touch - So
as to destroy thee. Thou shalt have a good issue out of all thy
troubles, though they are both great and many.

[Job 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 5:20</span></span>

He shall - These things he utters with more confidence, because the
rewards or punishments of this life, were more constantly distributed to
men in the Old Testament according to their good or bad behaviour, than
they are now: and because it was his opinion, that great afflictions
were the certain evidences of wickedness; and consequently, that great
deliverances would infallibly follow upon true repentance.

[Job 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 5:22</span></span>

Laugh - With a laughter of joy and triumph, arising from a just security
and confidence in God's watchful and gracious providence.

[Job 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 5:23</span></span>

League - Thou shalt be free from annoyance thereby, as if they had made
an inviolable league with thee. This is a bold metaphor, but such as are
frequent both in scripture and other authors. This is an addition to the
former privilege; they shall not hurt thee, [Job
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#022), nay, they shall befriend thee,
as being at peace with thee. Our covenant with God is a covenant with
all the creatures, that they shall do us no hurt, but serve and be ready
to do us good.

[Job 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 5:24</span></span>

Know - By certain experience.

[Job 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 5:25</span></span>

Know - By assurance from God's promises, and the impressions of his
Spirit; and by experience in due time.

[Job 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 5:26</span></span>

Full age - In a mature and old, but vigorous age, as the word implies.
It is a great blessing, to live to a full age, and not to have the
number of our years cut short. Much more, to be willing to die, to come
chearfully to the grave: and to die seasonably, just in the bed - time,
when our souls are ripe for God.

[Job 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 5:27</span></span>

Searched - This is no rash or hasty conceit, but what both I and my
brethren have learned by deep consideration, long experience, and
diligent observation. Know thou - Know it for thyself; (So the word is)
with application to thy own case. That which we thus hear and know for
ourselves, we hear and know for our good.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 6](job006)

</div>
