<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job041)  [Next](psa001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 42](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#001.md)

[Job 42:2](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 42:2</span></span>

Thou canst, &c. - Job here subscribes to God's unlimited power,
knowledge and dominion, to prove which was the scope of God's discourse
out of the whirlwind. And his judgment being convinced of these, his
conscience also was convinced, of his own folly in speaking so
irreverently concerning him. No thought can be withholden from thee - No
thought of ours can be withholden from thy knowledge. And there is no
thought of thine, which thou canst be hindered from bringing into
execution.

[Job 42:3](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 42:3</span></span>

Who - What am I that I should be guilty of such madness! Therefore -
Because my mind was without knowledge. Knew not - I have spoken
foolishly and unadvisedly of all things far above my reach.

[Job 42:4](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 42:4</span></span>

Hear - Hear and accept my humble confession. Enquire - I will no more
dispute the matter with thee, but beg information from thee. The words
which God had uttered to Job by way of challenge, Job returns to him in
way of submission.

[Job 42:5](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 42:5</span></span>

Seeth thee - The knowledge which I had of thy nature, perfections and
counsels, was hitherto grounded chiefly, upon the instructions of men;
but now it is clear and certain, as being immediately inspired into my
mind by this thy glorious apparition and revelation, and by the
operation of thy holy spirit; which makes these things as evident to me,
as if I saw them with my bodily eyes. When the mind is enlightened by
the spirit of God, our knowledge of Divine things as far exceeds what we
had before, as knowledge by ocular demonstration, exceeds, that by
common fame.

[Job 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 42:7</span></span>

Eliphaz - As the eldest of the three, and because he spoke first, and by
his example led the rest into the same miscarriages. Two friends - Elihu
is not here reproved, because he dealt more mercifully with Job, and did
not condemn his person, but only rebuked his sinful expressions. Ye have
not, &c. - This is not to be understood absolutely, but comparatively.
Job was not so much to be blamed as they, because his opinion concerning
the methods of God's providence, and the indifferency of its
dispensations towards good and bad men was truer than theirs, which was,
that God did always reward good men and punish sinners in this life.

[Job 42:8](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 42:8</span></span>

My servant - Whom though you condemned as an hypocrite, I own for my
faithful servant. Offer - By the hand of Job, whom I hereby constitute
your priest to pray and sacrifice for you. Lest I deal - Lest my just
judgment take hold of you for your false and foolish speeches.

[Job 42:9](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 42:9</span></span>

Accepted Job - And as Job prayed and offered sacrifice for those who had
grieved and wounded his spirit, so Christ prayed and died for his
persecutors, and ever lives, making intercession for transgressors.

[Job 42:10](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 42:10</span></span>

Captivity - All his bodily distempers were thoroughly healed, and
probably in a moment. His mind was calmed, his peace returned, and the
consolations of God were not small with him. Prayed - Whereby he
manifests his obedience to God and his true love to them.

[Job 42:11](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 42:11</span></span>

Then - When Job had humbled himself, and God was reconciled to him.
Sisters - His kindred. Eat - Feasted with him, to congratulate with him
God's great and glorious favour. Bemoaned - They declared the sense
which they had of his calamities while they were upon him, although they
had hitherto wanted opportunity to express it.

[Job 42:12](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 42:12</span></span>

Blessed - Not only with spiritual, but also with temporal blessings.
Just double to what they were, [Job
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#003.md). This is a remarkable instance of
the extent of the Divine providence, to things that seem minute as this,
the exact number of a man's cattle; as also of the harmony of
providence, and the reference of one event to another: for known unto
God are all his works, from the beginning to the end.

[Job 42:14](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 42:14</span></span>

Jemima - The day, either because of her eminent beauty, or because she
was born in the day of his prosperity, after a dark night of affliction.
Kezia is the name of a spice of a very fragrant smell, commonly called
Cassia. Keren - happuch signifies plenty restored.

[Job 42:15](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 42:15</span></span>

So fair - In the Old Testament we often find women praised for their
beauty, but never in the New, because the beauty of holiness is brought
to a much clearer light by the gospel.

[Job 42:16](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 42:16</span></span>

After this, &c. - Some conjecture, that he was seventy when his trouble
came. If so his age was doubled, as his other possessions.

[Job 42:17](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 42:17</span></span>

Full of days - So coming to his grave, as Eliphaz had spoken, like a
ripe shock of corn in its season.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 1](psa001.md)

</div>
