<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job011)  [Next](job013.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#001.md)

[Job 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 12:2</span></span>

Ye - You have engrossed all the reason of mankind; and each of you has
as much wisdom as an whole people put together. All the wisdom which is
in the world, lives in you, and will be utterly lost when you die. When
wise and good men die, it is a comfort to think that wisdom and goodness
do not die with them: it is folly to think, that there will be a great,
irreparable loss of us when we are gone, since God has the residue of
the spirit, and can raise up others more fit to do his work.

[Job 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 12:3</span></span>

But - In these things, which he speaks not in a way of boasting, but for
the just vindication both of himself, and of that cause of God, which
for the substance of it he maintained rightly, as God himself attests,
[Job 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#007.md). Such things - The truth is,
neither you nor I have any reason to be puffed up with our knowledge of
these things: for the most barbarous nations know that God is infinite
in wisdom, and power, and justice. But this is not the question between
you and me.

[Job 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 12:4</span></span>

Upon God - Even by my religious neighbours, by those who call upon God,
and not in vain; whose prayers therefore I covet, not their reproaches.
The just - I, who, notwithstanding all their hard censures dare still
own it, that through God's grace I am an upright man.

[Job 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 12:5</span></span>

Slip with his feet - And fall into trouble; tho' he had formerly shone
as a lamp, he is then looked upon as a lamp going out, as the snuff of a
candle, which we throw to the ground and tread upon; and accordingly is
despised in the thought of him that is at ease.

[Job 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 12:6</span></span>

Are secure - Job's friends had all supposed, that wicked men cannot
prosper long in the world. This Job opposes, and maintains, that God
herein acts as sovereign, and reserves that exact distribution of
rewards and punishments for the other world.

[Job 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 12:7</span></span>

But - If thou observest the beasts, and their properties and actions,
and events, from them thou mayst learn this lesson: that which Zophar
had uttered with so much pomp and gravity, [Job
11:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#007.md), concerning God's infinite
wisdom, saith Job, thou needest not go into heaven or hell to know. but
thou mayst learn it even from the beasts.

[Job 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 12:9</span></span>

Lord - This is the only time that we meet with the name Jehovah in all
the discourses between Job and his friends. For God in that age was more
known by the name of Shaddai, the Almighty.

[Job 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 12:11</span></span>

Doth not - This may be a preface to his following discourse; whereby he
invites them to hear and judge of his words candidly and impartially;
that they and he too might agree in disallowing what should appear to be
false, and owning of every truth.

[Job 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 12:12</span></span>

Wisdom - These words contain a concession of what Bildad had said, [Job
8:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#008.md), and a joining with him in that
appeal; but withal, an intimation that this wisdom was but imperfect,
and liable to many mistakes; and indeed mere ignorance and folly, if
compared with the Divine wisdom, and therefore that antiquity ought not
to be received against the truths of the most wise God.

[Job 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 12:14</span></span>

No opening - Without God's permission. Yea, he shuts up in the grave,
and none can break open those sealed doors. He shuts up in hell, in
chains of darkness, and none can pass that great gulf.

[Job 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 12:15</span></span>

The waters - Which are reserved its the clouds, that they may not fall
upon the earth. They - The waters upon the earth, springs, and brooks,
and rivers. As at the time of the general deluge, to which here is a
manifest allusion.

[Job 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 12:16</span></span>

With him - The same thing he had said before, [Job
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#013.md), but he repeats it here to
prepare the way for the following events, which are eminent instances,
both of his power and wisdom. Are his - Wholly subject to his disposal.
He governs the deceiver and sets bounds to his deceits, how far they
shall extend; he also over - rules all this to his own glory, and the
accomplishment of his righteous designs of trying the good, and
punishing wicked men, by giving them up to believe lies. Yet God is not
the author of any error or sin, but only the wise and holy governor of
it.

[Job 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 12:17</span></span>

Spoiled - The wise counsellors or statesmen, by whom the affairs of
kings and kingdoms are ordered, he leadeth away as captives in triumph,
being spoiled either of that wisdom which they had, or seemed to have;
or of that power and dignity which they had enjoyed. Fools - By
discovering their folly, and by infatuating their minds, and turning
their own counsels to their ruin.

[Job 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 12:18</span></span>

Looseth - He freeth them from that wherewith they bind their subjects to
obedience, their power and authority, and that majesty which God stamps
upon kings, to keep their people in awe. Girdeth - He reduces them to a
mean and servile condition; which is thus expressed, because servants
did use to gird up their garments (that after the manner of those parts
were loose and long) that they might be fitter for attendance upon their
masters: he not only deposes them from their thrones, but brings them
into slavery.

[Job 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 12:20</span></span>

The speech - By taking away or restraining the gift of utterance from
them. Or, by taking away their understanding which should direct their
speech. Trusty - Of those wise and experienced counsellors, that were
trusted by the greatest princes.

[Job 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 12:22</span></span>

Darkness - The most secret counsels of princes, which are contrived and
carried on in the dark.

[Job 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 12:23</span></span>

Nations - What hitherto he said of princes, he now applies to nations,
whom God does either increase or diminish as he pleases.

[Job 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 12:25</span></span>

Grope - Thus are the revolutions of kingdoms brought about by an
overruling providence. Heaven and earth are shaken: but the Lord
remaineth a king forever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 13](job013.md)

</div>
