<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job009)  [Next](job011.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#001.md)

[Job 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 10:1</span></span>

Shall I - Shall I give over complaining?

[Job 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 10:2</span></span>

Condemn - Or, pronounce me not to be a wicked man, neither deal with me
as such, as I confess thou mightest do in rigorous justice: O discover
my integrity by removing this stroke, for which my friends condemn me.
Wherefore - For what ends and reasons, and for what sins; for I am not
conscious to myself of any peculiar sins by which I have deserved to be
made the most miserable of all men. When God afflicts, he contends with
us: when he contends with us, there is always a reason for it. And it is
desirable to know, what that reason is, that we may forsake whatever he
has a controversy with us for.

[Job 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 10:3</span></span>

Good - Dost thou take any pleasure in it? Far be it from Job, to think
that God did him wrong. But he is at a loss to reconcile his providences
with his justice. And so other good men have often been, and will be,
until the day shall declare it.

[Job 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 10:4</span></span>

Eyes of faith - No. Eyes of flesh cannot see in the dark: but darkness
hideth not from God. Eyes of flesh are but in one place at a time, and
can see but a little way. But the eyes of the Lord are in every place,
and run to and fro thro' the whole earth. Eyes of flesh will shortly be
darkened by age, and shut up by death. But the eyes of God are ever the
same, nor does his sight ever decay. As man - Man sees the outside only,
and judges by appearances: but thou seest mine heart.

[Job 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 10:5</span></span>

Man's - Man's time is short and uncertain, and therefore he must improve
it, and diligently search out the crimes of malefactors, lest by death
he lose the opportunity of doing justice: but thou art eternal, and
seest at one view all mens hearts, and all their actions present and to
come; and therefore thou dost not need to proceed with me in this
manner, by making so long a scrutiny into my heart and life.

[Job 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 10:6</span></span>

Searchest - Keeping me so long upon the rack, to compel me to accuse
myself.

[Job 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 10:7</span></span>

Wicked - An hypocrite, as my friends account me. Deliver - But thou art
the supreme ruler of the world; therefore I must wait thy time, and
throw myself on thy mercy, in submission to thy sovereign will.

[Job 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 10:9</span></span>

Clay - As a potter makes a vessel of clay; so this may note both the
frailty of man's nature, which of itself decays and perishes, and doth
not need such violent shocks to overthrow it; and the excellency of the
Divine artifice commended from the meanness of the materials; which is
an argument why God should not destroy it. Again - I must die by the
course of nature, and therefore while I do live, give me some ease and
comfort.

[Job 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 10:10</span></span>

As milk - Thus he modestly and accurately describes God's admirable work
in making man out of a small and liquid, and as it were milky substance,
by degrees congealed and condensed into that exquisite frame of man's
body.

[Job 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 10:11</span></span>

Clothed - Covered my inward and more noble parts; which are first
formed. So he proceeds in describing man's formation gradually. Bones -
The stay and strength of the body; and some of them, as the skull and
ribs, enclose and defend its vital parts.

[Job 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 10:12</span></span>

Life - Thou didst not only give me a curious body, but also a reasonable
soul: thou didst at first give me life, and then maintain it in me; both
when I was in the womb (which is a marvellous work of God) and afterward
when I was unable to do anything to preserve my own life. Favour - Thou
didst not give mere life, but many other favours, such as nourishment by
the breast, education, knowledge, and instruction. Visitation - The care
of thy providence watching over me for my good, and visiting me in
mercy. Preserved - My life, which is liable to manifold dangers, if God
did not watch over us every day and moment. Thou hast hitherto done
great things for me, given me life, and the blessings of life, and daily
deliverances: and wilt thou now undo all that thou hast done? And shall
I who have been such an eminent monument of thy mercy, now be a
spectacle of thy vengeance.

[Job 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 10:13</span></span>

Hid - Both thy former favours and thy present frowns. Both are according
to thy own will, and therefore undoubtedly consistent, however they
seem. When God does what we cannot account for, we are bound to believe,
there are good reasons for it hid in his heart. It is not with us, or in
our reach to assign the cause; but I know this is with thee.

[Job 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 10:14</span></span>

Markest - If I am a wicked man, I cannot hide it from thee; and thou
wilt punish me for it.

[Job 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 10:15</span></span>

Wicked - An hypocrite, as my friends esteem me. Righteous - An upright
man; so whether good or bad, all comes to one. Yet - Yet I have no
comfort, or hopes of any good. Confusion - I am confounded within
myself, not knowing what to say or do. Let my extremity move thee to
pity, and help me.

[Job 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 10:16</span></span>

Lion - Which hunteth after his prey with great eagerness, and when he
overtakes it, falls upon it with great fury. Returnest - The lion tears
its prey speedily, and so ends its torments; but thou renewest my
calamities again and again, and makest my plagues wonderful both for
kind and extremity, and continuance.

[Job 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 10:17</span></span>

Witnesses - Thy judgments, which are the evidences both of my sins, and
of thy wrath. Indignation - My miseries are the effects of thine anger.
Army - Changes may denote the various kinds, and an army the great
number of his afflictions.

[Job 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 10:20</span></span>

Cease - My life is short, and of itself hastens to an end, there is no
need that thou shouldest grudge me some ease for so small a moment.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 11](job011.md)

</div>
