<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job005)  [Next](job007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#001.md)

[Job 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 6:2</span></span>

My grief - The cause of my grief. Weighed - Were fully understood, and
duly considered. O that I had an equal judge! that would understand my
case, and consider whether I have not cause for complaints. Together -
Together with any other most heavy thing to be put into the other scale.

[Job 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 6:3</span></span>

Sea - Which is heavier than dry sand. Swallowed - My voice and spirit
fail me. I cannot find, or utter words sufficient to express my sorrow
or misery.

[Job 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 6:4</span></span>

Arrows - So he fitly calls his afflictions, because, like arrows, they
came upon him swiftly and suddenly one after another, immediately shot
by God into his spirit. Poison - Implying that these arrows were more
keen than ordinary, being dipped in God's wrath, as the barbarous
nations used to dip their arrows in poison, that they might not only
pierce, but burn up and consume the vital parts. Drinketh - Exhausteth
and consumeth my soul. In array - They are like a numerous army, who
invade me on every side. This was the sorest part of his calamity,
wherein he was an eminent type of Christ, who complained most of the
sufferings of his soul. Now is my soul troubled. My soul is exceeding
sorrowful. My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Indeed trouble of
mind is the sorest trouble. A wounded spirit who can bear.

[Job 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 6:5</span></span>

Doth, &c. - Even the brute beasts, when they have convenient food, are
quiet and contented. So it is no wonder that you complain not, who live
in ease and prosperity, any more than I did, when I wanted nothing.

[Job 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 6:6</span></span>

Can, &c. - Do men use to eat unsavoury meats with delight, or without
complaint? Men commonly complain of their meat when it is but unsavoury,
how much more when it is so bitter as mine is?

[Job 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 6:7</span></span>

The things, &c. - The sense may be, those grievous afflictions, which I
dreaded the very thought of, are now my daily, though sorrowful bread.

[Job 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 6:9</span></span>

Destroy - To end my days and calamities together.

[Job 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 6:10</span></span>

Harden - I would bear up with courage under all my torments, with the
hopes of death, and blessedness after death. Spare - Not suffer me to
live any longer. Concealed - As I have steadfastly believed them, and
not wilfully departed from them, so I have not been ashamed, nor afraid,
boldly to profess and preach the true religion in the midst of Heathens.
And therefore I know if God doth cut me off, I shall be a gainer by it.

[Job 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 6:11</span></span>

Strength - My strength is so spent, that it is vain for me to hope for
such restitution as thou hast promised me, [Job
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#022.md). End - What is death to me? It is
not terrible, but comfortable. That - Then why should I desire to
prolong my life. But as desirous of death as Job was, yet he never
offered to put an end to his own life. Such a thought will never be
entertained by any, that have the least regard to the law of God and
nature. How uneasy soever the soul's confinement in the body may be, it
must by no means break the prison, but wait for a fair discharge.

[Job 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 6:12</span></span>

Is, &c. - I am not made of stone or brass, but of flesh and blood, as
others are, therefore I am unable to endure these miseries longer, and
can neither hope for. nor desire the continuance of my life.

[Job 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 6:13</span></span>

What, &c. - If my outward condition be helpless and hopeless? Have I
therefore lost my understanding, cannot I judge whether it is more
desirable for me to live or to die, whether I be an hypocrite or no,
whether your words have truth and weight in them; whether you take the
right method in dealing with me?

[Job 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 6:14</span></span>

To him - Heb. to him that is melted or dissolved with affections. But.
&c. - But thou hast no pity for thy friend; a plain evidence that thou
art guilty of what thou didst charge me with, even of the want of the
fear of God. The least which those that are at ease can do for them that
are pained, is to pity them, to feel a tender concern for them, and to
sympathize with them.

[Job 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 6:15</span></span>

Brethren - Friends; for though Eliphaz only had spoken, the other two
shewed their approbation of his discourse. Deceitfully - Adding to the
afflictions which they said they came to remove. And it is no new thing,
for even brethren to deal deceitfully. It is therefore our wisdom to
cease from man. We cannot expect too little from the creature, or too
much from the creator.

[Job 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 6:16</span></span>

Which - Which in winter when the traveller neither needs nor desires it,
are full of water congealed by the frost. Snow - Under which the water
from snow, which formerly fell, and afterward was dissolved, lies hid.
So he speaks not of those brooks which are fed by a constant spring, but
of them which are filled by accidental falls of water or snow.

[Job 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 6:17</span></span>

Warm - When the weather grows milder. Hot - In the hot season, when
waters are most refreshing and necessary.

[Job 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 6:18</span></span>

Perish - They are gone out of their channel, flowing hither and thither,
'till they are quite consumed.

[Job 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 6:19</span></span>

Tema - This place and Sheba were both parts of the hot and dry country
of Arabia, in which waters were very scarce, and therefore precious and
desirable, especially to travellers. Companies - Men did not there
travel singly, as we do, but in companies for their security against
wild beasts and robbers.

[Job 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 6:20</span></span>

Hoped - They comforted themselves with the expectation of water. Ashamed
- As having deceived themselves and others. We prepare confusion for
ourselves, by our vain hopes: the reeds break under us, because we lean
upon them.

[Job 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 6:21</span></span>

Nothing - You are to me as if you had never come to me; for I have no
comfort from you. Afraid - You are shy of me, and afraid for yourselves,
lest some further plagues should come upon me, wherein you for my sake,
should be involved: or, lest I should be burdensome to you.

[Job 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 6:22</span></span>

Did I say - Give me something for my support or relief. You might have
at least given me comfortable words, when I expected nothing else from
you.

[Job 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 6:23</span></span>

Deliver - By the force of your arms, as Abraham delivered Lot. Redeem -
By price or ransom.

[Job 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 6:24</span></span>

Teach - Convince me by solid arguments. I will - I will patiently hear
and gladly receive your counsels.

[Job 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 6:25</span></span>

Forcible - The words of truth have a marvellous power. Reprove - But
there is no truth in your assertions or weight in your arguments.

[Job 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 6:26</span></span>

Words - Do you think it is sufficient to quarrel with some of my words,
without giving allowance for human infirmity, or extreme misery.
Desperate - Of a poor miserable, hopeless and helpless man. As wind -
Which pass away and are forgotten.

[Job 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 6:27</span></span>

Overwhelm - You load with censures and calumnies. Desolate - Me who am
deprived of all my children, my estate, and my friends. I spoke all I
thought, as to my friends, and you thence occasion to cast me down.

[Job 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">job 6:28</span></span>

Look - Consider my cause better than you have done, that you may give a
more righteous judgment. Evident - You will plainly discover it.

[Job 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">job 6:29</span></span>

Return - Turn from your former judgment. Iniquity - Or, there shall be
no iniquity, in my words. Righteousness - In this cause or matter
between you and me; and you will find the right to be on my side.

[Job 6:30](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">job 6:30</span></span>

Is there - Consider if there be any untruth or iniquity in what I have
already said, or shall farther speak. Taste - My judgment, which judgeth
of words and actions, as the palate doth of meats.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 7](job007.md)

</div>
