<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job018)  [Next](job020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#001)

[Job 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 19:3</span></span>

Ten - Many times. A certain number for an uncertain. Strange - That you
carry yourselves like strangers to me, and condemn me as if you had
never known my integrity.

[Job 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 19:4</span></span>

Erred - If I have sinned, I myself suffer for my sins, and therefore
deserve your pity rather than reproaches.

[Job 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 19:7</span></span>

Cry - Unto God. Wrong - That I am oppressed by my friends.

[Job 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 19:9</span></span>

Glory - Of my estate, children, authority, and all my comforts. Crown -
All my power, and laid my honour in the dust.

[Job 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 19:10</span></span>

Every side - In all respects, my person, and family, and estate. Gone -
I am a lost and dead man. Hope - All my hopes of the present life, but
not of the life to come. Tree - Which being once plucked up by the
roots, never grows again. Hope in this life is a perishing thing. But
the hope of good men, when it is cut off from this world, is but removed
like a tree, transplanted from this nursery to the garden of God.

[Job 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 19:12</span></span>

Troops - My afflictions, which are God's soldiers marching under his
conduct. Raise - Cast up a trench round about me.

[Job 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 19:13</span></span>

Estranged - As we must eye the hand of God, in all the injuries we
receive from our enemies, so likewise in all the slights and
unkindnesses we receive from our friends.

[Job 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 19:15</span></span>

Maids - Who by reason of their sex, commonly have more compassionate
hearts than men.

[Job 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 19:18</span></span>

Arose - From my seat, to shew my respect to them, though they were my
inferiors.

[Job 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 19:19</span></span>

Inward - My intimates and confidants, to whom I imparted all my thoughts
and counsels.

[Job 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 19:20</span></span>

Skin - Immediately, the fat and flesh next to the skin being consumed.
As - As closely as it doth to these remainders of flesh which are left
in my inward parts.

[Job 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 19:21</span></span>

Touched me - My spirit is touched with a sense of his wrath, a calamity
of all others the most grievous.

[Job 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 19:22</span></span>

As God - As if you had the same infinite knowledge which God hath,
whereby you can search my heart and know my hypocrisy, and the same
sovereign authority to say and do what you please with me. Not satisfied
- Are like wolves or lions that are not contented with devouring the
flesh of their prey, but also break their bones.

[Job 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 19:23</span></span>

My words - The words which I am now about to speak. And that which Job
wished for, God granted him. His words are written in God's book; so
that wherever that book is read, there shall this glorious confession be
declared, for a memorial of him.

[Job 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 19:24</span></span>

Lead - Anciently they used to grave the letters in a stone with an iron
tool, and then to fill up the cuts with lead, that the words might be
more plainly seen.

[Job 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 19:25</span></span>

For - This is the reason of his confidence in the goodness of his cause,
and his willingness to have the matter depending between him and his
friends, published and submitted to any trial, because he had a living
and powerful Redeemer to plead his cause, and to give sentence for him.
My Redeemer - In whom I have a particular interest. The word Goel, here
used; properly agrees to Jesus Christ: for this word is primarily used
of the next kinsman, whose office it was to redeem by a price paid, the
sold or mortgaged estate of his deceased kinsman; to revenge his death,
and to maintain his name and honour, by raising up seed to him. All
which more fitly agrees to Christ, who is our nearest kinsman and
brother, as having taken our nature upon him; who hath redeemed that
everlasting inheritance which our first parents had utterly lost, by the
price of his own blood; and hath revenged the death of mankind upon the
great contriver of it, the devil, by destroying him and his kingdom; and
hath taken a course to preserve our name, and honour, and persons, to
eternity. And it is well observed, that after these expressions, we meet
not with such impatient or despairing passages, as we had before; which
shews that they had inspired him with new life and comfort. Latter day -
At the day of the general resurrection and judgment, which, as those
holy patriarchs well knew and firmly believed, was to be at the end of
the world. The earth - The place upon which Christ shall appear and
stand at the last day. Heb. upon the dust; in which his saints and
members lie or sleep, whom he will raise out of it. And therefore he is
fitly said to stand upon the dust, or the grave, or death; because then
he will put that among other enemies under his feet.

[Job 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 19:26</span></span>

Though - Though my skin is now in a great measure consumed, and the rest
of it, together with this body, shall be devoured by the worms, which
may seem to make my case desperate. Flesh - Or with bodily eyes; my
flesh or body being raised from the grave, and re - united to my soul.
God - The same whom he called his Redeemer, [Job
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025), who having taken flesh, and
appearing in his flesh or body with and for Job upon the earth, might
well be seen with his bodily eyes. Nor is this understood of a simple
seeing of him; but of that glorious and beatifying vision of God, which
is promised to all God's people.

[Job 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 19:27</span></span>

See - No wonder he repeats it again, because the meditation of it was
most sweet to him. For - For my own benefit and comfort. Another - For
me or in my stead. I shall not see God by another's eyes, but by my own,
and by these self - same eyes, in this same body which now I have.
Though - This I do confidently expect, tho' the grave and the worms will
consume my whole body.

[Job 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">job 19:28</span></span>

Therefore - Because my faith and hope are in God. The root - The root
denotes, a root of true religion. And the root of all true religion is
living faith.

[Job 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">job 19:29</span></span>

Sword - Of some considerable judgment to be inflicted on you which is
called the sword, as [Deu 32:41](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#041), and
elsewhere. That - This admonition I give you, that you may know it in
time, and prevent it. A judgment - God sees and observes, and will judge
all your words and actions.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 20](job020)

</div>
