<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Joel Index](joe.md)  
  [Previous](joe001)  [Next](joe003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joel Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001.md)

[Joel 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joe 2:1</span></span>

Blow ye - The prophet continues his exhortation to the priests, who were
appointed to summon the solemn assemblies.

[Joel 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joe 2:2</span></span>

A day of darkness - A time of exceeding great troubles and calamities.
And this passage may well allude to the day of judgment, and the
calamities which precede that day. As the morning - As the morning
spreads itself over all the hemisphere and first upon the high
mountains, so shall the approaching calamities overspread this people. A
great people - This seems more directly to intend the Babylonians.

[Joel 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joe 2:3</span></span>

A fire - The Chaldeans, as a fire shall utterly consume all things.
Behind them - What is left behind is as burnt with a flame. As Eden -
Fruitful and pleasant.

[Joel 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joe 2:6</span></span>

Blackness - Such as is the colour of dead men, or the dark paleness of
men frightened into swoons.

[Joel 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joe 2:7</span></span>

Their ranks - This skill in ordering and the steadiness in keeping
under, exactly like trained soldiers, foretells the terror and strength
of both the armies signified by these locusts, and of the locusts
themselves.

[Joel 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joe 2:8</span></span>

The sword - The sword shall not be a weapon to destroy them; literally
verified in the locusts, and verified in the strange preservations in
the most desperate adventures made by the Assyrians or Babylonians.

[Joel 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joe 2:9</span></span>

Runs to and fro - This seems not proper to these insects, but it well
suits with soldiers, that conquer a city and search all places for
plunder. Run upon the wall - To clear the wall of all the besieged. The
houses - Either forsaken by the inhabitants, or defended by such as are
in them. Like a thief - Suddenly, unexpectedly, to spoil if not to kill.

[Joel 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joe 2:10</span></span>

The earth - A divine hyperbole. But this also may have a reference to
the great day.

[Joel 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joe 2:11</span></span>

Utter his voice - Summon them in and encourage them as a general doth
his soldiers. His army - Of locusts and insects, and of Chaldeans
signified by these.

[Joel 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joe 2:13</span></span>

And repenteth him - He turneth from executing the fierceness of his
wrath.

[Joel 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joe 2:14</span></span>

He will return - God doth not move from one place to another; but when
he withholds his blessings, he is said to withdraw himself. And so when
he gives out his blessing, he is said to return. And leave a blessing
behind him - Cause the locusts to depart before they have eaten up all
that is in the land.

[Joel 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joe 2:16</span></span>

The children - Though they understand little what is done, yet their
cities ascend, and God with pity looks on their tears. These that suck -
Their cries and tears may perhaps move the congregation to more earnest
supplication to God for mercy. So the Ninevites, [Jon
3:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#007.md). The bridegroom - Let the new
married man leave the mirth of the nuptials and afflict himself with the
rest.

[Joel 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joe 2:17</span></span>

The porch - That stately porch built by Solomon, [Kg1
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#003.md). The altar - The altar of burnt -
offering, which stood at some distance from this porch, and here are the
priests commanded to stand, fasting and praying, whence they might be
heard and seen by the people in the next court, in which the people were
wont to pray. To reproach - Famine, though by locusts is a reproach to
this thine heritage; it will be greater reproach to be slaves to the
nations signified by the locusts, therefore in mercy deliver us from
both one and the other.

[Joel 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joe 2:20</span></span>

The northern army - That part of the locusts which are toward the north.
With his face - The van of this army shall be driven into the dead sea,
east of Jerusalem. The hinder part - The rear of this army shall be
driven into the west sea. His stink - The stench of these locusts
destroying and lying putrified on the face of the earth, or the corpses
of the Assyrians slain and unburied.

[Joel 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joe 2:22</span></span>

Their strength - Bring forth as much as they are able to stand under.

[Joel 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joe 2:23</span></span>

The former rain - The autumn rain which is needful to mellow the earth
and fit it to receive the corn. The latter rain - Needful to bring
forward and ripen the fruits, accounted the latter rain because these
husbandmen and vine - dressers reckoned from seed time to spring and
harvest. The first month - That is, our March.

[Joel 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joe 2:24</span></span>

The fats - The vessels into which the liquor ran out of the press.

[Joel 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joe 2:25</span></span>

Restore - Make up to you.

[Joel 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joe 2:26</span></span>

Wondrously - In one year giving as much as the locusts wasted in the
years foregoing. Ashamed - Neither disappointed of your hopes, nor
necessitated to seek relief among the heathen.

[Joel 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joe 2:28</span></span>

Afterward - After the return out of Babylon, after the various troubles
and salvations by which these may know that I am the Lord. I will pour -
In extraordinary gifts on the first preachers of the gospel, and in
various graces to all believers. Upon all flesh - Before these gifts
were confined to one particular nation; but now they shall be enlarged
to all nations, and all that believe. Shall prophesy - This was in part
fulfilled according to the letter in the first days of the gospel; but
the promise means farther, by pouring out of the spirit on your sons and
your daughters, they shall have as full a knowledge of the mysteries of
God's law, as prophets before time had. Shalt dream dreams - This also
was literally fulfilled in the apostles days. But it may mean farther,
the knowledge of God and his will, shall abound among all ranks, sexes
and ages in the Messiah's days, and not only equal, but surpass all that
formerly was by prophesy, dreams, or visions.

[Joel 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joe 2:29</span></span>

My spirit - Of adoption and sanctification.

[Joel 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joe 2:30</span></span>

Wonders - They who read what historians report of these times, will see
this fulfilled in the very letter. Blood - Possibly eruption of blood,
as some fountains have been reported to have run with blood, prefiguring
the great effusion of blood by the sword, and wars following. Fire -
Either breaking out of the earth, or lightning in the air.

[Joel 2:31](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joe 2:31</span></span>

The sun - Having mentioned the prodigies which were to be wrought on
earth, he now specifies what shall be done in heaven. The terrible day -
The unholy day of the destruction of Jerusalem; typifying the day of
judgment.

[Joel 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joe 2:32</span></span>

Whosoever shall call - Who hearing the gospel repents and believes in
Christ. Delivered - Either from those outward afflictions, or which is
infinitely better from eternal miseries, which will swallow up the
unbelieving world; "and it will aggravate the ruin of those who perish,
that they might have been saved on such easy terms." Is it then easy for
a non - elect to repent and believe? May he not as easily pull the sun
out of the firmament? In mount Zion - In the true church typified by
Zion. Jerusalem - In mystical Jerusalem, the church and the city of the
Messiah. Deliverance - Temporal and eternal. Shall call - To believe in
Christ, and by him to wait for eternal life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joel Chapter 3](joe003.md)

</div>
