<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joel Index](joe)  
  [Previous](joe002)  [Next](amo001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joel Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#001)

[Joel 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joe 3:1</span></span>

In those days - When I shall by Cyrus bring Judah out of Babylon. Of
Judah - As the type of the whole remnant that are saved. And Jerusalem -
For beside what refers to the two tribes restored by Cyrus, the bringing
back the captivity of the whole Israel of God by Christ is to be
considered all along through this chapter.

[Joel 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joe 3:2</span></span>

All nations - In the type it is all those nations that have oppressed
Judah, in the anti - type, all nations that have been enemies to Christ
and the church. Into the valley of Jehoshaphat - I will debate my
people's cause, and do them right in the midst of my church, signified
by the valley of Jehoshaphat. Parted my land - Such is the injustice of
the persecutors of the church now, and so God will judge them in due
time.

[Joel 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joe 3:3</span></span>

Cast lots - It was customary with conquerors to divide the captives by
lot, and so did these enemies of the Jews.

[Joel 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joe 3:4</span></span>

Yea - Have I done you any wrong, which you avenge upon my people? Or do
you begin to violate the laws of neighbourhood and friendship, and think
to escape? Do ye think you have to do with a poor opprest people, my
people, and I nothing concerned at it? Palestine - On which were towns
of trade, and merchants that bought and sold these captives. A
recompence - Have I or my people so dealt with you? And if - If you will
deal thus, I will speedily avenge myself and my people of you.

[Joel 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joe 3:5</span></span>

Taken - Either as part of the spoil, or as part of your pay. My silver -
Silver and gold vessels dedicated to my service.

[Joel 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joe 3:6</span></span>

Remove them - That there might be no hope of their return to their
country.

[Joel 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joe 3:7</span></span>

I will raise them - This was fulfilled when Alexander, and his
successors dismissed all the Jews that were slaves in Greece, and gave
them leave to return to their own country.

[Joel 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joe 3:8</span></span>

And I will sell - Give them up into the hands of the Jews.

[Joel 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joe 3:9</span></span>

This - These things which I will do to the enemies of God's people. The
Gentiles - The Assyrians, Chaldeans, and Grecians successively. Prepare
war - Make ready for wars against the enemies of my people.

[Joel 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joe 3:10</span></span>

I am strong - Put on strength and valour; let none be absent from this
war.

[Joel 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joe 3:11</span></span>

Round about - All round about Judah. Thither - Toward Jerusalem; the
church and heritage of God. Thy mighty ones - All those mighty warriors
whom thou wilt make use of successively to punish the oppressors of thy
church.

[Joel 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joe 3:12</span></span>

The heathen - The several nations in their appointed time, perhaps the
Assyrians first under Salmaneser, next under Sennacherib, both of whom
came up to the valley of Jehoshaphat. For there - In the midst of my
people to plead with, condemn and punish the heathen round about Judea.

[Joel 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joe 3:13</span></span>

Put ye - Ye executioners of divine vengeance: begin to reap, cut down
sinners ripe for judgment; let Tiglath Pilneser and his soldiers cut
down Syria and its king, for their violence against my people. Let
Cyaxares and his armies cut down Assyria. Let Nebuchadnezzar cut down
Moab, Ammon, mount Seir, Egypt, Tyre, Zidon and the Philistines; after
this let Cyrus reap down the ripened Babylonians, and Alexander the
Medes and Persians. And let the divided Grecian captains cut down one
another, 'till the Romans cut them down. And when this is done God will
have mighty ones still to cut down his enemies, 'till the final judgment
wherein they all shall for ever be destroyed. Get you down - In another
metaphor the prophet declares the cutting off the church's enemies. The
press - As the grapes in the press are trod, so the enemies of God's
people, are to be trodden in the wine - press of God's displeasure.
Overflow - The blood of slaughtered men runs as wine prest out, in
greater abundance than the vats can hold. Is great - The violence and
all manner of sins of these kingdoms is grown exceeding great.

[Joel 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joe 3:14</span></span>

In the valley of decision - Where God having gathered them, decided
their quarrels, and by the conqueror punish the conquered for their sins
against God and his people. The day - The day of vengeance.

[Joel 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joe 3:16</span></span>

Shall roar - He will strike the enemy with astonishment as the roaring
of the lion astonishes the weaker beasts of the forest.

[Joel 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joe 3:17</span></span>

Dwelling - Very graciously present with you, and ever watching over you,
and delighting to save you. Then - After her enemies are destroyed and
the remnant is saved, and the Messiah is come; for to him and his days
these things ultimately refer. Jerusalem - The church of Christ.
Strangers - No profane or unclean person shall pass through it, or be
found in it any more for ever.

[Joel 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joe 3:18</span></span>

The mountains - The vines planted upon the mountains. Shall flow - So
fruitful shall the hills be, that milk shall abound every where. A
fountain - The prophet alludes to those waters which were conveyed from
some spring through conduit pipes towards the altar. This no doubt is a
shadow of the purifying blood of Christ, and his sanctifying spirit and
word. And in that it is said to come from the house of the Lord, it
intimates that this saving grace shall be first preached from Jerusalem,
and by the church, which is the house of God, shall be published to
others. Shittim - Was a place in the plains of Moab. These spiritual
waters shall flow down to the dry and thirsty, the barren and fruitless
Gentiles, and make them fruitful.

[Joel 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joe 3:19</span></span>

Egypt - By Egypt we may understand all the enemies of the church who
carry it toward the church, as Egypt carried it toward Israel. Edom -
Edom was an implacable enemy to Judah in his greatest distress. And all
who come under Edom's character are here threatened under this name.
Judah - The people of God.

[Joel 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joe 3:20</span></span>

Judah - The redeemed of the Lord, his church.

[Joel 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joe 3:21</span></span>

And I will cleanse - Purge away both by the spirit of sanctification and
by free pardon in the blood of the redeemer. Their blood - Their
sinfulness, which before I had not taken away.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos Chapter 1](amo001)

</div>
