<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh002)  [Next](joh004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#001)

[John 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 3:1</span></span>

A ruler - One of the great council.

[John 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 3:2</span></span>

The same came - Through desire; but by night - Through shame: We know -
Even we rulers and Pharisees.

[John 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 3:3</span></span>

Jesus answered - That knowledge will not avail thee unless thou be born
again - Otherwise thou canst not see, that is, experience and enjoy,
either the inward or the glorious kingdom of God. In this solemn
discourse our Lord shows, that no external profession, no ceremonial
ordinances or privileges of birth, could entitle any to the blessings of
the Messiah's kingdom: that an entire change of heart as well as of life
was necessary for that purpose: that this could only be wrought in man
by the almighty power of God: that every man born into the world was by
nature in a state of sin, condemnation, and misery: that the free mercy
of God had given his Son to deliver them from it, and to raise them to a
blessed immortality: that all mankind, Gentiles as well as Jews, might
share in these benefits, procured by his being lifted up on the cross,
and to be received by faith in him: but that if they rejected him, their
eternal, aggravated condemnation, would be the certain consequence.
Except a man be born again - If our Lord by being born again means only
reformation of life, instead of making any new discovery, he has only
thrown a great deal of obscurity on what was before plain and obvious.

[John 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 3:4</span></span>

When he is old - As Nicodemus himself was.

[John 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 3:5</span></span>

Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit - Except he experience
that great inward change by the Spirit, and be baptized (wherever
baptism can be had) as the outward sign and means of it.

[John 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 3:6</span></span>

That which is born of the flesh is flesh - Mere flesh, void of the
Spirit, yea, at enmity with it; And that which is born of the Spirit is
spirit - Is spiritual, heavenly, divine, like its Author.

[John 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 3:7</span></span>

Ye must be born again - To be born again, is to be inwardly changed from
all sinfulness to all holiness. It is fitly so called, because as great
a change then passes on the soul as passes on the body when it is born
into the world.

[John 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 3:8</span></span>

The wind bloweth - According to its own nature, not thy will, and thou
hearest the sound thereof - Thou art sure it doth blow, but canst not
explain the particular manner of its acting. So is every one that is
born of the Spirit - The fact is plain, the manner of his operations
inexplicable.

[John 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 3:11</span></span>

We speak what we know - I and all that believe in me.

[John 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 3:12</span></span>

Earthly things - Things done on earth; such as the new birth, and the
present privileges of the children of God. Heavenly things - Such as the
eternity of the Son, and the unity of the Father, Son, and Spirit.

[John 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 3:13</span></span>

For no one - For here you must rely on my single testimony, whereas
there you have a cloud of witnesses: Hath gone up to heaven, but he that
came down from heaven. Who is in heaven - Therefore he is omnipresent;
else he could not be in heaven and on earth at once. This is a plain
instance of what is usually termed the communication of properties
between the Divine and human nature; whereby what is proper to the
Divine nature is spoken concerning the human, and what is proper to the
human is, as here, spoken of the Divine.

[John 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 3:14</span></span>

And as Moses - And even this single witness will soon be taken from you;
yea, and in a most ignominious manner. [Num
21:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#008).

[John 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 3:15</span></span>

That whosoever - He must be lifted up, that hereby he may purchase
salvation for all believers: all those who look to him by faith recover
spiritual health, even as all that looked at that serpent recovered
bodily health.

[John 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 3:16</span></span>

Yea, and this was the very design of God's love in sending him into the
world. Whosoever believeth on him - With that faith which worketh by
love, and hold fast the beginning of his confidence steadfast to the
end. God so loved the world - That is, all men under heaven; even those
that despise his love, and will for that cause finally perish. Otherwise
not to believe would be no sin to them. For what should they believe?
Ought they to believe that Christ was given for them? Then he was given
for them. He gave his only Son - Truly and seriously. And the Son of God
gave himself, [Gal 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004), truly and
seriously.

[John 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 3:17</span></span>

God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world - Although many
accuse him of it.

[John 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 3:18</span></span>

He that believeth on him is not condemned - Is acquitted, is justified
before God. The name of the only - begotten Son of God - The name of a
person is often put for the person himself. But perhaps it is farther
intimated in that expression, that the person spoken of is great and
magnificent. And therefore it is generally used to express either God
the Father or the Son.

[John 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 3:19</span></span>

This is the condemnation - That is, the cause of it. So God is clear.

[John 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 3:21</span></span>

He that practiseth the truth (that is, true religion) cometh to the
light - So even Nicodemus, afterward did. Are wrought in God - That is,
in the light, power, and love of God.

[John 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 3:22</span></span>

Jesus went - From the capital city, Jerusalem, into the land of Judea -
That is, into the country. There he baptized - Not himself; but his
disciples by his order, [Joh 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#002).

[John 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 3:23</span></span>

John also was baptizing - He did not repel them that offered, but he
more willingly referred them to Jesus.

[John 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 3:25</span></span>

The Jews - Those men of Judea, who now went to be baptized by Jesus; and
John's disciples, who were mostly of Galilee: about purifying - That is,
baptism. They disputed, which they should be baptized by.

[John 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 3:27</span></span>

A man can receive nothing - Neither he nor I. Neither could he do this,
unless God had sent him: nor can I receive the title of Christ, or any
honour comparable to that which he hath received from heaven. They seem
to have spoken with jealousy and resentment; John answers with sweet
composure of spirit.

[John 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joh 3:29</span></span>

He that hath the bride is the bridegroom - He whom the bride follows.
But all men now come to Jesus. Hence it is plain he is the bridegroom.
The friend who heareth him - Talk with the bride; rejoiceth greatly - So
far from envying or resenting it.

[John 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 3:30</span></span>

He must increase, but I must decrease - So they who are now, like John,
burning and shining lights, must (if not suddenly eclipsed) like him
gradually decrease, while others are increasing about them; as they in
their turns grew up, amidst the decays of the former generation. Let us
know how to set, as well as how to rise; and let it comfort our
declining days to trace, in those who are likely to succeed us in our
work, the openings of yet greater usefulness.

[John 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 3:31</span></span>

It is not improbable, that what is added, to the end of the chapter, are
the words of the evangelist, not the Baptist. He that is of the earth -
A mere man; of earthly original, has a spirit and speech answerable to
it.

[John 3:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 3:32</span></span>

No man - None comparatively, exceeding few; receiveth his testimony -
With true faith.

[John 3:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 3:33</span></span>

Hath set to his seal - It was customary among the Jews for the witness
to set his seal to the testimony he had given. That God is true - Whose
words the Messiah speaks.

[John 3:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 3:34</span></span>

God giveth not him the Spirit by measure - As he did to the prophets,
but immeasurably. Hence he speaketh the words of God in the most perfect
manner.

[John 3:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 3:36</span></span>

He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life - He hath it already.
For he loves God. And love is the essence of heaven. He that obeyeth not
- A consequence of not believing.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 4](joh004)

</div>
