<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Joshua Index](jos.md)  
  [Previous](jos022)  [Next](jos024.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#001.md)

[Joshua 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 23:1</span></span>

A long time - About fourteen years after it.

[Joshua 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 23:2</span></span>

Joshua called - Either to his own city, or rather to Shiloh, the usual
place of such assemblies, where his words being uttered before the Lord,
were likely to have the more effect upon them. All Israel - Not all the
people in their own persons, but in their representatives, by their
elders, heads, judges and officers. Probably he took the opportunity, of
one of the three great feasts. You will not have me long to preach to
you; therefore observe what I say, and lay it up for the time to come.

[Joshua 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 23:3</span></span>

Because of you - For your good, that you might gain by their losses.

[Joshua 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 23:4</span></span>

That remain - Not yet conquered. An inheritance - You shall certainly
subdue them, and inherit their hand, as you have done the rest, if you
be not wanting to yourselves. All the nations - That is, with the land
of those nations; the people put for their land, as we have seen before;
and as sometimes on the contrary, the land is put for the people. The
great sea - Where the Philistines, your most formidable adversaries yet
survive; but them also and their land I have given to you, and you shall
undoubtedly destroy them, if you will proceed vigorously in your work.

[Joshua 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 23:6</span></span>

Very courageous - For it will require great courage and resolution to
execute all the commands of Moses, and particularly, that of expelling
and destroying the residue of the Canaanites. The right hand or the left
- That is, in one kind or other, by adding to the law, or diminishing
from it.

[Joshua 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 23:7</span></span>

Come not - That is, avoid all familiar converse and contracts, but
especially marriages with them. Name their gods - To wit, unnecessarily
and familiarly, lest the mention of them breed discourse about them, and
so by degrees bring to the approbation and worship of them. Nor cause -
Nor require nor compel the Gentiles to swear by them, as they used to
do; especially in leagues and contracts. It is pity, that among
Christians, the name of the Heathen God's are so commonly used,
especially in poems. Let those names which have been set up in rivalship
with God, be forever loathed and lost. Nor bow - Neither give them any
inward reverence, or outward adoration. Here is an observable gradation,
whereby he shews what notable progress sin usually makes, and what need
there is to look to the beginnings of it, forasmuch as a civil and
common conversation with their persons was likely to bring them, and
indeed did actually bring them, by insensible steps, to the worship of
their gods. So it is no wonder, if some things not simply and in
themselves evil, be forbidden by God, as here the naming of their gods
is, because they are occasions and introductions to evil.

[Joshua 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 23:8</span></span>

Cleave to the Lord - By constant obedience, entire affection, faithful
service and worship of him alone. To this day - To wit, since you came
in to Canaan; since which time the body of the people (for of them he
speaks, not of every particular person) had behaved themselves much
better than they did in the wilderness, and had not been guilty of any
gross and general apostacy from God, or rebellion against him.

[Joshua 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 23:9</span></span>

No man - To wit, whom you have invaded; otherwise some of those people
did yet remain unconquered.

[Joshua 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 23:10</span></span>

He fighteth - Impute not this therefore to your own valour, as you will
be apt to do, but to God's gracious and powerful assistance.

[Joshua 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 23:11</span></span>

Take heed - Now it requires more watchfulness and diligence than it did
in the wilderness, because your temptations are now stronger; from the
examples and insinuations of your bad neighbours, the remainders of this
wicked people; and from your own peace and prosperity: and the pride,
security, forgetfulness of God, and luxury, which usually attend that
condition.

[Joshua 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 23:12</span></span>

Go back - From God, and from his worship and service.

[Joshua 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 23:13</span></span>

Traps to you - By your converse with them, you will be drawn by degrees
into their errors, and impieties, and brutish lusts. Thorns in your eyes
- When they have seduced, and thereby weakened you, then they will
molest and vex you, no less than a severe scourge doth a man's sides
which are lashed by it, or than a small thorn doth the eye when it is
got within it. Till ye perish - They shall so persecute you, and fight
against, you with such success, that you shall be forced to quit your
own land, and wander you know not whither; which must needs be very
terrible to them to think of, when they compared this present ease, and
plenty and safety, with the pains, and weariness, and hazards, and wants
of their former wanderings.

[Joshua 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 23:14</span></span>

Of all the earth - That is, of all flesh, or of all men; the way which
all men go; I am about to die, as all men must. To die is, to go a
journey, a journey to our long home. And Joshua himself, tho' he could
so ill be spared, cannot be exempted from this common lot. He takes
notice of it, that they might look on these as his dying words, and
regard them accordingly. Ye know - That is, you know assuredly; your own
experience puts it out of all question.

[Joshua 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 23:15</span></span>

Evil things - The accomplishment of God's promise is a pledge that he
will also fulfil his threatnings; both of them depending upon the same
ground, the faithfulness of God.

[Joshua 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 23:16</span></span>

It will aggravate their perdition, that the land from which they shall
perish is a good land, and a land which God himself had given them: and
which therefore he would have secured to them, if they had not thrown
themselves out of it. "Thus the goodness of the heavenly Canaan, says
Mr. Henry, and the free and sure grant God has made of it, will
aggravate the misery of those that shall forever be shut out and perish
from it. Nothing will make them see how wretched they are, so much as to
see, how happy they might have been." Might have been! What on the
supposition of absolute decrees? How happy might a person not elected
have been? And if he was elected, how could he be wretched for ever?
What art of man can reconcile these things? Again, shall any of the
elect perish for ever? or has God made to any others, a free and sure
grant of the heavenly Canaan? If not, how can the misery of those that
perish be aggravated, by a free and sure grant which they never had any
share in?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 24](jos024.md)

</div>
