<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos020)  [Next](jos022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#001)

[Joshua 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 21:1</span></span>

Then - When the whole land was distributed to the several tribes, but
not actually possessed by them; which was the proper season for them to
put in their claim. Fathers of the Levites - The fathers of the Levites
were Kohath, Gershom, and Merari, and the heads of these were the chief
persons now alive of these several families.

[Joshua 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 21:2</span></span>

The Lord commanded - Observe: the maintenance of ministers is not an
arbitrary thing, left purely to the good will of the people. No: as the
God of Israel commanded, that the Levites should be provided for, so
hath the Lord Jesus ordained, (and a perpetual ordinance it is) that
they who preach the gospel should live of the gospel.

[Joshua 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 21:3</span></span>

The children of Israel gave - Probably they gave the Levites
promiscuously such cities as God commanded, and the lot appropriated
them to their several houses or families. Out of their inheritance -
That is, out of their several possessions; that the burden might be
equally divided; and, that the Levites being dispersed among the several
tribes, according to Jacob's prediction, [Gen
49:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#007), might more easily, and
effectually teach the Israelites God's law and judgments, which they
were engaged to do, [Deu 33:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#010), and
that the people might upon all occasions resort to them, and enquire the
meaning of the law at their mouths. And suburbs - Not only the use, but
the absolute dominion of them, as is manifest both from [Jos
21:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#011), where a distinction is made
between the city and suburbs of Hebron, and the fields and villages
thereof; (the former given to the Levites, the latter to Caleb;) and
from the return of these cities in the Jubilee, unto the Levites as to
their proper owners, [Lev 25:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#033).

[Joshua 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 21:4</span></span>

Judah, Simeon, and Benjamin - Which three tribes were nearest the
temple, where their business lay. Thirteen cities - For though the
priests were now few enough for one city, yet respect was to be had to
their succeeding numbers; this division being made for all future
generations. And seeing the Levites might sell their houses until the
Jubilee, [Lev 25:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#033), much more might
they let them; and therefore it is probable their cities were not long
uninhabited, many being inclined to dwell with them by virtue of
relations contracted with them; or out of respect to the service of God,
and the good of their souls.

[Joshua 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 21:5</span></span>

Children of Kohath - Who were of Aaron's family. Ephraim, Dan, and
Manesseh - Which tribes are nearest to the three former, and so the
Kohathites are placed next to their brethren the Aaronites. Ten cities -
Fewer than they gave out of the three former tribes, because their
inheritance was less than the former.

[Joshua 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 21:9</span></span>

Judah and Simeon - These are mentioned together, because the cities of
Simeon lay within Judah's portion.

[Joshua 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 21:10</span></span>

Families - That is, of the family, the plural number for the singular,
which is not unusual.

[Joshua 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 21:12</span></span>

The fields and villages - That is, all beyond the two thousand cubits
expressed, [Num 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#005). This is here
mentioned, not as his peculiar case, but as one eminent instance, to
shew, that it was so in all the rest of the cities here named; that the
fields and villages thereof still belonged to the several tribes from
whom the cities and their suburbs were taken; and to make the rest of
the Israelites more chearfully resign part of their possessions to the
Levites, because even Caleb did so, though his possession had been long
before promised, and now actually given to him by God's special command,
as a mark of honour and compensation for his long and faithful service.

[Joshua 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 21:16</span></span>

And Ain - Ain and Gibeon, and some others here named are not named, [Ch1
6:59](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#059). Either they were destroyed in
some of those invasions wherewith their land was grievously wasted
before that time; or they appear there under other names.

[Joshua 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jos 21:20</span></span>

Which remained - Over and above those who were priests.

[Joshua 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jos 21:25</span></span>

Half the tribe - Namely, that half which dwelt in Canaan.

[Joshua 21:41](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">jos 21:41</span></span>

Forty eight cities - Why hath this tribe, which was the least of all,
more cities than any of them? First, it doth not appear that they had
more: for though all the cities of the Levites be expressed, it is not
so with the other tribes, but divers of their cities are omitted.
Secondly, the Levites were confined to their cities and suburbs; the
rest had large territories belonging to their cities, which also so they
were in a capacity of improving, which the Levites were not; so that one
of their cities might be more considerable than divers of the Levites.
Thirdly, God, was pleased to deal liberally with his ministers, to put
honour on those whom he foresaw many would be prone to despise; and,
that being free from outward distractions, they might more entirely and
fervently devote themselves to the service of God.

[Joshua 21:43](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">jos 21:43</span></span>

All the land - He gave them the right to all, and the actual possession
of the greatest part of it, and power to possess the rest, as soon as it
was needful for them, which was when their numbers were increased, and
the absolute dominion of all the people remaining in it.

[Joshua 21:44](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">jos 21:44</span></span>

Gave them rest - Namely, all the days of Joshua; for afterwards it was
otherwise with them.

[Joshua 21:45](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">jos 21:45</span></span>

All came to pass - Such an acknowledgment as this, here subscribed by
Joshua, in the name of all Israel, we afterward find made by Solomon;
and all Israel did in effect say amen to it, [Kg1
8:56](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#056). The inviolable truth of God's
promise, and the performance of it to the uttermost, is what all
believers in Christ have been always ready to bear their testimony to.
And if in any thing it has seemed to come short, they have been as ready
to take all the blame to themselves.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 22](jos022)

</div>
