<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos016)  [Next](jos018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#001)

[Joshua 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 17:1</span></span>

The first born of Joseph - The sense is, though Ephraim was to be more
potent and numerous, yet Manasseh was the first - born, and had the
privilege of the first - born, which was translated to Joseph, namely, a
double portion; and therefore though this was but half the tribe of
Manasseh, yet they are not made intimates to Ephraim, but have a
distinct lot of their own, as their brethren, or other half tribe had
beyond Jordan. For Machir - The only son of Manasseh, who therefore is
here, put for the whole tribe. The first - born - So even only sons are
sometimes called, as [Mat 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#025). He -
That is, Machir, had given great proof of his valour (though the
particular history be not mentioned) and his posterity were no
degenerate sons, but had his valiant blood still running in their veins.
Gilead and Bashan - Part of these countries; for part of them was also
given to the Reubenites, and part to the Gadites. This may be added as a
reason, either, why he got those places from the Amorites: or why they
were allotted to him or his posterity, because this was a frontier
country, and the out - works to the land of Canaan, and therefore
required valiant persons to defend it.

[Joshua 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 17:2</span></span>

A Lot - A distinct inheritance. The rest - Namely, those of them which
had not received their possessions beyond Jordan. Male - children - This
expression is used to bring in what follows, concerning his female
children.

[Joshua 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 17:4</span></span>

He - That is, Eleazar, or Joshua, with the consent of the princes
appointed for that work.

[Joshua 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 17:5</span></span>

Ten portions - Five for the sons, and five for the daughters; for as for
Hepher, both he and his son Zelophehad was dead, and that without sons,
and therefore had no portion; but his daughters had several portions
allotted to them.

[Joshua 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 17:6</span></span>

The daughters - Not less than the son, so the sex was no bar to their
inheritance.

[Joshua 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 17:9</span></span>

Three cities - Tappuah, and the cities upon the coast descending to the
river, &c. last mentioned. Among the cities of Manasseh - That is, are
intermixed with their cities, which was not strange nor unfit, these two
being linked together by a nearer alliance than the rest.

[Joshua 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 17:10</span></span>

His border - Manasseh's, whose portion is here described, and whose name
was last mentioned. In Asher - That is, upon the tribe of Asher; for
though Zebulon came between Asher and them for the greatest part of
their land; yet it seems there was some necks of land, both of Ephraim's
and of Manasseh's, which jutted out farther than the rest, and touched
the borders of Asher. And it is certain there were many such incursions
of the land of one tribe upon some parcels of another, although they
were otherwise considerably distant one from the other.

[Joshua 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 17:11</span></span>

Manasseh had in Issachar and in Asher - As Ephraim had some cities in
the tribe of Manasseh, and as it was not unusual, when the place
allotted to any tribe was too narrow for it, and the next too large, to
give away part from the larger to the less portion; nay, sometimes one
whole tribe was taken into another; as Simeon's was into Judah's
portion, when it was found too large for Judah. Inhabitants of Dor - Not
the places only, but the people; whom they spared and used for servants.
Three countries - The words may be rendered, the third part of that
country; and so the meaning may be, that the cities and towns here
mentioned are a third part of that country, that is, of that part of
Issachar's and Asher's portion, in which those places lay.

[Joshua 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 17:14</span></span>

Children of Joseph - That is, of Ephraim and Manasseh. Spake unto Joshua
- That is, expostulated with him, when they went and saw that portion
which was allotted them, and found it much short of their expectation.
One portion - Either, because they really had but one lot, which was
afterwards divided by the arbitrators between them. Or, because the land
severally allotted to them, was but little enough for one of them.

[Joshua 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 17:15</span></span>

A great people - He retorts their own argument; seeing thou art a great
and numerous people, turn thy complaints into action, and enlarge thy
borders by thy own hand, to which thou mayest confidently expect God's
assistance. The wood - country - To the mountain, as it is called, [Jos
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#018), where among some towns there is
much wood - land, which thou mayest without much difficulty possess, and
so get the more room. And cut down - The wood, for thy own advantage; in
building more cities and towns; and preparing the land for pasture and
tillage. The Perizzites - Supposed to be a savage and brutish kind of
people, that lived in woods and mountains. Giants - Who lived in caves
and mountains, now especially when they were driven out of their cities.
If mount Ephraim - Or, seeing mount Ephraim is too narrow for thee, as
thou complainest; take to thyself the rest of that hilly and wood
country. Mount Ephraim was a particular portion of the land, belonging
to the tribe of Ephraim. And this seems to be here mentioned, for all
the portion allotted to Ephraim and Manasseh, as appears from their
complaint, which was not, that this part, but that their whole portion
was too strait for them.

[Joshua 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 17:16</span></span>

Is not enough - Heb. the hill will not be found, that is, obtained by
us; those fierce and strong people the Perizzites and the giants will
easily defend themselves, and frustrate our attempts, having the
advantage of the woods and mountains. The Canaanites that dwell - That
is, and if thou sayest, that if the hill either cannot be conquered, or
is not sufficient for us, we may go down and take more land out of the
pleasant and fruitful valleys, we shall meet with no less difficulty
there than in the mountains. Chariots of iron - Not all made of iron,
but armed with iron, not only for defence, but for offence also, having
as it were scythes and swords fastened to them, to cut down all that
stood in their way.

[Joshua 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jos 17:17</span></span>

One lot only - Thou needest and deservedst more than that lot, of which
thou art actually possessed, and thou hast power to get more; which if
thou endeavourest to do, God will bless thee, and give thee more.

[Joshua 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jos 17:18</span></span>

The out - goings of it - The valleys and fields belonging or adjoining
to it, for there the Canaanites were, [Jos
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#016).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 18](jos018)

</div>
