<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos017)  [Next](jos019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001)

[Joshua 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 18:1</span></span>

Set up the tabernacle - By God's appointment. It was removed from
Gilgal, partly for the honour and conveniency of Joshua, that he being
of the tribe of Ephraim, and seating himself there, might have the
opportunity of consulting with God as often as he needed; and partly for
the conveniency of all the tribes, that being in the center of them,
they might more easily resort to it from all places. Here the tabernacle
continued for above three hundred years, even 'till Samuel's days, [Sa1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#003). Shiloh was the name given to the
Messiah in dying Jacob's prophecy. So the pitching the tabernacle in
Shiloh intimated to the Jews, that in that Shiloh whom Jacob spoke of,
all the ordinances of this worldly sanctuary should have their
accomplishment, in a greater and more perfect tabernacle.

[Joshua 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 18:3</span></span>

How long are you slack - This slackness is supposed to arise from an
opinion of the impossibility of making any regular distribution of the
parts, 'till the whole were more exactly surveyed, which accordingly is
here done. Likewise, being weary of war, and having sufficient plenty of
all things, they were unwilling to run into new hazards.

[Joshua 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 18:4</span></span>

Three men - Three, not one, for more exact observation both of the
measure and quality of the several portions, and for greater assurance
of their care and faithfulness in giving in their account. Of each tribe
- One of each of these tribes, who were yet unprovided for.

[Joshua 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 18:5</span></span>

Seven parts - Which were of equal extent or worth: for no tribe was so
great, but one of these parts in its full extent would abundantly
suffice them; and there was no reason why the portions should be greater
or less according as the tribes at present were more or fewer in number,
because of the various changes which happened therein successively; it
being usual for one tribe to be more numerous than another in one age,
which was fewer in the next. And if the several tribes had increased
more, and not diminished their numbers by their sins, they might have
sent forth colonies, and taken any part of the land, even as far as
Euphrates, all which the Lord of the whole earth had given them a right
to, which when they pleased they might take possession of. Judah shall
abide on the south - They shall not be disturbed in their possession,
but shall keep it, except some part of it shall be adjudged to another
tribe. Joseph on the north - In respect of Judah, not of the whole land;
for divers other tribes were more northern than they.

[Joshua 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 18:6</span></span>

Before the Lord - That is, before the ark or tabernacle, that God may be
witness and judge, and author of the division, that each may be
contented with his lot, and that your several possessions may be secured
to you as things sacred.

[Joshua 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 18:9</span></span>

By cities - Or, according to the cities, to which the several parties or
territories belonged.

[Joshua 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 18:11</span></span>

And the children of Joseph - Wherein we see the wisdom of Divine
Providence, this being the only place in which that prophecy, [Deu
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#012), could have been accomplished.
Providence cast Benjamin next to Joseph on the one hand, because
Benjamin was own and only brother to Joseph, and next to Judah on the
other hand, that this tribe might hereafter unite with Judah, in an
adherence to the throne of David, and the temple at Jerusalem.

[Joshua 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 18:14</span></span>

Kirjath - jearim - The Israelites changed the name, to blot out the
remembrance of Baal.

[Joshua 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 18:16</span></span>

The end of the mountain - The place where the mountain ends, and the
valley begins. Before the valley - That is, in the prospect of that
valley. In the valley on the north - Which extends unto this other
valley on the north - side of it. Of Jebusi - To that part where the
Jebusites lived, which was in and near Jerusalem.

[Joshua 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jos 18:21</span></span>

Jericho - For tho' the city was destroyed, the territory remained.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 19](jos019)

</div>
