<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos013)  [Next](jos015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#001)

[Joshua 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 14:1</span></span>

Eleazar the priest - He best understood the laws of God by which this
division was to be regulated. Heads of the fathers - Twelve persons,
each the head of his tribe, who were appointed and named by God, [Num
34:19](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#019), and if any of them were now
dead, no doubt Joshua and Eleazar, by God's direction, put others in
their stead.

[Joshua 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 14:2</span></span>

By lot - This course God ordained, partly to prevent discontents,
enmities and quarrels among the tribes, and partly to demonstrate the
truth and wisdom of his providence, by which alone those parts fell to
each of them, which Jacob long since, and Moses lately, foretold; so
that as a learned man saith, he must be more stupid than stupidity, that
doth not acknowledge a Divine hand in this matter. The lot did only
determine the several parts to the several tribes, but did not precisely
fix all the bounds of it; these might be either enlarged or diminished
according to the greater or smaller number of the tribes.

[Joshua 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 14:4</span></span>

Were two tribes - That is, had the portion of two tribes, and therefore
though Levi was excluded, there remained nine tribes and a half, to be
provided for in Canaan.

[Joshua 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 14:5</span></span>

They - That is, the persons named, [Jos
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#005), who acted in the name of the
children of Israel, divided it, either now, or presently after.

[Joshua 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 14:6</span></span>

Then - When Joshua and the rest were consulting about the division of
the land, though they did not yet actually divide it. The heads of that
tribe who were willing thus to shew respect to him; and to testify their
consent, that he should be provided for by himself, and that they would
not take it as any reflection on the rest of the tribe. In Gilgal -
Where the division of the land was designed and begun, though it was
executed and finished at Shiloh. The Kenezite - Of the posterity of
Kenaz. The Lord said - In general, the promise he made us of possessing
this land; and for my part, that which is expressed here, [Jos
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#009).

[Joshua 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 14:7</span></span>

As it was in mine heart - I spake my opinion sincerely, without flattery
and fear, when the other spies were biased by their own fears, and the
dread of the people, to speak otherwise than in their consciences they
believed.

[Joshua 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 14:8</span></span>

I wholly followed the Lord - Which self - commendation is justifiable,
because it was necessary, as being the ground of his petition. Therefore
it was not vain glory in him to speak it: no more than it is for those,
who have God's spirit witnessing with their spirits, that they are the
children of God, humbly and thankfully to tell others, for their
encouragement, what God hath done for their souls.

[Joshua 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 14:10</span></span>

Forty - five years - Whereof thirty - eight years were spent in the
wilderness, and seven since they came into Canaan. The longer we live
the more sensible we should be, of God's goodness to us in keeping us
alive! Of his care in prolonging our frail lives, his patience in
prolonging our forfeited lives! And shall not the life thus kept by his
providence, be devoted to his praise?

[Joshua 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 14:11</span></span>

For war - Not only for counsel, but for action; for marching and
fighting. And therefore this gift will not be cast away upon an
unprofitable and unserviceable person. To go out, and to come in - To
perform all the duties belonging to my place. Moses had said, that at
eighty years old, even our strength is labour and sorrow. But Caleb was
an exception to this rule: At eighty - five years old, his strength was
still ease and joy. This he got by following the Lord fully.

[Joshua 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 14:12</span></span>

This mountain - That is, this mountainous country. He names the country
rather than the cities, because the cities were given to the Levites,
[Jos 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#011), [Jos
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#013). Thou heardest - Didst
understand, both by the reports of others, and by thy own observation.
Hearing, the sense by which we get knowledge, is often put for knowing
or understanding. If the Lord will be with me - A modest and pious
expression, signifying both the absolute necessity of God's help, and
his godly fear, lest God for his sins should deny his assistance to him;
for although he was well assured in general, that God would crown his
people with success in this war, yet he might doubt of his particular
success in this or that enterprize. To drive them out - Out of their
fastnesses where they yet remain, Caleb desires this difficult work as a
testimony of his own faith, and as a motive to quicken his brethren to
the like attempts.

[Joshua 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 14:13</span></span>

Blessed him - Prayed to God to bless and help him according to his own
desire.

[Joshua 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 14:15</span></span>

A great man - In stature, and strength, and dignity, and authority, as
being the progenitor of Anak, the father of those famous giants called
Anakims.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 15](jos015)

</div>
