<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos014)  [Next](jos016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#001)

[Joshua 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 15:1</span></span>

The lot - For the general understanding of this, it must be known That
casting lots was transacted with great seriousness and solemnity, in
God's presence, with prayer and appeal to him for the decision of the
matter. That although exact survey of this land was not taken 'till [Jos
18:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#004), yet there was, and must needs
be a general description of it, and a division thereof into nine parts
and an half; which, as far as they could guess, were equal either in
quantity or quality. That the lot did not at this time so unchangeably
determine each tribe, that their portion could neither be increased or
diminished; as is manifest, because after Judah's lot was fixed,
Simeon's lot was taken out of it, [Jos
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#009), though after the land was more
distinctly known and surveyed, it is likely the bounds were more certain
and fixed. That the lot determined only in general what part of the land
belonged to each tribe, but left the particulars to be determined by
Joshua and Eleazar. For the manner of this, it is probably conceived,
that there was two pots, into one of which were put the names of all the
tribes, each in a distinct paper, and into the other the names of each
portion described; then Eleazar or some other person, drew out first the
name of one of the tribes out of one pot, and then the name of one
portion out of the other, and that portion was appropriated to that
tribe. And with respect to these pots, in the bottom of which the papers
lay, these lots are often said to come up, or come forth. Of Judah -
Whose lot came out first by God's disposition, as a note of his
preeminency above his brethren. Of Edom - Which lay south - east from
Judah's portion. Judah and Joseph were the two sons of Jacob, on whom
Reuben's forfeited birthright devolved. Judah had the dominion entailed
upon him, and Joseph the double portion. Therefore these two tribes are
first seated: and on them the other seven attended.

[Joshua 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 15:2</span></span>

The bay - Heb. the tongue: either a creek or arm of that sea; or a
promontory, which by learned authors is sometimes called a tongue. Every
sea is salt, but this had an extraordinary saltness, the effect of that
fire and brimstone which destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah: the ruins of
which lie buried at the bottom of this dead water, which never was moved
itself by any tides, nor had any living thing in it.

[Joshua 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 15:5</span></span>

The end of Jordan - That is, the place where Jordan runs into the salt -
sea.

[Joshua 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 15:6</span></span>

The stone of Bohan - A place so called, not from Bohan's dwelling there,
(for the Reubenites had no portion on this side Jordan) but from some
notable exploit which he did there, though it is not recorded in
scripture.

[Joshua 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 15:8</span></span>

Went up - Properly; for the line went from Jordan and the salt sea, to
the higher grounds nigh Jerusalem; and therefore the line is said to go
down, [Jos 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#016), because there it
takes a contrary course, and goes downward to Jordan and the sea. Valley
of Hinnom - A very pleasant place, but afterward made infamous. Of the
Jebusites - Of the city of the Jebusites, which was anciently called
Jebussi. Jerusalem - It may seem hence, that Jerusalem properly, or at
least principally, belonged to Benjamin; and yet it is ascribed to Judah
also; either because a part of the city was allotted to Judah; or
because the Benjamites desired the help and conjunction of this powerful
tribe of Judah, for the getting and keeping of this most important
place. And when the Benjamites had in vain attempted to drive out the
Jebusites, this work was at last done by the tribe of Judah, who
therefore had an interest in it by the right of war; as Ziglag which
belonged to the tribe of Simeon, being gotten from the Philistines by
David, was joined by him to his tribe of Judah, [Sa1
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#006).

[Joshua 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 15:10</span></span>

Mount Seir - Not that of Edom, but another so called from some
resemblance it had to it.

[Joshua 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 15:13</span></span>

He - Joshua. City of Arba - Or, Kirjath - arba. Not the city, which was
the Levites, but the territory of it, [Jos
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#013).

[Joshua 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 15:14</span></span>

Drove thence - That is, from the said territory, from their caves and
forts in it. These giants having either recovered their cities, or
defended themselves in the mountains. Three sons of Anak - Either the
same who are mentioned, [Num 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#033),
and so they were long - lived men, such as mainly were in those times
and places: or their sons, called by their father's names, which is very
usual.

[Joshua 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 15:15</span></span>

Debir - The same mentioned above, [Jos
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#007). The name was Kirjath - sepher -
This clause seems to be added to distinguish this from the other Debir
subdued by Joshua, [Jos 10:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#038).

[Joshua 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 15:16</span></span>

To wife - Which is to be understood with some conditions, as, if he were
one who could marry her by God's law; and if she were willing; for
though parents had a great power over their children, they could not
force them to marry any person against their own wills. He might
otherwise be an unfit and unworthy person; but this was a divine
impulse, that Othniel's valour might be more manifest, and so the way
prepared for his future government of the people, [Jdg
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#009).

[Joshua 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jos 15:18</span></span>

As she came - Or, as she went, namely, from her father's house to her
husband's, as the manner was. She moved him - She persuaded her husband,
either, That he would ask: or rather, That he would suffer her to ask,
as she did. She lighted - That she might address herself to her father
in an humble posture, and as a suppliant, which he understood by her
gesture.

[Joshua 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jos 15:19</span></span>

A blessing - That is, a gift, as that word signifies, [Gen
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#011). A south land - That is, a dry
land, much exposed to the south wind, which in those parts was very hot
and drying, as coming from the deserts of Arabia. Springs of water -
That is, a field, wherein are springs of water, which in that country
were of great price; she begs a well moistened field, which also might
give some relief to that which was dry and barren. Upper and nether
springs - Or two fields, one above and the other below that south and
dry ground which she complained of, that by this means it might be
watered on both sides.

[Joshua 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jos 15:32</span></span>

Twenty nine - Here are thirty seven or thirty eight cities named before;
how then are they only reckoned twenty nine? There were only twenty nine
of them, which either, properly belonged to Judah; the rest fell to
Simeon's lot; or Were cities properly so called, that is, walled cities,
or such as had villages under them, as it here follows; the rest being
great, but unwalled towns, or such as had no villages under them.

[Joshua 15:48](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">jos 15:48</span></span>

The mountains - That is, in the higher grounds called mountains or
hills, in comparison of the sea - coast.

[Joshua 15:55](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">jos 15:55</span></span>

Ziph - Which gave its name to the neighbouring mountains, [Sa1
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#001).

[Joshua 15:62](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#062)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_062">jos 15:62</span></span>

City of salt - So called either from the salt sea, which was near it; or
from the salt which was made in, or about it.

[Joshua 15:63](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#063)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_063">jos 15:63</span></span>

Inhabitants of Jerusalem - For though Jerusalem was in part taken by
Joshua before this; yet the upper and stronger part of it, called Zion,
was still kept by the Jebusites, even until David's time; and it seems
from thence they descended to the lower town called Jerusalem, and took
it so that the Israelites were forced to win it a second time; yea, and
a third time also: for afterwards it was possessed by the Jebusites,
[Jdg 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#011); [Sa2
5:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006). Could not drive them out -
Namely, because of their unbelief, as Christ could do no mighty work,
because of the peoples unbelief, [Mar
6:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#005); [Mat
13:58](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#058), and because of their sloth, and
cowardice, and wickedness, whereby they forfeited God's help. The
children of Judah - The same things which are here said of the children
of Judah, are said of the Benjamites, [Jdg
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#021). Hence ariseth a question, To
which of the tribes Jerusalem belonged? It seems probable, that part of
it, and indeed the greatest part, stood in the tribe of Benjamin; and
hence this is mentioned in the list of their cities, and not in Judah's
list; and part of it stood in Judah's share, even mount Moriah, on which
the temple was built; and mount Sion, when it was taken from the
Jebusites. To this day - When this book was written, whether in Joshua's
life, which continued many years after the taking of Jerusalem; or after
his death, when this clause was added by some other man of God. But this
must be done before David's time, when the Jebusites were quite
expelled, and their fort taken.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 16](jos016)

</div>
