<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1016)  [Next](kg1018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 17:1</span></span>

Elijah - The most eminent of the prophets, who is here brought in, like
Melchisedek, without any mention of his father, or mother, or beginning
of his days; like a man dropt out of the clouds, and raised by God's
special providence as a witness for himself in this most degenerate time
that by his zeal, and courage and miracles, he might give some check, to
their various and abominable idolatries, and some reviving to that small
number of the Lord's prophets, and people, who yet remained in Israel.
He seems to have been naturally of a rough spirit. And rough spirits are
called to rough services. His name signifies, my God Jehovah is he: he
that sends me, and will own me, and bear me out. Said to Ahab - Having
doubtless admonished him of his sin and danger before; now upon his
obstinacy in his wicked courses, he proceeds to declare, and execute the
judgment of God upon him. As the Lord, &c. - I Swear by the God of
Israel, who is the only true and living God; whereas the gods whom thou
hast joined with him, or preferred before him, are dead and senseless
idols. Before whom - Whose minister I am, not only in general, but
especially in this threatening, which I now deliver in his name and
authority. There shall not, &c. - This was a prediction, but was
seconded with his prayer, that God would verify it, [Jam
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017), And this prayer was truly
charitable; that by this sharp affliction, God's honour, and the truth
of his word (which was now so horribly and universally contemned) might
be vindicated; and the Israelites (whom impunity had hardened in their
idolatry) might be awakened to see their own wickedness, and the
necessity of returning to the true religion. Those years - That is,
These following years, which were three and an half, [Luk
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#025); [Jam
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017). My word - Until I shall declare,
that this judgment shall cease, and shall pray to God for the removal of
it.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg1 17:3</span></span>

Hide thyself - Thus God rescues him from the fury of Ahab and Jezebel,
who, he knew, would seek to destroy him. That Ahab did not seize on him
immediately upon these words must be ascribed to God's over - ruling
providence.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg1 17:4</span></span>

Have commanded - Or, I shall command, that is, effectually move them, by
instincts which shall be as forcible with them, as a law or command is
to men. God is said to command both brute creatures, and senseless
things; when he causeth them to do the things which he intends to effect
by them. The ravens - Which he chuseth for this work; to shew his care
and power in providing for the prophet by those creatures, which are
noted for their greediness, that by this strange experiment he might be
taught to trust God in those many and great difficulties to which he was
to be exposed. God could have sent angels to minister to him. But he
chose winged messengers of another kind to shew he can serve his own
purposes as effectually, by the meanest creatures as by the mightiest.
Ravens neglect their own young, and do not feed them: yet when God
pleaseth, they shall feed his prophet.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg1 17:6</span></span>

And flesh - Not raw, but boiled by the ministry of some angel or man,
and left in some place 'till the ravens came for it: in all which, there
is nothing incredible, considering the power and providence of God.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 17:7</span></span>

A while - Heb. at the end of days; that is, of a year; for so the word
days is often used. Dried - God so ordering it, for the punishment of
those Israelites who lived near it, and had hitherto been refreshed by
it: and for the exercise of Elijah's faith, and to teach him to depend
upon God alone.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg1 17:9</span></span>

Zarephath - A city between Tyre and Sidon, called Sarepta by St. [Luk
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#026), and others. Zidon - To the
jurisdiction of that city, which was inhabited by Gentiles. And God's
providing for his prophet, first, by an unclean bird, and then by a
Gentile, whom the Jews esteemed unclean, was a presage of the calling of
the Gentiles, and rejection of the Jews. So Elijah was the first prophet
of the Gentiles. Commanded - Appointed or provided, for that she had as
yet no revelation or command of God about it, appears from [Kg1
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#012).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg1 17:12</span></span>

She said - Therefore though she was a Gentile, yet she owned the God of
Israel as the true God. Two sticks - A few sticks, that number being
often used indefinitely for any small number. And die - For having no
more provision, we must needs perish with hunger. For though the famine
was chiefly in the land of Israel, yet the effects of it were in Tyre
and Sidon, which were fed by the corn of that land. But what a poor
supporter was this likely to be? who had no fuel, but what she gathered
in the streets, and nothing to live upon herself, but an handful of meal
and a little oil! To her Elijah is sent, that he might live upon
providence, as much as he had done when the ravens fed him.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg1 17:13</span></span>

But make, &c. - This he requires as a trial of her faith, and obedience,
which he knew God would plentifully reward; and so this would be a great
example to encourage others to the practice of the same graces.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg1 17:14</span></span>

The barrel, &c. - The meal of the barrel So the cruse of oil for the oil
of the cruse.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg1 17:15</span></span>

Many days - A long time, even above two years, before the following
event about her son happened. And surely the increase of her faith to
such a degree, as to enable her thus to deny herself and trust the
promise, was as great a miracle in the kingdom of grace, as the increase
of her oil in the kingdom of providence. Happy are they who can thus
against hope believe and obey in hope.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg1 17:16</span></span>

Wasted not - See how the reward answered the service. She made one cake
for the prophet and was repaid with many for herself and her son. What
is laid out in charity is set out to the best interest, an upon the best
securities.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg1 17:17</span></span>

No breath - That is, he died. We must not think it strange, if we meet
with sharp afflictions, even when we are in the way of eminent service
to God.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg1 17:18</span></span>

She said - Wherein have I injured thee? Or, why didst thou come to
sojourn in my house, if this be the fruit of it? They are the words of a
troubled mind. Art thou come - Didst thou come for this end, that thou
mightest severely observe my sins, and by thy prayers bring down God's
just judgment upon me, as thou hast brought down this famine upon the
nation? To call, &c. - To God's remembrance: for God is said in
scripture, to remember sins, when he punisheth them; and to forget them,
when he spares the sinner.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg1 17:19</span></span>

Into a loft - A private place, where he might more freely pour out his
soul to God, and use such gestures as he thought most proper.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg1 17:20</span></span>

He cried - A prayer full of powerful arguments. Thou art the Lord, that
canst revive the child: and my God; and therefore wilt not, deny me. She
is a widow, add not affliction to the afflicted; deprive her not of the
support and staff of her age: she hath given me kind entertainment: let
her not fare the worse for her kindness to a prophet, whereby wicked men
will take occasion to reproach both her, and religion.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg1 17:21</span></span>

Come into him - By which it is evident, that the soul was gone out of
his body, this was a great request; but Elijah was encouraged to make
it; by his zeal for God's honour, and by the experience which he had of
his prevailing power with God in prayer.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg1 17:22</span></span>

Into him again - This plainly supposes the existence of the soul in a
state of separation, and consequently its immortality: probably God
might design by this miracle to give an evidence hereof, for the
encouragement of his suffering people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 18](kg1018)

</div>
