<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1017)  [Next](kg1019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 18:1</span></span>

The third year - Either, From the time when he went to hide himself by
the brook Cherith; six months before which time the famine might begin.
And so this being towards the end of the third year, it makes up these
three years and six months, [Jam 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017).
Or, From the time of his going to Sarepta, which probably was a year
after the famine begun; So this might be in the middle of the third
year, which also makes up the three years and six months. Go to Ahab -
To acquaint him with the cause of this judgment, and to advise him to
remove it, and upon that condition to promise him rain. Will send -
According to thy word and prayer, which thou shalt make for it. Thus God
takes care to maintain the honour of his prophet, and in judgment
remembers mercy to Israel, for the sake of the holy seed yet left among
them, who suffered in this common calamity.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg1 18:2</span></span>

Elijah went - Wherein he shews a strong faith, and resolute obedience,
and invincible courage, that he durst at God's command run into the
mouth of this raging lion.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg1 18:3</span></span>

Obadiah - Being valued by Ahab for his great prudence and fidelity, and
therefore indulged as to the worship of the calves and Baal. But how
could he and some other Israelites be said to fear the Lord, when they
did not go up to Jerusalem to worship, as God had commanded? Although
they seem not to be wholly excusable in this neglect, yet because they
worshipped God in spirit and truth, and performed all moral duties to
God and their brethren, and abstained from idolatry, being kept from
Jerusalem by violence, God bares with their infirmity herein.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg1 18:4</span></span>

Prophets - This name is not only given to such as are endowed with an
extraordinary spirit of prophecy, but to such ministers as devoted
themselves to the service of God in preaching, praying, and praising
God. And fed - With the hazard of his own life, and against the king's
command; as wisely considering, that no command of an earthly prince
could over - rule the command of the king of kings. Bread and water -
With meat and drink. See how wonderfully God raises up friends for his
ministers and people where one would least expect them!

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 18:7</span></span>

And fell - By this profound reverence, shewing his great respect and
love to him.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg1 18:8</span></span>

Thy lord - Ahab: whom, though a very wicked man, he owns for Obadiah's
Lord and king; thereby instructing us, that the wickedness of kings doth
not exempt their subjects from obedience to their lawful commands.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg1 18:9</span></span>

He said - Wherein have I offended God, and thee, that thou shouldest
expose me to certain ruin.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg1 18:10</span></span>

No nation - Near his own, where he could in reason think that Elijah had
hid himself. It does not appear, that Ahab sought him, in order to put
him to death: but rather in hopes of prevailing upon him, to pray for
the removal of the drought.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg1 18:12</span></span>

Carry thee - Such transportations of the prophets having doubtless been
usual before this time, as they were after it. Slay me - Either as one
that hath deluded him with vain hopes: or, because I did not seize upon
thee, and bring thee to him. But I, &c. - He speaks not these words, in
a way of boasting; but that he might move the prophet to spare him, and
not put him upon that hazardous action.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg1 18:17</span></span>

Ahab said - Have I at last met with thee, O thou disturber of my
kingdom, the author of this famine, and all our calamities?

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg1 18:18</span></span>

He answered - These calamities are not to be imputed to me, but thine
and thy father's wickedness. He answered him boldly, because he spoke in
God's name, and for his honour and service. Ye - All of you have
forsaken the Lord, and thou in particular, hast followed Baalim.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg1 18:19</span></span>

Send - Messengers, that this controversy may be decided, what is the
cause of these heavy judgments. All Israel - By their heads, or
representatives, that they may be witnesses of all our transactions.
Carmel - Not that Carmel, in Judah, but another in Issachar by the
midland sea, which he chose as a convenient place being not far from the
center of his kingdom, to which all the tribes might conveniently
resort, and at some distance from Samaria, that Jezebel might not
hinder. Prophets of Baal - Who were dispersed in all the parts of the
kingdom. Of the groves - Who attended upon those Baal's or idols that
were worshipped in the groves, which were near the royal city, and much
frequented by the king and the queen.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg1 18:20</span></span>

Ahab sent - He complied with Elijah's motion; because the urgency of the
present distress made him willing to try all means to remove it; from a
curiosity of seeing some extraordinary events; and principally, because
God inclined his heart.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg1 18:21</span></span>

And said - Why do you walk so lamely and unevenly, being so unsteady in
your opinions and practices, and doubting whether it is better to
worship God or Baal? If the Lord - Whom you pretend to worship. Follow -
Worship him, and him only, and that in such place and manner as he hath
commanded you. If Baal - If Baal can prove himself to be the true God.
Answered not - Being convinced of the reasonableness of his proposition.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg1 18:22</span></span>

I only - Here present, to own the cause of God. As far the other
prophets of the Lord, many of them were slain, others banished, or hid
in caves.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg1 18:23</span></span>

Let then, &c. - To put this controversy to a short issue.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg1 18:24</span></span>

By Fire - That shall consume the sacrifice by fire sent from heaven;
which the people knew the true God used to do. It was a great
condescension in God, that he would permit Baal to be a competitor with
him. But thus God would have every mouth to be stopped, and all flesh
become silent before him. And Elijah doubtless had a special commission
from God, or he durst not have put it to this issue. But the case was
extraordinary, and the judgment upon it would be of use not only then,
but in all ages. Elijah does not say, The God that answers by water,
tho' that was the thing the country needed, but that answers by fire,
let him be God; because the atonement was to be made, before the
judgment could be removed. The God therefore that has power to pardon
sin, and to signify that by consuming the sin - offering, must needs be
the God that can relieve us against the calamity.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg1 18:25</span></span>

Dress it first - And I am willing to give you the precedency. This he
did, because if he had first offered, and God had answered by fire,
Baal's priests would have desisted from making the trial on their part;
and because the disappointment of the priests of Baal, of which he was
well assured, would prepare the way for the people's attention to his
words, and cause them to entertain his success with more affection; and
this coming last would leave the greater impression upon their hearts.
And this they accepted, because they might think, that if Baal answered
them first, which they presumed he would, the people would be so
confirmed and heightened in their opinion of Baal, that they might
murder Elijah before he came to his experiment.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg1 18:26</span></span>

Dressed - Cut it in pieces, and laid the parts upon the wood. From
morning - From the time of the morning sacrifice; which advantage Elijah
suffered them to take. They leapt upon - Or, beside the altar: or,
before it. They used some superstitious and disorderly gestures, either
pretending to be acted by the spirit of their god, and to be in a kind
of religious extasy; or, in way of devotion to their god.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg1 18:27</span></span>

Mocked them - Derided them and their gods, which had now proved
themselves to be ridiculous and contemptible things.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">kg1 18:28</span></span>

Cut themselves - Mingling their own blood with their sacrifices; as
knowing by experience, that nothing was more acceptable to their Baal
(who was indeed the devil) than human blood; and hoping thereby to move
their god to help them. And this indeed was the practice of divers
Heathens in the worship of their false gods.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg1 18:29</span></span>

Prophesied - That is, prayed to, and worshipped their god.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">kg1 18:30</span></span>

The altar - This had been built by some of their ancestors for the
offering of sacrifice to the God of Israel, which was frequently done in
high places. Broken down - By some of the Baalites, out of their enmity
to the true God, whose temple, because they could not reach, they shewed
their malignity in destroying his altars.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">kg1 18:31</span></span>

Twelve stones - This he did, to renew the covenant between God and all
the tribes, as Moses did, [Exo 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#004),
to shew, that he prayed and acted in the name, and for the service of
the God of all the Patriarchs, and of all the tribes of Israel, and for
their good: and, to teach the people, that though the tribes were
divided as to their civil government, they ought all to be united in the
worship of the same God. Israel - Jacob was graciously answered by God
when he prayed to him, and was honoured with the glorious title of
Israel, which noted his prevalency with God and men. And I, calling upon
the same God, doubt not of a like gracious answer; and if ever you mean
to have your prayers granted, you must seek to the God of Jacob.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">kg1 18:33</span></span>

With water - This they could quickly fetch, either from the river
Kishon; or, if that was dried up, from the sea; both were at the foot of
the mountain. This he did to make the miracle more glorious, and more
unquestionable.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">kg1 18:36</span></span>

The evening sacrifice - This time he chose, that he might unite his
prayers with the prayers of the godly Jews at Jerusalem, who at that
time assembled together to pray. Lord God of, &c. - Hereby he shews
faith in God's ancient covenant, and also reminds the people, of their
relation both to God and to the patriarchs. Done these things - Brought
this famine, gathered the people hither, and done what I have done, or
am doing here; not in compliance with my own passions, but in obedience
to thy command.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">kg1 18:37</span></span>

Hast turned - Let them feel so powerful a change in their hearts, that
they may know it is thy work. Back again - Unto thee, from whom they
have revolted.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">kg1 18:38</span></span>

Consumed - Solomon's altar was consecrated by fire from heaven; but this
was destroyed, because no more to be used.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">kg1 18:39</span></span>

They fell - In acknowledgment of the true God. He is God - He alone; and
Baal is a senseless idol. And they double the words, to note their
abundant satisfaction and assurance of the truth of their assertion.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">kg1 18:40</span></span>

Elijah said - He takes the opportunity, whilst the peoples hearts were
warm with the fresh sense of this great miracle. The brook Kishon - That
their blood might be poured into that river, and thence conveyed into
the sea, and might not defile the holy land. Slew them - As these
idolatrous priests were manifestly under a sentence of death, passed
upon such by the sovereign Lord of life and death, so Elijah had
authority to execute it, being a prophet, and an extraordinary minister
of God's vengeance. The four hundred prophets of the groves, it seems,
did not attend, and so escaped, which perhaps Ahab rejoiced in. But it
proved, they were reserved to be the instruments of his destruction, by
encouraging him to go up to Ramoth - Gilead.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">kg1 18:41</span></span>

Get up - From the river, where he had been present at the slaughter of
Baal's priests, to thy tent: which probably was pitched on the side of
Carmel. Eat, &c. - Take comfort, and refresh thyself: for neither the
king, nor any of the people could have leisure to eat, being wholly
intent upon the decision of the great controversy. For there is, &c. -
The rain is as certainly coming, as if you heard the noise which it
makes.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">kg1 18:42</span></span>

The top of Carmel - Where he might pour out his prayers unto God; and
whence he might look towards the sea. He had a large prospect of the sea
from hence. The sailors at this day call it cape Carmel. Between his
knees - That is, bowed his head so low, that it touched his knees; thus
abasing himself in the sense of his own meanness, now God had thus
honoured him.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">kg1 18:43</span></span>

Go - While I continue praying. Elijah desired to have timely notice of
the first appearance of rain, that Ahab and the people might know that
it was obtained from Jehovah by the prophet's prayers, and thereby be
confirmed in the true religion.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:44](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">kg1 18:44</span></span>

Like a man's hand - Great blessings often rise from small beginnings,
and showers of plenty from a cloud of a span long. Let us therefore
never despise the day of small things, but hope and wait for greater
things from it.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">kg1 18:46</span></span>

The hand, &c. - God gave him more than natural strength, whereby he was
enabled to outrun Ahab's chariot, for so many miles together. He girded,
&c. - That his garments, which were long, might not hinder him. Ran
before Ahab - To shew how ready he was to honour and serve the king,
that by this humble and self - denying carriage, it might appear, what
he had done was not from envy or passion, but only from a just zeal for
God's glory: that by his presence with the king and his courtiers, he
might animate and oblige them to proceed in the reformation of religion:
and, to demonstrate, that he was neither ashamed of, nor afraid for what
he had done, but durst venture himself in the midst of his enemies.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 19](kg1019)

</div>
