<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1.md)  
  [Previous](kg1019)  [Next](kg1021.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#001.md)

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 20:1</span></span>

Gathered his host - To war against Israel: wherein his design was to
enlarge the conquest which his father had made, but God's design was to
punish Israel for their apostacy and idolatry.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg1 20:3</span></span>

Thy silver, &c. - I challenge them as my own, and expect to have them
forthwith delivered, if thou expect peace with me.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg1 20:4</span></span>

The king said - I do so far comply with thy demand, that I will own thee
for my Lord, and myself for thy vassal, and will hold my wives, and
children, and estate, as by thy favour, and with an acknowledgment.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg1 20:5</span></span>

Saying, &c. - Although I did before demand not only the dominion of thy
treasures, and wives, and children, as thou mayst seem to understand me,
but also the actual portion of them; wherewith I would then have been
contented.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg1 20:6</span></span>

Yet, &c. - Yet now I will not accept of those terms, but together with
thy royal treasures, I expect all the treasures of thy servants or
subjects; nor will I wait 'till thou deliver them to me, but I will send
my servants into the city, and they shall search out and take away all
thou art fond of, and this to prevent fraud and delay; and then I will
grant thee a peace.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 20:7</span></span>

Seeketh mischief - Though he pretended peace, upon these terms
propounded, it is apparent by those additional demands, that he intends
nothing less than our utter ruin. I denied not - I granted his demands
in the sense before mentioned.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg1 20:10</span></span>

And said, &c. - If I do not assault thy city with so numerous an army,
as shall turn all thy city into an heap of dust, and shall be sufficient
to carry it all away, though every soldier take but one handful of it.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg1 20:11</span></span>

Let not him, &c. - Do not triumph before the victory, for the events of
war are uncertain.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg1 20:13</span></span>

And behold, &c. - God, though forsaken and neglected by Ahab, prevents
him with his gracious promise of help: that Ahab and the idolatrous
Israelites, might hereby be fully convinced, or left without excuse,
that Ben - hadad's intolerable pride, and contempt of God, and of his
people, might be punished: and that the remnant of his prophets and
people who were involved in the same calamity with the rest of the
Israelites, might be preserved and delivered. I am the Lord - And not
Baal, because I will deliver thee, which he cannot do.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg1 20:14</span></span>

He said, &c. - Not by old and experienced soldiers, but by those young
men; either the sons of the princes, and great men of the land, who were
fled thither for safety; or their pages, or servants that used to attend
them: who are bred up delicately, and seem unfit for the business. Thou
- Partly to encourage the young men to fight courageously, as being the
presence of their prince: and partly, that it might appear, that the
victory was wholly due to God's gracious providence, and not to the
valour or worthiness of the instruments.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg1 20:15</span></span>

All Israel - All that were fit to go out to war; all, except those whom
their age, or the same infirmity excused.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg1 20:18</span></span>

Take them - He bids them not fight, for he thought they needed not to
strike one stroke; and that the Israelites could not stand the first
brunt.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg1 20:20</span></span>

His man - Him who came to seize upon him, as Ben - hadad had commanded.
Fled - Being amazed at the unexpected and undaunted courage of the
Israelites, and struck with a divine terror.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg1 20:21</span></span>

The king went - Proceeded further in his march. Smote the chariots - The
men that fought from them.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg1 20:22</span></span>

Mark, and see - Consider what is necessary for thee to do by way of
preparation. The enemies of the children of God, are restless in their
malice and tho' they may take some breathing time for themselves, they
are still breathing out slaughter against the church. It therefore
concerns us always to expect our spiritual enemies, and to mark and see
what we do.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg1 20:23</span></span>

Said to him - They suppose that their gods were no better than the
Syrian gods and that there were many gods who had each his particular
charge and jurisdiction; which was the opinion of all heathen nations;
that some were gods of the woods, other of the rivers, and others of the
mountains; and they fancied these to be the latter, because the land of
Canaan was a mountainous land, and the great temple of their God at
Jerusalem, stood upon an hill, and so did Samaria, where they had
received their last blow: it is observable, they do not impute their ill
success to their negligence, and drunkenness, and bad conduct, nor to
the valour of the Israelites; but to a divine power, which was indeed
visible in it. In the plain - Wherein there was not only superstition,
but policy; because the Syrians excelled the Israelites in horses, which
are most serviceable in plain ground.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg1 20:24</span></span>

Take the kings away - Who being of softer education, and less
experienced in military matters, were less fit for service; and being
many of them but mercenaries, and therefore less concerned in his good
success, would be more cautions in venturing themselves. Captains - That
is, experienced soldiers of his own subjects, who would faithfully obey
the commands of the general (to which the kings would not so readily
yield) and use their utmost skill and valour for their own interest and
advancement.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg1 20:27</span></span>

And went - Being encouraged by the remembrance of their former success,
and an expectation of assistance from God again. And pitched - Probably
upon some hilly ground, where they might secure themselves, and watch
for advantage against their enemies; which may be the reason why the
Syrians durst not assault them before the seventh day, [Kg1
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#029.md). Little flocks - Few, and weak,
being also for conveniency of fighting, and that they might seem to be
more than they were, divided into two bodies.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">kg1 20:30</span></span>

The wall - Or, the walls (the singular number, for the plural) of the
city; in which they were now fortifying themselves. This might possibly
happen thro' natural causes; but most probably, was effected by the
mighty power of God, sending some earthquake, or violent storm which
threw down the walls upon them; or doing this by the ministry of angels.
And if ever miracle was to be wrought, now seems to have been the proper
season for it; when the blasphemous Syrians denied the sovereign power
of God, and thereby in some sort obliged him, to give a proof of it; and
to shew, that he was the God of the plains, as well as of the mountains;
and that he could as effectually destroy them in their strongest holds,
as in the open fields; and make the very walls, to whose strength they
trusted for their defence, to be the instruments of their ruin. But it
may be farther observed, that it is not said, that all these were killed
by the fall of this wall; but only that the wall fell upon them, killing
some, and wounding others.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">kg1 20:31</span></span>

He will save thy life - This encouragement have all poor sinners, to
repent and humble themselves before God. The God of Israel is a merciful
God; let us rend our hearts and return to him.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">kg1 20:32</span></span>

My brother - I do not only pardon him, but honour and love him as my
brother. What a change is here! From the height of prosperity, to the
depth of distress. See the uncertainty of human affairs! Such turns are
they subject to, that the spoke of the wheel which is uppermost now, may
soon be the lowest of all.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">kg1 20:33</span></span>

Thy brother - Understand, Liveth: for that he enquired after, [Kg1
20:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#032.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">kg1 20:34</span></span>

Streets - Or, Markets, &c. places where thou mayest either receive the
tribute which I promise to pay thee, or exercise judicature upon my
subjects in case of their refusal. So he made, &c. - He takes no notice
of his blasphemy against God; nor of the injuries which his people had
suffered from him.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">kg1 20:35</span></span>

In the word - ln the name, and by the command of God, whereof doubtless
he had informed him. Smite me - So as to wound me, [Kg1
20:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#037.md). He speaks what God commanded
him, though it was to his own hurt; by which obedience to God, he
secretly reproacheth Ahab's disobedience in a far easier matter. And
this the prophet by God's appointment desires, that looking like a
wounded soldier, he might have the more free access to the king. Refused
- Not out of contempt of God's command, but probably, in tenderness to
his brother.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">kg1 20:36</span></span>

Slew him - We cannot judge of the case; this man might be guilty of many
other heinous sins unknown to us but known to God; for which, God might
justly cut him off: which God chose to do upon this occasion, that by
the severity of this punishment of a prophet's disobedience, proceeding
from pity to his brother, he might teach Ahab the greatness of his sin,
in sparing him through foolish pity, whom by the laws of religion, and
justice, and prudence, he should have cut of.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">kg1 20:38</span></span>

With ashes - Or, with a cloath, or band; (as the Hebrew doctors
understand the word) whereby he bound up his wound, which probably was
in his face; for it was to be made in a conspicuous place, that it might
be visible to Ahab and others.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">kg1 20:39</span></span>

He said - This relation is a parable; an usual way of instruction in the
eastern parts, and most fit for this occasion wherein an obscure prophet
was to speak to a great king; impatient of a down - right reproof, and
exceeding partial in his own cause. A man - My commander as the manner
of expression sheweth.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">kg1 20:40</span></span>

Thy judgment - Thy sentence; thou must perform the condition. Either
suffer the one, or do the other.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">kg1 20:42</span></span>

Thy life - What was the great sin of Ahab in this action, for which God
so severely punisheth him? The great dishonour hereby done to God, in
suffering so horrid a blasphemer, to go unpunished, which was contrary
to an express law, [Lev 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#016.md). And God
had delivered him into Ahab's hand, for his blasphemy, as he promised to
do, [Kg1 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#028.md), by which act of his
providence, compared with that law, it was most evident, that this man
was appointed by God to destruction, but Ahab was so far from punishing
this blasphemer, that he doth not so much as rebuke him, but dismisseth
him upon easy terms, and takes not the least care for the reparation of
God's honour, and the people were punished for their own sins, which
were many, and great; though God took this occasion to inflict it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 21](kg1021.md)

</div>
