<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1012)  [Next](kg1014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 13:1</span></span>

Man of God - An holy prophet. By the word, &c. - By Divine inspiration
and command.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg1 13:2</span></span>

The altar - And consequently, against all that worship. O altar - He
directs his speech to the altar, because the following signs were
wrought upon it. Josiah - Which being done above three hundred years
after this prophecy, plainly shews the absolute certainty of God's
providence; and fore - knowledge even in the most contingent things. For
this was in itself uncertain, and wholly depended upon man's will, both
as to the having of a child, and as to the giving it this name.
Therefore God can certainly and effectually over - rule man's will which
way he pleaseth; or else it was possible, that this prediction should
have been false; which is blasphemous to imagine. The priests - The
bones of the priests, [Kg2 23:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#015),
whereby the altar should be defiled. How bold was the man, that durst
attack the king in his pride, and interrupt the solemnity he was proud
of? Whoever is sent on God's errand, must not fear the faces of men. It
was above three hundred and fifty years ere this prophecy was fulfilled.
Yet it is spoken of as sure and nigh at hand. For a thousand years are
with God as one day.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg1 13:3</span></span>

Gave a sign - That is, he then wrought a miracle, to assure them of the
truth of his prophecy.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg1 13:4</span></span>

Put forth, &c. - To point out the man whom he would have the people lay
hands on. The altar - Where it was employed in offering something upon
it. Dried up - Or, withered, the muscles and sinews, the instruments of
motion, shrunk up. This God did, to chastise Jeroboam for offering
violence to the Lord's prophet: to secure the prophet against farther
violence: and, that in this example God might shew, how highly he
resents the injuries done to his ministers, for the faithful discharge
of their office.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg1 13:6</span></span>

Thy God - Who hath manifested himself to be thy God and friend, in a
singular manner; and therefore will hear thy prayers for me, though he
will not regard mine, because I have forsaken him and his worship.
Besought - To assure Jeroboam, that what he had said, was not from ill -
will to him, and that he heartily desired his reformation, and not his
ruin. Restored - Because he repented of that violence, which he intended
against that prophet, for which God inflicted it: and that this goodness
of God to him, might have led him to repentance; or, if he continued
impenitent, leave him without excuse.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg1 13:9</span></span>

For so, &c. - My refusal of thy favour, is not from any contempt, or
hatred of thy person; but in obedience to the just command of my God,
who hath forbidden me all father converse or communication with thee.
Eat nor drink - In that place, or with that people. Whereby God
declares, how detestable they were in God's eyes; because they were vile
apostates from the true God, and embraced this idol - worship, against
the light of their own consciences, merely to comply with the king's
humour and command. Nor turn - That by thy avoiding the way that led
thee to Beth - el as execrable, although thou wentest by my special
command, thou mightest teach all others, how much they should abhor that
way, and all thoughts of going to that place, or to such people, upon
any unnecessary occasion.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg1 13:11</span></span>

A prophet - One to whom, and by whom God did sometimes impart his mind;
as it is manifest from [Kg1 13:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#020),
and one that had a respect to the Lord's holy prophets, and gave credit
to their predictions: but whether he was a good man, may be doubted,
seeing we find him in a downright lie, [Kg1
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#018). And altho' an holy prophet may
possibly have continued in the kingdom of Israel, he would never have
gone from his own habitation, to dwell at Beth - el, the chief seat of
idolatry, unless with design to preach against it: which it is evident
he did not; his sons seem to have been present at, and, and to have
joined with others in that idolatrous worship.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg1 13:21</span></span>

Cried - With a loud voice, the effect of his passion, both for his own
guilt and shame, and for the prophet's approaching misery.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg1 13:22</span></span>

Shall not, &c. - Thou shalt not die a natural, but a violent death; and
that in this journey, before thou returnest to thy native habitation.
But is it not strange that the lying prophet escapes, while the man of
God is so severely punished? Certainly there must be a judgment to come,
when these things shall be called over again, and when those who sinned
most and suffered least in this world, will receive according to their
works.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg1 13:23</span></span>

Saddled for him - But, it is observable, he doth not accompany him; his
guilty conscience making him fear to be involved in the same judgment
with him.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg1 13:24</span></span>

Slew him - But why doth God punish a good man so severely for so small
an offence? His sin was not small, for it was a gross disobedience to a
positive command. And it cannot seem strange if God should bring his
deserved death upon him in this manner, for the accomplishment of his
own glorious designs, to vindicate his own justice from the imputation
of partiality; to assure the truth of his predictions, and thereby
provoke Jeroboam and his idolatrous followers to repentance; and to
justify himself in all his dreadful judgments which he intended to
inflict upon Jeroboam's house, and the whole kingdom of Israel.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">kg1 13:28</span></span>

He found, &c. - Here was a concurrence of miracles: that the ass did not
run away from the lion, according to his nature, but boldly stood still,
as reserving himself to carry the prophet to his burial; that the lion
did not devour its prey, nor yet go away when he had done his work, but
stood still, partly to preserve the carcase of the prophet from other
wild beasts or fowls, partly, as an evidence that the prophet's death
was not casual, nor the effect of a lion's ravenous disposition, but of
God's singular and just judgment; and consequently, that his prediction
was divine, and should be infallibly accomplished in its proper time;
and partly, as a token of God's favour to the deceased prophet, of whose
very carcase he took such special care: thereby signifying, that
although for wise and just reasons he thought fit to take away his life,
yet his remains was precious to him.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">kg1 13:30</span></span>

His grave - So that threatening, [Kg1
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#022), was fulfilled; and withal, the
memory of his prophecy was revived and preserved among them, and his
very carcase resting there, might be a witness of their madness and
desperate wickedness, in continuing in their abominable idolatry, after
such an assurance of the dreadful effects of it. They - The old prophet
and his sons, and others, whom common humanity taught to lament the
untimely death of so worthy a person. Alas, &c. - Which was an usual
form of expression in funeral - lamentations.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">kg1 13:31</span></span>

When I am dead, &c - Tho' he was a lying prophet, yet he desired to die
the death of a true prophet. Gather not my Soul with the sinners of Beth
- el, but with this man of God: Because what he cried against the altar
of Beth - el, shall surely come to pass. Thus by the mouth of two
witnesses was it established, if possible to convince Jeroboam.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">kg1 13:32</span></span>

Samaria - That is, of the kingdom of Samaria; as it was called, though
not when this fact was done, yet before these books were written.
Samaria was properly this name of one city, [Kg1
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#001), but from hence the whole kingdom
of Israel was so called.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">kg1 13:33</span></span>

After this - That is, after all these things: the singular number put
for the plural; after so many, and evident, and successive miracles.
Made again - He abated not so much as a circumstance in his idolatrous
worship. Whosoever - Without any respect to tribe or family, or
integrity of body, or mind, or life; all which were to be regarded in
the priesthood.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">kg1 13:34</span></span>

Sin - Either, an occasion of sin, and means of hardening all his
posterity in their idolatry: or, a punishment, for so the word sin is
often used. This his obstinate continuance in his idolatry, after such
warnings, was the utter ruin of all his family. They betray themselves
effectually, who endeavour to support themselves by any sin.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 14](kg1014)

</div>
