<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1.md)  
  [Previous](kg1005)  [Next](kg1007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001.md)

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 6:1</span></span>

Four hundred and four score, &c. - Allowing forty years to Moses,
seventeen to Joshua, two hundred ninety - nine to the Judges, forty to
Eli, forty to Samuel and Saul, forty to David, and four to Solomon
before he began the work, we have just the sum of four hundred and
eighty. So long it was before that holy house was built, which in less
than four hundred and thirty years was burnt by Nebuchadnezzar. It was
thus deferred, because Israel had by their sins, made themselves
unworthy of this honour: and because God would shew how little he values
external pomp and splendor in his service. And God ordered it now,
chiefly to be a shadow of good things to come.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg1 6:2</span></span>

The house - Properly so called, as distinct from all the walls and
buildings which were adjoining to it; namely, the holy, and most holy
place. Length - From east, to west. And this and the other measures may
seem to belong to the inside from wall to wall. Cubits - Cubits of the
sanctuary. Height - Namely, of the house: for the porch was one hundred
and twenty cubits high, [Ch2 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#004.md). So
that all the measures compared each with other were harmonious. For
sixty to twenty (the length to the breadth) is triple: or as three to
one: and sixty to thirty (the length to the height) is double, or as two
to one: and thirty to twenty (the height to the breadth) is one and an
half, as three to two. Which are the proportions answering to the three
great concords in music, commonly called, a twelfth, an eighth, and a
fifth. Which therefore must needs be a graceful proportion to the eye,
as that in music is graceful to the ear.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg1 6:3</span></span>

The porch - In the front of, or entrance into the house, [Ch2
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#004.md), being a portico, a walk or
gallery, at one end of the building (from side to side.) And the
measures of this were harmonious also. For twenty to ten (the length of
the portico to the breadth of it) is double, or as two to one. And, if
the height within, be the same with that of the house, that is thirty;
it will be to the length of it, as three to two; and to its breadth, as
three to one. Or, if we take in the whole height mentioned, [Ch2
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#004.md), which is one hundred and twenty;
there is in this no disproportion: being to its length as six to one;
and to its breadth as twelve to one; especially when this height was
conveniently divided into several galleries, one over another, each of
which had their due proportions.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg1 6:4</span></span>

Narrow - Narrow outward, to prevent the inconveniences of the weather;
widening by degrees inward, that so the house might better receive, and
more disperse the light.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg1 6:5</span></span>

Against the wall - The beams of the chambers were not fastened into the
wall, but leaned upon the buttresses of the wall. Chambers - For the
laying the priests garments, and other utensils belonging to the temple,
therein. Round about - On all the sides except the east, where the porch
was; and except some very small passages for the light. And yet these
lights might be in the five uppermost cubits of the wall, which were
above all these chambers, for these were only fifteen cubits high, and
the wall was twenty cubits high. Chambers - Galleries which encompassed
all the chambers; and which were necessary for passage to them.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg1 6:6</span></span>

Broad - On the inside, and besides the galleries mentioned above.
Narrowed rests - Or, narrowings: as in our buildings the walls of an
house are thicker, or broader at the bottom, and narrower towards the
top: only these narrowings were in the outside of the wall, which at
each of the three stories was a cubit narrower than that beneath it. And
this is mentioned, as the reason of the differing breadth of the
chambers; because the wall being narrower, allowed more space for the
upper chambers. Not fastened - That there might be no holes made in the
wall for fastening them; and that the chambers might be removed, if
occasion were, without any inconvenience to the house.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 6:7</span></span>

Made ready - Hewed, and squared, and fitted exactly according to the
direction of the architect. Neither hammer, &c. - So it was ordered,
partly for the ease and conveniency of carriage: partly, for the
magnificence of the work, and commendation of the workmen's skill and
diligence: and partly, for mystical signification. And as this temple
was a manifest type both of Christ's church upon earth, and of the
heavenly Jerusalem: so this circumstance signified as to the former,
that it is the duty of the builders and members of the church, as far as
in them lies, to take care that all things be transacted there with
perfect peace and quietness; and that no noise of contention, or
division, or violence, be heard in that sacred building: and for the
latter, that no spiritual stone, no person, shall bear a part in that
heavenly temple, unless he be first hewed, and squared, and made meet
for it in this life.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg1 6:8</span></span>

The door - That is, by which they entered to go up to the middle chamber
or chambers; such as were in the middle story. Right side - That is, in
the south - side, called the right side; because when a man looks
towards the east, the south is on his right hand. There was another door
on the left, or the north - side, leading to the chambers on that side.
Winding stairs - Without the wall, leading up to the gallery out of
which they went into the several chambers. Middle chamber - Or rather,
into the middle story, or row of chambers; and so in the following
words, out of the middle story: for these stair's could not lead up into
each of the chambers; nor was it needful, but only into the story, which
was sufficient for the use of all the chambers.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg1 6:10</span></span>

Built chambers - The Hebrew words may be properly rendered, He built a
roof, a flat and plain roof, over all the house, according to the manner
of the Israelitish buildings. The inner roof was arched, [Kg1
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#009.md), that it might be the more
beautiful, but the outward roof was flat. Five cubits - Above the walls
of the temple: that it might be a little higher than the arched roof,
which it was designed to cover and secure. They rested - Heb. it rested,
namely, the roof. Timber of cedar - Which rested upon the top of the
wall, as the chambers, [Kg1 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#005.md),
rested upon the sides of the wall.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg1 6:12</span></span>

If - God expresses the condition upon which his promise and favour is
suspended; and by assuring him thereof in case of obedience, he plainly
intimates the contrary upon his disobedience. Thus he was taught, that
all the charge he and the people were at, in erecting this temple, would
neither excuse them from obedience to the law of God, nor shelter them
from his judgments in case of disobedience.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg1 6:15</span></span>

Walls - The name of a wall is not appropriated to stone or brick,
because we read of a brazen wall, [Jer
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#020.md), and a wall of iron, [Eze
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#003.md). And that wall into which Saul
smote his javelin, [Sa1 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#010.md), seems
more probably to be understood of wood, than of stone; especially,
considering that it was the room where the king used to dine. By this
periphrasis, from the floor of the house, unto the walls of the ceiling,
he designs all the side - walls of the house. Them - The side - walls of
the house. Wood - With other kind of wood, even with fir; as appears
from [Ch2 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#005.md), wherewith the floor is
here said to be covered. Floor - This is spoken only concerning the
floor, because there was nothing but planks of fir; whereas there was
both cedar and fir in the sides of the house, the fir being either put
above, or upon the cedar; or intermixed with, or put between the boards
or ribs of cedar: as may be gathered from, [Ch2
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#005.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg1 6:16</span></span>

House - That is, the most holy place, which contained in length twenty
cubits, which may be said to be on the sides Of the house, because this
part took off twenty cubits in length from each side of the house, and
was also twenty cubits from side to side, so it was twenty cubits every
way. The oracle - the most holy place - The last words are added, to
explain what he means by the word oracle, which he had not used before.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg1 6:17</span></span>

House - That is, the holy place. Temple - This is added, to restrain the
signification of the word house, which otherwise notes the whole
building. It - The oracle.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg1 6:18</span></span>

Cedar - Cedar is here named, not to exclude all other wood, but stone
only; as the following words shew.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg1 6:19</span></span>

Prepared - That is, adorned and fitted it for the receipt of the ark.
Solomon made every thing new, but the ark. That with its mercy seat was
still the same that Moses made. This was the token of God's presence,
which is with his people, whether they meet in tent or temple, and
changes not with their condition.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg1 6:20</span></span>

Forepart - Which was in the inner part of the house, called in Hebrew,
the forepart; not because a man first enters there, but because when a
man is entering, or newly entered into the house, it is still before
him. Covered - With gold, [Kg1 7:48](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#048.md);
[Ch1 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#018.md). The altar - The altar of
incense.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg1 6:21</span></span>

House - Or, that house, the oracle. Partition - He made a veil, which
was a farther partition between the holy, and the most holy; which veil
did hang upon these golden chains. Before the oracle - In the outward
part of the wall, or partition, which was erected between the oracle and
the holy place; which is properly said to be before the oracle, there
the veil was hung; and there the chains or bars, or whatsoever it was
which fastened the doors of the oracle, were placed. It - The partition;
which he here distinguisheth from the house, or the main walls of the
house, which he had in the former part of this verse told us were
overlaid with gold; and now he affirms much as of the partition.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg1 6:22</span></span>

Whole house - Not only the oracle, but all the holy place. The altar -
the altar of incense, which was set in the holy place close by the doors
of the oracle. With gold - As before he overlaid it with cedar.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg1 6:23</span></span>

Cherubim - Besides those two made by Moses, [Exo
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#018.md), which were of gold, and far
less than these. The Heathens set up images of their gods, and
worshipped them. These were designed to represent the servants and
attendants of the God of Israel, the holy angels, not to be worshipped
themselves, but to shew how great he is whom we worship.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg1 6:29</span></span>

Cherubim - As signs of the presence and protection of the angels vouch -
safed by God to that place. Palm - trees - Emblems of that peace and
victory over their enemies, which the Israelites duly serving God in
that place might expect. Within and without - Within the oracle and
without it, in the holy place.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">kg1 6:31</span></span>

Fifth part - That is, four cubits in height or breadth, whereas the wall
was twenty cubits.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">kg1 6:36</span></span>

Inner court - The priests court, [Ch2
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#009.md), so called, because it was next to
the temple which it compassed. Cedar beams - Which is understood, of so
many galleries, one on each side of the temple, whereof the three first
were of stone, and the fourth of cedar, all supported with rows of
pillars: upon which there were many chambers for the uses of the temple,
and of the priests.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">kg1 6:38</span></span>

Seven years - It is not strange that this work took up so much time:
for, The temple properly so called, was for quantity the least part of
it, there being very many and great buildings both above ground in the
several courts, (for though only the court of the priests be mentioned,
yet it is thereby implied, that the same thing was proportionably done
in the others) and under ground. The great art which was used here, and
the small number of exquisite artists, required the longer time for the
doing it. And if the building of Diana's temple employed all Asia for
two hundred years; and the building of one pyramid employed three
hundred and sixty thousand men, for twenty years together; both which,
Pliny affirms: no reasonable man can wonder that this temple was seven
years in building. Now let us see what this temple typifies. Christ
himself is the true temple. He himself spoke of the temple of his body:
and in him dwelt all the fullness of the godhead. In him all the Israel
of God meet, and thro' him have access with confidence to God. Every
believer is a living temple, in whom the spirit of God dwelleth. We are
wonderfully made by the Divine Providence, but more wonderfully made
anew by the Divine grace. And as Solomon's temple was built on a rock,
so are we built on Christ. The church is a mystical temple, enriched and
beautified, not with gold and precious stones, but with the gifts and
graces of the spirit. Angels are ministering spirits, attending the
church and all the members of it on all sides. Heaven is the everlasting
temple. There the church will be fixt, and no longer moveable. The
cherubim there always attend upon the throne of glory. In the temple
there was no noise of axes or hammers: every thing is quiet and serene
in heaven. All that shall be stones in that building, must here be
fitted and made ready for it; must be hewn and squared by the Divine
grace, and so made meet for a place in that temple.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 7](kg1007.md)

</div>
