<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2.md)  
  [Previous](kg2016)  [Next](kg2018.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#001.md)

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 17:1</span></span>

To reign - He usurped the kingdom in Ahaz's fourth year; but either was
not owned as king, by the generality of the people; or was not accepted
and established in his kingdom, 'till Ahaz's twelfth year. Nine - After
his confirmation and peaceable possession of his kingdom: for in all, he
reigned seventeen, or eighteen years; twelve with Ahaz, who reigned
sixteen years, and six with Hezekiah.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg2 17:2</span></span>

But not, &c. - For he neither worshipped Baal, as many of his
predecessors did; nor compelled the people to worship the calves; (one
of them, that of Dan, being destroyed, or carried away before, as the
Hebrew writers affirm;) nor, as some add, hindered those by force, who
were minded to go to Jerusalem to worship. And yet, the measure of the
Israelites sins, being now full, vengeance comes upon them without
remedy.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 17:3</span></span>

Shalmaneser - The son, or successor of Tiglath - pileser. The ancient
Hebrew writers made him the same with Sennacherib, who eight years after
this time, invaded the kingdom of Judah; it being very frequent in the
Eastern parts, for one man to be called by several names. Josephus
affirms, that he met with his name in the annals of the Tyrians, which
were extant in his days. He came against him, either because he denied
the tribute which he had promised to pay; or that he might make him
tributary.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg2 17:6</span></span>

Carried Israel away, &c. - There, we have reason to think, after some
time, they were so mingled with the nations, that they were lost, and
the name of Israel was no more in remembrance. They that forgot God,
were themselves forgotten, and they that studied to be like the nations,
were buried among them. Thus ended Israel as a nation. When we read
their entry into Canaan, under Hoshea the son of Nun, who would have
thought, that such would be their exit, under Hoshea, the son of Elah?
Yet we find St. James writing to the twelve tribes scattered abroad. So
that tho' we never read of the return of those that were carried
captive, nor have any ground to believe, that they still remain a
distinct body in some remote corner of the world, yet a remnant of them
did escape, and will remain 'till all Israel shall be saved.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 17:9</span></span>

Did secretly - This belongs, either, To their gross idolatries, and
other abominable practices, which they were ashamed to own before
others; or, to the worship of calves: and so the words are otherwise
rendered; they covered things that were not right towards the Lord: they
covered their idolatrous worship of the calves, with fair pretences of
necessity, the two kingdoms being now divided, and at enmity; and of
their honest intention of serving the true God, and retaining the
substance of the Jewish religion. City - In all parts and places, both
in cities, and in the country; yea, in the most uninhabited parts, where
few or none dwell, beside the watchmen, who are left there in towers, to
preserve the cattle and fruits of the earth, or to give notice of the
approach of enemies.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 17:13</span></span>

Seers - To whom he declared his mind, by revelations and visions, and by
whom he published it, bearing witness, from heaven to their doctrine by
eminent and glorious miracles.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 17:14</span></span>

Hardened, &c. - Refused to submit their neck to the yoke of God's
precepts. A metaphor from stubborn oxen, that will not bow to the yoke.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 17:15</span></span>

Vanity - Idols; so called because of their nothingness, impotency, and
unprofitableness; and by the long worship of idols, they were made like
them, vain, sottish, and senseless creatures.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 17:16</span></span>

Left all - They grew worse and worse; from a partial disobedience to
some of God's laws, they fell by degrees to a total apostacy from all.
The host - The stars, as Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg2 17:18</span></span>

Judah only - And the greatest part of the tribe of Benjamin, with those
of the tribes of Simeon and Levi who were incorporated with them.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg2 17:19</span></span>

Judah kept not - Judah's idolatry and wickedness are here remembered, as
an aggravation of the sin of the Israelites, which was not only evil in
itself, but mischievous to their neighbour, who by their examples were
instructed in their wicked arts, and provoked to an imitation of them.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg2 17:20</span></span>

All Israel - All the tribes of Israel: first, one part of them, and now
the rest. But this extends not to every individual person of these
tribes; for many of them removed into the kingdom of Judah, and were
associated with them.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg2 17:21</span></span>

They made - Which action is here ascribed to the people, because they
would not tarry 'till God by his providence, had invested Jeroboam with
the kingdom which he had promised him; but rashly, and rebelliously,
rose up against the house of David, to which they had so great
obligations; and set him upon the throne without God's leave or advice.
Drave - He not only dissuaded, but kept then, by force from God's
worship at Jerusalem, the only place appointed for it. A great sin - So
the worship of the calves is called, to meet with that idle conceit of
the Israelites, who esteemed it a small sin, especially when they were
forced to it by severe penalties; which yet he shews did not excuse it
from being a sin, and a great sin too.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg2 17:25</span></span>

Therefore - For their gross neglect, and contempt of God, which was
contrary to the principles and practices of the Heathens, who used to
worship the gods of the nations where they lived, and gave that honour
to their false Gods, which here they denied to the true. Hereby also God
asserted his own sovereignty over that land, and made them to
understand, that neither the Israelites were cast out, nor they brought
in by their valour, or strength, but by God's providence, who as he had
cast the Israelites out for their neglect of God's service; so both
could, and would in his due time, turn them out also, if they were
guilty of the same sins.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">kg2 17:28</span></span>

Taught them - The manner of God's worship, as it was practised in
Israel; as may be gathered both from the quality of this person, who was
an Israelitish priest; and from the place of his residence, Beth - el, a
place infamous for the worship of the calves, and from the manner of
their making priests by this man's direction.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">kg2 17:32</span></span>

Sacrificed - Unto the true God: for as to the worship of their own gods,
they needed no instruction, and would not permit a person of another
religion to minister therein.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">kg2 17:33</span></span>

They feared - They worshipped God externally in that way which the
Israelites used. But every nation made gods of their own besides.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">kg2 17:34</span></span>

Unto this day - That is, till the time when this book was written, above
three hundred years in all, till the time of Alexander the Great, when
they were prevailed upon to call away their idols. Former manners - As
the Israelites before their captivity, gave these nations an ill
example, in serving the Lord, and Baal together; so, or after their
former manner, they do unto this day, in the land of their captivity.
They fear not - Though they pretended to fear, and serve both the Lord
and idols, yet in truth they did not, and do not fear or worship the
Lord, but their own calves, or other vain inventions: and God will not
accept that mongrel and false worship, which they pretend to give to the
true God. Statutes - God's law delivered to their fathers, and to them,
as their inheritance, [Psa 119:111](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#111.md).
This is alleged as an evidence, that they did not fear the Lord,
whatsoever they pretended, because they lived in the constant breach of
his statutes. Israel - A name, signifying his special interest in God,
and power with him, which was given to him, not only for himself, but
for his posterity also, whom God frequently honours with that name. And
by this great favour he aggravates their sin.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">kg2 17:41</span></span>

So - In like manner, and after their example. These - Who came in their
stead.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 18](kg2018.md)

</div>
