<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev024)  [Next](lev026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#001)

[Leviticus 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 25:1</span></span>

In mount Sinai - That is, near mount Sinai. So the Hebrew particle beth
is sometimes used. So there is no need to disturb the history in this
place.

[Leviticus 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 25:2</span></span>

When ye come into the land - So as to be settled in it; for the time of
the wars was not to be accounted, nor the time before Joshua's
distribution of the land among them. Keep a sabbath - That is, enjoy
rest and freedom from plowing, and tilling. Unto the Lord - In obedience
and unto the honour of God. This was instituted, For the assertion of
God's sovereign right to the land, in which the Israelites were but
tenants at God's will. For the trial of their obedience. For the
demonstration of his providence as well in general towards men, as
especially towards his own people. To wean them from inordinate love,
and pursuit of worldly advantages, and to inure them to depend upon God
alone, and upon God's blessing for their subsistence. To put them in
mind of that blessed and eternal rest provided for all good men.

[Leviticus 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 25:4</span></span>

A sabbath of rest to the land - They were neither to do any work about
it, nor expect any harvest from it. All yearly labours were to be
intermitted in the seventh year, as much as daily labours on the seventh
day.

[Leviticus 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 25:5</span></span>

Of its own accord - From the grains that fell out of the ears the last
reaping time. Thou shalt not reap - That is, as thy own peculiarly, but
only so as others may reap it with thee, for present food. Undressed -
Not cut off by thee, but suffered to grow for the use of the poor.

[Leviticus 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 25:6</span></span>

The sabbath of the land - That is, the growth of the sabbath, or that
fruit which groweth in the sabbatical year. For thy servant - For all
promiscuously, to take food from thence as they need it.

[Leviticus 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 25:9</span></span>

The jubilee - Signified the true liberty from our spiritual debts and
slaveries to be purchased by Christ, and to be published to the world by
the sound of the gospel. The seventh month - Which was the first month
of the year for civil affairs; the jubilee therefore began in that
month; and, as it seems, upon this very tenth day, when the trumpet
sounded, as other feasts generally began when the trumpet sounded. In
the day of atonement - A very fit time, that when they fasted and prayed
for God's mercy to them in the pardon of their sins, then they might
exercise their charity to men in forgiving their debts; and to teach us,
that the foundation of all solid comfort must be laid in repentance and
atonement for our sins through Christ.

[Leviticus 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 25:10</span></span>

The fiftieth year - The year of jubilee was not the forty and ninth
year, as some learned men think, but precisely the fiftieth. The old
weekly sabbath is called the seventh day, because it truly was so, being
next after the six days of the week and distinct from them all: and the
year of release is called the seventh year, [Lev
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#004), as immediately following the six
years, [Lev 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#003), and distinct from
them all. And in like manner the jubilee is called the fiftieth year,
because it comes next after seven tines seven or forty - nine years,
[Lev 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#008), and is distinct from them
all. Unto all the inhabitants - Understand such as were Israelites;
principally to all servants, even to such as would not and did not go
out at the seventh year, and to the poor, who now were acquitted from
all their debts, and restored to their possessions. Jubilee - So called
either from the Hebrew word Jobel which signifies first a ram, and then
a ram's horn, by the sound whereof it was proclaimed; or from Jubal the
inventor of musical instruments, [Gen
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#021), because it was celebrated with
music and all expressions of joy. Unto his possession - Which had been
sold or otherwise alienated from him. This law was not at all unjust,
because all buyers and sellers had an eye to this condition in their
bargains; but it was expedient in many regards, as To mind them that God
alone was the Lord and proprietor both of them and of their lands, and
they only his tenants; a point which they were very apt to forget. That
hereby inheritances, families, and tribes, might be kept entire and
clear until the coming of the Messiah, who was to be known as by other
things, so by the tribe and family out of which he was to come. And this
accordingly was done by the singular providence of God until the Lord
Jesus did come. Since which time those characters are miserably
confounded: which is no small argument that the Messiah is come. To set
bounds both to the insatiable avarice of some, and the foolish
prodigality of others, that the former might not wholly and finally
swallow up the inheritances of their brethren, and the latter might not
be able to undo themselves and their posterity for ever, which was a
singular privilege of this law and people. His family - From whom he was
gone, being sold to some other family either by himself or by his
father.

[Leviticus 25:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 25:12</span></span>

It shall be holy - So it was, because it was sequestered in great part
from worldly employments and dedicated to God, and to the exercise of
holy joy and thankfulness; and because it was a type of that holy and
happy jubilee which they were to expect and enjoy under the Messiah. The
increase thereof - Such things as it produced of itself. Out of the
field - Whence they in common with others might take it as they needed
it; but must not put it into barns, See [Lev
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#005), and [Exo
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#011).

[Leviticus 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 25:14</span></span>

Ye shall not oppress - Neither the seller by requiring more, nor the
buyer by taking the advantage from his brother's necessities to give him
less than the worth of it.

[Leviticus 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 25:15</span></span>

Years of fruits - Or, fruitful years; for there were some unfruitful
years; those wherein they were not allowed to sow or reap.

[Leviticus 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 25:16</span></span>

Years of fruits - Or, For the number of the fruits. The meaning is, he
selleth not the land, but only the fruits thereof, and that for a
certain time.

[Leviticus 25:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lev 25:21</span></span>

For three years - Not compleatly, but in great part, namely, for that
part of the 6th year which was between the beginning of harvest and the
beginning of the 7th year, for the whole 7th year, and for that part of
the 8th year which was before the harvest, which reached almost until
the beginning of the ninth year. This is added to shew the equity of
this command. As God would hereby try their faith and obedience, so he
gave them an eminent proof of his own exact providence and tender care
over them in making provisions suitable to their necessities.

[Leviticus 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lev 25:22</span></span>

Old fruit - Of the sixth year principally, if not solely.

[Leviticus 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lev 25:23</span></span>

For ever - So as to be for ever alienated from the family of him that
sells it. Or, absolutely and properly, so as to become the property of
the buyer: Or, to the extermination or utter cutting off, namely, of the
seller, from all hopes and possibility of redemption. The land is mine -
Procured for you by my power, given to you by my grace and bounty, and
the right of propriety reserved by me. With me - That is, in my land or
houses: thus he is said to sojourn with another that dwells in his
house. Howsoever in your own or other mens opinions you pass for lords
and proprietors, yet in truth, ye are but strangers and sojourners, not
to possess the land for ever, but only for a season, and to leave it to
such as I have appointed for it.

[Leviticus 25:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">lev 25:24</span></span>

A redemption - A right of redemption in the time and manner following.

[Leviticus 25:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">lev 25:25</span></span>

If any of his kin come - Or, If the redeemer come, being near akin to
him, who in this was an eminent type of Christ, who was made near akin
to us by taking our flesh, that he might perform the work of redemption
for us.

[Leviticus 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">lev 25:27</span></span>

The years of the sale - That is, from the time of the sale to the
jubilee. See above, [Lev 25:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#015). The
overplus - That is, a convenient price for the years from this
redemption to the jubilee.

[Leviticus 25:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">lev 25:28</span></span>

Go out - That is, out of the buyer's hand, without any redemption money.

[Leviticus 25:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">lev 25:30</span></span>

It shall not go out - The reasons before alledged for lands do not hold
in such houses; there was no danger of confusion in tribes or families
by the alienation of houses. The seller also had a greater propriety in
houses than in lands, as being commonly built by the owner's cost and
diligence, and therefore had a fuller power to dispose of them. Besides,
God would hereby encourage persons to buy and possess houses in such
places, as frequency and fulness of inhabitants in cities, was a great
strength, honour and advantage to the whole land.

[Leviticus 25:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">lev 25:31</span></span>

In the villages - Because they belonged to and were necessary for the
management of the lands.

[Leviticus 25:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">lev 25:34</span></span>

May not be sold - Not sold at all, partly, because it was of absolute
necessity for them for the keeping of their cattle, and partly because
these were no enclosures, but common fields, in which all the Levites
that lived in such a city had an interest, and therefore no particular
Levite could dispose of his part in it.

[Leviticus 25:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">lev 25:35</span></span>

A sojourner - Understand it of proselytes only, for of other strangers
they were permitted to take usury, [Deu
23:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#020).

[Leviticus 25:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">lev 25:36</span></span>

Of him - That is, of thy brother, whether he be Israelite, or proselyte.
Or increase - All kinds of usury are in this case forbidden, whether of
money, or of victuals, or of any thing that is commonly lent by one man
to another upon usury, or upon condition of receiving the thing lent
with advantage and overplus. If one borrow in his necessity, there can
be no doubt but this law is binding still. But it cannot be thought to
bind, where money is borrowed for purchase of lands, trade, or other
improvements. For there it is reasonable, that the lender share with the
borrower in the profit.

[Leviticus 25:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">lev 25:39</span></span>

As a bond - man - Neither for the time, for ever, nor for the manner,
with the hardest and vilest kinds of service, rigorously and severely
exacted.

[Leviticus 25:41](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">lev 25:41</span></span>

Then shall he depart - Thou shalt not suffer him or his to abide longer
in thy service, as thou mightest do in the year of release, [Exo
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#002), [Exo
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006).

[Leviticus 25:42](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">lev 25:42</span></span>

They are my servants - They, no less than you, are members of my church
and people; such as I have chosen out of all the world to serve me here,
and to enjoy me hereafter, and therefore are not to be oppressed,
neither are you absolute lords over them to deal with them as you
please.

[Leviticus 25:43](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">lev 25:43</span></span>

Fear thy God - Though thou dost not fear them who are in thy power, and
unable to right themselves, yet fear that God who hath commanded thee to
use them kindly, and who can and will avenge their cause, if thou
oppress them.

[Leviticus 25:47](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">lev 25:47</span></span>

The flock - Heb. root, that is, one of the root or flock. So the word
root is elsewhere used for the branch or progeny growing from it. He
seems to note one of a foreign race and country, transplanted into the
land of Israel, and there having taken root amongst the people of God,
yet even such an one, though he hath some privilege by it, shall not
have power to keep an Hebrew servant from the benefit of redemption.

[Leviticus 25:50](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">lev 25:50</span></span>

According to the time of an hired servant - Allowance shall be made for
the time wherein he hath served, proportionable to that which is given
to an hired servant for so long service, because his condition is in
this like theirs; it is not properly his person, but his work and labour
that was sold.

[Leviticus 25:53](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">lev 25:53</span></span>

In thy sight - Thou shalt not suffer this to be done, but whethe thou
art a magistrate, or a private person, thou shalt take care according to
thy capacity to get it remedied.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 26](lev026)

</div>
