<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Leviticus Index](lev.md)  
  [Previous](lev002)  [Next](lev004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001.md)

[Leviticus 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 3:1</span></span>

A peace - offering - This was an offering for peace and prosperity, and
the blessing of God, either, obtained, and so it was a thank - offering,
or, desired; and so it was a kind of supplication to God. A female -
Which were allowed here, tho' not in burnt - offerings, because those
principally respected the honour of God, who is to be served with the
best; but the peace - offerings did primarily respect the benefit of the
offerer, and therefore the choice was left to himself. Burnt - offerings
had regard to God, as in himself the best of beings, and therefore were
wholly burned. But peace - offerings had regard to God as a benefactor
to his creatures, and therefore were divided between the altar, the
priest, and the offerer.

[Leviticus 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 3:2</span></span>

At the door - Not on the north - side of the altar, where the burnt -
offering was killed, as also the sin - offering, and the trespass -
offering, but in the very entrance of the court where the brazen altar
stood, which place was not so holy as the other; as appears both because
it was more remote from the holy of holies, and because the ashes of the
sacrifices were to be laid here. And the reason of this difference is
not obscure, both because part of this sacrifice was to be waved by the
hands of the offerer, [Lev 7:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#030.md), who
might not come into the court; and because this offering was not so holy
as the others, which were to be eaten only by the priest, whereas part
of these were eaten by the offerer.

[Leviticus 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 3:5</span></span>

Upon the burnt sacrifice - Either, Upon the remainders of it, which were
yet burning; or rather, After it; for the daily burnt - offering was
first to be offered, both as more eminently respecting God's honour; and
as the most solemn and stated sacrifice, which should take place of all
occasional oblations, and as a sacrifice of an higher nature, being for
atonement, without which no peace could be obtained, nor peace offering
offered with acceptance.

[Leviticus 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 3:9</span></span>

The rump - Which in sheep is fat, and sweet, and in these parts was very
much larger and better than ours.

[Leviticus 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 3:11</span></span>

Burnt it - The parts now mentioned; the rest fell to the priest, [Lev
7:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#031.md). The food - That is, the fuel of
the fire, or the matter of the offering. It is called food, Heb. bread,
to note God's acceptance of it, and delight in it; as men delight in
their food.

[Leviticus 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 3:16</span></span>

Shall burn them - The parts mentioned, among which the tail is not one,
as it was in the sheep. because that in goats is a refuse part. All the
fat - This is to be limited, To those beasts, which were offered or
offerable in sacrifice, as it is explained, [Lev
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#023.md), [Lev
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#025.md). To that kind of fat which is
above - mentioned, and required to be offered, which was separated, or
easily separable from the flesh for the fat which was here and there
mixed with the flesh they might eat.

[Leviticus 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 3:17</span></span>

All your dwellings - Not only at or near the tabernacle, not only of
those beasts which you actually sacrifice, but also in your several
dwellings, and of all that kind of beasts. Fat - Was forbidden, To
preserve the reverence of the holy rites and sacrifices. That they might
be taught hereby to acknowledge God as their Lord, and the Lord of all
the creatures, who might reserve what he pleased to himself. To exercise
them in obedience to God, and self - denial and mortification of their
appetites, even in those things which probably many of them would much
desire. Blood - Was forbidden partly to maintain reverence to God and
his worship; partly out of opposition to idolaters, who used to drink
the blood of their sacrifices; partly with respect to Christ's Blood,
thereby manifestly signified. God would not permit the very shadows of
this to be used as a common thing. Nor will he allow us, tho' we have
the comfort of the atonement made, to assume to ourselves any share in
the honour of making it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 4](lev004.md)

</div>
