<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev018)  [Next](lev020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#001)

[Leviticus 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 19:2</span></span>

Be ye holy - Separated from all the forementioned defilements, and
entirely consecrated to God and obedient to all his laws. I am holy -
Both in my essence, and in all my laws, which are holy and just and
good.

[Leviticus 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 19:3</span></span>

His mother - The mother is put first, partly because the practice of
this duty begins there, mothers, by perpetual converse, being sooner
known to their children than their fathers; and partly because this duty
is commonly neglected to the mother, upon whom children have not so much
dependence as they have upon their father. And this fear includes the
two great duties of reverence and obedience. And keep my sabbaths - This
is added, to shew, that, whereas it is enjoined to parents that they
should take care the sabbath be observed both by themselves and their
children, it is the duty of children to fear and obey their parents in
this matter. But that, if parents should neglect their duty herein, or
by their command, counsel, or example, draw them to pollute the sabbath,
the children in that case must keep the sabbath, and prefer the command
of God before the commands of their parents.

[Leviticus 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 19:4</span></span>

Idols - The word signifies such as are no Gods, or nothings, as they are
called, [Co1 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#004), many idols having no
being, but in the fancy of their worshippers, and all of them having no
virtue or power to do good or evil, [Isa
41:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#023).

[Leviticus 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 19:5</span></span>

At your own will - Or, according to your own pleasure, what you think
fit: For though this in general was required, yet it was left to their
choice to determine the particulars.

[Leviticus 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 19:6</span></span>

On the morrow - He speaks here of that sort of peace - offerings, which
were offered either by vow or freely for the obtaining of some mercy,
for the other sort, which was by way of gratitude for mercies received,
were to be eaten the same day.

[Leviticus 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 19:10</span></span>

I am the Lord your God - Who gave you all these things with a
reservation of my right in them, and with a charge of giving part of
them to the poor.

[Leviticus 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 19:12</span></span>

Ye shall not swear falsely - This is added, to shew how one sin draws on
another, and that when men will lye for their own advantage, they will
easily be induced to perjury. Profane the name - By any unholy use of
it. So it is an additional precept, thou shalt not abuse my holy name by
swearing either falsely or rashly.

[Leviticus 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 19:14</span></span>

Before the blind - To make them fall. Under these two particulars are
manifestly forbidden all injuries done to such as are unable to right or
defend themselves; of whom God here takes the more care, because they
are not able to secure themselves. Fear thy God - Who both can and will
avenge them.

[Leviticus 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 19:15</span></span>

The poor - So as through pity to him to give an unrighteous sentence.

[Leviticus 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 19:16</span></span>

Stand against the blood - In judgment as a false accuser or false
witness, for accusers and witnesses use to stand, whilst the judges sit
in courts of judicature.

[Leviticus 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 19:17</span></span>

Thou shalt not hate - As thou dost, in effect, if thou dost not rebuke
him. Thy brother - The same as thy neighbour, that is, every man. If thy
brother hath done wrong, thou shalt neither divulge it to others, nor
hate him, and smother that hatred by sullen silence; nor flatter him
therein, but shalt freely and in love, tell him of his fault. And not
suffer sin upon him - Not suffer him to lie under the guilt of any sin,
which thou by rebuking him, and thereby bringing him to repentance,
couldst free him from.

[Leviticus 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lev 19:18</span></span>

Thy neighbour - Every man, as plainly appears, By comparing this place
with [Lev 19:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#034), where this law is
applied to strangers. Because the word neighbour is explained by another
man, [Lev 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#010); [Rom
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#008). As thyself - With the same
sincerity, though not equality of affection.

[Leviticus 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lev 19:19</span></span>

Thou shalt not let thy cattle gender - This was prohibited, partly to
restrain the curiosity and boldness of men, who might attempt to amend
or change the works of God, partly that by the restraint here laid even
upon brute - creatures men might be taught to abhor all unnatural lusts,
partly to teach the Israelites to avoid mixtures with other nations,
either in marriage or in religion, which also may be signified by the
following prohibitions.

[Leviticus 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 19:20</span></span>

She shall be scourged - Heb. There shall be a scourging, which probably
may belong to both of them, for Both were guilty. It follows, they shall
not be punished with death, which may seem to imply that they were to be
punished by some other common and considerable punishment, which
scourging indeed was, but the paying of a ram was a small penalty and
very unsuitable to the greatness of the offence. And the offering of the
ram as a trespass offering for the sin against God, is not inconsistent
with making satisfaction other ways for the injury done to men, but only
added here as farther punishment to the man, either because he only
could do this, and not the woman, who being a bondwoman had nothing of
her own to offer. Or because his sex and his freedom aggravated his sin.
Not put to death - Which they should have been, had she been free, [Deu
22:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#023). The reason of this
difference is not from any respect which God gives to persons, for bond
and free are alike to him, but because bond - women were scarce wives,
and their marriages were scarce true - marriages, being neither made by
their choice, but their masters authority, nor continued beyond the year
of release, but at her master's or husband's pleasure.

[Leviticus 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lev 19:23</span></span>

As uncircumcised - That is, As unclean, not to be eaten but cast away.
This precept was serviceable, To the trees themselves, which grew the
better and faster, being early stript of those fruits, which otherwise
would have drawn away much more of the strength from the tree. To men,
both because the fruit then was less wholesome, and because hereby men
were taught to bridle their appetites; a lesson of great use and
absolute necessity in a holy life.

[Leviticus 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">lev 19:24</span></span>

Holy - Consecrated to the Lord, as the first - fruits and tithes were,
and therefore given to the priests and Levites, [Num
18:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#012); [Deu
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#004) yet so that part of them were
communicated to the poor widows and fatherless and strangers. See [Deu
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#028). To bless the Lord, by whose
power and goodness the trees bring forth fruit to perfection.

[Leviticus 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">lev 19:25</span></span>

That it may yield the increase - That God may be pleased to give his
blessing, which alone can make them fruitful.

[Leviticus 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">lev 19:26</span></span>

Any thing with the blood - Any flesh out of which the blood is poured.
Neither shall ye use enchantments - It was unpardonable in them, to whom
were committed the oracles of God, to ask counsel of the devil. And yet
worse in Christians, to whom the son of God is manifested, to destroy
the works of the devil. For Christians to have their nativities cast, or
their fortunes told, or to use charms for the cure of diseases, is an
intolerable affront to the Lord Jesus, a support of idolatry, and a
reproach both to themselves, and to that worthy name by which they are
called. Nor observe times - Superstitiously, esteeming some days lucky,
others unlucky.

[Leviticus 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">lev 19:27</span></span>

The corners of your heads - That is your temples, ye shall not cut off
the hair of your heads round about your temples. This the Gentiles did,
either for the worship of their idols, to whom young men used to
consecrate their hair, being cut off from their heads, as Homer,
Plutarch and many others write; or in funerals or immoderate mournings,
as appears from [Isa 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#002); [Jer
48:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#037). And the like is to be thought
concerning the beard or the hair in the corner, that is, corners of the
beard. The reason then of this prohibition is because God would not have
his people agree with idolaters, neither in their idolatries, nor in
their excessive sorrowing, no nor so much as in the appearances of it.

[Leviticus 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">lev 19:28</span></span>

Cuttings in your flesh - Which the Gentiles commonly did both in the
worship of their idols, and in their solemn mournings, [Jer
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#006).

[Leviticus 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">lev 19:29</span></span>

Do not prostitute - As the Gentiles frequently did for the honour of
some of their idols, to whom women were consecrated, and publickly
prostituted.

[Leviticus 19:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">lev 19:31</span></span>

Wizards - Them that have entered into covenant with the devil, by whose
help they foretel many things to come, and acquaint men with secret
things. See [Lev 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#027); [Deu
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#011); [Sa1
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#003), [Sa1
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#007), [Sa1
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#009); [Kg2
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#006).

[Leviticus 19:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">lev 19:32</span></span>

Rise up - To do them reverence when they pass by, for which end they
were obliged, as the Jews say, presently to sit down again when they
were past, that it might be manifest they arose out of respect to them.
Fear thy God - This respect is due to such, if not for themselves, yet
for God's sake, who requires this reverence, and whose singular blessing
old age is.

[Leviticus 19:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">lev 19:33</span></span>

Vex him - Either with opprobrious expressions, or grievous exactions.

[Leviticus 19:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">lev 19:34</span></span>

As one born among you - Either

1, as to the matters of common right, so it reacheth to all strangers.
Or 2, as to church - privileges, so it concerns only those who were

proselytes. Ye were strangers - And therefore are sensible of the fears,
distresses, and miseries of such, which call for your pity, and you
ought to do to them, as you desired others should do to you, when you
were such.

[Leviticus 19:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">lev 19:35</span></span>

In mete - yard - In the measuring of lands, or dry things, as cloth,
ribband. In measure - In the measuring liquid or such dry things as are
only contigious, as corn or wine.

[Leviticus 19:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">lev 19:36</span></span>

A just ephah and a just hin - These two two measures are named as most
common, the former for dry, the latter for moist things, but under them
he manifestly comprehends all other measures.

[Leviticus 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">lev 19:37</span></span>

Therefore - Because my blessings and deliverances are not indulgences to
sin, but greater obligations to all duties to God and men.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 20](lev020)

</div>
