<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev008)  [Next](lev010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#001)

[Leviticus 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 9:1</span></span>

On the eighth day - Namely, from the day of his consecration, or when
the seven days of his consecration were ended. The eighth day is famous
in scripture for the perfecting and purifying both of men and beasts.
See [Lev 12:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#002) [Lev
14:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#008), [Lev
15:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#013), [Lev
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#027). And the elders of Israel - All
the congregation were called to be witnesses of Aaron's installment into
his office, to prevent their murmurings and contempt; which being done,
the elders were now sufficient to be witnesses of his first execution of
his office.

[Leviticus 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 9:2</span></span>

For a sin - offering - For himself and his own sins, which was an
evidence of the imperfection of that priesthood, and of the necessity of
a better. The Jewish writers suggest, that a calf was appointed, to
remind him of his sin in making the golden calf. Thereby he had rendered
himself for ever unworthy of the honour of the priesthood: on which he
had reason to reflect with sorrow and shame, in all the atonements he
made.

[Leviticus 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 9:3</span></span>

A sin - offering - For the people, for whose sin a young bullock was
required, [Lev 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#015), but that was for
some particular sin; this was more general for all their sins. Besides,
there being an eye here to the priest's consecration and entrance into
his office, it is no wonder if there be some difference in these
Sacrifices from those before prescribed.

[Leviticus 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 9:4</span></span>

The Lord will appear - Heb. Hath appeared. He speaks of the thing to
come as if it were past, which is frequent in scripture, to give them
the more assurance of the thing.

[Leviticus 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 9:5</span></span>

Before the tabernacle where God dwelt.

[Leviticus 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 9:6</span></span>

The glory of the Lord - The glorious manifestation of God's powerful and
gracious presence.

[Leviticus 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 9:7</span></span>

Go and offer - Moses had hitherto sacrificed, but now he resigns his
work to Aaron, and actually gives him that commission which from God he
had received for him. For thyself and for the people - The order is very
observable, first for thyself, otherwise thou art unfit to do it for the
people. Hereby God would teach us, both the deficiency of this
priesthood, and how important it is that God's ministers should be in
the favour of God themselves, that their ministrations may be acceptable
to God, and profitable to the people.

[Leviticus 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 9:9</span></span>

The altar - Of burnt - offering, of which alone he speaks both in the
foregoing and following words; and the blood was poured out at the
bottom of this altar only, not of the altar of incense, as appears from
[Lev 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#007), where indeed there is
mention of putting some of the blood upon the horns of the altar of
incense, in this case of the priest's sacrificing for his own sins. But
there seems to be a double difference, That sacrifice was offered for
some particular sin, this for his sins indefinitely. There he is
supposed to be compleat in his office, and here he is but entering into
his office, and therefore must prepare and sanctify himself by this
offering upon the brazen altar in the court, before he can be admitted
into the holy place where the altar of incense was. And the like is to
be said for the difference between the sin - offering for the people
here, and [Lev 4:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#017).

[Leviticus 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 9:10</span></span>

He burnt it - By ordinary fire, which was used until the fire came down
from heaven, [Lev 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#024), though
afterwards it was forbidden. And if it had not been allowed otherwise,
yet this being done by Aaron at the command of Moses, and consequently
with God's approbation, it was unquestionably lawful. Add to this, that
there is nothing said to be consumed by that heavenly fire, but the
burnt - offering with the fat belonging to it, namely, that burnt -
offering mentioned [Lev 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#016), which
therefore is not there said to be burnt, as it is said of the other
burnt - offering, [Lev 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#013), and of
the rest of the sacrifices in their places.

[Leviticus 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 9:16</span></span>

The burnt - offering - Which also was offered for the people, as the
last mentioned sin - offering was.

[Leviticus 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 9:17</span></span>

Besides the burnt - sacrifice - Which was to be first offered every
morning; for God will not have his ordinary and stated service swallowed
up by extraordinary.

[Leviticus 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lev 9:19</span></span>

That - Fat. Which covereth the inwards - Or the Guts.

[Leviticus 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lev 9:22</span></span>

Aaron lifted up his hands - Which was the usual rite of blessing. By
this posture he signified both whence he expected the blessing, and his
hearty desire of it for them. And blessed them - In some such manner, as
is related, [Num 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#024), &c. though not
in the same form, for it is not probable that he used it before God
delivered it And this blessing was an act of his priestly office, no
less than sacrificing. And herein be was a type of Christ, who came into
the world to bless us, and when he was parting from his disciples,
lifted up his hands and blessed them: yea, and in them his whole church,
of which they were the elders and representatives. And came down - From
the altar; whence he is said to come down, either Because the altar
stood upon raised ground, or Because it was nearer the holy place, which
was the upper end.

[Leviticus 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lev 9:23</span></span>

And Moses - Went in with Aaron to direct him, and to see him perform
those parts of his office which were to be done in the holy place, about
the lights, and the table of shew - bread, and the altar of incense,
upon which part of the blood of the sacrifices now offered was to be
sprinkled, [Lev 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#007), [Lev
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#016). And blessed the people - Prayed
to God for his blessing upon them, as this phrase is explained, [Num
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#023), &c. and particularly for his
gracious acceptation of these and all succeeding sacrifices, and for his
signification thereof by some extraordinary token. And the glory of the
Lord - Either a miraculous brightness shining from the cloudy pillar, as
[Exo 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#010), or a glorious and visible
discovery of God's gracious presence and acceptance of the present
service.

[Leviticus 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">lev 9:24</span></span>

And there came a fire - In token of God's approbation of the priesthood
now instituted, and the sacrifices offered, and consequently of others
of the like nature. And this fire now given was to be carefully kept,
and not suffered to go out, [Lev 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#013),
and therefore was carried in a peculiar vessel in their journeys in the
wilderness. From before the Lord - Or, from the presence of the Lord,
that is, from the place where God was in a special manner present,
either from heaven or from the holy of holies. They shouted - As
wondering at, rejoicing in, and blessing God for this gracious discovery
of himself, and his favour. This also was a figure of good things to
come. Thus the Spirit descended in fire upon the apostles, so ratifying
their commission, as this does that of the priests. And the descent of
this holy fire into our souls, to kindle in them devout affections, and
such an holy zeal as burns up all unholiness, is a certain token of
God's gracious acceptance.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 10](lev010)

</div>
