<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev022)  [Next](lev024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#001)

[Leviticus 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 23:2</span></span>

Ye shall proclaim - Cause to be proclaimed, by the priests. Holy
convocations - Days for your assembling together to my worship in a
special manner.

[Leviticus 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 23:3</span></span>

Ye shall do no work therein - So it runs in the general for the sabbath
day, and for the day of expiation, [Lev
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#028), excluding all works about
earthly employments whether of profit or of pleasure; but upon other
feast days he forbids only servile works, as [Lev
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#007), [Lev
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#021), [Lev
23:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#036), for surely this manifest
difference in the expressions used by the wife God must needs imply a
difference in the things. In all your dwellings - Other feasts, were to
be kept before the Lord in Jerusalem only, whither all the males were to
come for that end; but the sabbath was to be kept in all places, both in
synagogues, and in their private houses.

[Leviticus 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 23:4</span></span>

These are the feasts of the Lord - Or rather, the solemnities: (for the
day of atonement was a fast:) and so the word is used, [Isa
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#020), where Zion is called the city
of our solemnities.

[Leviticus 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 23:10</span></span>

An omer - They did not offer this corn in the ear, or by a sheaf or
handful, but, as Josephus, 3. 10 affirms, and may be gathered from [Lev
2:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#014), purged from the chaff, and
dryed, and beaten out.

[Leviticus 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 23:11</span></span>

He shall wave the sheaf before the Lord - In the name of the whole
congregation, which as it were sanctified to them the whole harvest, and
gave them a comfortable use of all the rest. For then we may eat our
bread with joy, when God hath accepted our works. And thus should we
always begin with God; begin our lives with him, begin every day with
him, begin every work and business with him: seek ye first the kingdom
of God. The morrow after the sabbath - After the first day of the feast
of unleavened bread, which was a sabbath or day of rest, as appears from
[Lev 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#007), or upon the sixteenth day
of the month. And this was the first of those fifty days, in the close
whereof was the feast of pentecost.

[Leviticus 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 23:13</span></span>

Two tenth deals - Or, parts, of an ephah, that is, two omers, whereas in
other sacrifices of lambs there was but one tenth deal prescribed. The
reason of which disproportion may be this, that one of the tenth deals
was a necessary attendant upon the lamb, and the other was peculiar to
this feast, and was an attendant upon that of the corn, and was offered
with it in thanksgiving to God for the fruits of the earth.

[Leviticus 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 23:14</span></span>

Bread - Made of new wheat. Nor green ears - Which were usual, not only
for offerings to God, but also for man's food.

[Leviticus 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 23:15</span></span>

From the morrow - From the sixteenth day of the month, and the second
day of the feast of unleavened bread inclusively.

[Leviticus 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 23:16</span></span>

A new meal - offering - Of new corn made into loaves.

[Leviticus 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lev 23:18</span></span>

One bullock and two rams - In [Num
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#011), [Num
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#019), it is two young bullocks and
one ram. Either therefore it was left to their liberty to chuse which
they would offer, or one of the bullocks there, and one of the rams
here, were the peculiar sacrifices of the feast day, and the other were
attendants upon the two loaves, which were the proper offering at this
time. And the one may be mentioned there, and the other here, to teach
us, that the addition of a new sacrifice did not destroy the former, but
both were to be offered, as the extraordinary sacrifices of every feast
did not hinder the oblation of the daily sacrifice.

[Leviticus 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lev 23:19</span></span>

One kid - In [Lev 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#014), the sin -
offering for the sin of the people is a bullock, but here a kid; &c. the
reason of the difference may be this, because that was for some
particular sin of the people, but this only in general for all their
sins.

[Leviticus 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 23:20</span></span>

Wave them - Some part of them in the name of the whole; and so for the
two lambs, otherwise they had been too big and too heavy, to be waved.
For the priests - Who had to themselves not only the breast and shoulder
as in others, which belonged to the priest, but also the rest which
belonged to the offerer; because the whole congregation being the
offerer here, it could neither be distributed to them all, nor given to
some without offence to the rest.

[Leviticus 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lev 23:21</span></span>

An holy convocation - A sabbath or day of rest, called pentecost; which
was instituted, partly in remembrance of the consummation of their
deliverance out of Egypt by bringing them thence to the mount of God, or
Sinai, as God had promised, and of that admirable blessing of giving the
law to them on the 50th day, and forming them into a commonwealth under
his own immediate government; and partly in gratitude for the farther
progress of their harvest, as in the passover they offered a thank -
offering to God for the beginning of their harvest. The perfection of
this feast, was the pouring out of the holy spirit upon the apostles on
this very day, in which the law of faith was given, fifty days after
Christ our passover was sacrificed for us. And on that day the apostles,
having themselves received the first - fruits of the spirit, begat three
thousand souls thro' the word of truth, as the first - fruits of the
Christian church.

[Leviticus 23:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lev 23:22</span></span>

When ye reap, thou - From the plural, ye, he comes to the singular,
thou, because he would press this duty upon every person who hath an
harvest to reap, that none might plead exemption from it. And it is
observable, that though the present business is only concerning the
worship of God, yet he makes a kind of excursion to repeat a former law
of providing for the poor, to shew that our devotion to God is little
esteemed by him if it be not accompanied with acts of charity to men.

[Leviticus 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">lev 23:24</span></span>

A sabbath - Solemnized with the blowing of trumpets by the priests, not
in a common way, as they did every first day of every month, but in an
extraordinary manner, not only in Jerusalem, but in all the cities of
Israel. They began to blow at sun - rise, and continued blowing till sun
- set. This seems to have been instituted, To solemnize the beginning of
the new year, whereof as to civil matters and particularly as to the
Jubilee, this was the first day; concerning which it was fit the people
should be admonished, both to excite their thankfulness for God's
blessings in the last year, and to direct them in the management of
their civil affairs. To put a special honour upon this month. For as the
seventh day was the sabbath, and the seventh year was a sabbatical year,
so God would have the seventh month to be a kind of sabbatical month,
for the many sabbaths and solemn feasts which were observed in this more
than in any other month. And by this sounding of the trumpets in its
beginning, God would quicken and prepare them for the following
sabbaths, as well as that of atonement and humiliation for their sins,
as those of thanksgiving for God's mercies.

[Leviticus 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">lev 23:27</span></span>

Afflict your souls - With fasting, and bitter repentance for all,
especially their national sins, among which no doubt God would have them
remember their sin of the golden calf. For as God had threatened to
remember it in after times to punish them for it, so there was great
reason why they should remember it to humble themselves for it.

[Leviticus 23:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">lev 23:28</span></span>

Whatsoever soul - Either of the Jewish nation, or religion. Hereby God
would signify the absolute necessity which every man had of repentance
and forgiveness of sin, and the desperate condition of all impenitent
persons.

[Leviticus 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">lev 23:32</span></span>

From even to even - The day of atonement began at the evening of the
ninth day, and continued till the evening of the tenth day. Ye shall
celebrate your sabbath - This particular sabbath is called your sabbath,
possibly to note the difference between this and other sabbaths: for the
weekly sabbath is oft called the sabbath of the Lord. The Jews are
supposed to begin every day, and consequently their sabbaths, at the
evening, in remembrance of the creation, as Christians generally begin
their days and sabbaths with the morning in memory of Christ's
resurrection.

[Leviticus 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">lev 23:34</span></span>

Of tabernacles - Of tents or booths or arbours. This feast was appointed
to remind them of that time when they had no other dwellings in the
wilderness, and to stir them up to bless God, as well for the gracious
protection then afforded them, as for the more commodious habitations
now given them; and to excite them to gratitude for all the fruits of
the year newly ended, which were now compleatly brought in.

[Leviticus 23:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">lev 23:36</span></span>

Ye shall offer - A several - offering each day. The eighth day - Which
though it was not one of the days of this feast strictly taken. Yet in a
larger sense it belonged to this feast, and is called the great day of
the feast, [Joh 7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037). And so indeed it
was, as for other reasons, so because, by their removal from the
tabernacles into fixed habitations, it represented that happy time
wherein their 40 years tedious march in the wilderness was ended with
their settlement in the land of Canaan, which it was most fit they
should acknowledge with such a solemn day of thanksgiving as this was.

[Leviticus 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">lev 23:37</span></span>

A sacrifice - A sin - offering, called by the general name, a sacrifice,
because it was designed for that which was the principal end of all
sacrifices, the expiation of sin.

[Leviticus 23:38](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">lev 23:38</span></span>

Beside the sabbaths - The offerings of the weekly sabbaths. God will not
have any sabbath - sacrifice diminished because of the addition of
others, proper to any other feast. And it is here to be noted, that
though other festival days are sometimes called sabbaths, yet these are
here called the sabbaths of the Lord, in way of contradistinction, to
shew that this was more eminently such than other feast - days. Your
gifts - Which being here distinguished from the free - will - offerings
made to the Lord, may note what they freely gave to the priests over and
above their first - fruits and tithes or other things which they were
enjoined to give.

[Leviticus 23:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">lev 23:39</span></span>

This is no addition of a new, but only a repetition of the former
injunction, with a more particular explication both of the manner and
reason of the feast. The fruit - Not the corn, which was gathered long
before, but that of the trees, as vines, olives, and other fruit -
trees: which compleated the harvest, whence this is called the feast of
in - gathering.

[Leviticus 23:40](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">lev 23:40</span></span>

Of goodly trees - Namely, olive, myrtle and pine, mentioned, [Neh
8:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#015), which were most plentiful
there, and which would best preserve their greenness. Thick trees - Fit
for shade and shelter. And willows - To mix with the other, and in some
sort bind them together. And as they made their booths of these
materials, so they carried some of these boughs in their hands, as is
affirmed by Jewish and other ancient writers.

[Leviticus 23:42](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">lev 23:42</span></span>

In booths - Which were erected in their cities or towns, either in their
streets, or gardens, or the tops of their houses. These were made flat,
and therefore were fit for the use.

[Leviticus 23:44](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">lev 23:44</span></span>

The feasts of the Lord - We have reason to be thankful, that the feasts
of the Lord, now are not so numerous, nor the observance of them so
burdensome and costly; but more spiritual and significant, and surer and
sweeter earnests of the everlasting feast, at the last in - gathering,
which we hope to be celebrating to eternity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 24](lev024)

</div>
