<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](mar016)  [Next](luk002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

[Luke 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 1:1</span></span>

This short, weighty, artless, candid dedication, belongs to the Acts, as
well as the Gospel of St. Luke. Many have undertaken - He does not mean
St. Matthew or Mark; and St. John did not write so early. For these were
eye witnesses themselves and ministers of the word.

[Luke 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 1:3</span></span>

To write in order - St. Luke describes in order of time; first, The acts
of Christ; his conception, birth, childhood, baptism, miracles,
preaching, passion, resurrection, ascension: then, The acts of the
Apostles. But in many smaller circumstances he does not observe the
order of time. Most excellent Theophilus - This was the appellation
usually given to Roman governors. Theophilus (as the ancients inform us)
was a person of eminent quality at Alexandria. In [Act
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001), St. Luke does not give him that
title. He was then probably a private man. After the preface St. Luke
gives us the history of Christ, from his coming into the world to his
ascension into heaven.

[Luke 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 1:5</span></span>

The course of Abia - The priests were divided into twenty - four
courses, of which that of Abia was the eighth, [Ch1
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#010). Each course ministered in its
turn, for seven days, from Sabbath to Sabbath. And each priest of the
course or set in waiting, had his part in the temple service assigned
him by lot.

[Luke 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">luk 1:6</span></span>

Walking in all the moral commandments, and ceremonial ordinances,
blameless - How admirable a character! May our behaviour be thus
unblamable, and our obedience thus sincere and universal!

[Luke 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 1:10</span></span>

The people were praying without, at the time of the incense - So the
pious Jews constantly did. And this was the foundation of that elegant
figure, by which prayer is in Scripture so often compared to incense.
Perhaps one reason of ordaining incense might be, to intimate the
acceptableness of the prayer that accompanied it; as well as to remind
the worshippers of that sacrifice of a sweet - smelling savour, which
was once to be offered to God for them, and of that incense, which is
continually offered with the prayers of the saints, upon the golden
altar that is before the throne, [Rev
8:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#003).

[Luke 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 1:12</span></span>

Zacharias was troubled - Although he was accustomed to converse with
God, yet we see he was thrown into a great consternation, at the
appearance of his angelical messenger, nature not being able to sustain
the sight. Is it not then an instance of the goodness is well as of the
wisdom of God, that the services, which these heavenly spirits render
us, are generally invisible?

[Luke 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 1:13</span></span>

Thy prayer is heard - Let us observe with pleasure, that the prayers of
pious worshippers come up with acceptance before God; to whom no costly
perfume is so sweet, as the fragrancy of an upright heart. An answer of
peace was here returned, when the case seemed to be most helpless. Let
us wait patiently for the Lord, and leave to his own wisdom the time and
manner wherein he will appear for us. Thou shalt call his name John -
John signifies the grace or favour of Jehovah. A name well suiting the
person, who was afterward so highly in favour with God, and endued with
abundance of grace; and who opened a way to the most glorious
dispensation of grace in the Messiah's kingdom. And so Zacharias's
former prayers for a child, and the prayer which he, as the
representative of the people, was probably offering at this very time,
for the appearing of the Messiah, were remarkably answered in the birth
of his forerunner.

[Luke 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 1:15</span></span>

He shall be great before the Lord - God the Father: of the Holy Ghost
and the Son of God mention is made immediately after. And shall drink
neither wine nor strong drink - Shall be exemplary for abstemiousness
and self - denial; and so much the more filled with the Holy Ghost.

[Luke 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 1:16</span></span>

And many of the children of Israel shall he turn - None therefore need
be ashamed of "preaching like John the Baptist." To the Lord their God -
To Christ.

[Luke 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 1:17</span></span>

He shall go before him, Christ, in the power and spirit of Elijah - With
the same integrity, courage, austerity, and fervour, and the same power
attending his word: to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children -
To reconcile those that are at variance, to put an end to the most
bitter quarrels, such as are very frequently those between the nearest
relations: and the hearts of the disobedient to the wisdom of the just -
And the most obstinate sinners to true wisdom, which is only found among
them that are righteous before God.

[Luke 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 1:18</span></span>

Zacharias said, Whereby shall I know this? - In how different a spirit
did he blessed virgin say, How shall this be? Zacharias disbelieved the
fact: Mary had no doubt of the thing; but only inquired concerning the
manner of it.

[Luke 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 1:19</span></span>

I am Gabriel, that stand in the presence of God - Seven angels thus
stand before God, [Rev 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#002); who seem
the highest of all. There seems to be a remarkable gradation in the
words, enhancing the guilt of Zacharias's unbelief. As if he had said, I
am Gabriel, a holy angel of God: yea, one of the highest order. Not only
so, but am now peculiarly sent from God; and that with a message to thee
in particular. Nay, and to show thee glad tidings, such as ought to be
received with the greatest joy and readiness.

[Luke 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 1:20</span></span>

Thou shalt be dumb - The Greek word signifies deaf, as well as dumb: and
it seems plain, that he was as unable to hear, as he was to speak; for
his friends were obliged to make signs to him, that he might understand
them, [Luk 1:62](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#062).

[Luke 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 1:21</span></span>

The people were waiting - For him to come and dismiss them (as usual)
with the blessing.

[Luke 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">luk 1:24</span></span>

Hid herself - She retired from company, that she might have the more
leisure to rejoice and bless God for his wonderful mercy.

[Luke 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 1:25</span></span>

He looked upon me to take away my reproach - Barrenness was a great
reproach among the Jews. Because fruitfulness was promised to the
righteous.

[Luke 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 1:26</span></span>

In the sixth month - After Elisabeth had conceived.

[Luke 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 1:27</span></span>

Espoused - It was customary among the Jews, for persons that married to
contract before witnesses some time before. And as Christ was to be born
of a pure virgin, so the wisdom of God ordered it to be of one espoused,
that to prevent reproach he might have a reputed father, according to
the flesh.

[Luke 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 1:28</span></span>

Hail, thou highly favoured; the Lord is with thee; blessed art thou
among women - Hail is the salutation used by our Lord to the women after
his resurrection: thou art highly favoured, or hast found favour with
God, [Luk 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#030), is no more than was
said of Noah, Moses, and David. The Lord is with thee, was said to
Gideon, [Jdg 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#012); and blessed shall
she be above women, of Jael, [Jdg
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#024). This salutation gives no room
for any pretence of paying adoration to the virgin; as having no
appearance of a prayer, or of worship offered to her.

[Luke 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">luk 1:32</span></span>

He shall be called the Son of the Highest - In this respect also: and
that in a more eminent sense than any, either man or angel, can be
called so. The Lord shall give him the throne of his father David - That
is, the spiritual kingdom, of which David's was a type.

[Luke 1:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">luk 1:33</span></span>

He shall reign over the house of Jacob - In which all true believers are
included.

[Luke 1:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">luk 1:35</span></span>

The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall
overshadow thee - The power of God was put forth by the Holy Ghost, as
the immediate Divine agent in this work: and so he exerted the power of
the Highest as his own power, who together with the Father and the Son
is the most high God. Therefore also - Not only as he is God from
eternity, but on this account likewise he shall be called the Son of
God.

[Luke 1:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">luk 1:36</span></span>

And behold, thy cousin Elisabeth - Though Elisabeth was of the house of
Aaron, and Mary of the house of David, by the fathers side, they might
be related by their mothers. For the law only forbad heiresses marrying
into another tribe. And so other persons continually intermarried;
particularly the families of David and of Levi.

[Luke 1:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">luk 1:38</span></span>

And Mary said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord - It is not improbable,
that this time of the virgin's humble faith, consent, and expectation,
might be the very time of her conceiving.

[Luke 1:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">luk 1:39</span></span>

A city of Judah - Probably Hebron, which was situated in the hill
country of Judea, and belonged to the house of Aaron.

[Luke 1:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 1:41</span></span>

When Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary - The discourse with which
she saluted her, giving an account of what the angel had said, the joy
of her soul so affected her body, that the very child in her womb was
moved in an uncommon manner, as if it leaped for joy.

[Luke 1:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">luk 1:45</span></span>

Happy is she that believed - Probably she had in her mind the unbelief
of Zacharias.

[Luke 1:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">luk 1:46</span></span>

And Mary said - Under a prophetic impulse, several things, which perhaps
she herself did not then fully understand.

[Luke 1:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">luk 1:47</span></span>

My spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour - She seems to turn her
thoughts here to Christ himself, who was to be born of her, as the angel
had told her, he should be the Son of the Highest, whose name should be
Jesus, the Saviour. And she rejoiced in hope of salvation through faith
in him, which is a blessing common to all true believers, more than in
being his mother after the flesh, which was an honour peculiar to her.
And certainly she had the same reason to rejoice in God her Saviour hat
we have: because he had regarded the low estate of his handmaid, in like
manner as he regarded our low estate; and vouchsafed to come and save
her and us, when we were reduced to the lowest estate of sin and misery.

[Luke 1:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">luk 1:51</span></span>

He hath wrought strength with his arm - That is, he hath shown the
exceeding greatness of his power. She speaks prophetically of those
things as already done, which God was about to do by the Messiah. He
hath scattered the proud - Visible and invisible.

[Luke 1:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">luk 1:52</span></span>

He hath put down the mighty - Both angels and men.

[Luke 1:54](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">luk 1:54</span></span>

He hath helped his servant Israel - By sending the Messiah.

[Luke 1:55](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">luk 1:55</span></span>

To his seed - His spiritual seed: all true believers.

[Luke 1:56](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#056)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">luk 1:56</span></span>

Mary returned to her own house - And thence soon after to Bethlehem.

[Luke 1:60](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#060)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_060">luk 1:60</span></span>

His mother said - Doubtless by revelation, or a particular impulse from
God.

[Luke 1:66](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#066)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_066">luk 1:66</span></span>

The hand of the Lord - The peculiar power and blessing of God.

[Luke 1:67](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#067)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_067">luk 1:67</span></span>

And Zacharias prophesied - Of things immediately to follow. But it is
observable, he speaks of Christ chiefly; of John only, as it were,
incidentally.

[Luke 1:69](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#069)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_069">luk 1:69</span></span>

A horn - Signifies honour, plenty, and strength. A horn of salvation -
That is, a glorious and mighty Saviour.

[Luke 1:70](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#070)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_070">luk 1:70</span></span>

His prophets, who have been since the world began - For there were
prophets from the very beginning.

[Luke 1:74](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#074)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_074">luk 1:74</span></span>

To serve him without fear - Without any slavish fear. Here is the
substance of the great promise. That we shall be always holy, always
happy: that being delivered from Satan and sin, from every uneasy and
unholy temper, we shall joyfully love and serve God, in every thought,
word, and work.

[Luke 1:76](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#076)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_076">luk 1:76</span></span>

And thou, child - He now speaks to John; yet not as a parent, but as a
prophet.

[Luke 1:77](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#077)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_077">luk 1:77</span></span>

To give knowledge of salvation by the remission of sins - The knowledge
of the remission of our sins being the grand instrument of present and
eternal salvation, [Heb 8:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#011). But
the immediate sense of the words seems to be, to preach to them the
Gospel doctrine of salvation by the remission of their sins.

[Luke 1:78](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#078)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_078">luk 1:78</span></span>

The day spring - Or the rising sun; that is, Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 2](luk002)

</div>
