<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Matthew Index](mat.md)  
  [Previous](mat004)  [Next](mat006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001.md)

[Matthew 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 5:1</span></span>

And seeing the multitudes - At some distance, as they were coming to him
from every quarter. He went up into the mountain - Which was near: where
there was room for them all. His disciples - not only his twelve
disciples, but all who desired to learn of him.

[Matthew 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 5:2</span></span>

And he opened his mouth - A phrase which always denotes a set and solemn
discourse; and taught them - To bless men; to make men happy, was the
great business for which our Lord came into the world. And accordingly
he here pronounces eight blessings together, annexing them to so many
steps in Christianity. Knowing that happiness is our common aim, and
that an innate instinct continually urges us to the pursuit of it, he in
the kindest manner applies to that instinct, and directs it to its
proper object. Though all men desire, yet few attain, happiness, because
they seek it where it is not to be found. Our Lord therefore begins his
Divine institution, which is the complete art of happiness, by laying
down before all that have ears to hear, the true and only true method of
acquiring it. Observe the benevolent condescension of our Lord. He
seems, as it were, to lay aside his supreme authority as our legislator,
that he may the better act the part of: our friend and Saviour. Instead
of using the lofty style, in positive commands, he, in a more gentle and
engaging way, insinuates his will and our duty, by pronouncing those
happy who comply with it.

[Matthew 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 5:3</span></span>

Happy are the poor - In the following discourse there is, A sweet
invitation to true holiness and happiness, [Mat
5:3-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003.md). A persuasive to impart it to
others, [Mat 5:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#013.md). A description of
true Christian holiness, [Mat 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017.md);
[Mat 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#012.md). (in which it is easy to
observe, the latter part exactly answers the former.) The conclusion:
giving a sure mark of the true way, warning against false prophets,
exhorting to follow after holiness. The poor in spirit - They who are
unfeignedly penitent, they who are truly convinced of sin; who see and
feel the state they are in by nature, being deeply sensible of their
sinfulness, guiltiness, helplessness. For theirs is the kingdom of
heaven - The present inward kingdom: righteousness, and peace, and joy
in the Holy Ghost, as well as the eternal kingdom, if they endure to the
end. [Luk 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#020.md).

[Matthew 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 5:4</span></span>

They that mourn - Either for their own sins, or for other men's, and are
steadily and habitually serious. They shall be comforted - More solidly
and deeply even in this world, and eternally in heaven.

[Matthew 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 5:5</span></span>

Happy are the meek - They that hold all their passions and affections
evenly balanced. They shall inherit the earth - They shall have all
things really necessary for life and godliness. They shall enjoy
whatever portion God hath given them here, and shall hereafter possess
the new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness.

[Matthew 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 5:6</span></span>

They that hunger and thirst after righteousness - After the holiness
here described. They shall be satisfied with it.

[Matthew 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 5:7</span></span>

The merciful - The tender - hearted: they who love all men as
themselves: They shall obtain mercy - Whatever mercy therefore we desire
from God, the same let us show to our brethren. He will repay us a
thousand fold, the love we bear to any for his sake.

[Matthew 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 5:8</span></span>

The pure in heart - The sanctified: they who love God with all their
hearts. They shall see God - In all things here; hereafter in glory.

[Matthew 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 5:9</span></span>

The peace makers - They that out of love to God and man do all possible
good to all men. Peace in the Scripture sense implies all blessings
temporal and eternal. They shall be called the children of God - Shall
be acknowledged such by God and man. One would imagine a person of this
amiable temper and behaviour would be the darling of mankind. But our
Lord well knew it would not be so, as long as Satan was the prince of
this world. He therefore warns them before of the treatment all were to
expect, who were determined thus to tread in his steps, by immediately
subjoining, Happy are they who are persecuted for righteousness' sake.
Through this whole discourse we cannot but observe the most exact method
which can possibly be conceived. Every paragraph, every sentence, is
closely connected both with that which precedes, and that which follows
it. And is not this the pattern for every Christian preacher? If any
then are able to follow it without any premeditation, well: if not, let
them not dare to preach without it. No rhapsody, no incoherency, whether
the things spoken be true or false, comes of the Spirit of Christ.

[Matthew 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 5:10</span></span>

For righteousness' sake - That is, because they have, or follow after,
the righteousness here described. He that is truly a righteous man, he
that mourns, and he that is pure in heart, yea, all that will live godly
in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, [Ti2
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#012.md). The world will always say, Away
with such fellows from the earth. They are made to reprove our thoughts.
They are grievous to us even to behold. Their lives are not like other
men's; their ways are of another fashion.

[Matthew 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 5:11</span></span>

Revile - When present: say all evil - When you are absent.

[Matthew 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 5:12</span></span>

Your reward - Even over and above the happiness that naturally and
directly results from holiness.

[Matthew 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 5:13</span></span>

Ye - Not the apostles, not ministers only; but all ye who are thus holy,
are the salt of the earth - Are to season others. [Mar
9:50](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#050.md); [Luk
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#034.md).

[Matthew 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 5:14</span></span>

Ye are the light of the world - If ye are thus holy, you can no more be
hid than the sun in the firmament: no more than a city on a mountain -
Probably pointing to that on the brow of the opposite hill.

[Matthew 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 5:15</span></span>

Nay, the very design of God in giving you this light was, that it might
shine. [Mar 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#021.md); [Luk
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#016.md); [Luk
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#033.md).

[Matthew 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 5:16</span></span>

That they may see - and glorify - That is, that seeing your good works,
they may be moved to love and serve God likewise.

[Matthew 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 5:17</span></span>

Think not - Do not imagine, fear, hope, that I am come - Like your
teachers, to destroy the law or the prophets. I am not come to destroy -
The moral law, but to fulfil - To establish, illustrate, and explain its
highest meaning, both by my life and doctrine.

[Matthew 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 5:18</span></span>

Till all things shall be effected - Which it either requires or
foretells. For the law has its effect, when the rewards are given, and
the punishments annexed to it inflicted, as well as when its precepts
are obeyed. [Luk 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#017.md); [Luk
21:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#033.md).

[Matthew 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 5:19</span></span>

One of the least - So accounted by men; and shall teach - Either by word
or example; shall be the least - That is, shall have no part therein.

[Matthew 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 5:20</span></span>

The righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees - Described in the sequel
of this discourse.

[Matthew 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 5:21</span></span>

Ye have heard - From the scribes reciting the law; Thou shalt do no
murder - And they interpreted this, as all the other commandments,
barely of the outward act. The judgement - The Jews had in every city a
court of twenty - three men, who could sentence a criminal to be
strangled. But the sanhedrim only (the great council which sat at
Jerusalem, consisting of seventy - two men,) could sentence to the more
terrible death of stoning. That was called the judgment, this the
council. [Exo 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#013.md).

[Matthew 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 5:22</span></span>

But I say unto you - Which of the prophets ever spake thus? Their
language is, Thus saith the Lord. Who hath authority to use this
language, but the one lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy.
Whosoever is angry with his brother - Some copies add, without a cause -
But this is utterly foreign to the whole scope and tenor of our Lord's
discourse. If he had only forbidden the being angry without a cause,
there was no manner of need of that solemn declaration, I say unto you;
for the scribes and Pharisees themselves said as much as this. Even they
taught, men ought not to be angry without a cause. So that this
righteousness does not exceed theirs. But Christ teaches, that we ought
not, for any cause, to be so angry as to call any man Raca, or fool. We
ought not, for any cause, to be angry at the person of the sinner, but
at his sins only. Happy world, were this plain and necessary distinction
thoroughly understood, remembered, practised! Raca means, a silly man, a
trifler. Whosoever shall say, Thou fool - Shall revile, or seriously
reproach any man. Our Lord specified three degrees of murder, each
liable to a sorer punishment than the other: not indeed from men, but
from God. Hell fire - In the valley of Hinnom (whence the word in the
original is taken) the children were used to be burnt alive to Moloch.
It was afterward made a receptacle for the filth of the city, where
continual fires were kept to consume it. And it is probable, if any
criminals were burnt alive, it was in this accursed and horrible place.
Therefore both as to its former and latter state, it was a fit emblem of
hell. It must here signify a degree of future punishment, as much more
dreadful than those incurred in the two former cases, as burning alive
is more dreadful than either strangling or stoning.

[Matthew 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 5:23</span></span>

Thy brother hath aught against thee - On any of the preceding accounts:
for any unkind thought or word: any that did not spring from love.

[Matthew 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 5:24</span></span>

Leaving thy gift, go - For neither thy gift nor thy prayer will atone
for thy want of love: but this will make them both an abomination before
God.

[Matthew 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 5:25</span></span>

Agree with thine adversary - With any against whom thou hast thus
offended: while thou art in the way - Instantly, on the spot; before you
part. Lest the adversary deliver thee to the judge - Lest he commit his
cause to God. [Luk 12:58](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#058.md).

[Matthew 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 5:26</span></span>

Till thou hast paid the last farthing - That is, for ever, since thou
canst never do this. What has been hitherto said refers to meekness:
what follows, to purity of heart.

[Matthew 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 5:27</span></span>

Thou shalt not commit adultery - And this, as well as the sixth
commandment, the scribes and Pharisees interpreted barely of the outward
act. [Exo 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#014.md).

[Matthew 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 5:29</span></span>

If a person as dear as a right eye, or as useful as a right hand, cause
thee thus to offend, though but in heart. Perhaps here may be an
instance of a kind of transposition which is frequently found in the
sacred writings: so that [Mat 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029.md) may
refer to [Mat 5:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#027.md); and [Mat
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#030.md) to [Mat
5:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#021.md). As if he had said, Part with
any thing, however dear to you, or otherwise useful, if you cannot avoid
sin while you keep it. Even cut off your right hand, if you are of so
passionate a temper, that you cannot otherwise be restrained from
hurting your brother. Pull out your eyes, if you can no otherwise be
restrained from lusting after women. [Mat
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#008.md); [Mar
9:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#043.md).

[Matthew 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 5:30</span></span>

See note ... "[Mat 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029.md)".

[Matthew 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 5:31</span></span>

Let him give her a writing of divorce - Which the scribes and Pharisees
allowed men to do on any trifling occasion. [Deu
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001.md); [Mat
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#007.md); [Mar
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#002.md); [Luk
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#018.md).

[Matthew 5:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 5:32</span></span>

Causeth her to commit adultery - If she marry again.

[Matthew 5:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 5:33</span></span>

Our Lord here refers to the promise made to the pure in heart of seeing
God in all things, and points out a false doctrine of the scribes, which
arose from their not thus seeing God. What he forbids is, the swearing
at all, by any creature, in our ordinary conversation: both of which the
scribes and Pharisees taught to be perfectly innocent. [Exo
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#007.md).

[Matthew 5:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mat 5:36</span></span>

For thou canst not make one hair white or black - Whereby it appears,
that this also is not thine but God's.

[Matthew 5:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mat 5:37</span></span>

Let your conversation be yea, yea; nay, nay - That is, in your common
discourse, barely affirm or deny.

[Matthew 5:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mat 5:38</span></span>

Ye have heard - Our Lord proceeds to enforce such meekness and love on
those who are persecuted for righteousness' sake (which he pursues to
the end of the chapter) as were utterly unknown to the scribes and
Pharisees. It hath been said - In the law, as a direction to judges, in
ease of violent and barbarous assaults. An eye for an eye, and a tooth
for a tooth - And this has been interpreted, as encouraging bitter and
rigorous revenge. [Deu 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#021.md).

[Matthew 5:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">mat 5:39</span></span>

But I say unto you, that ye resist not the evil man - Thus; the Greek
word translated resist signifies standing in battle array, striving for
victory. If a man smite thee on the right cheek - Return not evil for
evil: yea, turn to him the other - Rather than revenge thyself.

[Matthew 5:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">mat 5:40</span></span>

Where the damage is not great, choose rather to suffer it, though
possibly it may on that account be repeated, than to demand an eye for
an eye, to enter into a rigorous prosecution of the offender. The
meaning of the whole passage seems to be, rather than return evil for
evil, when the wrong is purely personal, submit to one bodily wrong
after another, give up one part of your goods after another, submit to
one instance of compulsion after another. That the words are not
literally to be understood, appears from the behaviour of our Lord
himself, [Joh 18:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#022.md).

[Matthew 5:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mat 5:42</span></span>

Thus much for your behaviour toward the violent. As for those who use
milder methods, Give to him that asketh thee - Give and lend to any so
far, (but no further, for God never contradicts himself) as is
consistent with thy engagements to thy creditors, thy family, and the
household of faith. [Luk 6:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#030.md).

[Matthew 5:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">mat 5:43</span></span>

Thou shalt love thy neighbour; And hate thy enemy - God spoke the former
part; the scribes added the latter. [Lev
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#018.md).

[Matthew 5:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">mat 5:44</span></span>

Bless them that curse you - Speak all the good you can to and of them,
who speak all evil to and of you. Repay love in thought, word, and deed,
to those who hate you, and show it both in word and deed. [Luk
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#027.md), [Luk
6:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#035.md).

[Matthew 5:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">mat 5:45</span></span>

That ye may be the children - That is, that ye may continue and appear
such before men and angels. For he maketh his sun to rise - He gives
them such blessings as they will receive at his hands. Spiritual
blessings they will not receive.

[Matthew 5:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#046.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">mat 5:46</span></span>

The publicans - were officers of the revenue, farmers, or receivers of
the public money: men employed by the Romans to gather the taxes and
customs, which they exacted of the nations they had conquered. These
were generally odious for their extortion and oppression, and were
reckoned by the Jews as the very scum of the earth.

[Matthew 5:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#047.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">mat 5:47</span></span>

And if ye salute your friends only - Our Lord probably glances at those
prejudices, which different sects had against each other, and intimates,
that he would not have his followers imbibe that narrow spirit. Would to
God this had been more attended to among the unhappy divisions and
subdivisions, into which his Church has been crumbled! And that we might
at least advance so far, as cordially to embrace our brethren in Christ,
of whatever party or denomination they are!

[Matthew 5:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#048.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">mat 5:48</span></span>

Therefore ye shall be perfect; as your Father who is in heaven is
perfect - So the original runs, referring to all that holiness which is
described in the foregoing verses, which our Lord in the beginning of
the chapter recommends as happiness, and in the close of it as
perfection. And how wise and gracious is this, to sum up, and, as it
were, seal all his commandments with a promise! Even the proper promise
of the Gospel! That he will put those laws in our minds, and write them
in our hearts! He well knew how ready our unbelief would be to cry out,
this is impossible! And therefore stakes upon it all the power, truth,
and faithfulness of him to whom all things are possible.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 6](mat006.md)

</div>
