<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat012)  [Next](mat014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#001)

[Matthew 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 13:1</span></span>

[Mar 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#001); [Luk
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#004).

[Matthew 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 13:2</span></span>

He went into the vessel - Which constantly waited upon him, while he was
on the sea coast.

[Matthew 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 13:3</span></span>

In parables - The word is here taken in its proper sense, for apt
similes or comparisons. This way of speaking, extremely common in the
eastern countries, drew and fixed the attention of many, and occasioned
the truths delivered to sink the deeper into humble and serious hearers.
At the same time, by an awful mixture of justice and mercy, it hid them
from the proud and careless. In this chapter our Lord delivers seven
parables; directing the four former (as being of general concern) to all
the people; the three latter to his disciples. Behold the sower - How
exquisitely proper is this parable to be an introduction to all the
rest! In this our Lord answers a very obvious and a very important
question. The same sower, Christ, and the same preachers sent by him,
always sow the same seed: why has it not always the same effect? He that
hath ears to hear, let him hear!

[Matthew 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 13:4</span></span>

And while he sowed, some seeds fell by the highway side, and the birds
came and devoured them - It is observable, that our Lord points out the
grand hinderances of our bearing fruit, in the same order as they occur.
The first danger is, that the birds will devour the seed. If it escape
this, there is then another danger, namely, lest it be scorched, and
wither away. It is long after this that the thorns spring up and choke
the good seed. A vast majority of those who hear the word of God,
receive the seed as by the highway side. Of those who do not lose it by
the birds, yet many receive it as on stony places. Many of them who
receive it in a better soil, yet suffer the thorns to grow up, and choke
it: so that few even of these endure to the end, and bear fruit unto
perfection: yet in all these cases, it is not the will of God that
hinders, but their own voluntary perverseness.

[Matthew 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 13:8</span></span>

Good ground - Soft, not like that by the highway side; deep, not like
the stony ground; purged, not full of thorns.

[Matthew 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 13:11</span></span>

To you, who have, it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of
heaven - The deep things which flesh and blood cannot reveal, pertaining
to the inward, present kingdom of heaven. But to them who have not, it
is not given - Therefore speak I in parables, that ye may understand,
while they do not understand.

[Matthew 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 13:12</span></span>

Whosoever hath - That is, improves what he hath, uses the grace given
according to the design of the giver; to him shall be given - More and
more, in proportion to that improvement. But whosoever hath not -
Improves it not, from him shall be taken even what he hath - Here is the
grand rule of God's dealing with the children of men: a rule fixed as
the pillars of heaven. This is the key to all his providential
dispensations; as will appear to men and angels in that day. [Mat
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#029); [Mar
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#025); [Luk
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#018); [Luk
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#026).

[Matthew 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 13:13</span></span>

Therefore I speak to them in parables, because seeing, they see not - In
pursuance of this general rule, I do not give more knowledge to this
people, be. cause they use not that which they have already: having all
the means of seeing, hearing, and understanding, they use none of them:
they do not effectually see, or hear, or understand any thing.

[Matthew 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 13:14</span></span>

Hearing ye will hear, but in nowise understand - That is, Ye will surely
hear. All possible means will be given you: yet they will profit you
nothing; because your heart is sensual, stupid, and insensible; your
spiritual senses are shut up; yea, you have closed your eyes against the
light; as being unwilling to understand the things of God, and afraid,
not desirous that he should heal you. [Isa
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009); [Joh
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#040); [Act
28:26](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#026).

[Matthew 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 13:16</span></span>

But blessed are your eyes - For you both see and understand. You know
how to prize the light which is given you. [Luk
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#023).

[Matthew 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 13:19</span></span>

When any one heareth the word, and considereth it not - The first and
most general cause of unfruitfulness. The wicked one cometh - Either
inwardly; filling the mind with thoughts of other things; or by his
agent. Such are all they that introduce other subjects, when men should
be considering what they have heard.

[Matthew 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 13:20</span></span>

The seed sown on stony places, therefore sprang up soon, because it did
not sink deep, [Mat 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#005). He receiveth
it with joy - Perhaps with transport, with ecstacy: struck with the
beauty of truth, and drawn by the preventing grace of God.

[Matthew 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 13:21</span></span>

Yet hath he not root in himself - No deep work of grace: no change in
the ground of his heart. Nay, he has no deep conviction; and without
this, good desires soon wither away. He is offended - He finds a
thousand plausible pretences for leaving so narrow and rugged a way.

[Matthew 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 13:22</span></span>

He that received the seed among the thorns, is he that heareth the word
and considereth it - In spite of Satan and his agents: yea, hath root in
himself is deeply convinced, and in a great measure inwardly changed; so
that he will not draw back, even when tribulation or persecution
ariseth. And yet even in him, together with the good seed, the thorns
spring up, [Mat 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#007). (perhaps
unperceived at first) till they gradually choke it, destroy all its life
and power, and it becometh unfruitful. Cares are thorns to the poor:
wealth to the rich; the desire of other things to all. The deceitfulness
of riches - Deceitful indeed! for they smile, and betray: kiss, and
smite into hell. They put out the eyes, harden the heart, steal away all
the life of God; fill the soul with pride, anger, love of the world;
make men enemies to the whole cross of Christ! And all the while are
eagerly desired, and vehemently pursued, even by those who believe there
is a God!

[Matthew 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 13:23</span></span>

Some a hundred fold, some sixty, some thirty - That is, in various
proportions; some abundantly more than others.

[Matthew 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 13:24</span></span>

He proposed another parable - in which he farther explains the case of
unfruitful hearers. The kingdom of heaven (as has been observed before)
sometimes signifies eternal glory: sometimes the way to it, inward
religion; sometimes, as here, the Gospel dispensation: the phrase is
likewise used for a person or thing relating to any one of those: so in
this place it means, Christ preaching the Gospel, who is like a man
sowing good seed - The expression, is like, both here and in several
other places, only means, that the thing spoken of may be illustrated by
the following similitude. Who sowed good seed in his field - God sowed
nothing but good in his whole creation. Christ sowed only the good seed
of truth in his Church.

[Matthew 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 13:25</span></span>

But while men slept - They ought to have watched: the Lord of the field
sleepeth not. His enemy came and sowed darnel - This is very like wheat,
and commonly grows among wheat rather than among other grain: but tares
or vetches are of the pulse kind, and bear no resemblance to wheat.

[Matthew 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 13:26</span></span>

When the blade was sprung up, then appeared the darnel - It was not
discerned before: it seldom appears, as soon as the good seed is sown:
all at first appears to be peace, and love, and joy.

[Matthew 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 13:27</span></span>

Didst not thou sow good seed in thy field? Whence then hath it darnel? -
Not from the parent of good. Even the heathen could say, "No evil can
from thee proceed: 'Tis only suffer'd, not decreed: As darkness is not
from the sun, Nor mount the shades, till he is gone."

[Matthew 13:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 13:28</span></span>

He said, An enemy hath done this - A plain answer to the great question
concerning the origin of evil. God made men (as he did angels)
intelligent creatures, and consequently free either to choose good or
evil: but he implanted no evil in the human soul: An enemy (with man's
concurrence) hath done this. Darnel, in the Church, is properly outside
Christians, such as have the form of godliness, without the power. Open
sinners, such as have neither the form nor the power, are not so
properly darnel, as thistles and brambles: these ought to be rooted up
without delay, and not suffered in the Christian community. Whereas
should fallible men attempt to gather up the darnel, they would often
root up the wheat with them.

[Matthew 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 13:31</span></span>

He proposed to them another parable - The former parables relate chiefly
to unfruitful hearers; these that follow, to those who bear good fruit.
The kingdom of heaven - Both the Gospel dispensation, and the inward
kingdom. [Mar 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#030); [Luk
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#018).

[Matthew 13:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 13:32</span></span>

The least - That is, one of the least: a way of speaking extremely
common among the Jews. It becometh a tree - In those countries it grows
exceeding large and high. So will the Christian doctrine spread in the
world, and the life of Christ in the soul.

[Matthew 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 13:33</span></span>

Three measures - This was the quantity which they usually baked at once:
till the whole was leavened - Thus will the Gospel leaven the world and
grace the Christian. [Luk 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#020).

[Matthew 13:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 13:34</span></span>

Without a parable spake he not unto them - That is, not at that time; at
other times he did.

[Matthew 13:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mat 13:35</span></span>

[Psa 78:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#002).

[Matthew 13:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mat 13:38</span></span>

The good seed are the children of the kingdom - That is, the children of
God, the righteous.

[Matthew 13:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mat 13:41</span></span>

They shall gather all things that offend - Whatever had hindered or
grieved the children of God; whatever things or persons had hindered the
good seed which Christ had sown from taking root or bearing fruit. The
Greek word is, All scandals.

[Matthew 13:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">mat 13:44</span></span>

The three following parables are proposed, not to the multitude, but
peculiarly to the apostles: the two former of them relate to those who
receive the Gospel; the third, both to those who receive, and those who
preach it. The kingdom of heaven is like treasure hid in a field - The
kingdom of God within us is a treasure indeed, but a treasure hid from
the world, and from the most wise and prudent in it. He that finds this
treasure, (perhaps when he thought it far from him,) hides it deep in
his heart, and gives up all other happiness for it.

[Matthew 13:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">mat 13:45</span></span>

The kingdom of heaven - That is, one who earnestly seeks for it: in [Mat
13:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#047) it means, the Gospel preached,
which is like a net gathering of every kind: just so the Gospel,
wherever it is preached, gathers at first both good and bad, who are for
a season full of approbation and warm with good desires. But Christian
discipline, and strong, close exhortation, begin that separation in this
world, which shall be accomplished by the angels of God in the world to
come.

[Matthew 13:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">mat 13:52</span></span>

Every scribe instructed unto the kingdom of heaven - That is, every duly
prepared preacher of the Gospel has a treasure of Divine knowledge, out
of which he is able to bring forth all sorts of instructions. The word
treasure signifies any collection of things whatsoever, and the places
where such collections are kept.

[Matthew 13:53](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">mat 13:53</span></span>

He departed thence - He crossed the lake from Capernaum: and came once
more into his own country - Nazareth: but with no better success than he
had had there before.

[Matthew 13:54](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">mat 13:54</span></span>

Whence hath HE - Many texts are not understood, for want of knowing the
proper emphasis; and others are utterly misunderstood, by placing the
emphasis wrong. To prevent this in some measure, the emphatical words
are here printed in capital letters. [Mar
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#001); [Luk
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#016), [Luk
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#022).

[Matthew 13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">mat 13:55</span></span>

The carpenter's son - The Greek, word means, one that works either in
wood, iron, or stone. His brethren - Our kinsmen. They were the sons of
Mary, sister to the virgin, and wife of Cleophas or Alpheus. James -
Styled by St. Paul also, the Lord's brother, [Gal
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019). Simon - Surnamed the Canaanite.

[Matthew 13:57](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">mat 13:57</span></span>

They were offended at him - They looked on him as a mean, ignoble man,
not worthy to be regarded. [Joh 4:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#044);
[Luk 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#023).

[Matthew 13:58](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#058)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">mat 13:58</span></span>

He wrought not many mighty works, because of their unbelief - And the
reason why many mighty works are not wrought now, is not, that the faith
is not every where planted; but, that unbelief every where prevails.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 14](mat014)

</div>
