<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Matthew Index](mat.md)  
  [Previous](mat001)  [Next](mat003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001.md)

[Matthew 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 2:1</span></span>

Bethlehem of Judea - There was another Bethlehem in the tribe of
Zebulon. In the days of Herod - commonly called Herod the Great, born at
Ascalon. The sceptre was now on the point of departing from Judah. Among
his sons were Archelaus, mentioned [Mat
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#022.md); Herod Antipas, mentioned [Mat
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#001.md); &c., and Philip, mentioned [Luk
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#019.md). Herod Agrippa, mentioned [Act
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#001.md); &c., was his grandson. Wise men
- The first fruits of the Gentiles. Probably they were Gentile
philosophers, who, through the Divine assistance, had improved their
knowledge of nature, as a means of leading to the knowledge of the one
true God. Nor is it unreasonable to suppose, that God had favoured them
with some extraordinary revelations of himself, as he did Melchisedec,
Job, and several others, who were not of the family of Abraham; to which
he never intended absolutely to confine his favours. The title given
them in the original was anciently given to all philosophers, or men of
learning; those particularly who were curious in examining the works of
nature, and observing the motions of the heavenly bodies. From the east
- So Arabia is frequently called in Scripture. It lay to the east of
Judea, and was famous for gold, frankincense, and myrrh. We have seen
his star - Undoubtedly they had before heard Balaam's prophecy. And
probably when they saw this unusual star, it was revealed to them that
this prophecy was fulfilled. In the east - That is, while we were in the
east.

[Matthew 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 2:2</span></span>

To do him homage - To pay him that honour, by bowing to the earth before
him, which the eastern nations used to pay to their monarchs.

[Matthew 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 2:4</span></span>

The chief priests - That is, not only the high priest and his deputy,
with those who formerly had borne that office: but also the chief man in
each of those twenty - four courses, into which the body of priests were
divided, [Ch1 24:6-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#006.md). The scribes
were those whose peculiar business it was to explain the Scriptures to
the people. They were the public preachers, or expounders of the law of
Moses. Whence the chief of them were called doctors of the law.

[Matthew 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 2:6</span></span>

Thou art in nowise the least among the princes of Judah - That is, among
the cities belonging to the princes or heads of thousands in Judah. When
this and several other quotations from the Old Testament are compared
with the original, it plainly appears, the apostles did not always think
it necessary exactly to transcribe the passages they cited, but
contented themselves with giving the general sense, though with some
diversity of language. The words of Micah, which we render, Though thou
be little, may be rendered, Art thou little? And then the difference
which seems to be here between the prophet and the evangelist vanishes
away. [Mic 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002.md).

[Matthew 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 2:8</span></span>

And if ye find him, bring me word - Probably Herod did not believe he
was born; otherwise would not so suspicious a prince have tried to make
sure work at once?

[Matthew 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 2:10</span></span>

Seeing the star - Standing over where the child was.

[Matthew 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 2:11</span></span>

They presented to him gifts - It was customary to offer some present to
any eminent person whom they visited. And so it is, as travellers
observe, in the eastern countries to this day. Gold, frankincense, and
myrrh - Probably these were the best things their country afforded; and
the presents ordinarily made to great persons. This was a most
seasonable, providential assistance for a long and expensive journey
into Egypt, a country where they were entirely strangers, and were to
stay for a considerable time.

[Matthew 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 2:15</span></span>

That it might be fulfilled - That is, whereby was fulfilled. The
original word frequently signifies, not the design of an action, but
barely the consequence or event of it. Which was spoken of the Lord by
the prophet - on another occasion: Out of Egypt have I called my Son -
which was now fulfilled as it were anew; Christ being in a far higher
sense the Son of God than Israel, of whom the words were originally
spoken. [Hos 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#001.md).

[Matthew 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 2:16</span></span>

Then Herod, seeing that he was deluded by the wise men - So did his
pride teach him to regard this action, as if it were intended to expose
him to the derision of his subjects. Sending forth - a party of
soldiers: In all the confines thereof - In all the neighbouring places,
of which Rama was one.

[Matthew 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 2:17</span></span>

Then was fulfilled - A passage of Scripture, whether prophetic,
historical, or poetical, is in the language of the New Testament
fulfilled, when an event happens to which it may with great propriety be
accommodated.

[Matthew 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 2:18</span></span>

Rachel weeping for her children - The Benjamites, who inhabited Rama,
sprung from her. She was buried near this place; and is here beautifully
represented risen, as it were out of her grave, and bewailing her lost
children. Because they are not - that is, are dead. The preservation of
Jesus from this destruction, may be considered as a figure of God's care
over his children in their greatest danger. God does not often, as he
easily could, cut off their persecutors at a stroke. But he provides a
hiding place for his people, and by methods not less effectual, though
less pompous, preserves them from being swept away, even when the enemy
comes in like a flood. [Jer 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015.md).

[Matthew 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 2:22</span></span>

He was afraid to go thither - into Judea; and so turned aside into the
region of Galilee - a part of the land of Israel not under the
jurisdiction of Archelaus.

[Matthew 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 2:23</span></span>

He came and dwelt in Nazareth - (where he had dwelt before he went to
Bethlehem) a place contemptible to a proverb. So that hereby was
fulfilled what has been spoken in effect by several of the prophets,
(though by none of them in express words,) He shall be called a Nazarene
- that is, he shall be despised and rejected, shall be a mark of public
contempt and reproach.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 3](mat003.md)

</div>
