<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Matthew Index](mat.md)  
  [Previous](mat017)  [Next](mat019.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#001.md)

[Matthew 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 18:1</span></span>

Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven? - Which of us shall be thy
prime minister? They still dreamed of a temporal kingdom.

[Matthew 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 18:2</span></span>

And Jesus calling to him a little child - This is supposed to have been
the great Ignatius, whom Trajan, the wise, the good Emperor Trajan,
condemned to be cast to the wild beasts at Rome! [Mar
9:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#036.md); [Luk
9:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#047.md).

[Matthew 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 18:3</span></span>

Except ye be converted - The first step toward entering into the kingdom
of grace, is to become as little children: lowly in heart, knowing
yourselves utterly ignorant and helpless, and hanging wholly on your
Father who is in heaven, for a supply of all your wants. We may farther
assert, (though it is doubtful whether this text implies so much,)
except ye be turned from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
to God:, except ye be entirely, inwardly changed, renewed in the image
of God, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of glory. Thus must every man
be converted in this life, or he can never enter into life eternal. Ye
shall in no wise enter - So far from being great in it. [Mat
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#014.md).

[Matthew 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 18:5</span></span>

And all who are in this sense little children are unspeakably dear to
me. Therefore help them all you can, as if it were myself in person, and
see that ye offend them not; that is, that ye turn them not out of the
right way, neither hinder them in it. [Mat
10:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040.md); [Luk
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#016.md); [Joh
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#020.md). [Mar
9:42](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#042.md); [Luk
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#001.md).

[Matthew 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 18:7</span></span>

Wo to the world because of offences - That is, unspeakable misery will
be in the world through them; for it must needs be that offences come -
Such is the nature of things, and such the weakness, folly, and
wickedness of mankind, that it cannot be but they will come; but wo to
that man - That is, miserable is that man, by whom the offence cometh.
Offences are, all things whereby any one is turned out of, or hindered
in the way of God.

[Matthew 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 18:8</span></span>

If thy hand, foot, eye, cause thee to offend - If the most dear
enjoyment, the most beloved and useful person, turn thee out of, or
hinder thee in the way Is not this a hard saying? Yes; if thou take
counsel with flesh and blood. [Mat
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029.md); [Mar
9:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#043.md).

[Matthew 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 18:10</span></span>

See that ye despise not one of these little ones - As if they were
beneath your notice. Be careful to receive and not to offend, the very
weakest believer in Christ: for as inconsiderable as some of these may
appear to thee, the very angels of God have a peculiar charge over them:
even those of the highest order, who continually appear at the throne of
the Most High. To behold the face of God seems to signify the waiting
near his throne; and to be an allusion to the office of chief ministers
in earthly courts, who daily converse with their princes.

[Matthew 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 18:11</span></span>

Another, and yet a stronger reason for your not despising them is, that
I myself came into the world to save them. [Luk
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#010.md).

[Matthew 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 18:12</span></span>

[Luk 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#004.md).

[Matthew 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 18:14</span></span>

So it is not the will of your Father - Neither doth my Father despise
the least of them. Observe the gradation. The angels, the Son, the
Father.

[Matthew 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 18:15</span></span>

But how can we avoid giving offence to some? or being offended at
others! Especially suppose they are quite in the wrong? Suppose they
commit a known sin? Our Lord here teaches us how: he lays down a sure
method of avoiding all offences. Whosoever closely observes this
threefold rule, will seldom offend others, and never be offended
himself. If any do any thing amiss, of which thou art an eye or ear
witness, thus saith the Lord, If thy brother - Any who is a member of
the same religious community: Sin against thee, Go and reprove him alone
- If it may be in person; if that cannot so well be done, by thy
messenger; or in writing. Observe, our Lord gives no liberty to omit
this; or to exchange it for either of the following steps. If this do
not succeed, Take with thee one or two more - Men whom he esteems or
loves, who may then confirm and enforce what thou sayest; and afterward,
if need require, bear witness of what was spoken. If even this does not
succeed, then, and not before, Tell it to the elders of the Church - Lay
the whole matter open before those who watch over yours and his soul. If
all this avail not, have no farther intercourse with him, only such as
thou hast with heathens. Can any thing be plainer? Christ does here as
expressly command all Christians who see a brother do evil, to take this
way, not another, and to take these steps, in this order, as he does to
honour their father and mother. But if so, in what land do the
Christians live? If we proceed from the private carriage of man to man,
to proceedings of a more public nature, in what Christian nation are
Church censures conformed to this rule? Is this the form in which
ecclesiastical judgments appear, in the popish, or even the Protestant
world? Are these the methods used even by those who boast the most
loudly of the authority of Christ to confirm their sentences? Let us
earnestly pray, that this dishonour to the Christian name may be wiped
away, and that common humanity may not, with such solemn mockery, be
destroyed in the name of the Lord! Let him be to thee as the heathen -
To whom thou still owest earnest good will, and all the offices of
humanity. [Luk 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#003.md).

[Matthew 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 18:18</span></span>

Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth - By excommunication, pronounced in
the spirit and power of Christ. Whatsoever ye shall loose - By
absolution from that sentence. In the primitive Church, absolution meant
no more than a discharge from Church censure. Again I say - And not only
your intercession for the penitent, but all your united prayers, shall
be heard. How great then is the power of joint prayer! If two of you -
Suppose a man and his wife. [Mat
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019.md).

[Matthew 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 18:20</span></span>

Where two or three are gathered together in my name - That is, to
worship me. I am in the midst of them - By my Spirit, to quicken their
prayers, guide their counsels, and answer their petitions.

[Matthew 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 18:22</span></span>

Till seventy times seven - That is, as often as there is occasion. A
certain number is put for an uncertain.

[Matthew 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 18:23</span></span>

Therefore - In this respect.

[Matthew 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 18:24</span></span>

One was brought who owed him ten thousand talents - According to the
usual computation, if these were talents of gold, this would amount to
seventy - two millions sterling. If they were talents of silver, it must
have been four millions, four hundred thousand pounds. Hereby our Lord
intimates the vast number and weight of our offences against God, and
our utter incapacity of making him any satisfaction.

[Matthew 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 18:25</span></span>

As he had not to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold - Such was the
power which creditors anciently had over their insolvent debtors in
several countries.

[Matthew 18:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 18:30</span></span>

Went with him before a magistrate, and cast him into prison, protesting
he should lie there, till he should pay the whole debt.

[Matthew 18:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 18:34</span></span>

His lord delivered him to the tormentors - Imprisonment is a much
severer punishment in the eastern countries than in ours. State
criminals, especially when condemned to it, are not only confined to a
very mean and scanty allowance, but are frequently loaded with clogs or
heavy yokes, so that they can neither lie nor sit at ease: and by
frequent scourgings and sometimes rackings are brought to an untimely
end. Till he should pay all that was due to him - That is, without all
hope of release, for this he could never do. How observable is this
whole account; as well as the great inference our Lord draws from it:
The debtor was freely and fully forgiven; He wilfully and grievously
offended; His pardon was retracted, the whole debt required, and the
offender delivered to the tormentors for ever. And shall we still say,
but when we are once freely and fully forgiven, our pardon can never be
retracted? Verily, verily, I say unto you, So likewise will my heavenly
Father do to you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his
brother their trespasses.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 19](mat019.md)

</div>
