<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Micah Index](mic.md)  
  [Previous](mic003)  [Next](mic005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Micah Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001.md)

[Micah 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mic 4:1</span></span>

In the last days - Or, in the latter days, at the expiring of the
seventy years captivity, near two hundred years from Micah's time, a
type of the days of the Messiah's kingdom. The mountain - The mountain
on which the temple stood, the type of the church of Christ. Established
- Literally fulfilled when the second temple was built by the Jews.
Spiritually, when Christ established his church by the preaching of the
gospel.

[Micah 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mic 4:2</span></span>

Many nations - This was in part fulfilled when so many proselyted
servants of several nations, in love to their Jewish masters, and more
to the God of the Jews, came up with them from Jerusalem. Come - So the
Jews, released from captivity, encouraged each other; which was a
fulfilling of this prophecy in part; the conversion of the multitude of
the Gentiles to Christ, was a more eminent fulfilling of it. To the
mountain - To the temple at Jerusalem, a type of Christ and the gospel
church. From Jerusalem - In Jerusalem is declared the only way of
worshipping God, and from thence the only law of right worship shall go
forth, when the Messiah is come.

[Micah 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mic 4:3</span></span>

He - The Messiah shall act as a judge and king. Rebuke - So Christ
commissioned his apostles, to teach all nations.

[Micah 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mic 4:4</span></span>

They - The redeemed of the Lord, redeemed from Babylonish captivity, the
type of a greater redemption by Christ. Shall sit - That is, they shall
enjoy peace, security and plenty. This was more fully made good in the
gospel - days.

[Micah 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mic 4:5</span></span>

All people will walk - It is the practice of all nations, to serve their
gods. Will walk - Seek the Lord, embrace his law and worship.

[Micah 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mic 4:6</span></span>

That halteth - The Jews weakened with the hard usage of oppressing
conquerors. Her - Captive Judah; driven out, of their own land. And
Christ will much more gather to his fold those who were captives to
Satan.

[Micah 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mic 4:7</span></span>

A remnant - Which as they are preserved for a seed, so they take root
and increase, and continue to the coming of the Messiah.

[Micah 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mic 4:8</span></span>

O tower - One tower put for the whole city Jerusalem. The strong - hold
- Ophel, a strong fort, is likewise put for the whole city. The first
dominion - The former dominion; the government (after seventy years
captivity) shall return to the former royal family, and continue in it
'till Shiloh come. This, in the type was fulfilled, under Zerubbabel and
his successors; but the whole antitype concerns the Messiah's kingdom.

[Micah 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mic 4:9</span></span>

Now - Now I have promised such great things to you. No king - Thou hast
lost thy king Zedekiah, but thy God, thy king is with thee. Thy
counsellor - Hast thou none among thy wise counsellors left? Yet the
Wonderful Counsellor is with thee. Messiah, the wisdom of his father,
hath the conduct of thy sufferings, deliverance and re - establishment.

[Micah 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mic 4:10</span></span>

In pain - Thou shalt have troubles, sorrows, and dangers in the wars
against the Babylonians, and in the captivity under them. Now - Shortly.
In the field - In their journey to Babylon they were forced to lodge in
the fields. Delivered - By Cyrus, by Darius, and by Artaxerxes; and this
was a type of a greater deliverance. Redeem - The Hebrew word points out
a redemption by the next kinsman, and so minds us of the Messiah, the
great redeemer of the church.

[Micah 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mic 4:11</span></span>

Now - The time is at hand. Defiled - Let her be polluted with blood, and
let us enter, sack and destroy her temple and palaces. Look - With
delight on her destruction.

[Micah 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mic 4:12</span></span>

The thoughts - The design of the holy, just and faithful God. As the
sheaves - The husbandman gathers the sheaves into the floor to thresh
them; so God in due time will bring his enemies together, that they may
be bruised, broken and destroyed.

[Micah 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mic 4:13</span></span>

And thresh - The future strength of the church employed in subduing her
enemies, is here foretold. Iron - This expresses the strength of the
church firm as iron, to beat down her enemies. Brass - By this
figurative speech, is the strength of Zion expressed, treading
underfoot, and breaking the power of her enemies in pieces. And I - I,
the church. Their gain - The spoils of my conquered enemies.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah Chapter 5](mic005.md)

</div>
