<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Micah Index](mic.md)  
  [Previous](jon004)  [Next](mic002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Micah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001.md)

[Micah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mic 1:1</span></span>

Hezekiah - The best son, of the worst father. How long Micah prophesied
during his reign, we can but conjecture, possibly 'till the fourteenth
year of Hezekiah. So this prophet may be supposed to have prophesied
sixteen years in Jotham's time, as many under Ahaz, and fourteen under
Hezekiah, in all forty - six years. And he survived the captivity of
Israel ten years, which he lamented as well as foretold.

[Micah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mic 1:2</span></span>

O earth - This seems to be an appeal to the senseless creatures, or a
summons to bring them in evidences for God against those kingdoms.
Therein - Animate or inanimate creatures, all that are on the earth.
Temple - Either from his temple at Jerusalem, or from heaven.

[Micah 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mic 1:3</span></span>

The Lord - He comes forth as a judge, to hear, determine, and punish.
His place - Heaven, the place of his glorious throne. Come down - Shew,
by the effects of his power, justice, and wisdom, that he is more
eminently present there. Tread upon - Trample under foot all that is
high, excellent, and matter of your glorying.

[Micah 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mic 1:4</span></span>

Cleft - Or rent in sunder, broken up and slide away.

[Micah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mic 1:5</span></span>

Jacob - The sons of Jacob, the ten tribes. What - Or, who is the spring,
and cause of that overflowing transgression? Of Jacob - The kingdom of
the ten tribes, the head of which was Samaria, where the kings had their
residence, where they worshiped idols, and set an example to the rest of
the Israelitish kingdom. And what - Or, who is the cause of the high
places, and the idolatry there practised? Jerusalem - Which was the
chief city of that kingdom, and had the same influence over Judah, as
Samaria had on the ten tribes.

[Micah 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mic 1:6</span></span>

As an heap - As a heap of ruins. Of a vineyard - In planting vineyards,
they dig up the earth, and cast it up in hillocks; so shall they make
this city. Into the valley - The city was built on a high hill, and a
deep valley beneath it. I will discover - I will raze the walls,
fortresses, and public buildings of this city, to the very foundations.

[Micah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mic 1:7</span></span>

The hires - The rich gifts given for the honour and service of the idols
by deceived idolaters. She - The kingdom of Samaria. It - Their wealth,
or the rich presents made to their idols. Of an harlot - As harlots get
rich gifts of their lovers. They - These rich presents shall be turned
by the Assyrians to the service and honour of their idols.

[Micah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mic 1:8</span></span>

Therefore - Because of those dreadful slaughters in Israel and Samaria.
And naked - As one that in bitterness of passion hath cast off his upper
garment. Dragons - Or rather, Jackals, which haunt desolate places, and
make a great and hideous noise by night.

[Micah 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mic 1:9</span></span>

Her wound - The wounds of Samaria, her own sins, and God's just
displeasure. It is come - The contagion of her sins, and the indignation
of God against it, have reached to Judah also, yea, to Jerusalem.

[Micah 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mic 1:10</span></span>

Declare ye it not - Lest the Philistines triumph. Weep ye not - Make no
public weeping. Aphrah - This was farther from the Philistines. Roll
thyself - Express thy sorrow.

[Micah 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mic 1:11</span></span>

Pass ye away - The imperative is here put for the future; they shalt go
into captivity. Saphir - Probably Samaria and Jerusalem. Naked - Stript
by the conquering enemy. Zaanan - It is thought, this was a considerable
garrison full of people and soldiers. Came not forth - To help their
neighbouring town Beth - ezel. Beth - ezel - A strong town taken by the
Assyrians. His standing - The enemy shall encamp among you, shall stand
on your ground, so that you will have no opportunity of coming out to
help your neighbours.

[Micah 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mic 1:12</span></span>

Maroth - A town in Judea. But evil - The flood of affliction by the
Assyrian, swallowed up other cities, and swelled even to the head city,
Jerusalem.

[Micah 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mic 1:13</span></span>

Lachish - A strong fortress on the confines of Judah. Bind the chariot -
To fly from the sword of the enemy. She - Lachish, which being the
nearest to idolatrous Israel, took the infection of them, and conveyed
it to Jerusalem. The transgressions - Not only the idolatry, but other
sins also. Of Israel - Of the ten tribes.

[Micah 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mic 1:14</span></span>

Give presents - The inhabitants of Lachish courted the assistance of the
Philistines against the Assyrian. Moresheth - gath - A known city of the
Philistines, called Moresheth - gath, to distinguish it from a town of
the same name in the tribe of Judah. Achzib - This was also a city of
the Philistines. A lie - A lying refuge, a prop that will break under
them.

[Micah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mic 1:15</span></span>

An heir - The Assyrian, who in the right of conquest shall possess thee.
Mareshah - A town of the Philistines. Adullam - Perhaps this city was
considerable enough at that time, to be the glory of Israel.

[Micah 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mic 1:16</span></span>

Thee - O Judea and Israel, tear off thy hair. Shave what thou canst not
tear off. For thy children - For the loss of them, some being slain,
others starved, or swept away with pestilence, and the residue carried
captive. As the eagle - One species of which is entirely bald.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah Chapter 2](mic002.md)

</div>
