<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh.md)  
  [Previous](neh002)  [Next](neh004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001.md)

[Nehemiah 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 3:1</span></span>

Eliashib - Grand - child of Joshua, the first high - priest after their
return from Babylon. Rose - Began the work. Ministers should be foremost
in every good work, animating others by their example as well as
doctrine. Sheep - gate - Which was next to the temple; so called,
because the sheep were brought thro' it to be sacrificed. Sanctified -
Or, they prepared or repaired it: for so the word sometimes signifies.
But our translation seems best, both because that use of the word is
most common, and because this is spoken only of this gate, which being
built by the priests, and nighest to the temple, and with a special eye
to the service of the temple, for which both men and things were most
commonly brought in this way, and being also the first part of the
building, might be in a peculiar manner sanctified by solemn prayer and
sacrifice, whereby it was dedicated to God's service.

[Nehemiah 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">neh 3:5</span></span>

Their nobles - Did not submit to it, would not further it, either
through sloth or covetousness, or secret compliance with the enemies of
the Jews. Of their Lord - Of God, whom they owned for their Lord, whose
work this was, because it had proceeded thus far by his singular
providence: and because it was done for the defence of the city, and
people, and temple of God. And therefore they are branded to all
posterity. Let not nobles think any thing beneath them, by which they
may benefit their country. What is their nobility good for, but that it
places them in an higher and larger sphere of usefulness?

[Nehemiah 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">neh 3:7</span></span>

The throne - Unto the place where the governor of the country on this
side Euphrates, under the Persian kings, sometimes had a palace or
throne.

[Nehemiah 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">neh 3:8</span></span>

Fortified - It is not said, they repaired, but they fortified it, either
because this part of the wall was less demolished than the other, and
therefore they needed not to repair it, but only to make it stronger:
or, to note their extraordinary care and diligence, that they would not
only repair it, but make it stronger than ever.

[Nehemiah 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">neh 3:9</span></span>

Half part - As Rome was anciently divided into several quarters or
regions, so was Jerusalem; and especially into two parts, whereof one
was in the tribe of Benjamin, and nearest the temple, the other in the
tribe of Judah, these accordingly had two several rulers, this man and
the other, [Neh 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#012.md), but both under
the chief governor of the city.

[Nehemiah 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">neh 3:12</span></span>

His daughters - Who were either heiresses or rich widows, and caused
part to be done at their charges.

[Nehemiah 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">neh 3:14</span></span>

Beth - haccerem - A town or territory, the government whereof was
divided between two persons.

[Nehemiah 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">neh 3:16</span></span>

Made - By Hezekiah, [Kg2 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#020.md).
Whereby it is distinguished from that pool which was natural. Mighty -
Or, of the valiant: which possibly was formerly appointed for the
receipt of those chief captains that should attend upon the king in
their courses.

[Nehemiah 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">neh 3:20</span></span>

Earnestly - Did his work with eminent diligence and fervency: which is
here noted to his commendation. And it is probable, this good man's zeal
provoked many, to take the more pains, and make the more haste.

[Nehemiah 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">neh 3:21</span></span>

The door - Therefore the door was not in the middle of the house, as now
they commonly are, but at one end of it.

[Nehemiah 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">neh 3:27</span></span>

Tekoites - The same spoken of before, who having dispatched their first
share sooner than their brethren, freely offered to supply the defects
of others, who, as it seems, neglected that part of the work which had
been committed to them. And this their double diligence is noted both
for the greater shame of their nobles, who would not do any part of it,
and for their own honour, who were so far from being corrupted by that
bad example, that they were quickened to greater zeal and industry in
this pious work.

[Nehemiah 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">neh 3:30</span></span>

The sixth son of Zalaph - It seems, his five elder brethren, laid not
their hands to the work. But in doing that which is good, we need not
stay to see our betters go before us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 4](neh004.md)

</div>
