<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh.md)  
  [Previous](neh004)  [Next](neh006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#001.md)

[Nehemiah 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">neh 5:2</span></span>

Many - Which is in itself a blessing, but to us is turned into a curse.
Take up - We are forced to take up corn, upon unreasonable terms.

[Nehemiah 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">neh 5:3</span></span>

The dearth - Which might happen, both from the multitude of the people
in and near Jerusalem, from their work, which wholly took them up, and
kept them from taking care of their families, and from the expectation
of their enemies invasion, which hindered them from going abroad to
fetch provision, and the people round about from bringing it to them.

[Nehemiah 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">neh 5:5</span></span>

Our flesh - We are of the same nature, and religion with them, though
they treat us as if we were beasts or Heathens. Bondage - We are
compelled to sell them for our subsistence. Daughters - Which was an
evidence of their great necessity, because their daughters were more
tender, and weak, and unfit for bond - service, and more exposed to
injuries than their sons. Redeem - Which we are allowed to do, [Exo
21:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#007.md), but have not wherewith to do
it.

[Nehemiah 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">neh 5:7</span></span>

Exact - Which was against the plain and positive law of God, [Deu
23:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#019.md), especially in this time of
publick calamity. I set - I called a publick congregation, both of the
rulers and people, the greatest part whereof were free from this guilt,
and therefore more impartial judges of the matter, and represented it to
them, that the offenders might be convinced, and reformed; if not for
fear of God, or love of their brethren, yet at least for the publick
shame and the cries of the poor. Ezra, and Nehemiah were both good and
useful men; but of how different tempers? Ezra was a man of a mild
tender spirit, and when told of the sin of the rulers, rent his clothes
and wept: Nehemiah forced them to reform, being of a warm and eager
spirit. So God's work may be done, and yet different methods taken in
doing it; which is a good reason why we should not arraign the
management of others, nor make our own standard.

[Nehemiah 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">neh 5:8</span></span>

We - I, and my brethren, and predecessors, have used our utmost interest
and power, both with the kings of Persia, that our brethren might be
redeemed from bondage, and with particular persons in Babylon, and
Persia, whose bond - slaves the Jews were, and who would not part with
them without a price. Be sold - Do you expect that we should pay you a
price for them, as we did to the Babylonians?. Or, must we use as much
importunity to solicit you for their redemption, as we did to their
enemies?

[Nehemiah 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">neh 5:9</span></span>

Reproach - Who are round about you, and observe all your actions, and
will reproach both you for such barbarous usage of your brethren, and
religion for your sakes.

[Nehemiah 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">neh 5:10</span></span>

Brethren - In office; these who are employed with me in the government
of this people. Servants - In my name, and for my use. Exact - As a just
recompense for our pains and care for the publick good, to which we
wholly devote ourselves, even to the neglect of all our private
concerns. But I freely remit my own right, and therefore you also ought
to do so, seeing I lay no burden upon you, but what I am willing to bear
a part of upon my own shoulders.

[Nehemiah 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">neh 5:11</span></span>

Also - Also require not: which is to be supplied out of the next verse,
where it is expressed in their grant of this desire. Hundredth part -
Which they required every month for the use of their monies or goods,
according to the custom then used.

[Nehemiah 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">neh 5:12</span></span>

Require - For the hundredth part. Priests - As witnesses; that the oath
being taken before the priests, who acted in God's name, the oath might
make the more deep and durable impression upon their consciences.

[Nehemiah 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">neh 5:13</span></span>

My lap - The extreme parts of my garment, which I first folded together,
and then shook it and scattered it asunder. This was a form of swearing
then in use.

[Nehemiah 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">neh 5:14</span></span>

Twelve years - Not that he continued so long together at Jerusalem, but
he so long governed Jerusalem by himself when present, and in his
absence, by a deputy. The bread - That allowance which by the laws of
God and nations, and of the king of Persia, the governors might require.

[Nehemiah 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">neh 5:15</span></span>

The former - Not Ezra, who was no governor, nor Zerubbabel, but others
between him and Nehemiah, whom he forbears to name. Beside, &c. - Which
they required of the people every day to defray their other expenses.
Their servants - Ruled them with rigor and cruelty; which fault of the
servants is charged upon their masters, because they did not restrain
them. He had an awe of God's mercy, and a fear of offending him. Those
that truly fear God, will not dare to do any thing cruel or unjust. And
this is not only a powerful, but an acceptable principle both of justice
and charity.

[Nehemiah 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">neh 5:16</span></span>

I continued - Overseeing, directing, and encouraging the workmen, which
was my whole business; and this at my own cost. Bought - Of our poor
brethren, whose necessities gave abundant opportunity of enriching
myself with good bargains.

[Nehemiah 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">neh 5:17</span></span>

Rulers - Not only Jews of the inferior sort, for whom meaner provisions
might suffice, but also their rulers, for whom better provision was fit;
who resorted to him upon all occasions, to give him notice of the
enemies designs; or to receive his orders.

[Nehemiah 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">neh 5:18</span></span>

Required not - But bore it out of my own estate: which was very
considerable, his office in the Persian court being a place of great
profit.

[Nehemiah 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">neh 5:19</span></span>

According - As I have done thy people good for thy sake, so do me good
for thine own sake; for thou art pleased, and hast promised graciously
to reward us according to our works, and to mete to men the same measure
which they meet to others.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 6](neh006.md)

</div>
