<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh.md)  
  [Previous](neh007)  [Next](neh009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001.md)

[Nehemiah 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">neh 8:2</span></span>

First day - This was the feast of trumpets, which is called a sabbath,
and on which they were to have an holy convocation, [Lev
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#024.md). And it was on this day, the
altar was set up, after their return from captivity; in remembrance of
which they had probably kept it ever since, with more than ordinary
solemnity.

[Nehemiah 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">neh 8:7</span></span>

Understand - As well the words, which being Hebrew, now needed to be
translated into the Chaldee or Syriack language, now, the common
language of that people, who together with their religion, had also in a
great part lost their language; as also the meaning of them: they
expounded the mind and will of God in what they read, and applied it to
the peoples present condition. Place - That is, In their several places
and stations into which the company seems to have been distributed for
conveniency of hearing; it not being likely that so vast a congregation
could distinctly hear one man's voice. Or, by their stations, that is,
by the several stations of the Levites, and persons last named; who seem
to have had several scaffolds, by comparing this with [Neh
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#004.md), upon which thy stood, as Ezra did
upon his pulpit, [Neh 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#004.md).

[Nehemiah 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">neh 8:8</span></span>

They - Ezra and his companions successively. Sense - The meaning of the
Hebrew words, which they expounded in the common language. Thy gave - So
they gave them both a translation of the Hebrew words into the Chaldee,
and an exposition of the things contained in them.

[Nehemiah 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">neh 8:9</span></span>

Wept - Out of a sense of their guilt and danger by reason of it.

[Nehemiah 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">neh 8:10</span></span>

Eat - Feast before the Lord. Send - For the relief of your poor
brethren. Holy - Being the feast of trumpets, and the beginning of this
joyful month, wherein so many days of thanksgiving were to be observed.
Strength - Rejoicing in God in serving him with chearfulness, and
thankfulness, which is your duty always, but now especially, will give
you that strength both of mind and body, which you greatly need, both to
perform all the duties required of you, and to oppose all the designs of
your enemies.

[Nehemiah 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">neh 8:13</span></span>

Levites - Chusing rather to confess their ignorance than vainly to
pretend to more knowledge than they had: wherein they shew both
humility, and serious godliness, that they were more careful to learn
their duty than to preserve their reputation.

[Nehemiah 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">neh 8:15</span></span>

Mount - The mount of Olives, which was next Jerusalem, and stored with
olive - branches, and probably with the rest: for these trees seem to
have been planted hereabouts principally, for the use of the city in
this very feast, which, though, long neglected, should have been
celebrated every year. And this place seems to be here designed as the
most eminent place, being put for any place near to the several cities
of Judah, where these branches were to be procured.

[Nehemiah 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">neh 8:17</span></span>

Done so - So, as to the manner and circumstances. They never kept this
feast so joyfully, having not only the same causes of rejoicing which
they formerly had, but special causes to increase their joy; they never
kept it so solemnly and religiously: for whereas at other times, only
the first and last day of that feast were celebrated with an holy
convocation, now there was an holy convocation, and the people
assembled, and attended upon the reading of the law, every day of this
feast.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 9](neh009.md)

</div>
