<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num011)  [Next](num013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#001)

[Numbers 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 12:1</span></span>

Miriam - Miriam seems to be first named, because she was the first mover
of the sedition; wherefore she is more eminently punished. The Ethiopian
- Either, Zipporah, who is here called an Ethiopian, in the Hebrew a
Cushite, because she was a Midianite: the word Cush being generally used
in scripture, not for Ethiopia properly so called below Egypt, but for
Arabia. If she be meant, probably they did not quarrel with him for
marrying her, because that was done long since, but for being swayed by
her and her relations, by whom they might think he was persuaded to
chose seventy rulers, by which co - partnership in government they
thought their authority and reputation diminished. And because they
durst not accuse God, they charge Moses, his instrument, as the manner
of men is. Or, some other woman, whom he married either whilst Zipporah
lived, or rather because she was now dead, though that, as many other
things, be not recorded. For, as the quarrel seems to be about his
marrying a stranger, it is probable it was a fresh occasion about which
they contended. And it was lawful for him as well as any other to marry
an Ethiopian or Arabian woman, provided she were, a sincere proselyte.

[Numbers 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 12:2</span></span>

By us - Are not we prophets as well as he? so Aaron was made, [Exo
4:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#015), and so Miriam is called, [Exo
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020). And Moses hath debased and
mixed the holy seed, which we have not done. Why then should he take all
power to himself, and make rulers as he pleaseth, without consulting us.
The Lord heard - Observed their words and carriage to Moses.

[Numbers 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 12:3</span></span>

Meek - This is added as the reason why Moses took no notice of their
reproach, and why God did so severely plead his cause. Thus was he
fitted for the work he was called to, which required all the meekness he
had. And this is often more tried by the unkindness of our friends, than
by the malice of our enemies. Probably this commendation was added, as
some other clauses were, by some succeeding prophet. How was Moses so
meek, when we often read of his anger? But this only proves, that the
law made nothing perfect.

[Numbers 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 12:4</span></span>

Suddenly - To stifle the beginnings of the sedition, that this example
might not spread amongst the people. Come out - Out of your private
dwellings, that you may know my pleasure and your own doom.

[Numbers 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 12:5</span></span>

In the door - While they stood without, not being admitted into the
tabernacle, as Aaron used to be; a sign of God's displeasure.

[Numbers 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 12:6</span></span>

Among you - if you be prophets, yet know there is a difference among
prophets, nor do I put equal honour upon all of them.

[Numbers 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 12:7</span></span>

In all my house - That is, whom I have set over all my house, my church
and people, and therefore over you; and who hath discharged his office
faithfully, and not partially as you falsely accuse him.

[Numbers 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 12:8</span></span>

Mouth to mouth - That is, distinctly, by an articulate voice;
immediately, not by an interpreter, nor by shadows and representations
in his fancy, as it is in visions and dreams; and familiarly. Apparently
- Plainly and certainly. Dark speeches - Not in parables, similitudes,
dark resemblances; as by shewing a boiling pot, an almond tree, &c. to
Jeremiah, a chariot with wheels, &c. to Ezekiel. The similitude - Not
the face or essence of God, which no man can see and live, [Exo
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020), but some singular manifestation
of his glorious presence, as [Exo
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#011), [Exo
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020). Yea the Son of God appeared to
him in an human shape, which he took up for a time, that he might give
him a foretaste of his future incarnation. My servant - Who is so in
such an eminent and extraordinary manner.

[Numbers 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 12:9</span></span>

He departed - From the door of the tabernacle, in token of his great
displeasure, not waiting for their answer. The removal of God's presence
from us, is the saddest token of his displeasure. And he never departs,
till we by our sin and folly drive him from us.

[Numbers 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 12:10</span></span>

From the tabernacle - Not from the whole tabernacle, but from that part,
whither it was come, to that part which was directly over the mercy -
seat, where it constantly abode. Leprous - She, and not Aaron, either
because she was chief in the transgression or because God would not have
his worship interrupted or dishonoured, which it must have been if Aaron
had been leprous. White - This kind of leprosy was the most virulent and
incurable of all. It is true, when the leprosy began in a particular
part, and thence spread itself over all the flesh by degrees, and at
last made it all white, that was an evidence of the cure of the leprosy,
[Lev 13:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#012). But it was otherwise
when one was suddenly smitten with this universal whiteness.

[Numbers 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 12:11</span></span>

Lay not the sin - Let not the guilt and punishment of this sin rest upon
us, upon her in this kind, upon me in any other kind, but pray to God
for the pardon and removal of it.

[Numbers 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 12:12</span></span>

As one dead - Because part of her flesh was putrefied and dead, and not
to be restored but by the mighty power of God. Like a still - born
child, that hath been for some time dead in the womb, which when it
comes forth, is putrefied, and part of it consumed.

[Numbers 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 12:14</span></span>

Spit in her face - That is, expressed some eminent token of indignation
and contempt, which was this, [Job
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#010); [Isa
50:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006). Ashamed - And withdraw herself,
from her father's presence, as Jonathan did upon a like occasion, [Sa1
20:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#034). So though God healed her
according to Moses's request, yet he would have her publickly bear the
shame of her sin, and be a warning to others to keep them from the same
transgression.

[Numbers 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 12:15</span></span>

Journeyed not - Which was a testimony of respect to her both from God
and from the people, God so ordering it, partly lest she should be
overwhelmed by such a publick rebuke from God, and partly lest, she
being a prophetess, the gift of prophesy should come into contempt.

[Numbers 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 12:16</span></span>

Paran - That is, in another part of the same wilderness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 13](num013)

</div>
