<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num005)  [Next](num007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#001.md)

[Numbers 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 6:2</span></span>

Man or woman - For both sexes might make this vow, if they were free and
at their own disposal: otherwise their parents or husbands could
disannul the vow. A vow of a Nazarite - Whereby they sequestered
themselves from worldly employments and enjoyments, that they might
entirely consecrate themselves to God's service, and this either for
their whole lifetime, or for a less and limited space of time.

[Numbers 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 6:3</span></span>

Nor eat grapes - Which was forbidden him for greater caution to keep him
at the farther distance from wine.

[Numbers 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 6:4</span></span>

All the days of his separation - Which were sometimes more, sometimes
fewer, as he thought fit to appoint.

[Numbers 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 6:5</span></span>

No razor - Nor scissors, or other instrument to cut off any part of his
hair. This was appointed, partly as a sign of his mortification to
worldly delights and outward beauty; partly as a testimony of that
purity which hereby he professed, because the cutting off the hair was a
sign of uncleanness, as appears from [Num
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#009.md), partly that by the length of his
hair he might be constantly minded of his vow; and partly that he might
reserve his hair entirely for God, to whom it was to be offered. Holy -
That is, wholly consecrated to God and his service, whereby he shews
that inward holiness was the great thing which God required and valued
in these, and consequently in other rites and ceremonies.

[Numbers 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 6:7</span></span>

His father - Wherein he was equal to the high - priest, being, in some
sort, as eminent a type of Christ, and therefore justly required to
prefer the service of God, to which he had so fully given himself,
before the expressions of his affections to his dearest and nearest
relations. The consecration - That is, the token of his consecration,
namely, his long hair.

[Numbers 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 6:9</span></span>

He shall shave his head - Because his whole body, and especially his
hair was defiled by such an accident, which he ought to impute either to
his own heedlessness, or to God's providence so ordering the matter,
possibly for the punishment of his other sins, or for the quickening him
to more purity and detestation of all dead works, whereby he would be
defiled.

[Numbers 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 6:11</span></span>

A sin - offering - Because such a pollution was, though not his sin, yet
the chastisement of his sin. He sinned - That is, contracted a
ceremonial uncleanness, which is called sinning, because it was a type
of sin, and a violation of a law, tho' through ignorance and
inadvertency. Hallow - Begin again to hallow or consecrate it.

[Numbers 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 6:12</span></span>

The days of his separation - As many days as he had before vowed to God.
Lost - Heb. fall, to the ground, that is, be void or of none effect.

[Numbers 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 6:14</span></span>

A sin - offering - Whereby he confessed his miscarriages,
notwithstanding the strictness of his vow and all the diligence which he
could use, and consequently acknowledged his need of the grace of God in
Christ Jesus the true Nazarite. For peace - offerings - For thankfulness
to God, who had given him grace to make and in some measure to keep such
a vow. So he offered all the three sorts of offerings, that he might so
far fulfil all righteousness and profess his obligation to observe the
will of God in all things.

[Numbers 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 6:15</span></span>

Their meal - offering - Such as generally accompanied the sacrifices.

[Numbers 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 6:18</span></span>

At the door - Publickly, that it might be known that his vow was ended,
and therefore he was at liberty as to those things from which he had
restrained himself for a season, otherwise some might have been
scandalized at his use of his liberty. The fire - Upon which the flesh
of the peace - offerings was boiled.

[Numbers 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 6:19</span></span>

The shoulder - The left - shoulder, as it appears from [Num
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#020.md), where this is joined with the
heave - shoulder, which was the right - shoulder, and which was the
priests due in all sacrifices, [Lev
7:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#032.md), and in this also. But here the
other shoulder was added to it, as a special token of thankfulness from
the Nazarites for God's singular favours vouchsafed unto them. The hands
- That he may give them to the priest, as his peculiar gift.

[Numbers 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">num 6:20</span></span>

May drink wine - And return to his former manner of living.

[Numbers 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">num 6:21</span></span>

That his hand shall get - Besides what he shall voluntarily give
according to his ability.

[Numbers 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 6:23</span></span>

On this wise - Heb. Thus, or in these words: yet they were not tied to
these very words; because after this we have examples of Moses and David
and Solomon, blessing the people in other words.

[Numbers 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 6:24</span></span>

Bless thee - Bestow upon you all manner of blessings, temporal and
spiritual. Keep thee - That is, continue his blessings to thee, and
preserve thee in and to the use of them; keep thee from sin and its
bitter effects.

[Numbers 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">num 6:25</span></span>

Shine upon thee - Alluding to the shining of the sun upon the earth, to
enlighten, and warm, and renew the face of it. The Lord love thee, and
make thee know that he loves thee. We cannot but be happy, if we have
God's love; and we cannot but be easy, if we know that we have it.

[Numbers 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">num 6:26</span></span>

Lift up his countenance - That is, look upon thee with a chearful and
pleasant countenance, as one that is well pleased with thee and thy
services. Peace - Peace with God, with thy own conscience, and with all
men; all prosperity is comprehended under this word.

[Numbers 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">num 6:27</span></span>

Put my name - Shall call them by my name, shall recommend them to me as
my own people, and bless them and pray unto me for them as such; which
is a powerful argument to prevail with God for them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 7](num007.md)

</div>
