<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num003)  [Next](num005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#001.md)

[Numbers 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 4:3</span></span>

From thirty - This age was prescribed, as the age of full strength of
body, and therefore most proper for their laborious work of carrying the
parts and vessels of the tabernacle, and of maturity of judgment, which
is necessary for the right management of holy services. Whence even John
and Christ entered not upon their ministry till that age. Indeed their
first entrance upon their work was at their 25th year, when they began
as learners, and acted under the inspection and direction of their
brethren; but in their 30th year they were compleatly admitted to a full
discharge of their whole office. But David, being a prophet, and
particularly directed by God in the affairs of the temple, made a change
in this matter, because the magnificence of the temple, and the great
multitude of sacred utensils and sacrifices, required a greater number
of attendants than formerly was necessary. Until fifty - When they were
exempted from the toilsome work of carrying burdens, but not discharged
from the honourable and easy work done within the tabernacle, [Num
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#026.md). All that enter - That is, that
do and may enter, having no defect, nor other impediment.

[Numbers 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 4:5</span></span>

They shall take down - For upon this necessary occasion the inferior
priests are allowed to come into the holy of holies, which otherwise was
peculiar to the high - priest. The covering veil - The second veil,
wherewith the ark was covered while the tabernacle stood, [Exo
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#003.md). Cover the ark - Because the
Levites, who were to carry the ark, might neither see, nor immediately
touch it.

[Numbers 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 4:6</span></span>

Badgers - skins - Whereby the ark was secured from the injuries of the
weather.

[Numbers 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 4:7</span></span>

The dishes - Upon which the shew - bread was put. Continual bread - So
called because it was continually to be there, even in the wilderness;
where though they had only manna for themselves, yet they reserved corn
for the weekly making of these loaves, which they might with no great
difficulty procure from some of the people bordering upon the
wilderness.

[Numbers 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 4:11</span></span>

The golden altar - All covered with plates of gold.

[Numbers 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 4:12</span></span>

The instruments of ministry - The sacred garments used by the priests in
their holy ministrations. Cover them - All these coverings were
designed, For safety, that these holy things might not be filled by
rain, or tarnished by the sun. For decency, most of them had a cloth of
blue, or purple, or scarlet over them; the ark, a cloth wholly of blue,
perhaps an emblem of the azure skies, which are spread between us and
the Majesty on high; For concealment. It was a fit sign of the darkness
of that dispensation. The holy things were then covered. But Christ hath
now destroyed the face of the covering.

[Numbers 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 4:13</span></span>

The altar - Hence we may conclude, that they did offer sacrifices at
other times, though not so constantly and diligently, as they did in
Canaan. Moreover the taking away of the ashes only doth sufficiently
imply that the fire was preserved, which as it came down from heaven,
[Lev 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#024.md). So it was by God's command
to be continually fed, and kept burning, and therefore doubtless was put
into some vessel, which might be either fastened to the altar and put
within this covering, or carried by some person appointed thereunto.

[Numbers 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 4:15</span></span>

Bear it - Upon their shoulders. Afterward the priests themselves, being
multiplied, carried these things, though the Levites also were not
excluded. They shall not touch - Before they are covered.

[Numbers 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 4:16</span></span>

Eleazar - He himself is to carry these things, and not to commit them to
the sons of Kohath. The oversight - The care that all the things above
mentioned be carried by the persons and in the manner expressed.

[Numbers 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 4:18</span></span>

Cut not off - Do not by your neglect provoke God to cut them off for
touching the holy things.

[Numbers 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 4:19</span></span>

To his service - To that which is peculiarly allotted to him, the
services, and burdens being equally distributed among them.

[Numbers 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">num 4:25</span></span>

The curtains - The curtains or covering of goats - hair. The tabernacle
- The ten curtains which covered the boards of the tabernacle; for the
boards themselves were carried by the Merarites. His covering - The
covering of rams - skins which was put next over those ten curtains.

[Numbers 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">num 4:26</span></span>

Which is round about - Which court compassed both the tabernacle and the
altar.

[Numbers 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">num 4:28</span></span>

Under the hand - Under his conduct and direction.

[Numbers 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">num 4:31</span></span>

The sockets - Which were as the feet upon which the pillars stood.

[Numbers 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">num 4:32</span></span>

Ye shall reckon - Every part and parcel shall be put in an inventory;
which is required here rather than in the fore - going particulars;
because these were much more numerous than the former; because being
meaner things, they might otherwise have been neglected; and also to
teach us, that God esteems nothing small in his service, and that he
expects his will should be observed in the minutest circumstances. The
death of the saints is represented us the taking down of the tabernacle.
The immortal soul, like the most holy things, is first covered and taken
away, carried by angels unseen, and care is taken also of the body, the
skin and flesh, which are as the curtains, the bones and sinews, which
are as the bars and pillars. None of these shall be lost. Commandment is
given concerning the bones, a covenant made with the dust. They are in
safe custody, and shall be produced in the great day, when this
tabernacle shall be set up again, and these vile bodies made like the
glorious body of Jesus Christ.

[Numbers 4:44](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">num 4:44</span></span>

Three thousand - Here appears the wisdom of Divine Providence, that
whereas in the Kohathites and Gershonites, whose burdens were fewer and
easier, there were but about a third part of them fit for service; the
Merarites, whose burdens were more and heavier, had above half of them
fit for this work.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 5](num005.md)

</div>
