<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Peter Index](pe2)  
  [Previous](pe2002)  [Next](jo1001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Peter Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001)

[2 Peter 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pe2 3:2</span></span>

Be the more mindful thereof, because ye know scoffers will come first -
Before the Lord comes. Walking after their own evil desires - Here is
the origin of the error, the root of libertinism. Do we not see this
eminently fulfilled?

[2 Peter 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pe2 3:4</span></span>

Saying, Where is the promise of his coming - To judgment (They do not
even deign to name him.) We see no sign of any such thing. For ever
since the fathers - Our first ancestors. Fell asleep, all things -
Heaven. water, earth. Continue as they were from the beginning of the
creation - Without any such material change as might make us believe
they will ever end.

[2 Peter 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pe2 3:5</span></span>

For this they are willingly ignorant of - They do not care to know or
consider. That by the almighty word of God - Which bounds the duration
of all things, so that it cannot be either longer or shorter. Of old -
Before the flood. The aerial heavens were, and the earth - Not as it is
now, but standing out of the water and in the water - Perhaps the
interior globe of earth was fixed in the midst of the great deep, the
abyss of water; the shell or exterior globe standing out of the water,
covering the great deep. This, or some other great and manifest
difference between the original and present constitution of the
terraqueous globe, seems then to have been so generally known, that St.
Peter charges their ignorance of it totally upon their wilfulness.

[2 Peter 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pe2 3:6</span></span>

Through which - Heaven and earth, the windows of heaven being opened,
and the fountains of the great deep broken up. The world that then was -
The whole antediluvian race. Being overflowed with water, perished - And
the heavens and earth themselves, though they did not perish, yet
underwent a great change. So little ground have these scoffers for
saying that all things continue as they were from the creation.

[2 Peter 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pe2 3:7</span></span>

But the heavens and the earth, that are now - Since the flood. Are
reserved unto fire at the day wherein God will judge the world, and
punish the ungodly with everlasting destruction.

[2 Peter 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pe2 3:8</span></span>

But be not ye ignorant - Whatever they are. Of this one thing - Which
casts much light on the point in hand. That one day is with the Lord as
a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day - Moses had said, [Psa
90:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#004), "A thousand years in thy sight
are as one day;" which St. Peter applies with regard to the last day, so
as to denote both his eternity, whereby he exceeds all measure of time
in his essence and in his operation; his knowledge, to which all things
past or to come are present every moment; his power, which needs no long
delay, in order to bring its work to perfection; and his longsuffering,
which excludes all impatience of expectation, and desire of making
haste. One day is with the Lord as a thousand years - That is, in one
day, in one moment he can do the work of a thousand years. Therefore he
"is not slow:" he is always equally ready to fulfil his promise. And a
thousand years are as one day - That is, no delay is long to God. A
thousand years are as one day to the eternal God. Therefore "he is
longsuffering:" he gives us space for repentance, without any
inconvenience to himself. In a word, with God time passes neither slower
nor swifter than is suitable to him and his economy; nor can there be
any reason why it should be necessary for him either to delay or hasten
the end of all things. How can we comprehend this? If we could
comprehend it, St. Peter needed not to have added, with the Lord.

[2 Peter 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pe2 3:9</span></span>

The Lord is not slow - As if the time fixed for it were past. Concerning
his promise - Which shall surely be fulfilled in its season. But is
longsuffering towards us - Children of men. Not willing that any soul,
which he hath made should perish.

[2 Peter 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pe2 3:10</span></span>

But the day of the Lord will come as a thief - Suddenly, unexpectedly.
In which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise - Surprisingly
expressed by the very sound of the original word. The elements shall
melt with fervent heat - The elements seem to mean, the sun, moon, and
stars; not the four, commonly so called; for air and water cannot melt,
and the earth is mentioned immediately after. The earth and all the
works - Whether of nature or art. That are therein shall be burned up -
And has not God already abundantly provided for this? 1. By the stores
of subterranean fire which are so frequently bursting out at Aetna,
Vesuvius, Hecla, and many other burning mountains. 2. By the ethereal
(vulgarly called electrical) fire, diffused through the whole globe;
which, if the secret chain that now binds it up were loosed, would
immediately dissolve the whole frame of nature. 3. By comets, one of
which, if it touch the earth in its course toward the sun, must needs
strike it into that abyss of fire; if in its return from the sun, when
it is heated, as a great man computes, two thousand times hotter than a
red - hot cannonball, it must destroy all vegetables and animals long
before their contact, and soon after burn it up.

[2 Peter 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pe2 3:11</span></span>

Seeing then that all these things are dissolved - To the eye of faith it
appears as done already. All these things - Mentioned before; all that
are included in that scriptural expression, "the heavens and the earth;"
that is, the universe. On the fourth day God made the stars, [Gen
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#016), which will be dissolved together
with the earth. They are deceived, therefore, who restrain either the
history of the creation, or this description of the destruction, of the
world to the earth and lower heavens; imagining the stars to be more
ancient than the earth, and to survive it. Both the dissolution and
renovation are ascribed, not to the one heaven which surrounds the
earth, but to the heavens in general, [Pe2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010), [Pe2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#013), without any restriction or
limitation. What persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation - With
men. And godliness - Toward your Creator.

[2 Peter 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pe2 3:12</span></span>

Hastening on - As it were by your earnest desires and fervent prayers.
The coming of the day of God - Many myriads of days he grants to men:
one, the last, is the day of God himself.

[2 Peter 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pe2 3:13</span></span>

We look for new heavens and a new earth - Raised as it were out of the
ashes of the old; we look for an entire new state of things. Wherein
dwelleth righteousness - Only righteous spirits. How great a mystery!

[2 Peter 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pe2 3:14</span></span>

Labour that whenever he cometh ye may be found in peace - May meet him
without terror, being sprinkled with his blood, and sanctified by his
Spirit, so as to be without spot and blameless. [Isa
65:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017); [Isa
66:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#022).

[2 Peter 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pe2 3:15</span></span>

And account the longsuffering of the Lord salvation - Not only designed
to lead men to repentance, but actually conducing thereto: a precious
means of saving many more souls. As our beloved brother Paul also hath
written to you - This refers not only to the single sentence preceding,
but to all that went before. St. Paul had written to the same effect
concerning the end of the world, in several parts of his epistles, and
particularly in his Epistle to the Hebrews. [Rom
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004).

[2 Peter 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pe2 3:16</span></span>

As also in all his epistles - St. Peter wrote this a little before his
own and St. Paul's martyrdom. St. Paul therefore had now written all his
epistles; and even from this expression we may learn that St. Peter had
read them all, perhaps sent to him by St. Paul himself. Nor was he at
all disgusted by what St. Paul had written concerning him in the Epistle
to the Galatians. Speaking of these things - Namely, of the coming of
our Lord, delayed through his longsuffering, and of the circumstances
preceding and accompanying it. Which things the unlearned - They who are
not taught of God. And the unstable - Wavering, double - minded,
unsettled men. Wrest - As though Christ would not come. As they do also
the other scriptures - Therefore St Paul's writings were now part of the
scriptures. To their own destruction - But that some use the scriptures
ill, is no reason why others should not use them at all.

[2 Peter 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pe2 3:18</span></span>

But grow in grace - That is, in every Christian temper. There may be,
for a time, grace without growth; as there may be natural life without
growth. But such sickly life, of soul or body, will end in death, and
every day draw nigher to it. Health is the means of both natural and
spiritual growth. If the remaining evil of our fallen nature be not
daily mortified, it will, like an evil humour in the body, destroy the
whole man. But "if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the
body," (only so far as we do this,) "ye shall live" the life of faith,
holiness, happiness. The end and design of grace being purchased and
bestowed on us, is to destroy the image of the earthy, and restore us to
that of the heavenly. And so far as it does this, it truly profits us;
and also makes way for more of the heavenly gift, that we may at last be
filled with all the fulness of God. The strength and well - being of a
Christian depend on what his soul feeds on, as the health of the body
depends on whatever we make our daily food. If we feed on what is
according to our nature, we grow; if not, we pine away and die. The soul
is of the nature of God, and nothing but what is according to his
holiness can agree with it. Sin, of every kind, starves the soul, and
makes it consume away. Let us not try to invert the order of God in his
new creation: we shall only deceive ourselves. It is easy to forsake the
will of God, and follow our own; but this will bring leanness into the
soul. It is easy to satisfy ourselves without being possessed of the
holiness and happiness of the gospel. It is easy to call these frames
and feelings, and then to oppose faith to one and Christ to the other.
Frames (allowing the expression) are no other than heavenly tempers,
"the mind that was in Christ." Feelings are the divine consolations of
the Holy Ghost shed abroad in the heart of him that truly believes. And
wherever faith is, and wherever Christ is, there are these blessed
frames and feelings. If they are not in us, it is a sure sign that
though the wilderness became a pool, the pool is become a wilderness
again. And in the knowledge of Christ - That is, in faith, the root of
all. To him be the glory to the day of eternity - An expression
naturally flowing from that sense which the apostle had felt in his soul
throughout this whole chapter. Eternity is a day without night, without
interruption, without end.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Chapter 1](jo1001)

</div>
