<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Peter Index](pe2.md)  
  [Previous](pe1005)  [Next](pe2002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Peter Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001.md)

[2 Peter 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe2 1:1</span></span>

To them that have obtained - Not by their own works, but by the free
grace of God. Like precious faith with us - The apostles. The faith of
those who have not seen, being equally precious with that of those who
saw our Lord in the flesh. Through the righteousness - Both active and
passive. Of our God and Saviour - It is this alone by which the justice
of God is satisfied, and for the sake of which he gives this precious
faith.

[2 Peter 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pe2 1:2</span></span>

Through the divine, experimental knowledge of God and of Christ.

[2 Peter 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pe2 1:3</span></span>

As his divine power has given us all things - There is a wonderful
cheerfulness in this exordium, which begins with the exhortation itself.
That pertain to life and godliness - To the present, natural life, and
to the continuance and increase of spiritual life. Through that divine
knowledge of him - Of Christ. Who hath called us by - His own glorious
power, to eternal glory, as the end; by Christian virtue or fortitude,
as the means.

[2 Peter 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pe2 1:4</span></span>

Through which - Glory and fortitude. He hath given us exceeding great,
and inconceivably precious promises - Both the promises and the things
promised, which follow in their due season, that, sustained and
encouraged by the promises, we may obtain all that he has promised.
That, having escaped the manifold corruption which is in the world -
From that fruitful fountain, evil desire. Ye may become partakers of the
divine nature - Being renewed in the image of God, and having communion
with them, so as to dwell in God and God in you.

[2 Peter 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pe2 1:5</span></span>

For this very reason - Because God hath given you so great blessings.
Giving all diligence - It is a very uncommon word which we render
giving. It literally signifies, bringing in by the by, or over and
above: implying, that good works the work; yet not unless we are
diligent. Our diligence is to follow the gift of God, and is followed by
an increase of all his gifts. Add to - And in all the other gifts of
God. Superadd the latter, without losing the former. The Greek word
properly means lead up, as in dance, one of these after the other, in a
beautiful order. Your faith, that "evidence of things not seen," termed
before "the knowledge of God and of Christ," the root of all Christian
graces. Courage - Whereby ye may conquer all enemies and difficulties,
and execute whatever faith dictates. In this most beautiful connexion,
each preceding grace leads to the following; each following, tempers and
perfects the preceding. They are set down in the order of nature, rather
than the order of time. For though every grace bears a relation to every
other, yet here they are so nicely ranged, that those which have the
closest dependence on each other are placed together. And to your
courage knowledge - Wisdom, teaching how to exercise it on all
occasions.

[2 Peter 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pe2 1:6</span></span>

And to your knowledge temperance; and to your temperance patience - Bear
and forbear; sustain and abstain; deny yourself and take up your cross
daily. The more knowledge you have, the more renounce your own will;
indulge yourself the less. "Knowledge puffeth up," and the great
boasters of knowledge (the Gnostics) were those that "turned the grace
of God into wantonness." But see that your knowledge be attended with
temperance. Christian temperance implies the voluntary abstaining from
all pleasure which does not lead to God. It extends to all things inward
and outward: the due government of every thought, as well as affection.
"It is using the world," so to use all outward, and so to restrain all
inward things, that they may become a means of what is spiritual; a
scaling ladder to ascend to what is above. Intemperance is to abuse the
world. He that uses anything below, looking no higher, and getting no
farther, is intemperate. He that uses the creature only so as to attain
to more of the Creator, is alone temperate, and walks as Christ himself
walked. And to patience godliness - Its proper support: a continual
sense of God's presence and providence, and a filial fear of, and
confidence in, him; otherwise your patience may be pride, surliness,
stoicism; but not Christianity.

[2 Peter 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pe2 1:7</span></span>

And to godliness brotherly kindness - No sullenness, sternness,
moroseness: "sour godliness," so called, is of the devil. Of Christian
godliness it may always be said, "Mild, sweet, serene, and tender is her
mood, Nor grave with sternness, nor with lightness free: Against example
resolutely good, Fervent in zeal, and warm in charity." And to brotherly
kindness love - The pure and perfect love of God and of all mankind. The
apostle here makes an advance upon the preceding article, brotherly
kindness, which seems only to relate to the love of Christians toward
one another.

[2 Peter 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pe2 1:8</span></span>

For these being really in you - Added to your faith. And abounding -
Increasing more and more, otherwise we fall short. Make you neither
slothful nor unfruitful - Do not suffer you to be faint in your mind, or
without fruit in your lives. If there is less faithfulness, less care
and watchfulness, since we were pardoned, than there was before, and
less diligence, less outward obedience, than when we were seeking
remission of sin, we are both slothful and unfruitful in the knowledge
of Christ, that is, in the faith, which then cannot work by love.

[2 Peter 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pe2 1:9</span></span>

But he that wanteth these - That does not add them to his faith. Is
blind - The eyes of his understanding are again closed. He cannot see
God, or his pardoning love. He has lost the evidence of things not seen.
Not able to see afar off - Literally, purblind. He has lost sight of the
precious promises: perfect love and heaven are equally out of his sight.
Nay, he cannot now see what himself once enjoyed. Having, as it were,
forgot the purification from his former sins - Scarce knowing what he
himself then felt, when his sins were forgiven.

[2 Peter 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pe2 1:10</span></span>

Wherefore - Considering the miserable state of these apostates. Brethren
- St. Peter nowhere uses this appellation in either of his epistles, but
in this important exhortation. Be the more diligent - By courage,
knowledge, temperance, &c. To make your calling and election firm - God
hath called you by his word and his Spirit; he hath elected you,
separated you from the world, through sanctification of the Spirit. O
cast not away these inestimable benefits! If ye are thus diligent to
make your election firm, ye shall never finally fall.

[2 Peter 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pe2 1:11</span></span>

For if ye do so, an entrance shall be ministered to you abundantly into
the everlasting kingdom - Ye shall go in full triumph to glory.

[2 Peter 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pe2 1:12</span></span>

Wherefore - Since everlasting destruction attends your sloth,
everlasting glory your diligence, I will not neglect always to remind
you of these things - Therefore he wrote another, so soon after the
former, epistle. Though ye are established in the present truth - That
truth which I am now declaring.

[2 Peter 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pe2 1:13</span></span>

In this tabernacle - Or tent. How short is our abode in the body! How
easily does a believer pass out of it!

[2 Peter 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pe2 1:14</span></span>

Even as the Lord Jesus showed me - In the manner which had foretold,
[Joh 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#018.md), &c. It is not improbable,
he had also showed him that the time was now drawing nigh.

[2 Peter 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pe2 1:15</span></span>

That ye may be able - By having this epistle among you.

[2 Peter 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pe2 1:16</span></span>

These things are worthy to be always had in remembrance For they are not
cunningly devised fables - Like those common among the heathens. While
we made known to you the power and coming - That is, the powerful coming
of Christ in glory. But if what they advanced of Christ was not true, if
it was of their own invention, then to impose such a lie on the world as
it was, in the very nature of things, above all human power to defend,
and to do this at the expense of life and all things only to enrage the
whole world, Jews and gentiles, against them, was no cunning, but was
the greatest folly that men could have been guilty of. But were
eyewitnesses of his majesty - At his transfiguration, which was a
specimen of his glory at the last day.

[2 Peter 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pe2 1:17</span></span>

For he received divine honour and inexpressible glory - Shining from
heaven above the brightness of the sun. When there came such a voice
from the excellent glory - That is, from God the Father. [Mat
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005.md).

[2 Peter 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pe2 1:18</span></span>

And we - Peter, James, and John. St. John was still alive. Being with
him in the holy mount - Made so by that glorious manifestation, as mount
Horeb was of old, [Exo 3:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#004.md).

[2 Peter 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pe2 1:19</span></span>

And we - St. Peter here speaks in the name of all Christians. Have the
word of prophecy - The words of Moses, Isaiah, and all the prophets, are
one and the same word, every way consistent with itself. St. Peter does
not cite any particular passage, but speaks of their entire testimony.
More confirmed - By that display of his glorious majesty. To which word
ye do well that ye take heed, as to a lamp which shone in a dark place -
Wherein there was neither light nor window. Such anciently was the whole
world, except that little spot where this lamp shone. Till the day
should dawn - Till the full light of the gospel should break through the
darkness. As is the difference between the light of a lamp and that of
the day, such is that between the light of the Old Testament and of the
New. And the morning star - Jesus Christ, [Rev
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016.md). Arise in your hearts - Be
revealed in you.

[2 Peter 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pe2 1:20</span></span>

Ye do well, as knowing this, that no scripture prophecy is of private
interpretation - It is not any man's own word. It is God, not the
prophet himself, who thereby interprets things till then unknown.

[2 Peter 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pe2 1:21</span></span>

For prophecy came not of old by the will of man - Of any mere man
whatever. But the holy men of God - Devoted to him, and set apart by him
for that purpose, spake and wrote. Being moved - Literally, carried.
They were purely passive therein.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Peter Chapter 2](pe2002.md)

</div>
