<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Philippians Index](phi.md)  
  [Previous](phi001)  [Next](phi003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philippians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#001.md)

[Philippians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">phi 2:1</span></span>

If there be therefore any consolation - In the grace of Christ. If any
comfort - In the love of God. If any fellowship of the Holy Ghost; if
any bowels of mercies - Resulting therefrom; any tender affection
towards each other.

[Philippians 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">phi 2:2</span></span>

Think the same thing - Seeing Christ is your common Head. Having the
same love - To God, your common Father. Being of one soul - Animated
with the same affections and tempers, as ye have all drank ill to one
spirit. Of one mind - Tenderly rejoicing and grieving together.

[Philippians 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">phi 2:3</span></span>

Do nothing through contention - Which is inconsistent with your thinking
the same thing. Or vainglory - Desire of praise, which is directly
opposite to the love of God. But esteem each the others better than
themselves - (For every one knows more evil of himself than he can of
another:) Which is a glorious fruit of the Spirit, and an admirable help
to your continuing "of one soul."

[Philippians 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">phi 2:4</span></span>

Aim not every one at his own things - Only. If so, ye have not bowels of
mercies.

[Philippians 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">phi 2:6</span></span>

Who being in the essential form - The incommunicable nature. Of God -
From eternity, as he was afterward in the form of man; real God, as real
man. Counted it no act of robbery - That is the precise meaning of the
words, - no invasion of another's prerogative, but his own strict and
unquestionable right. To be equal with God - the word here translated
equal, occurs in the adjective form five or six times in the New
Testament, [Mat 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#012.md); [Luk
6:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#034.md); [Joh
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#018.md); [Act
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#017.md); . In all which places it
expresses not a bare resemblance, but a real and proper equalitg. It
here implies both the fulness and the supreme height of the Godhead; to
which are opposed, he emptied and he humbled himself.

[Philippians 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">phi 2:7</span></span>

Yet - He was so far from tenaciously insisting upon, that he willingly
relinquished, his claim. He was content to forego the glories of the
Creator, and to appear in the form of a creature; nay, to he made in the
likeness of the fallen creatures; and not only to share the disgrace,
but to suffer the punishment, due to the meanest and vilest among them
all. He emptied himself - Of that divine fulness, which he received
again at his exaltation. Though he remained full, [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md), yet he appeared as if he had
been empty; for he veiled his fulness from the sight of men and angels.
Yea, he not only veiled, but, in some sense, renounced, the glory which
he had before the world began. Taking - And by that very act emptying
himself. The form of a servant - The form, the likeness, the fashion,
though not exactly the same, are yet nearly related to each other. The
form expresses something absolute; the likeness refers to other things
of the same kind; the fashion respects what appears to sight and sense.
Being made in the likeness of men - A real man, like other men. Hereby
he took the form of a servant.

[Philippians 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">phi 2:8</span></span>

And being found in fashion as a man - A common man, without any peculiar
excellence or comeliness. He humbled himself - To a still greater depth.
Becoming obedient - To God, though equal with him. Even unto death - The
greatest instance both of humiliation and obedience. Yea, the death of
the cross - Inflicted on few but servants or slaves.

[Philippians 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">phi 2:9</span></span>

Wherefore - Because of his voluntary humiliation and obedience. He
humbled himself; but God hath exalted him - So recompensing his
humiliation. And hath given him - So recompensing his emptying himself.
A name which is above every name - Dignity and majesty superior to every
creature.

[Philippians 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">phi 2:10</span></span>

That every knee - That divine honour might be paid in every possible
manner by every creature. Might bow - Either with love or trembling. Of
those in heaven, earth, under the earth - That is, through the whole
universe.

[Philippians 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">phi 2:11</span></span>

And every tongue - Even of his enemies. Confess that Jesus Christ is
Lord - Jehovah; not now "in the form of a servant," but enthroned in the
glory of God the Father.

[Philippians 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">phi 2:12</span></span>

Wherefore - Having proposed Christ's example, he exhorts them to secure
the salvation which Christ has purchased. As ye have always - Hitherto.
Obeyed - Both God, and me his minister. Now in my absence - When ye have
not me to instruct, assist, and direct you. Work out your own salvation
- Herein let every man aim at his own things. With fear and trembling -
With the utmost care and diligence.

[Philippians 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">phi 2:13</span></span>

For it is God - God alone, who is with you, though I am not. That
worketh in you according to his good pleasure - Not for any merit of
yours. Yet his influences are not to supersede, but to encourage, our
own efforts. Work out your own salvation - Here is our duty. For it is
God that worketh in you - Here is our encouragement. And O, what a
glorious encouragement, to have the arm of Omnipotence stretched out for
our support and our succour!

[Philippians 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">phi 2:14</span></span>

Do all things - Not only without contention, [Phi
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#003.md), but even without murmurings and
disputings - Which are real, though smaller, hinderances of love.

[Philippians 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">phi 2:15</span></span>

That ye may be blameless - Before men. And simple - Before God, aiming
at him alone. As the sons of God - The God of love; acting up to your
high character. Unrebukable in the midst of a crooked - Guileful,
serpentine, and perverse generation - Such as the bulk of mankind always
were. Crooked - By a corrupt nature, and yet more perverse by custom and
practice.

[Philippians 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">phi 2:17</span></span>

Here he begins to treat of the latter clause of [Phi
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#022.md). Yea, and if I be offered -
Literally, If I be poured out. Upon the sacrifice of your faith - The
Philippians, as the other converted heathens, were a sacrifice to God
through St. Paul's ministry, [Rom
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016.md). And as in sacrificing, wine was
poured at the foot of the altar, so he was willing that his blood should
be poured out. The expression well agrees with that kind of martyrdom by
which he was afterwards offered up to God.

[Philippians 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">phi 2:18</span></span>

Congratulate me - When I am offered up.

[Philippians 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">phi 2:19</span></span>

When I know - Upon my return, that ye stand steadfast.

[Philippians 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">phi 2:20</span></span>

I have none - Of those who are now with me.

[Philippians 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">phi 2:21</span></span>

For all - But Timotheus. Seek their own - Ease, safety, pleasure, or
profit. Amazing! In that golden age of the church, could St. Paul
throughly approve of one only, among all the labourers that were with
him? [Phi 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#014.md), [Phi
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#017.md). And how many do we think can now
approve themselves to God? Not the things of Jesus Christ - They who
seek these alone, will sadly experience this. They will find few helpers
likeminded with themselves, willing naked to follow a naked Master.

[Philippians 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">phi 2:22</span></span>

As a son with his father - He uses an elegant peculiarity of phrase,
speaking partly as of a son, partly as of a fellowlabourer.

[Philippians 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">phi 2:25</span></span>

To send Epaphroditus - Back immediately. Your messenger - The
Philippians had sent him to St. Paul with their liberal contribution.

[Philippians 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">phi 2:26</span></span>

He was full of heaviness - Because he supposed you would be afflicted at
hearing that he was sick.

[Philippians 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">phi 2:27</span></span>

God had compassion on him - Restoring him to health.

[Philippians 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">phi 2:28</span></span>

That I may be the less sorrowful - When I know you are rejoicing.

[Philippians 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">phi 2:30</span></span>

To supply your deficiency of service - To do what you could not do in
person.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians Chapter 3](phi003.md)

</div>
