<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa007)  [Next](psa009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001)

[Psalms 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 8:1</span></span>

In - Not only in Israel, but among all nations. Which shews that this
psalm speaks of the Messiah, and the times of the New Testament. Heavens
- Where thy throne of glory is established, where the blessed angels
celebrate thy praises, where Christ sitteth at thy right hand in
glorious majesty, from whence he poureth down excellent gifts upon
babes.

[Psalms 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 8:2</span></span>

Babes - Weak and foolish, and contemptible persons, who are frequently
called babes or children. Such are very unfit to grapple with an enemy:
and therefore when such persons conquer the most powerful and malicious
enemies, it must needs confound them, and advance the glory of God: as
indeed it did, when such mean persons as the apostles, and disciples of
Christ, maintained and propagated the gospel, in spite of all the wit,
power, and rage of their enemies. Ordained - Perfectly or firmly settled
strength; that is, the praise of his strength or power, [Mat
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#016), it is rendered praise. Still -
Silence and confound them. Avenger - The devil, and all who are his
vassals and espouse his quarrel.

[Psalms 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 8:3</span></span>

The moon - Either the sun is included under this general title: or he
omitted it, because he made this psalm by night. Ordained - Placed in
that excellent and unalterable order, and directed to their several
motions.

[Psalms 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 8:4</span></span>

What is man - How mean and inconsiderable a thing is man, if compared
with thy glorious majesty. Man - Heb. infirm, or miserable man. By which
it is apparent that he speaks of man, not according to the state of his
creation, but as fallen into a state of sin and misery, and mortality.
Mindful - Carest for him, and conferest such high favours upon him. The
son - Heb. the son of Adam, that great apostate from God, the sinful son
of a sinful father, his son by likeness of disposition and manners, no
less than by procreation. All which tends to magnify the following
mercy. Visitest - Not in anger, as that word is sometimes used, but with
thy grace and mercy.

[Psalms 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 8:5</span></span>

For - Thou hast in Christ mercifully restored man to his primitive
estate, wherein he was but one remove below the angels; from which he
was fallen by sin. Crowned - Man, fallen and lost man: who is actually
restored to glory and dominion in Christ his head and representative,
who received this crown and dominion for man's good, and in his stead;
which he will in due time communicate to his members. And so the two
expositions of this place concerning mankind and concerning Christ, may
be reconciled. For he speaks of that honourable estate conferred first
upon Christ, and then by his hands upon mankind. But the words more
literally rendered are, Thou madest him a little less than God. And
hence some have inferred, that man in his original state was the highest
of all creatures.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 9](psa009)

</div>
