<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa049)  [Next](psa051) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 50](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#001)

[Psalms 50:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 50:1</span></span>

Called - All the inhabitants of the earth, from one end to the other:
whom he here summons to be witnesses of his proceedings in this solemn
judgment, between him and his people, which is here poetically
represented. For here is a tribunal erected, the judge coming to it, the
witnesses and delinquents summoned, and at last the sentence given.

[Psalms 50:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 50:2</span></span>

Zion - The place where he was supposed to reside, and where he would now
sit in judgment. The perfection - The most amiable place of the whole
world, because, of the presence and worship, and blessing of God. Shined
- Hath manifested himself in a glorious manner.

[Psalms 50:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 50:3</span></span>

Our God - The prophet speaks this in the persons of the worshippers of
God. Though he be our God, yet he will come to execute judgment upon us.
Cease - Or delay to sit in judgment. Tempestuous - This is a farther
description of that terrible majesty, wherewith God would clothe himself
when he came to his tribunal.

[Psalms 50:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 50:4</span></span>

Call - To the inhabitants of them, all angels and men, whom he calls in
for witnesses of the equity of his proceedings.

[Psalms 50:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 50:5</span></span>

Gather - O ye angels, summon and fetch them to my tribunal. Which is
poetically spoken, to continue the metaphor, and representation of the
judgment. My saints - The Israelites, whom God had chosen and separated
them from all the nations of the earth, to be an holy and peculiar
people to himself, and they also had solemnly devoted themselves to God;
all which aggravated their apostacy. Those - Who have entered into
covenant with me, and have ratified that covenant by sacrifice. This
seems to be added, to acquaint them with the proper nature, use and end
of sacrifices, which were principally appointed to be signs and seals of
the covenant made between God and his people; and consequently to
convince them of their great mistake in trusting to their outward
sacrifices, when they neglected the very life and soul of them, which
was the keeping of their covenant with God.

[Psalms 50:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 50:6</span></span>

Declare - God will convince the people of his righteousness, and of
their own wickedness, by thunders and lightnings, and storms, or other
dreadful signs wrought by him in the heavens. Himself - In his own
person. God will not now reprove them, by his priests or prophets, but
in an extraordinary manner from heaven.

[Psalms 50:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 50:7</span></span>

Hear - Having brought in God, as coming to judgment, he now gives an
account of the process and sentence of the judge. Testify - I will
declare my charge against thee. Thy God - Not only in general, but in a
special manner, by that solemn covenant made at Sinai; whereby I
avouched thee to be my peculiar people, and thou didst avouch me to be
thy God.

[Psalms 50:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 50:8</span></span>

I will not - This is not the principal matter of my charge, that thou
hast neglected sacrifices which thou shouldst have offered.

[Psalms 50:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 50:9</span></span>

Bullock - Be not so foolish, as to imagine that thou dost lay any
obligations upon me by thy sacrifices.

[Psalms 50:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 50:11</span></span>

The fowls - Such as are wild and fly up and down upon mountains.

[Psalms 50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 50:14</span></span>

Offer - If thou wouldest know what sacrifices I prize, and indispensably
require, in the first place, it is that of thankfulness, proportionable
to my great and numberless favours; which doth not consist barely in
verbal acknowledgments, but proceeds from an heart deeply affected with
God's mercies, and is accompanied with such a course of life, as is well
- pleasing to God. Vows - Those substantial vows and promises, which
were the very soul of their sacrifices.

[Psalms 50:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 50:15</span></span>

Call - And make conscience of that great duty of fervent prayer, which
is an acknowledgment of thy subjection to me, and of thy trust and
dependance upon me. Glorify - Thou shalt have occasion to glorify me for
thy deliverance.

[Psalms 50:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 50:16</span></span>

But - With what confidence darest thou make mention of my grace and
favour, in giving thee such a covenant and statutes.

[Psalms 50:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 50:21</span></span>

Kept silence - I did not express my displeasure against thee in such
judgments as thou didst deserve. Thoughtest - Thou didst misconstrue my
patience and long - suffering, as if it had proceeded from my
approbation of thy evil courses. Set in order - I will bring to thy
remembrance, and lay upon thy conscience all thy sins.

[Psalms 50:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 50:23</span></span>

Glorifieth - He and he only gives me the honour that I require, and not
he who loads my altar with sacrifices.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 51](psa051)

</div>
