<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa044)  [Next](psa046.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 45](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001.md)

[Psalms 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 45:1</span></span>

Enditing - Heb. boileth, or bubbleth up like water over the fire. This
denotes that the workings of his heart, were fervent and vehement,
kindled by God's grace, and the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. Made -
Have composed. Pen - He was only the pen or instrument in uttering this
song; it was the spirit of God, by whose hand this pen was guided.

[Psalms 45:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 45:2</span></span>

Fairer - Than all other men: which is most true of Christ; but not of
Solomon; whom many have excelled, in holiness and righteousness, which
is the chief part of the beauty celebrated in this psalm. Grace - God
hath plentifully poured into thy mind and tongue the gift of speaking
wisely, eloquently, and acceptably. Therefore - And because God hath so
eminently qualified thee for rule, therefore he hath blessed thee with
an everlasting kingdom.

[Psalms 45:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 45:3</span></span>

Thy sword - To smite thine enemies. And the sword is here put for all
his arms, as it is in many other places.

[Psalms 45:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 45:4</span></span>

And - Being thus magnificently girt and armed. Ride - March on speedily
and successfully against thine enemies. The word - That is, the gospel:
which is called the word of truth, [Eph
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013.md), and may no less truly be called
the word of meekness, because it is not delivered with terror, as the
law was at Sinai, but meekly and sweetly; and the word of righteousness,
because it brings in everlasting righteousness, and strongly excites all
men to the practice of righteousness and holiness. And so the gospel is
compared, to an horse or chariot, upon which Christ is said to ride,
when the gospel is preached, and carried about from place to place.
Teach thee - Thou shalt do exploits, which shall be terrible to thine
enemies. But the phrase, thy right hand shall teach thee, is not to be
taken properly; the meaning is, his hand should shew him, discover and
work before him.

[Psalms 45:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 45:5</span></span>

Arrows - The same with the sword, and this is no other than his word,
which is sharp and powerful, and pierceth the hearts of men. The kings -
Of thine enemies. Fall - Prostrate at thy feet, after the manner of
conquered persons.

[Psalms 45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 45:6</span></span>

O God - It is evident, that the speech is still continued to the same
person whom he calls king, [Psa 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001.md),
[Psa 45:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#011.md), and here God, to assure us
that he doth not speak of Solomon, but a far greater king, who is not
only a man, but the mighty God, [Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006.md). A right scepter - Thou rulest
with exact righteousness and equity.

[Psalms 45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 45:7</span></span>

Therefore - Therefore God hath exalted thee far above all men and
angels, to a state of joy and endless glory at his right hand; which is
fitly compared by the oil of gladness. Thy God - According to thy human
nature, [Joh 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017.md), though in respect
of thy Divine nature, thou art his fellow, [Zac
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007.md), and his equal, , and one with
him, [Joh 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030.md). Oil - So called,
because it was a token of gladness, and used in feasts, and other solemn
occasions of rejoicing. Fellows - Above all them who partake with thee
in this unction: above all that ever were anointed for priests or
prophets, or kings.

[Psalms 45:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 45:8</span></span>

Myrrh - Wherewith they used to perfume their garments: this may denote
those glorious and sweet smelling virtues, which, as they were treasured
up in Christ's heart, so did they manifest themselves outwardly, and
give forth a grateful smell, in the whole course of his life and
actions. Palaces - The king is here supposed to reside in his ivory
palaces, and his garments are so fragrant, that they not only perfume
the whole palace in which he is; but the sweet favour is perceived by
those that pass by them, all which is poetically said, and with allusion
to Solomon's glorious garments and palaces. The heavenly mansions, may
not unfitly be called ivory palaces, as elsewhere in the same figurative
manner they are said to be adorned with gold and precious stones, from
which mansions Christ came into the world, into which Christ went, and
where he settled his abode after he went out of the world, and from
whence he poured forth all the fragrant gifts and graces of his spirit,
although there is no necessity to strain every particular circumstance
in such poetical descriptions; for some expressions may be used, only as
ornaments, as they are in parables; and it may suffice to know, that the
excellencies of the king Christ are described by things which earthly
potentates place their glory. Whereby - By the sweet smell of thy
garments out of those ivory palaces, or the effusion of the gifts and
graces of thy spirit from heaven; which as it is a great blessing to
those who receive them, so doth it rejoice the heart of Christ, both as
it is a demonstration of his own power and glory, and as it is the
instrument of bringing souls to God. Made thee - Thou art made glad.

[Psalms 45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 45:9</span></span>

Among - Among them that attend upon thy spouse, as the manner was in
nuptial solemnities. As the queen is the church in general, and so these
honourable women are particular believers, who are daily added to the
church, [Act 2:47](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#047.md). And although the
church is made up of particular believers, yet she is distinguished from
them, for the decency of the parable. And these believers may be said to
be Kings daughters, because among others, many persons of royal race
embraced the faith, and because they are in a spiritual sense, Kings
unto God, [Rev 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006.md). Right hand - The
most honourable place. Ophir - Clothed in garments made of the choicest
gold. By which he designs the graces wherewith the church is
accomplished.

[Psalms 45:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 45:10</span></span>

Hearken - The prophet having hitherto spoken to the bridegroom, now
addresseth his speech to the bride. O daughter - He speaks like an elder
person, and as her spiritual father and counsellor. Incline - He uses
several words, signifying the same thing, to shew his vehement desire of
her good. Forget - Comparatively.

[Psalms 45:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 45:11</span></span>

So - So thou shalt be acceptable to thy husband; which will abundantly
recompence thee, for the loss of thy father's house. Thy Lord - As he is
thy husband, and also as he is thy king, and God.

[Psalms 45:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 45:12</span></span>

The daughter - The people of Tyre; as the daughter of Zion or Jerusalem,
are put for their inhabitants: he mentions the Tyrians; because they
among others, and before many others, were to be converted to Christ,
but they are here put for all the Gentiles, whom that city fitly
represents, as being the mart of the nations. A gift - To testify their
homage. The rich - Of other nations.

[Psalms 45:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 45:13</span></span>

Daughter - The spouse; so called, because she was the daughter of one
king, and the wife of another. Within - In her soul. Her cloathing - She
is outwardly adorned with virtuous and honourable actions.

[Psalms 45:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 45:14</span></span>

Brought - He alludes to the custom of conducting the bride to the bride
- groom's house. Companions - Her bride - maidens attending upon her.

[Psalms 45:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 45:16</span></span>

Instead - Having directed his speech to the bride, he now returns to the
bridegroom, as may be gathered both from the Hebrew words, which are of
the masculine gender; and from the next verse, which unquestionably
belongs unto him, and therefore this cannot be understood of Solomon,
and his marriage with Pharaoh's daughter, because he had no children by
her, and but very few by all his wives and concubines; and his children
were so far from being made Princes in all the earth, that they enjoyed
but a small part of their father's dominions, but this was fully
accomplished in Christ: who instead of his fathers of the Jewish nation,
had a numerous posterity of Christians of all the nations of the earth,
which here and elsewhere are called princes and kings, because of their
great power with God and with men.

[Psalms 45:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 45:17</span></span>

Remembered - As he began the psalm with the celebration of the king's
praises, so now he ends with it, and adds this important circumstance,
that this nuptial song should not only serve for the present solemnity,
but should be remembered and sung in all successive generations.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 46](psa046.md)

</div>
