<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev001)  [Next](rev003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#001)

[Revelation 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 2:1</span></span>

Write - So Christ dictated to him every word. These things saith he who
holdeth the seven stars in his right hand - Such is his mighty power!
Such his favour to them and care over them, that they may indeed shine
as stars, both by purity of doctrine and holiness of life! Who walketh -
According to his promise, "I am with you always, even to the end of the
world." In the midst of the golden candlesticks - Beholding all their
works and thoughts, and ready to "remove the candlestick out of its
place," if any, being warned, will not repent. Perhaps here is likewise
an allusion to the office of the priests in dressing the lamps, which
was to keep them always burning before the Lord.

[Revelation 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 2:2</span></span>

I know - Jesus knows all the good and all the evil, which his servants
and his enemies suffer and do. Weighty word, "I know," how dreadful will
it one day sound to the wicked, how sweet to the righteous! The churches
and their angels must have been astonished, to find their several states
so exactly described, even in the absence of the apostle, and could not
but acknowledge the all - seeing eye of Christ and of his Spirit. With
regard to us, to every one of us also he saith, "I know thy works."
Happy is he that conceives less good of himself, than Christ knows
concerning him. And thy labour - After the general, three particulars
are named, and then more largely described in an inverted order, Thy
labour Thy patience: Thou canst not bear evil men: Thou hast patience:
Thou hast tried those who say they are apostles and are not, and hast
found them liars. Thou hast borne for my name's sake and hast not
fainted. And thy patience - Notwithstanding which thou canst not bear
that incorrigibly wicked men should remain in the flock of Christ. And
thou hast tried those who say they are apostles, and are not - For the
Lord hath not sent them.

[Revelation 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 2:4</span></span>

But I have against thee, that thou hast left thy first love - That love
for which all that church was so eminent when St. Paul wrote his epistle
to them. He need not have left this. He might have retained it entire to
the end. And he did retain it in part, or there could not have remained
so much of what was commendable in him. But he had not kept, as he might
have done, the first tender love in its vigour and warmth. Reader, hast
thou?

[Revelation 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 2:5</span></span>

It is not possible for any to recover the first love, but by taking
these three steps, 1. Remember: 2. Repent: 3. Do the first works.
Remember from whence thou art fallen - From what degree of faith, love,
holiness, though perhaps insensibly. And repent - Which in the very
lowest sense implies a deep and lively conviction of thy fall. Of the
seven angels, two, at Ephesus and at Pergamos, were in a mixed state;
two, at Sardis and at Laodicea, were greatly corrupted: all these are
exhorted to repent; as are the followers of Jezebel at Thyatira: two, at
Smyrna and Philadelphia, were in a flourishing state, and are therefore
only exhorted to steadfastness.

There can be no state, either of any pastor, church, or single person,
which has not here suitable instructions. All, whether ministers or
hearers, together with their secret or open enemies, in all places and
all ages, may draw hence necessary self - knowledge, reproof,
commendation, warning, or confirmation. Whether any be as dead as the
angel at Sardis, or as much alive as the angel at Philadelphia, this
book is sent to him, and the Lord Jesus hath something to say to him
therein. For the seven churches with their angels represent the whole
Christian church, dispersed throughout the whole world, as it subsists,
not, as some have imagined, in one age after another, but in every age.
This is a point of deep importance, and always necessary to be
remembered: that these seven churches are, as it were, a sample of the
whole church of Christ, as it was then, as it is now, and as it will be
in all ages. Do the first works - Outwardly and inwardly, or thou canst
never regain the first love. But if not - By this word is the warning
sharpened to those five churches which are called to repent; for if
Ephesus was threatened, how much more shall Sardis and Laodicea be
afraid! And according as they obey the call or not, there is a promise
or a threatening, [Rev 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#005), [Rev
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#016), [Rev
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#022); [Rev
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#003), [Rev
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#020). But even in the threatening the
promise is implied, in case of true repentance. I come to thee, and will
remove thy candlestick out of its place - I will remove, unless thou
repent, the flock now under thy care to another place, where they shall
be better taken care of. But from the flourishing state of the church of
Ephesus after this, there is reason to believe he did repent.

[Revelation 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 2:6</span></span>

But thou hast this - Divine grace seeks whatever may help him that is
fallen to recover his standing. That thou hatest the works of the
Nicolaitans - Probably so called from Nicolas, one of the seven deacons,
[Act 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#005). Their doctrines and lives
were equally corrupt. They allowed the most abominable lewdness and
adulteries, as well as sacrificing to idols; all which they placed among
things indifferent, and pleaded for as branches of Christian liberty.

[Revelation 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 2:7</span></span>

He that hath an ear, let him hear - Every man, whoever can hear at all,
ought carefully to hear this. What the Spirit saith - In these great and
precious promises. To the churches - And in them to every one that
overcometh; that goeth on from faith and by faith to full victory over
the world, and the flesh, and the devil. In these seven letters twelve
promises are contained, which are an extract of all the promises of God.
Some of them are not expressly mentioned again in this book, as "the
hidden manna," the inscription of "the name of the new Jerusalem," the
"sitting upon the throne." Some resemble what is afterwards mentioned,
as "the hidden name," [Rev 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#012); "the
ruling the nations," [Rev 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#015); "the
morning star," [Rev 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016). And some
are expressly mentioned, as "the tree of life," [Rev
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#002); freedom from "the second death,"
[Rev 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#006); the name in "the book of
life," [Rev 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#012); [Rev
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#027); the remaining "in the temple of
God," [Rev 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#015); the inscription of
"the name of God and of the Lamb," [Rev
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001); [Rev
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#004). In these promises sometimes the
enjoyment of the highest goods, sometimes deliverance from the greatest
evils, is mentioned. And each implies the other, so that where either
part is expressed, the whole is to be understood. That part is expressed
which has most resemblance to the virtues or works of him that was
spoken to in the letter preceding. To eat of the tree of life - The
first thing promised in these letters is the last and highest in the
accomplishment, [Rev 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#002), [Rev
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#014), [Rev
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#019). The tree of life and the water
of life go together, [Rev 22:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#001); both
implying the living with God eternally. In the paradise of my God - The
word paradise means a garden of pleasure. In the earthly paradise there
was one tree of life: there are no other trees in the paradise of God.

[Revelation 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 2:8</span></span>

These things saith the first and the last, who was dead and is alive -
How directly does this description tend to confirm him against the fear
of death! [Rev 2:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#010). Even with the
comfort wherewith St. John himself was comforted, [Rev
1:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#017), shall the angel of this
church be comforted.

[Revelation 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 2:9</span></span>

I know thy affliction and poverty - A poor prerogative in the eyes of
the world! The angel at Philadelphia likewise had in their sight but "a
little strength." And yet these two were the most honourable of all in
the eyes of the Lord. But thou art rich - In faith and love, of more
value than all the kingdoms of the earth. Who say they are Jews - God's
own people. And are not - They are not Jews inwardly, not circumcised in
heart. But a synagogue of Satan - Who, like them, was a liar and a
murderer from the beginning.

[Revelation 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 2:10</span></span>

The first and last words of this verse are particularly directed to the
minister; whence we may gather, that his suffering and the affliction of
the church were at the same time, and of the same continuance. Fear none
of those things which thou art about to suffer - Probably by means of
the false Jews. Behold - This intimates the nearness of the affliction.
Perhaps the ten days began on the very day that the Revelation was read
at Smyrna, or at least very soon after. The devil - Who sets all
persecutors to work; and these more particularly. Is about to cast some
of you - Christians at Smyrna; where, in the first ages, the blood of
many martyrs was shed. Into prison, that ye may be tried - To your
unspeakable advantage, [Pe1 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#012), [Pe1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#014). And ye shall have affliction -
Either in your own persons, or by sympathizing with your brethren. Ten
days - (Literally taken) in the end of Domitian's persecution, which was
stopped by the edict of the emperor Nerva. Be thou faithful - Our Lord
does not say, "till I come," as in the other letters, but unto death -
Signifying that the angel of this church should quickly after seal his
testimony with his blood; fifty years before the martyrdom of Polycarp,
for whom some have mistaken him. And I will give thee the crown of life
- The peculiar reward of them who are faithful unto death.

[Revelation 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 2:11</span></span>

The second death - The lake of fire, the portion of the fearful, who do
not overcome, [Rev 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008).

[Revelation 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 2:12</span></span>

The sword - With which I will cut off the impenitent, [Rev
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#016).

[Revelation 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 2:13</span></span>

Where the throne of Satan is - Pergamos was above measure given to
idolatry: so Satan had his throne and full residence there. Thou holdest
fast my name - Openly and resolutely confessing me before men. Even in
the days wherein Antipas - Martyred under Domitian. Was my faithful
witness - Happy is he to whom Jesus, the faithful and true witness,
giveth such a testimony!

[Revelation 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 2:14</span></span>

But thou hast there - Whom thou oughtest to have immediately cast out
from the flock. Them that hold the doctrine of Balaam - Doctrine nearly
resembling his. Who taught Balak - And the rest of the Moabites. To cast
a stumblingblock before the sons of Israel - They are generally termed,
the children, but here, the sons, of Israel, in opposition to the
daughters of Moab, by whom Balaam enticed them to fornication and
idolatry. To eat things sacrificed to idols - Which, in so idolatrous a
city as Pergamos, was in the highest degree hurtful to Christianity. And
to commit fornication - Which was constantly joined with the idol -
worship of the heathens.

[Revelation 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 2:15</span></span>

In like manner thou also - As well as the angel at Ephesus. Hast them
that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans - And thou sufferest them to
remain in the flock.

[Revelation 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 2:16</span></span>

If not, I come to thee - who wilt not wholly escape when I punish them.
And will fight with them - Not with the Nicolaitans, who are mentioned
only by the by, but the followers of Balaam. With the sword of my mouth
- With my just and fierce displeasure. Balaam himself was first
withstood by the angel of the Lord with "his sword drawn," [Num
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#023), and afterwards "slain with the
sword," [Num 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#008).

[Revelation 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 2:17</span></span>

To him that overcometh - And eateth not of those sacrifices. Will I give
of the hidden manna - Described, John vi. The new name answers to this:
it is now "hid with Christ in God." The Jewish manna was kept in the
ancient ark of the covenant. The heavenly ark of the covenant appears
under the trumpet of the seventh angel, [Rev
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#019), where also the hidden manna is
mentioned again. It seems properly to mean, the full, glorious,
everlasting fruition of God. And I will give him a white stone - The
ancients, on many occasions, gave their votes in judgment by small
stones; by black, they condemned; by white ones they acquitted.
Sometimes also they wrote on small smooth stones. Here may be an
allusion to both. And a new name - So Jacob, after his victory, gained
the new name of Israel. Wouldest thou know what thy new name will be?
The way to this is plain, - overcome. Till then all thy inquiries are
vain. Thou wilt then read it on the white stone.

[Revelation 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 2:18</span></span>

And to the angel of the church at Thyatira - Where the faithful were but
a little flock. These things saith the Son of God - See how great he is,
who appeared "like a son of man!" [Rev
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013). Who hath eyes as a flame of fire
- "Searching the reins and the heart," [Rev
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#023). And feet like fine brass -
Denoting his immense strength. Job comprises both these, his wisdom to
discern whatever is amiss, and his power to avenge it, in one sentence,
[Job 42:2](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#002), "No thought is hidden from
him, and he can do all things."

[Revelation 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 2:19</span></span>

I know thy love - How different a character is this from that of the
angel of the church at Ephesus! The latter could not bear the wicked,
and hated the works of the Nicolaitans; but had left his first love and
first works. The former retained his first love, and had more and more
works, but did bear the wicked, did not withstand them with becoming
vehemence. Mixed characters both; yet the latter, not the former, is
reproved for his fall, and commanded to repent. And faith, and thy
service, and patience - Love is shown, exercised, and improved by
serving God and our neighbour; so is faith by patience and good works.

[Revelation 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 2:20</span></span>

But thou sufferest that woman Jezebel - who ought not to teach at all,
[Ti1 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#012). To teach and seduce my
servants - At Pergamos were many followers of Balaam; at Thyatira, one
grand deceiver. Many of the ancients have delivered, that this was the
wife of the pastor himself. Jezebel of old led the people of God to open
idolatry. This Jezebel, fitly called by her name, from the resemblance
between their works, led them to partake in the idolatry of the
heathens. This she seems to have done by first enticing them to
fornication, just as Balaam did: whereas at Pergamos they were first
enticed to idolatry, and afterwards to fornication.

[Revelation 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rev 2:21</span></span>

And I gave her time to repent - So great is the power of Christ! But she
will not repent - So, though repentance is the gift of God, man may
refuse it; God will not compel.

[Revelation 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rev 2:22</span></span>

I will cast her into a bed - into great affliction - and them that
commit either carnal or spiritual adultery with her, unless they repent
- She had her time before. Of her works - Those to which she had enticed
their and which she had committed with them.

It is observable, the angel of the church at Thyatira was only blamed
for suffering her. This fault ceased when God took vengeance on her.
Therefore he is not expressly exhorted to repent, though it is implied.

[Revelation 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rev 2:23</span></span>

And I will kill her children - Those which she hath borne in adultery,
and them whom she hath seduced. With death - This expression denotes
death by the plague, or by some manifest stroke of God's hand. Probably
the remarkable vengeance taken on her children was the token of the
certainty of all the rest. And all the churches - To which thou now
writest. Shall know that I search the reins - The desires. And hearts -
Thoughts.

[Revelation 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rev 2:24</span></span>

But I say to you who do not hold this doctrine - Of Jezebel. Who have
not known the depths of Satan - O happy ignorance! As they speak - That
were continually boasting of the deep things which they taught. Our Lord
owns they were deep, even deep as hell: for they were the very depths of
Satan. Were these the same of which Martin Luther speaks? It is well if
there are not some of his countrymen now in England who know them too
well! I will lay upon you no other burden - Than that you have already
suffered from Jezebel and her adherents.

[Revelation 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rev 2:25</span></span>

What ye - Both the angel and the church have.

[Revelation 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">rev 2:26</span></span>

By works - Those which I have commanded. To him will I give power over
the nations - That is, I will give him to share with me in that glorious
victory which the Father hath promised me over all the nations who as
yet resist me, [Psa 2:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008).

[Revelation 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">rev 2:27</span></span>

And he shall rule them - That is, shall share with me when I do this.
With a rod of iron - With irresistible power, employed on those only who
will not otherwise submit; who will hereby be dashed in pieces - Totally
conquered.

[Revelation 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">rev 2:28</span></span>

I will give him the morning star - Thou, O Jesus, art the morning star!
O give thyself to me! Then will I desire no sun, only thee, who art the
sun also. He whom this star enlightens has always morning and no
evening. The duties and promises here answer each other; the valiant
conqueror has power over the stubborn nations. And he that, after having
conquered his enemies, keeps the works of Christ to the end, shall have
the morning star, - an unspeakable brightness and peaceable dominion in
him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 3](rev003)

</div>
