<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev011)  [Next](rev013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001)

[Revelation 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 12:1</span></span>

And a great sign was seen in heaven - Not only by St. John, but many
heavenly spectators represented in the vision. A sign means something
that has an uncommon appearance, and from which we infer that some
unusual thing will follow. A woman - The emblem of the church of Christ,
as she is originally of Israel, though built and enlarged on all sides
by the addition of heathen converts; and as she will hereafter appear,
when all her "natural branches are again "grafted in." She is at present
on earth; and yet, with regard to her union with Christ, may be said to
be in heaven, [Eph 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006). Accordingly,
she is described as both assaulted and defended in heaven, [Rev
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#004), [Rev
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007). Clothed with the sun, and the
moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars - These
figurative expressions must he so interpreted as to preserve a due
proportion between them. So, in Joseph's dream, the sun betokened his
father; the moon, his mother; the stars, their children. There may be
some such resemblance here; and as the prophecy points out the "power
over all nations," perhaps the sun may betoken the Christian world; the
moon, the Mahometans, who also carry the moon in their ensigns; and the
crown of twelve stars, the twelve tribes of Israel; which are smaller
than the sun and moon. The whole of this chapter answers the state of
the church from the ninth century to this time.

[Revelation 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 12:2</span></span>

And being with child she crieth, travailing in birth - The very pain,
without any outward opposition, would constrain a woman in travail to
cry out. These cries, throes, and pains to be delivered, were the
painful longings, the sighs, and prayers of the saints for the coming of
the kingdom of God. The woman groaned and travailed in spirit, that
Christ might appear, as the Shepherd and King of all nations.

[Revelation 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 12:3</span></span>

And behold a great red dragon - His fiery - red colour denoting his
disposition. Having seven heads - Implying vast wisdom. And ten horns -
Perhaps on the seventh head; emblems of mighty power and strength, which
he still retained. And seven diadems on his heads - Not properly crowns,
but costly bindings, such as kings anciently wore; for, though fallen,
he was a great potentate still, even "the prince of this world."

[Revelation 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 12:4</span></span>

And his tail - His falsehood and subtilty. Draweth - As a train. The
third part - A very large number. Of the stars of heaven - The
Christians and their teachers, who before sat in heavenly places with
Christ Jesus. And casteth them to the earth - Utterly deprives them of
all those heavenly blessings. This is properly a part of the description
of the dragon, who was not yet himself on earth, but in heaven:
consequently, this casting them down was between the beginning of the
seventh trumpet and the beginning of the third woe; or between the year
847 and the year 947; at which time pestilent doctrines, particularly
that of the Manichees in the east, drew abundance of people from the
truth. And the dragon stood before the woman, that when she had brought
forth, he might devour the child - That he might hinder the kingdom of
Christ from spreading abroad, as it does under this trumpet.

[Revelation 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 12:5</span></span>

And she brought forth a man child - Even Christ, considered not in his
person, but in his kingdom. In the ninth age, many nations with their
princes were added to the Christian church. Who was to rule all nations
- When his time is come. And her child - Which was already in heaven, as
were the woman and the dragon. Was caught up to God - Taken utterly out
of his reach.

[Revelation 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 12:6</span></span>

And the woman fled into the wilderness - This wilderness is undoubtedly
on earth, where the woman also herself is now supposed to be. It
betokens that part of the earth where, after having brought forth, she
found a new abode. And this must be in Europe; as Asia and Afric were
wholly in the hands of the Turks and Saracens; and in a part of it where
the woman had not been before. In this wilderness, God had already
prepared a place; that is, made it safe and convenient for her. The
wilderness is, those countries of Europe which lie on this side the
Danube; for the countries which lie beyond it had received Christianity
before. That they may feed her - That the people of that place may
provide all things needful for her. Twelve hundred and sixty days - So
many prophetic days, which are not, as some have supposed, twelve
hundred and sixty, but seven hundred and seventy - seven, common years.
This Bengelius has shown at large in his German Introduction. These we
may compute from the year 847 to 1524. So long the woman enjoyed a safe
and convenient place in Europe, which was chiefly Bohemia; where she was
fed, till God provided for her more plentifully at the Reformation.

[Revelation 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 12:7</span></span>

And there was war in heaven - Here Satan makes his grand opposition to
the kingdom of God; but an end is now put to his accusing the saints
before God. The cause goes against him, [Rev
12:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010), and Michael executes the
sentence. That Michael is a created angel, appears from his not daring,
in disputing with Satan, [Jde 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009), to
bring a railing accusation; but only saying, "The Lord rebuke thee." And
this modesty is implied in his very name; for Michael signifies, "Who is
like God?" which implies also his deep reverence toward God, and
distance from all self - exaltation. Satan would be like God: the very
name of Michael asks, "Who is like God?" Not Satan; not the highest
archangel. It is he likewise that is afterward employed to seize, bind,
and imprison that proud spirit.

[Revelation 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 12:8</span></span>

And he prevailed not - The dragon himself is principally mentioned; but
his angels, likewise, are to be understood. Neither was this place found
any more in heaven - So till now he had a place in heaven. How deep a
mystery is this! One may compare this with [Luk
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#018); [Eph
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002); [Eph
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008); [Eph
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012).

[Revelation 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 12:9</span></span>

And the great dragon was cast out - It is not yet said, unto the earth -
He was cast out of heaven; and at this the inhabitants of heaven
rejoice. He is termed the great dragon, as appearing here in that shape,
to intimate his poisonous and cruel disposition. The ancient serpent -
In allusion to his deceiving Eve in that form. Dragons are a kind of
large serpent. Who is called the Devil and Satan - These are words of
exactly the same meaning; only the former is Greek; the latter, Hebrew;
denoting the grand adversary of all the saints, whether Jews or
gentiles. He has deceived the whole world - Not only in their first
parents, but through all ages, and in all countries, into unbelief and
all wickedness; into the hating and persecuting faith and all goodness.
He was cast out unto the earth - He was cast out of heaven; and being
cast out thence, himself came to the earth. Nor had he been unemployed
on the earth before, although his ordinary abode was in heaven.

[Revelation 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 12:10</span></span>

Now is come - Hence it is evident that all this chapter belongs to the
trumpet of the seventh angel. In [Rev
11:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015), are proposed the contents of
this extensive trumpet; the execution of which is copiously described in
this and the following chapters. The salvation - Of the saints. The
might - Whereby the enemy is cast out. The kingdom - Here the majesty of
God is shown. And the power of his Christ - Which he will exert against
the beast; and when he also is taken away, then will the kingdom be
ascribed to Christ himself, [Rev
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#016); [Rev
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004). The accuser of our brethren - So
long as they remained on earth. This great voice, therefore, was the
voice of men only. Who accused them before our God day and night -
Amazing malice of Satan, and patience of God!

[Revelation 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 12:11</span></span>

And they have overcome him - Carried the cause against him. By the blood
of the Lamb - Which cleanses the soul from all sin, and so leaves no
room for accusing. And by the word of their testimony - The word of God,
which they believed and testified, even unto death. So, for instance,
died Olam, king of Sweden, in the year 900, whom his own subjects would
have compelled to idolatry; and, upon his refusal, slew as a sacrifice
to the idol which he would not worship. So did multitudes of Bohemian
Christians, in the year 916, when queen Drahomire raised a severe
persecution, wherein many "loved not their lives unto the death."

[Revelation 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 12:12</span></span>

Woe to the earth and the sea - This is the fourth and last denunciation
of the third woe, the most grievous of all. The first was only, the
second chiefly, on the earth, Asia; the third, both on the earth and the
sea, Europe. The earth is mentioned first, because it began in Asia,
before the beast brought it on Europe. He knoweth he hath but a little
time - Which extends from his casting out of heaven to his being cast
into the abyss.

We are now come to a most important period of time. The non - chronos
hastens to an end. We live in the little time wherein Satan hath great
wrath; and this little time is now upon the decline. We are in the
"time, times, and half a time," wherein the woman is "fed in the
wilderness;" yea, the last part of it, "the half time," is begun. We
are, as will be shown, towards the close of the "forty - two months" of
the beast; and when his number is fulfilled, grievous things will be.
Let him who does not regard the being seized by the wrath of the devil;
the falling unawares into the general temptation; the being borne away,
by the most dreadful violence, into the worship of the beast and his
image, and, consequently, drinking the unmixed wine of the wrath of God,
and being tormented day and night for ever and ever in the lake of fire
and brimstone; let him also who is confident that he can make his way
through all these by his own wisdom and strength, without need of any
such peculiar preservative as the word of this prophecy affords; let
him, I say, go hence. But let him who does not take these warnings for
senseless outcries, and blind alarms, beg of God, with all possible
earnestness, to give him his heavenly light herein.

God has not given this prophecy, in so solemn a manner, only to show his
providence over his church, but also that his servants may know at all
times in what particular period they are. And the more dangerous any
period of time is, the greater is the help which it affords. But where
may we fix the beginning and end of the little time? which is probably
four - fifths of a chronos, or somewhat above 888 years. This, which is
the time of the third woe, may reach from 947, to the year 1836. For,
The short interval of the second woe, (which woe ended in the year 840,)
and the 777 years of the woman, which began about the year 847, quickly
after which followed the war in heaven, fix the beginning not long after
864: and thus the third woe falls in the tenth century, extending from
900 to 1000; called the dark, the iron, the unhappy age. If we compare
the length of the third woe with the period of time which succeeds it in
the twentieth chapter, it is but a little time to that vast space which
reaches from the beginning of the non - chronos to the end of the world.

[Revelation 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 12:13</span></span>

And when the dragon saw - That be could no longer accuse the saints in
heaven, he turned his wrath to do all possible mischief on earth. He
persecuted the woman - The ancient persecutions of the church were
mentioned, [Rev 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009), [Rev
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#010), [Rev
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#014); but this persecution came after
her flight, [Rev 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#006), just at the
beginning of the third woe. Accordingly, in the tenth and eleventh
centuries, the church was furiously persecuted by several heathen
powers. In Prussia, king Adelbert was killed in the year 997, king
Brunus in 1008; and when king Stephen encouraged Christianity in
Hungary, he met with violent opposition. After his death, the heathens
in Hungary set themselves to root it out, and prevailed for several
years. About the same time, the army of the emperor, Henry the Third,
was totally overthrown by the Vandals. These, and all the accounts of
those times, show with what fury the dragon then persecuted the woman.

[Revelation 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 12:14</span></span>

And there were given to the woman the two wings of the great eagle, that
she might fly into the wilderness to her place - Eagles are the usual
symbols of great potentates. So [Eze
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#003), by "a great eagle', means the
king of Babylon. Here the great eagle is the Roman empire; the two
wings, the eastern and western branches of it. A place in the wilderness
was mentioned in [Rev 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#006) also; but
it is not the same which is mentioned here.

In the text there follow one after the other, The dragon's waiting to
devour the child. The birth of the child, which is caught up to God. The
fleeing of the woman into the wilderness. The war in heaven, and the
casting out of the dragon. The beginning of the third woe. The
persecution raised by the dragon against the woman. The woman's flying
away upon the eagle's wings.

In like manner there follow one after the other, The beginning of the
twelve hundred and sixty days. The beginning of the little time. The
beginning of the time, times, and half a time. This third period partly
coincides both with the first and the second. After the beginning of the
twelve hundred and sixty days, or rather of the third woe, Christianity
was exceedingly propagated, in the midst of various persecutions. About
the year 948 it was again settled in Denmark; in 965, in Poland and
Silesia; in 980, through all Russia. In 997 it was brought into Hungary;
into Sweden and Norway, both before and after. Transylvania received it
about 1000; and, soon after, other parts of Dacia.

Now, all the countries in which Christianity was settled between the
beginning of the twelve hundred and sixty days, and the imprisonment of
the dragon, may be understood by the wilderness, and by her place in
particular. This place contained many countries; so that Christianity
now reached, in an uninterrupted tract, from the eastern to the western
empire; and both the emperors now lent their wings to the woman, and
provided a safe abode for her. Where she is fed - By God rather than
man; having little human help. For a time, and times, and half a time -
The length of the several periods here mentioned seems to be nearly
this: -

Years

1 The non - chronos contains less than 1111 2 The little time 888 3 The
time, times, and half a time 777 4 The time of the beast 666 1 The non -
chronos extends from about 800 to 1836 2 The 1260 days of the woman from
847 - 1524 3 The little time 947 - 1836 4 The time, time, and half 1058
- 1836 5 The time of the beast between the beginning and end of the
three times and a half

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 13](rev013)

</div>
