<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev015)  [Next](rev017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#001)

[Revelation 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 16:1</span></span>

Pour out the seven phials - The epistles to the seven churches are
divided into three and four: the seven seals, and so the trumpets and
phials, into four and three. The trumpets gradually, and in a long tract
of time, overthrow the kingdom of the world: the phials destroy chiefly
the beast and his followers, with a swift and impetuous force. The four
first affect the earth, the sea, the rivers, the sun; the rest fall
elsewhere, and are much more terrible.

[Revelation 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 16:2</span></span>

And the first went - So the second, third, &c., without adding angel, to
denote the utmost swiftness; of which this also is a token, that there
is no period of time mentioned in the pouring out of each phial. They
have a great resemblance to the plagues of Egypt, which the Hebrews
generally suppose to have been a month distant from each other. Perhaps
so may the phials; but they are all yet to come. And poured out his
phial upon the earth - Literally taken. And there came a grievous ulcer
- As in Egypt, [Exo 9:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#010). On the
men who had the mark of the wild beast - All of them, and them only. All
those plagues seem to be described in proper, not figurative, words.

[Revelation 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 16:3</span></span>

The second poured out his phial upon the sea - As opposed to the dry
land. And it become blood, as of a dead man - Thick, congealed, and
putrid. And every living soul - Men, beasts, and fishes, whether on or
in the sea, died.

[Revelation 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 16:4</span></span>

The third poured out his phial on the rivers and fountains of water -
Which were over all the earth. And they became blood - So that none
could drink thereof.

[Revelation 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 16:5</span></span>

The Gracious one - So he is styled when his judgments are abroad, and
that with a peculiar propriety. In the beginning of the book he is
termed "The Almighty." In the time of his patience, he is praised for
his power, which otherwise might then be less regarded. In the time of
his taking vengeance, for his mercy. Of his power there could then be no
doubt.

[Revelation 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 16:6</span></span>

Thou host given then, blood to drink - Men do not drink out of the sea,
but out of fountains and rivers. Therefore this is fitly added here.
They are worthy - Is subjoined with a beautiful abruptness.

[Revelation 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 16:7</span></span>

Yea - Answering the angel of the waters, and affirming of God's
judgments in general, what he had said of one particular judgment.

[Revelation 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 16:8</span></span>

The fourth poured out his phial upon the sun - Which was likewise
affected by the fourth trumpet. There is also a plain resemblance
between the first, second, and third phials, and the first, second, and
third trumpet. And it was given him - The angel. To scorch the men - Who
had the mark of the beast. With fire - As well as with the beams of the
sun. So these four phials affected earth, water, fire, and air.

[Revelation 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 16:9</span></span>

And the men blasphemed God, who had power over these plagues - They
could not but acknowledge the hand of God, yet did they harden
themselves against him.

[Revelation 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 16:10</span></span>

The four first phials are closely connected together; the fifth concerns
the throne of the beast, the sixth the Mahometans, the seventh chiefly
the heathens. The four first phials and the four first trumpets go round
the whole earth; the three last phials and the three last trumpets go
lengthways over the earth in a straight line. The fifth poured out his
phial upon the throne of the wild beast - It is not said, "on the beast
and his throne." Perhaps the sea will then be vacant. And his kingdom
was darkened - With a lasting, not a transient, darkness. However the
beast as yet has his kingdom. Afterward the woman sits upon the beast.
and then it is said, "The wild beast is not," [Rev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003), [Rev
17:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#007).

[Revelation 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 16:11</span></span>

And they - His followers. Gnawed their tongues - Out of furious
impatience. Because of their pains and because of their ulcers - Now
mentioned together, and in the plural number, to signify that they were
greatly heightened and multiplied.

[Revelation 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 16:12</span></span>

And the sixth poured out his phial upon the great river Euphrates -
Affected also by the sixth trumpet. And the water of it - And of all the
rivers that flow into it. Was dried up - The far greater part of the
Turkish empire lies on this side the Euphrates. The Romish and Mahometan
affairs ran nearly parallel to each other for several ages. In the
seventh century was Mahomet himself; and, a little before him, Boniface
III., with his universal bishopric. In the eleventh, both the Turks and
Gregory VII. carried all before them. In the year 1300, Boniface
appeared with his two swords at the newly - erected jubilee. In the self
- same year arose the Ottoman Porte; yea, and on the same day. And here
the phial, poured out on the throne of the beast, is immediately
followed by that poured out on the Euphrates; that the way of the kings
from the east might be prepared - Those who lie east from the Euphrates,
in Persia, India, &c., who will rush blindfold upon the plagues which
are ready for them, toward the Holy Land, which lies west of the
Euphrates.

[Revelation 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 16:13</span></span>

Out of the mouth of the dragon, the wild beast, and the false prophet -
It seems, the dragon fights chiefly against God; the beast, against
Christ; the false prophet, against the Spirit of truth; and that the
three unclean spirits which come from them, and exactly resemble them,
endeavour to blacken the works of creation, of redemption, and of
sanctification. The false prophet - So is the second beast frequently
named, after the kingdom of the first is darkened; for he can then no
longer prevail by main strength, and so works by lies and deceit.
Mahomet was first a false prophet, and afterwards a powerful prince: but
this beast was first powerful as a prince; afterwards a false prophet, a
teacher of lies. Like frogs - Whose abode is in fens, marshes, and other
unclean places. To the kings of the whole world - Both Mahometan and
pagan. To gather them - To the assistance of their three principals.

[Revelation 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 16:15</span></span>

Behold, I come as a thief - Suddenly, unexpectedly. Observe the
beautiful abruptness. I - Jesus Christ. Hear him. Happy is he that
watcheth. - Looking continually for him that "cometh quickly." And
keepeth on his garments - Which men use to put off when they sleep. Lest
he walk naked, and they see his shame - Lest he lose the graces which he
takes no care to keep, and others see his sin and punishment.

[Revelation 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 16:16</span></span>

And they gathered them together to Armageddon - Mageddon, or Megiddo, is
frequently mentioned in the Old Testament. Armageddon signifies the city
or the mountain of Megiddo; to which the valley of Megiddo adjoined.
This was a place well known in ancient times for many memorable
occurrences; in particular, the slaughter of the kings of Canaan,
related, [Jdg 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#019). Here the narrative
breaks off. It is resumed, [Rev 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#019).

[Revelation 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 16:17</span></span>

And the seventh poured out his phial upon the air - Which encompasses
the whole earth. This is the most weighty phial of all, and seems to
take up more time than any of the preceding. It is done - What was
commanded, [Rev 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#001). The phials are
poured out.

[Revelation 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 16:18</span></span>

A great earthquake, such as had not been since men were upon the earth -
It was therefore a literal, not figurative, earthquake.

[Revelation 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 16:19</span></span>

And the great city - Namely, Jerusalem, here opposed to the heathen
cities in general, and in particular to Rome. And the cities of the
nations fell - Were utterly overthrown. And Babylon was remembered
before God - He did not forget the vengeance which was due to her,
though the execution of it was delayed.

[Revelation 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 16:20</span></span>

Every island and mountain was "moved out of its place," [Rev
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#014); but here they all flee away.
What a change must this make in the face of the terraqueous globe! And
yet the end of the world is not come.

[Revelation 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rev 16:21</span></span>

And a great hail falleth out of heaven - From which there was no
defence. From the earthquake men would fly into the fields; but here
also they are met by the hail: nor were they secure if they returned
into the houses, when each hail - stone weighed sixty pounds.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 17](rev017)

</div>
