<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#001)

[Revelation 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 22:1</span></span>

And he showed me a river of the water of life - The ever fresh and
fruitful effluence of the Holy Ghost. See [Eze
47:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#001); where also the trees are
mentioned which "bear fruit every month," that is, perpetually.
Proceeding out of the throne of God, and of the Lamb - "All that the
Father hath," saith the Son of God, "is mine;" even the throne of his
glory.

[Revelation 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 22:2</span></span>

In the midst of the street - Here is the paradise of God, mentioned,
[Rev 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007). Is the tree of life - Not
one tree only, but many. Every month - That is, in inexpressible
abundance. The variety, likewise, as well as the abundance of the fruits
of the Spirit, may be intimated thereby. And the leaves are for the
healing of the nations - For the continuing their health, not the
restoring it; for no sickness is there.

[Revelation 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 22:3</span></span>

And there shall be no more curse - But pure life and blessing; every
effect of the displeasure of God for sin being now totally removed. But
the throne of God and the Lamb shall be in it - That is, the glorious
presence and reign of God. And his servants - The highest honour in the
universe. Shalt worship him - The noblest employment.

[Revelation 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 22:4</span></span>

And shall see his face - Which was not granted to Moses. They shall have
the nearest access to, and thence the highest resemblance of, him. This
is the highest expression in the language of scripture to denote the
most perfect happiness of the heavenly state, [Jo1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002). And his name shall be on their
foreheads - Each of them shall be openly acknowledged as God's own
property, and his glorious nature most visibly shine forth in them. And
they shall reign - But who are the subjects of these kings? The other
inhabitants of the new earth. For there must needs be an everlasting
difference between those who when on earth excelled in virtue, and those
comparatively slothful and unprofitable servants, who were just saved as
by fire. The kingdom of God is taken by force; but the prize is worth
all the labour. Whatever of high, lovely, or excellent is in all the
monarchies of the earth is all together not a grain of dust, compared to
the glory of the children of God. God "is not ashamed to be called their
God, for whom he hath prepared this city." But who shall come up into
his holy place? "They who keep his commandments," [Rev
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#014).

[Revelation 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 22:5</span></span>

And they shall reign for ever and ever - What encouragement is this to
the patience and faithfulness of the saints, that, whatever their
sufferings are, they will work out for them "an eternal weight of
glory!" Thus ends the doctrine of this Revelation, in the everlasting
happiness of all the faithful. The mysterious ways of Providence are
cleared up, and all things issue in an eternal Sabbath, an everlasting
state of perfect peace and happiness, reserved for all who endure to the
end.

[Revelation 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 22:6</span></span>

And he said to me - Here begins the conclusion of the book, exactly
agreeing with the introduction, (particularly [Rev
22:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#006), [Rev
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#010), with [Rev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001), [Rev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#003),) and giving light to the whole
book, as this book does to the whole scripture. These sayings are
faithful and true - All the things which you have heard and seen shall
be faithfully accomplished in their order, and are infallibly true. The
Lord, the God of the holy prophets - Who inspired and authorised them of
old. Hath now sent me his angel, to show his servants - By thee. The
things which must be done shortly - Which will begin to be performed
immediately.

[Revelation 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 22:7</span></span>

Behold, I come quickly - Saith our Lord himself, to accomplish these
things. Happy is he that keepeth - Without adding or diminishing, [Rev
22:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#018), the words of this book.

[Revelation 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 22:8</span></span>

I fell down to worship at the feet of the angel - The very same words
which occur, [Rev 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010). The reproof
of the angel, likewise, See thou do it not, for I am thy fellowservant,
is expressed in the very same terms as before. May it not be the very
same incident which is here related again? Is not this far more
probable, than that the apostle would commit a fault again, of which he
had been so solemnly warned before?

[Revelation 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 22:9</span></span>

See thou do it not - The expression in the original is short and
elliptical, as is usual in showing vehement aversion.

[Revelation 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 22:10</span></span>

And he saith to me - After a little pause. Seal not the sayings of this
book - Conceal them not, like the things that are sealed up. The time is
nigh - Wherein they shall begin to take place.

[Revelation 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 22:11</span></span>

He that is unrighteous - As if he had said, The final judgment is at
hand; after which the condition of all mankind will admit of no change
for ever. Unrighteous - Unjustified. Filthy - Unsanctified, unholy.

[Revelation 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 22:12</span></span>

I - Jesus Christ. Come quickly - To judge the world. And my reward is
with me - The rewards which I assign both to the righteous and the
wicked are given at my coming. To give to every man according as his
work - His whole inward and outward behaviour shall be.

[Revelation 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 22:13</span></span>

I am the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last - Who exist from
everlasting to everlasting. How clear, incontestable a proof, does our
Lord here give of his divine glory!

[Revelation 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 22:14</span></span>

Happy are they that do his commandments - His, who saith, I come - He
speaks of himself. That they may have right - Through his gracious
covenant. To the tree of life - To all the blessings signified by it.
When Adam broke his commandment, he was driven from the tree of life.
They who keep his commandments" shall eat thereof.

[Revelation 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 22:15</span></span>

Without are dogs - The sentence in the original is abrupt, as expressing
abhorrence. The gates are ever open; but not for dogs; fierce and
rapacious men.

[Revelation 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 22:16</span></span>

I Jesus have sent my angel to testify these things - Primarily. To you -
The seven angels of the churches; then to those churches - and
afterwards to all other churches in succeeding ages. I - as God. Am the
root - And source of David's family and kingdom; as man, an descended
from his loins. "I am the star out of Jacob," [Num
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017); like the bright morning star,
who put an end to the night of ignorance, sin, and sorrow, and usher in
an eternal day of light, purity, and joy.

[Revelation 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 22:17</span></span>

The Spirit and the bride - The Spirit of adoption in the bride, in the
heart of every true believer. Say - With earnest desire and expectation.
Come - And accomplish all the words of this prophecy. And let him that
thirsteth, come - Here they also who are farther off are invited. And
whosoever will, let him take the water of life - He may partake of my
spiritual and unspeakable blessings, as freely as he makes use of the
most common refreshments; as freely as he drinks of the running stream.

[Revelation 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 22:18</span></span>

I testify to every one, &c. - From the fulness of his heart, the apostle
utters this testimony, this weighty admonition, not only to the churches
of Asia, but to all who should ever hear this book. He that adds, all
the plagues shall be added to him; he that takes from it, all the
blessings shall be taken from him; and, doubtless, this guilt is
incurred by all those who lay hinderances in the way of the faithful,
which prevent them from hearing their Lord's "I come," and answering,
"Come, Lord Jesus." This may likewise be considered as an awful
sanction, given to the whole New Testament; in like manner as Moses
guarded the law, [Deu 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#002), and [Deu
12:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#032); and as God himself did, [Mal
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#004), in closing the canon of the Old
Testament.

[Revelation 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 22:20</span></span>

He that testifieth these things - Even all that is contained in this
book. Saith - For the encouragement of the church in all her
afflictions. Yea - Answering the call of the Spirit and the bride. I
come quickly - To destroy all her enemies, and establish her in a state
of perfect and everlasting happiness. The apostle expresses his earnest
desire and hope of this, by answering, Amen. Come, Lord Jesus!

[Revelation 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rev 22:21</span></span>

The grace - The free love. Of the Lord Jesus - And all its fruits. Be
with all - Who thus long for his appearing!

It may be proper to subjoin here a short view of the whole contents of
this book. In the year of the world, 3940. Jesus Christ is born, three
years before the common computation. In that which is vulgarly called,
the thirtieth year of our Lord, Jesus Christ dies; rises; ascends. A.D.
96. The Revelation is given; the coming of our Lord is declared to the
seven churches in Asia, and their angels, Rev. i., ii., iii. 97, 98. The
seven seals are opened, and under the fifth the chronos is declared, C.
iv.-vi. Seven trumpets are given to the seven angels, C. vii. viii.
Century, 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th, the trumpet of the 1st, 2d, 3d, 4th angel, C.
viii. 510-589 The first woe, 589-634 The interval after the first woe,
C. ix. 634-840 The second woe, / 800 The beginning of the non-chronos
many kings, C. ix., x. 840-947 The interval after the second woe, /
847-1521 The twelve hundred and sixty days of the woman, after she hath
brought forth the man child, C xii. 6 947-1836 The third woe, 12
1058-1836 The time, times, and half a time, and within that period, the
beast, his forty- to C. xiii. 5 two months, his number 666, / 1209 War
with the saints: the end of the chronos, 7 1614 An everlasting gospel
promulged, C. xiv. 6 1810 The end of the forty-two months of the beast;
after which, and the pouring out of the phials, he is not, and Babylon
reigns queen, C. xv., xvi. 1832 The beast ascends from the bottomless
pit, C. xvii., xviii. 1836 The end of the non-chronos, and of the many
kings; the fulfilling of the word, and of the mystery of God; the
repentance of the survivors in the great city; the end of the "little
time," and of the three times and a half; the destruction of the east;
the imprisonment of Satan, C. xix., xx. Afterward The loosing of Satan
for a small time; the beginning of the thousand years' reign of the
saints; the end of the small time, C. xx. The end of the world; all
things new, C. xx., xxii.

The several ages, from the time of St. John's being in Patmos, down to
the present time, may, according to the chief incidents mentioned in the
Revelation, be distinguished thus:- Age II. The destruction of the Jews
by Adrian, C viii. 7 III. The inroads of the barbarous nations, 8 IV.
The Arian bitterness, 10 V. The end of the western empire. 12 VI. The
Jews tormented in Persia, C. ix. 1 VII. The Saracen cavalry. 13 VIII.
Many kings, C. x. 11 IX. The ruler of the nations born, C. xii. 5 X. The
third woe, 12 XI. The ascent of the beast out of the pen, C. xiii. 1 XII
Power given to the beast, 5 XIII. War with the saints, 7 XIV. The middle
of the third woe, XV. The beast in the midst of his strength, XVI. The
Reformation; the woman better fed, 9 XVII. An everlasting gospel
promulged, C. xiv. 6 XVIII. The worship of the beast and of his image, 9
