<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev002)  [Next](rev004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#001)

[Revelation 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 3:1</span></span>

The seven spirits of God - The Holy Spirit, from whom alone all
spiritual life and strength proceed. And the seven stars - which are
subordinate to him. Thou hast a name that thou livest - A fair
reputation, a goodly outside appearance. But that Spirit seeth through
all things, and every empty appearance vanishes before him.

[Revelation 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 3:2</span></span>

The things which remain - In thy soul; knowledge of the truth, good
desires, and convictions. Which were ready to die - Wherever pride,
indolence, or levity revives, all the fruits of the Spirit are ready to
die.

[Revelation 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 3:3</span></span>

Remember how - Humbly, zealously, seriously. Thou didst receive the
grace of God once, and hear - His word. And hold fast - The grace thou
hast received. And repent - According to the word thou hast heard.

[Revelation 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 3:4</span></span>

Yet thou hast a few names - That is, persons. But though few, they had
not separated themselves from the rest; otherwise, the angel of Sardis
would not have had them. Yet it was no virtue of his, that they were
unspotted; whereas it was his fault that they were but few. Who have not
defiled their garments - Either by spotting themselves, or by partaking
of other men's sins. They shall walk with me in white - in joy; in
perfect holiness; in glory. They are worthy - A few good among many bad
are doubly acceptable to God. O how much happier is this worthiness than
that mentioned, [Rev 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#006).

[Revelation 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 3:5</span></span>

He shall be clothed in white raiment - The colour of victory, joy, and
triumph. And I will not blot his name out of the book of life - Like
that of the angel of the church at Sardis: but he shall live for ever. I
will confess his name - As one of my faithful servants and soldiers.

[Revelation 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 3:7</span></span>

The holy one, the true one - Two great and glorious names He that hath
the key of David - A master of a family, or a prince, has one or more
keys, wherewith he can open and shut all the doors of his house or
palace. So had David a key, a token of right and sovereignty, which was
afterward adjudged to Eliakim, [Isa
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#022). Much more has Christ, the Son
of David, the key of the spiritual city of David, the New Jerusalem; the
supreme right, power, and authority, as in his own house. He openeth
this to all that overcome, and none shutteth: he shutteth it against all
the fearful, and none openeth. Likewise when he openeth a door on earth
for his works or his servants, none can shut; and when he shutteth
against whatever would hurt or defile, none can open.

[Revelation 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 3:8</span></span>

I have given before thee an opened door - To enter into the joy of thy
Lord; and, meantime, to go on unhindered in every good work. Thou hast a
little strength - But little outward human strength; a little, poor,
mean, despicable company. Yet thou hast kept my word - Both in judgment
and practice.

[Revelation 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 3:9</span></span>

Behold, I - who have all power; and they must then comply. I will make
them come and bow down before thy feet - Pay thee the lowest homage. And
know - At length, that all depends on my love, and that thou hast a
place therein. O how often does the judgment of the people turn quite
round, when the Lord looketh upon them! [Job
42:7](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#007), &c.

[Revelation 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 3:10</span></span>

Because thou hast kept the word of my patience - The word of Christ is
indeed a word of patience. I also will keep thee - O happy exemption
from that spreading calamity! From the hour of temptation - So that thou
shalt not enter into temptation; but it shall pass over thee. The hour
denotes the short time of its continuance; that is, at any one place. At
every one it was very sharp, though short; wherein the great tempter was
not idle, [Rev 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#010). Which hour shall
come upon the whole earth - The whole Roman empire. It went over the
Christians, and over the Jews and heathens; though in a very different
manner. This was the time of the persecution under the seemingly
virtuous emperor Trajan. The two preceding persecutions were under those
monsters, Nero and Domitian; but Trajan was so admired for his goodness,
and his persecution was of such a nature, that it was a temptation
indeed, and did throughly try them that dwelt upon the earth.

[Revelation 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 3:11</span></span>

Thy crown - Which is ready for thee, if thou endure to the end.

[Revelation 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 3:12</span></span>

I will make him a pillar in the temple of my God - I will fix him as
beautiful, as useful, and as immovable as a pillar in the church of God.
And he shall go out no more - But shall be holy and happy for ever. And
I will write upon him the name of my God - So that the nature and image
of God shall appear visibly upon him. And the name of the city of my God
- Giving him a title to dwell in the New Jerusalem. And my new name - A
share in that joy which I entered into, after overcoming all my enemies.

[Revelation 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 3:14</span></span>

To the angel of the church at Laodicea - For these St. Paul had had a
great concern, [Col 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001). These things
saith the Amen - That is, the True One, the God of truth. The beginning
- The Author, Prince, and Ruler. Of the creation of God - Of all
creatures; the beginning, or Author, by whom God made them all.

[Revelation 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 3:15</span></span>

I know thy works - Thy disposition and behaviour, though thou knowest it
not thyself. That thou art neither cold - An utter stranger to the
things of God, having no care or thought about them. Nor hot - As
boiling water: so ought we to be penetrated and heated by the fire of
love. O that thou wert - This wish of our Lord plainly implies that he
does not work on us irresistibly, as the fire does on the water which it
heats. Cold or hot - Even if thou wert cold, without any thought or
profession of religion, there would be more hope of thy recovery.

[Revelation 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 3:16</span></span>

So because thou art lukewarm - The effect of lukewarm water is well
known. I am about to spue thee out of my mouth - I will utterly cast
thee from me; that is, unless thou repent.

[Revelation 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 3:17</span></span>

Because thou sayest - Therefore "I counsel thee," &c. I am rich - In
gifts and grace, as well as worldly goods. And knowest not that thou art
- In God's account, wretched and pitiable.

[Revelation 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 3:18</span></span>

I counsel thee - who art poor, and blind, and naked. To buy of me -
Without money or price. Gold purified in the fire - True, living faith,
which is purified in the furnace of affliction. And white raiment - True
holiness. And eyesalve - Spiritual illumination; the "unction of the
Holy One," which teacheth all things.

[Revelation 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 3:19</span></span>

Whomsoever I love - Even thee, thou poor Laodicean! O how much has his
unwearied love to do! I rebuke - For what is past. And chasten - That
they may amend for the time to come.

[Revelation 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 3:20</span></span>

I stand at the door, and knock - Even at this instant; while he is
speaking this word. If any man open - Willingly receive me. I will sup
with him - Refreshing him with my graces and gifts, and delighting
myself in what I have given. And he with me - In life everlasting.

[Revelation 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rev 3:21</span></span>

I will give him to sit with me on my throne - In unspeakable happiness
and glory. Elsewhere, heaven itself is termed the throne of God: but
this throne is in heaven.

[Revelation 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rev 3:22</span></span>

He that hath an ear, let him hear, &c. - This stands in the three former
letters before the promise; in the four latter, after it; clearly
dividing the seven into two parts; the first containing three, the last,
four letters. The titles given our Lord in the three former letters
peculiarly respect his power after his resurrection and ascension,
particularly over his church; those in the four latter, his divine
glory, and unity with the Father and the Holy Spirit. Again, this word
being placed before the promises in the three former letters, excludes
the false apostles at Ephesus, the false Jews at Smyrna, and the
partakers with the heathens at Pergamos, from having any share therein.
In the four latter, being placed after them, it leaves the promises
immediately joined with Christ's address to the angel of the church, to
show that the fulfilling of these was near; whereas the others reach
beyond the end of the world. It should be observed, that the overcoming,
or victory, (to which alone these peculiar promises are annexed,) is not
the ordinary victory obtained by every believer; but a special victory
over great and peculiar temptations, by those that are strong in faith.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 4](rev004)

</div>
