<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev013)  [Next](rev015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001)

And I saw on mount Sion - The heavenly Sion. An hundred forty - four
thousand - Either those out of all mankind who had been the most
eminently holy, or the most holy out of the twelve tribes of Israel the
same that were mentioned, [Rev 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#004),
and perhaps also, [Rev 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#002). But they
were then in the world, and were sealed in their foreheads, to preserve
them from the plagues that were to follow. They are now in safety, and
have the name of the Lamb and of his Father written on their foreheads,
as being the redeemed of God and of the Lamb, his now unalienable
property. This prophecy often introduces the inhabitants of heaven as a
kind of chorus with great propriety and elegance. The church above,
making suitable reflections on the grand events which are foretold in
this book, greatly serves to raise the attention of real Christians, and
to teach the high concern they have in them. Thus is the church on earth
instructed, animated, and encouraged, by the sentiments temper, and
devotion of the church in heaven.

[Revelation 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 14:2</span></span>

And I heard a sound out of heaven - Sounding clearer and clearer: first,
at a distance, as the sound of many waters or thunders; and afterwards,
being nearer, it was as of harpers harping on their harps. It sounded
vocally and instrumentally at once.

[Revelation 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 14:3</span></span>

And they - The hundred forty - four thousand - Sing a new song - and
none could learn that song - To sing and play it in the same manner. But
the hundred forty - four thousand who were redeemed from the earth -
From among men; from all sin.

[Revelation 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 14:4</span></span>

These are they who had not been defiled with women - It seems that the
deepest defilement, and the most alluring temptation, is put for every
other. They are virgins - Unspotted souls; such as have preserved
universal purity. These are they who follow the Lamb - Who are nearest
to him. This is not their character, but their reward Firstfruits - Of
the glorified spirits. Who is ambitious to be of this number?

[Revelation 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 14:5</span></span>

And in their month there was found no guile - Part for the whole.
Nothing untrue, unkind, unholy. They are without fault - Having
preserved inviolate a virgin purity both of soul and body.

[Revelation 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 14:6</span></span>

And I saw another angel - A second is mentioned, [Rev
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008); a third, [Rev
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#009). These three denote great
messengers of God with their assistants; three men who bring messages
from God to men. The first exhorts to the fear and worship of God; he
second proclaims the fall of Babylon; the third gives warning concerning
the beast. Happy are they who make the right use of these divine
messages! Flying - Going on swiftly. In the midst of heaven -
Breadthways. Having an everlasting gospel - Not the gospel, properly so
called; but a gospel, or joyful message, which was to have an influence
on all ages. To preach to every nation, and tribe, and tongue, and
people - Both to Jew and gentile, even as far as the authority of the
beast had extended.

[Revelation 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 14:7</span></span>

Fear God and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come -
The joyful message is properly this, that the hour of God's judgment is
come. And hence is that admonition drawn, Fear God and give glory to
him. They who do this will not worship the beast, neither any image or
idol whatsoever. And worship him that made - Whereby he is absolutely
distinguished from idols of every kind. The heaven, and the earth, and
the sea, and fountains of water - And they who worship him shall be
delivered when the angels pour out their phials on the earth, sea,
fountains of water, on the sun, and in the air.

[Revelation 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 14:8</span></span>

And another angel followed, saying, Babylon is fallen - With the
overthrow of Babylon, that of all the enemies of Christ, and,
consequently, happier times, are connected. Babylon the great - So the
city of Rome is called upon many accounts. Babylon was magnificent,
strong, proud, powerful. So is Rome also. Babylon was first, Rome
afterwards, the residence of the emperors of the world. What Babylon was
to Israel of old, Rome hath been both to the literal and spiritual
"Israel of God." Hence the liberty of the ancient Jews was connected
with the overthrow of the Babylonish empire. And when Rome is finally
overthrown, then the people of God will be at liberty.

Whenever Babylon is mentioned in this book, the great is added, to teach
us that Rome then commenced Babylon, when it commenced the great city;
when it swallowed up the Grecian monarchy and its fragments, Syria in
particular; and, in consequence of this, obtained dominion over
Jerusalem about sixty years before the birth of Christ. Then it began,
but it will not cease to be Babylon till it is finally destroyed. Its
spiritual greatness began in the fifth century, and increased from age
to age. It seems it will come to its utmost height just before its final
overthrow.

Her fornication is her idolatry; invocation of saints and angels;
worship of images; human traditions; with all that outward pomp, yea,
and that fierce and bloody zeal, wherewith she pretends to serve God.
But with spiritual fornication, as elsewhere, so in Rome, fleshly
fornication is joined abundantly. Witness the stews there, licensed by
the Pope, which are no inconsiderable branch of his revenue. This is
fitly compared, to wine, because of its intoxicating nature.

Of this wine she hath, indeed, made all nations drink - More especially
by her later missions. We may observe, this making them drink is not
ascribed to the beast, but to Babylon. For Rome itself, the Roman
inquisitions, congregations, and Jesuits, continually propagate the
idolatrous doctrines and practices, with or without the consent of this
or that Pope, who himself is not secure from their censure.

[Revelation 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 14:9</span></span>

And a third angel followed - At no great distance of time. Saying, If
any one worship the wild beast - This worship consists, partly in an
inward submission, a persuasion that all who are subject to Christ must
be subject to the beast or they cannot receive the influences of divine
grace, or, as their expression is, there is no salvation out of their
church; partly in a suitable outward reverence to the beast himself, and
consequently to his image.

[Revelation 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 14:10</span></span>

He shall drink - With Babylon, [Rev
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#019). And shall be tormented - With
the beast, [Rev 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#010). In all the
scripture there is not another so terrible threatening as this. And God
by this greater fear arms his servants against the fear of the beast.
The wrath of God, which is poured unmixed - Without any mixture of
mercy; without hope. Into the cup of his indignation - And is no real
anger implied in all this? O what will not even wise men assert, to
serve an hypothesis!

[Revelation 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 14:11</span></span>

And the smoke - From the fire and brimstone wherein they are tormented.
Ascendeth for ever and ever - God grant thou and I may never try the
strict, literal eternity of this torment!

[Revelation 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 14:12</span></span>

Here is the patience of the saints - Seen, in suffering all things
rather than receive this mark. Who keep the commandments of God - The
character of all true saints; and particularly the great command to
believe in Jesus.

[Revelation 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 14:13</span></span>

And I heard a voice - This is most seasonably heard when the beast is in
his highest power and fury. Out of heaven - Probably from a departed
saint. Write - He was at first commanded to write the whole book.
Whenever this is repeated it denotes something peculiarly observable.
Happy are the dead - From henceforth particularly: 1. Because they
escape the approaching calamities: 2. Because they already enjoy so near
an approach to glory. Who die in the Lord - In the faith of the Lord
Jesus. For they rest - No pain, no purgatory follows; but pure, unmixed
happiness. From their labours - And the more laborious their life was,
the sweeter is their rest. How different this state from that of those,
[Rev 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#011), who "have no rest day or
night!" Reader, which wilt thou choose? Their works - Each one's
peculiar works. Follow - or accompany them; that is, the fruit of their
works. Their works do not go before to procure them admittance into the
mansions of joy; but they follow them when admitted.

[Revelation 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 14:14</span></span>

In the following verses, under the emblem of an harvest and a vintage,
are signified two general visitations; first, many good men are taken
from the earth by the harvest; then many sinners during the vintage. The
latter is altogether a penal visitation; the former seems to be
altogether gracious. Here is no reference in either to the day of
judgment, but to a season which cannot be far off. And I saw a white
cloud - An emblem of mercy. And on the cloud sat one like a son of man -
An angel in an human shape, sent by Christ, the Lord both of the vintage
and of the harvest. Having a golden crown on his head - In token of his
high dignity. And a sharp sickle in his hand - The sharper the welcomer
to the righteous.

[Revelation 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 14:15</span></span>

And another angel came out of the temple - "Which is in heaven," [Rev
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#017). Out of which came the judgments
of God in the appointed seasons.

[Revelation 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 14:16</span></span>

Crying - By the command of God. Thrust in thy sickle, for the harvest is
ripe - This implies an high degree of holiness in those good men, and an
earnest desire to be with God.

[Revelation 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 14:18</span></span>

And another angel from the altar - Of burnt offering; from whence the
martyrs had cried for vengeance. Who had power over fire - As "the angel
of the waters," [Rev 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#005), had over
water. Cried, saying, Lop off the clusters of the vine of the earth -
All the wicked are considered as constituting one body.

[Revelation 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 14:20</span></span>

And the winepress was trodden - By the Son of God, [Rev
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#015). Without the city - Jerusalem.
They to whom St. John writes, when a man said, "The city," immediately
understood this. And blood came out of the winepress, even to the
horses' bridles - So deep at its first flowing from the winepress! One
thousand six hundred furlongs - So far! at least two hundred miles,
through the whole land of Palestine.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 15](rev015)

</div>
