<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev006)  [Next](rev008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#001)

[Revelation 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 7:1</span></span>

And after these things - What follows is a preparation for the seventh
seal, which is the weightiest of all. It is connected with the sixth by
the particle and; whereas what is added, [Rev
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009), stands free and unconnected. I
saw four angels - Probably evil ones. They have their employ with the
four first trumpets, as have other evil angels with the three last;
namely, the angel of the abyss, the four bound in the Euphrates, and
Satan himself. These four angels would willingly have brought on all the
calamities that follow without delay. But they were restrained till the
servants of God were sealed, and till the seven angels were ready to
sound: even as the angel of the abyss was not let loose, nor the angels
in the Euphrates unbound, neither Satan cast to the earth, till the
fifth, sixth, and seventh angels severally sounded. Standing on the four
corners of the earth - East, west, south, north. In this order proceed
the four first trumpets. Holding the four winds - Which else might have
softened the fiery heat, under the first, second, and third trumpet.
That the wind should not blow upon the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any
tree - It seems, that these expressions betoken the several quarters of
the world; that the earth signifies that to the east of Patmos, Asia,
which was nearest to St. John, and where the trumpet of the first angel
had its accomplishment. Europe swims in the sea over against this; and
is accordingly termed by the prophets, "the islands." The third part,
Afric, seems to be meant, [Rev 8:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#007),
[Rev 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#010), by "the streams of water,"
or "the trees," which grow plentifully by them.

[Revelation 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 7:2</span></span>

And I saw another (a good) angel ascending from the east - The plagues
begin in the east; so does the sealing. Having the seal of the only
living and true God: and he cried with a loud voice to the four angels -
Who were hasting to execute their charge. To whom it was given to hurt
the earth and the sea - First, and afterwards "the trees."

[Revelation 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 7:3</span></span>

Hurt not the earth, till we - Other angels were joined in commission
with him. Have sealed the servants of our God on their foreheads -
Secured the servants of God of the twelve tribes from the impending
calamities; whereby they shall be as clearly distinguished from the
rest, as if they were visibly marked on their foreheads.

[Revelation 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 7:4</span></span>

Of the children of Israel - To these will afterwards be joined a
multitude out of all nations. But it may be observed, this is not the
number of all the Israelites who are saved from Abraham or Moses to the
end of all things; but only of those who were secured from the plagues
which were then ready to fall on the earth. It seems as if this book
had, in many places, a special view to the people of Israel.

[Revelation 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 7:5</span></span>

Judah is mentioned first, in respect of the kingdom, and of the Messiah
sprung therefrom.

[Revelation 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 7:7</span></span>

After the Levitical ceremonies were abolished, Levi was again on a level
with his brethren.

[Revelation 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 7:8</span></span>

Of the tribe of Joseph - Or Ephraim; perhaps not mentioned by name, as
having been, with Dan, the most idolatrous of all the tribes. It is
farther observable of Dan, that it was very early reduced to a single
family; which family itself seems to have been cut off in war, before
the time of Ezra; for in the Chronicles, where the posterity of the
patriarchs is recited, Dan is wholly omitted.

[Revelation 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 7:9</span></span>

A great multitude - Of those who had happily finished their course. Such
multitudes are afterwards described, and still higher degrees of glory
which they attain after a sharp fight and magnificent victory, [Rev
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001); [Rev
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#002); [Rev
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001); [Rev
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004). There is an inconceivable
variety in the degrees of reward in the other world. Let not any
slothful one say, "If I get to heaven at all, I will be content:" such
an one may let heaven go altogether. In worldly things, men are
ambitious to get as high as they can. Christians have a far more noble
ambition. The difference between the very highest and the lowest state
in the world is nothing to the smallest difference between the degrees
of glory. But who has time to think of this? Who is at all concerned
about it? Standing before the throne - In the full vision of God. And
palms in their hands - Tokens of joy and victory.

[Revelation 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 7:10</span></span>

Salvation to our God - Who hath saved us from all evil into all the
happiness of heaven. The salvation for which they praise God is
described, [Rev 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#015); that for which
they praise the Lamb, [Rev 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#014); and
both, in [Rev 7:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#016).

[Revelation 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 7:11</span></span>

And all the angels stood - In waiting. Round about the throne, and the
elders and the four living creatures - That is, the living creatures,
next the throne; the elders, round these; and the angels, round them
both. And they fell on their faces - So do the elders, once only, [Rev
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#016). The heavenly ceremonial has its
fixed order and measure.

[Revelation 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 7:12</span></span>

Amen - With this word all the angels confirm the words of the "great
multitude;" but they likewise carry the praise much higher. The
blessing, and the glory, and the wisdom, and the thanksgiving, and the
honour, and the power, and the strength, be unto our God for ever and
ever - Before the Lamb began to open the seven seals, a sevenfold hymn
of praise was brought him by many angels, [Rev
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#012). Now he is upon opening the last
seal, and the seven angels are going to receive seven trumpets, in order
to make the kingdoms of the world subject to God. All the angels give
sevenfold praise to God.

[Revelation 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 7:13</span></span>

And one of the elders - What stands, [Rev
7:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#013), might have immediately
followed [Rev 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#010); but that the
praise of the angels, which was at the same time with that of the "great
multitude," came in between. Answered - He answered St. John's desire to
know, not any words that he spoke.

[Revelation 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 7:14</span></span>

My lord - Or, my master; a common term of respect. So Zechariah,
likewise, bespeaks the angel, [Zac
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#009); [Zac
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#004); [Zac
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#004). Thou knowest - That is, I know
not; but thou dost. These are they - Not martyrs; for these are not such
a multitude as no man can number. But as all the angels appear here, so
do all the souls of the righteous who had lived from the beginning of
the world. Who come - He does not say, who did come; but, who come now
also: to whom, likewise, pertain all who will come hereafter. Out of
great affliction - Of various kinds, wisely and graciously allotted by
God to all his children. And have washed their robes - From all guilt.
And made them white - In all holiness. By the blood of the Lamb - Which
not only cleanses, but adorns us also.

[Revelation 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 7:15</span></span>

Therefore - Because they came out of great affliction, and have washed
their robes in his blood. Are they before the throne - It seems, even
nearer than the angels. And serve him day and night - Speaking after the
manner of men; that is, continually. In his temple - Which is in heaven.
And he shall have his tent over them - Shall spread his glory over them
as a covering.

[Revelation 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 7:16</span></span>

Neither shall the sun light on them - For God is there their sun. Nor
any painful heat, or inclemency of seasons.

[Revelation 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 7:17</span></span>

For the Lamb will feed them - With eternal peace and joy; so that they
shall hunger no more. And will lead them to living fountains of water -
The comforts of the Holy Ghost; so that they shall thirst no more.
Neither shall they suffer or grieve any more; for God "will wipe away
all tears from their eyes."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 8](rev008)

</div>
