<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev017)  [Next](rev019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#001)

[Revelation 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 18:1</span></span>

And I saw another angel coming down out of heaven - Termed another, with
respect to him who "came down out of heaven," [Rev
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#001). And the earth was enlightened
with his glory - To make his coming more conspicuous. If such be the
lustre of the servant, what images can display the majesty of the Lord,
who has "thousand thousands" of those glorious attendants "ministering
to him, and ten thousand times ten thousand standing before him?"

[Revelation 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 18:2</span></span>

And he cried, Babylon is fallen - This fall was mentioned before, [Rev
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008); but is now declared at large.
And is become an habitation - A free abode. Of devils, and an hold - A
prison. Of every unclean spirit - Perhaps confined there where they had
once practised all uncleanness, till the judgment of the great day. How
many horrid inhabitants hath desolate Babylon! of invisible beings,
devils, and unclean spirits; of visible, every unclean beast, every
filthy and hateful bird. Suppose, then, Babylon to mean heathen Rome;
what have the Romanists gained, seeing from the time of that
destruction, which they say is past, these are to be its only
inhabitants for ever.

[Revelation 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 18:4</span></span>

And I heard another voice - Of Christ, whose people, secretly scattered
even there, are warned of her approaching destruction. That ye be not
partakers of her sins - That is, of the fruits of them. What a
remarkable providence it was that the Revelation was printed in the
midst of Spain, in the great Polyglot Bible, before the Reformation!
Else how much easier had it been for the Papists to reject the whole
book, than it is to evade these striking parts of it.

[Revelation 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 18:5</span></span>

Even to heaven - An expression which implies the highest guilt.

[Revelation 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 18:6</span></span>

Reward her - This God speaks to the executioners of his vengeance. Even
as she hath rewarded - Others; in particular, the saints of God. And
give her double - This, according to the Hebrew idiom, implies only a
full retaliation.

[Revelation 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 18:7</span></span>

As much as she hath glorified herself - By pride, and pomp, and arrogant
boasting. And lived deliciously - In all kinds of elegance, luxury, and
wantonness. So much torment give her - Proportioning the punishment to
the sin. Because she saith in her heart - As did ancient Babylon, [Isa
47:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#008). I sit - Her usual style. Hence
those expressions, "The chair, the see of Rome: he sat so many years."
As a queen - Over many kings, "mistress of all churches; the supreme;
the infallible; the only spouse of Christ; out of which there is no
salvation." And am no widow - But the spouse of Christ. And shall see no
sorrow - From the death of my children, or any other calamity; for God
himself will defend "the church."

[Revelation 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 18:8</span></span>

Therefore - as both the natural and judicial consequence of this proud
security Shall her plagues come - The death of her children, with an
incapacity of bearing more. Sorrow - of every kind. And famine - In the
room of luxurious plenty: the very things from which she imagined
herself to be most safe. For strong is the Lord God who judgeth her -
Against whom therefore all her strength, great as it is, will not avail.

[Revelation 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 18:10</span></span>

Thou strong city - Rome was anciently termed by its inhabitants,
Valentia, that is, strong. And the word Rome itself, in Greek, signifies
strength. This name was given it by the Greek strangers.

[Revelation 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 18:12</span></span>

Merchandise of gold, &c. - Almost all these are still in use at Rome,
both in their idolatrous service, and in common life. Fine linen - The
sort of it mentioned in the original is exceeding costly. Thyine wood -
A sweet - smelling wood not unlike citron, used in adorning magnificent
palaces. Vessels of most precious wood - Ebony, in particular, which is
often mentioned with ivory: the one excelling in whiteness, the other in
blackness; and both in uncommon smoothness.

[Revelation 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 18:13</span></span>

Amomum - A shrub whose wood is a fine perfume. And beasts - Cows and
oxen. And of chariots - a purely Latin word is here inserted in the
Greek. This St. John undoubtedly used on purpose, in describing the
luxury of Rome. And of bodies - A common term for slaves. And souls of
men - For these also are continually bought and sold at Rome. And this
of all others is the most gainful merchandise to the Roman traffickers.

[Revelation 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 18:14</span></span>

And the fruits - From what was imported they proceed to the domestic
delicates of Rome; none of which is in greater request there, than the
particular sort which is here mentioned. The word properly signifies,
pears, peaches, nectarines, and all of the apple and plum kinds. And all
things that are dainty - To the taste. And splendid - To the sight; as
clothes, buildings, furniture.

[Revelation 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 18:19</span></span>

And they cast dust on their heads - As mourners. Most of the expressions
here used in describing the downfall of Babylon are taken from Ezekiel's
description of the downfall of Tyre, Eze. 26:1-28:19.

[Revelation 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 18:20</span></span>

Rejoice over her, thou heaven - That is, all the inhabitants of it; and
more especially, ye saints; and among the saints still more eminently,
ye apostles and prophets.

[Revelation 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rev 18:21</span></span>

And a mighty angel took up a stone, and threw it into the sea - By a
like emblem Jeremiah fore - showed the fall of the Chaldean Babylon,
[Jer 51:63-64](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#063).

[Revelation 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rev 18:22</span></span>

And the voice of harpers - Players on stringed instruments. And
musicians - Skilful singers in particular. And pipers - Who played on
flutes, chiefly on mournful, whereas trumpeters played on joyful,
occasions. Shall be heard no more in thee; and no artificer - Arts of
every kind, particularly music, sculpture, painting, and statuary, were
there carried to their greatest height. No, nor even the sound of a mill
- stone shall be heard any more in thee - Not only the arts that adorn
life, but even those employments without which it cannot subsist, will
cease from thee for ever. All these expressions denote absolute and
eternal desolation. The voice of harpers - Music was the entertainment
of the rich and great; trade, the business of men of middle rank;
preparing bread and the necessaries of life, the employment of the
lowest people: marriages, in which lamps and songs were known
ceremonies, are the means of peopling cities, as new births supply the
place of those that die. The desolation of Rome is therefore described
in such a manner, as to show that neither rich nor poor, neither persons
of middle rank, nor those of the lowest condition, should be able to
live there any more. Neither shall it be repeopled by new marriages, but
remain desolate and uninhabited for ever.

[Revelation 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rev 18:23</span></span>

For thy merchants were the great men of the earth - A circumstance which
was in itself indifferent, and yet led them into pride, luxury, and
numberless other sins.

[Revelation 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rev 18:24</span></span>

And in her was found the blood of the prophets and saints - The same
angel speaks still, yet he does not say "in thee," but in her, now so
sunk as not to hear these last words. And of all that had been slain -
Even before she was built. See [Mat
23:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035). There is no city under the sun
which has so clear a title to catholic blood - guiltiness as Rome. The
guilt of the blood shed under the heathen emperors has not been removed
under the Popes, but hugely multiplied. Nor is Rome accountable only for
that which hath been shed in the city, but for that shed in all the
earth. For at Rome under the Pope, as well as under the heathen
emperors, were the bloody orders and edicts given: and whereever the
blood of holy men was shed, there were the grand rejoicings for it. And
what immense quantities of blood have been shed by her agents! Charles
IX., of France, in his letter to Gregory XIII., boasts, that in and not
long after the massacre of Paris, he had destroyed seventy thousand
Hugonots. Some have computed, that, from the year 1518, to 1548, fifteen
millions of Protestants have perished by the Inquisition. This may be
overcharged; but certainly the number of them in those thirty years, as
well as since, is almost incredible. To these we may add innumerable
martyrs, in ancient, middle, and late ages, in Bohemia, Germany,
Holland, France, England, Ireland, and many other parts of Europe,
Afric, and Asia.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 19](rev019)

</div>
