<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev009)  [Next](rev011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#001)

[Revelation 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 10:1</span></span>

And I saw another mighty angel - Another from that "mighty angel,"
mentioned, [Rev 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#002); yet he was a
created angel; for he did not swear by himself, [Rev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006). Clothed with a cloud - In token
of his high dignity. And a rainbow upon his head - A lovely token of the
divine favour. And yet it is not too glorious for a creature: the woman,
[Rev 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001), is described more glorious
still. And his face as the sun - Nor is this too much for a creature:
for all the righteous "shall shine forth as the sun," [Mat
13:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#043). And his feet as pillars of fire
- Bright as flame.

[Revelation 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 10:2</span></span>

And he had in his hand - His left hand: he swore with his right. He
stood with his right foot on the sea, toward the west; his left, on the
land, toward the east: so that he looked southward. And so St. John (as
Patmos lies near Asia) could conveniently take the book out of his left
hand. This sealed book was first in the right hand of him that sat on
the throne: thence the Lamb took it, and opened the seals. And now this
little book, containing the remainder of the other, is given opened, as
it was, to St. John. From this place the Revelation speaks more clearly
and less figuratively than before. And he set his right foot upon the
sea - Out of which the first beast was to come. And his left foot upon
the earth - Out of which was to come the second. The sea may betoken
Europe; the earth, Asia; the chief theatres of these great things.

[Revelation 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 10:3</span></span>

And he cried - Uttering the words set down, [Rev
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#006). And while he cried, or was
crying - At the same instant. Seven thunders uttered their voices - In
distinct words, each after the other. Those who spoke these words were
glorious, heavenly powers, whose voice was as the loudest thunder.

[Revelation 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 10:4</span></span>

And I heard a voice from heaven - Doubtless from him who had at first
commanded him to write, and who presently commands him to take the book;
namely, Jesus Christ. Seal up those things which the seven thunders have
uttered, and write them not - These are the only things of all which he
heard that he is commanded to keep secret: so something peculiarly
secret was revealed to the beloved John, besides all the secrets that
are written in this book. At the same time we are prevented from
inquiring what it was which these thunders uttered: suffice that we may
know all the contents of the opened book, and of the oath of the angel.

[Revelation 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 10:5</span></span>

And the angel - This manifestation of things to come under the trumpet
of the seventh angel hath a twofold introduction: first, the angel
speaks for God, [Rev 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#007); then Christ
speaks for himself, [Rev 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#003). The
angel appeals to the prophets of former times; Christ, to his own two
witnesses. Whom I saw standing upon the earth and upon the sea, lifted
up his right hand toward heaven - As yet the dragon was in heaven. When
he is cast thence he brings the third and most dreadful woe on the earth
and sea: so that it seems as if there would be no end of calamities.
Therefore the angel comprises, in his posture and in his oath, both
heaven, sea, and earth, and makes on the part of the eternal God and
almighty Creator, a solemn protestation, that he will assert his kingly
authority against all his enemies. He lifted up his right hand toward
heaven - The angel in Daniel, [Dan
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#007), (not improbably the same angel,)
lifted up both his hands.

[Revelation 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 10:6</span></span>

And sware - The six preceding trumpets pass without any such solemnity.
It is the trumpet of the seventh angel alone which is confirmed by so
high an oath. By him that liveth for ever and ever - Before whom a
thousand years are but a day. Who created the heaven, the earth, the
sea, and the things that are therein - And, consequently, has the
sovereign power over all: therefore, all his enemies, though they rage a
while in heaven, on the sea, and on the earth, yet must give place to
him. That there shall be no more a time - "But in the days of the voice
of the seventh angel, the mystery of God shall be fulfilled:" that is, a
time, a chronos, shall not expire before that mystery is fulfilled. A
chronos (1111 years) will nearly pass before then, but not quite. The
period, then, which we may term a non - chronos (not a whole time) must
be a little, and not much, shorter than this. The non - chronos here
mentioned seems to begin in the year 800, (when Charles the Great
instituted in the west a new line of emperors, or of "many kings,") to
end in the year 1836; and to contain, among other things, the "short
time" of the third woe, the "three times and a half" of the woman in the
wilderness, and the "duration" of the beast.

[Revelation 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 10:7</span></span>

But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel - Who sounded not only
at the beginning of those days, but from the beginning to the end. The
mystery of God shall be fulfilled - It is said, [Rev
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#017), "The word of God shall be
fulfilled." The word of God is fulfilled by the destruction of the
beast; the mystery, by the removal of the dragon. But these great events
are so near together, that they are here mentioned as one. The beginning
of them is in heaven, as soon as the seventh trumpet sounds; the end is
on the earth and the sea. So long as the third woe remains on the earth
and the sea, the mystery of God is not fulfilled. And the angel's
swearing is peculiarly for the comfort of holy men, who are afflicted
under that woe. Indeed the wrath of God must be first fulfilled, by the
pouring out of the phials: and then comes the joyful fulfilling of the
mystery of God. As he hath declared to his servants the prophets - The
accomplishment exactly answering the prediction. The ancient prophecies
relate partly to that grand period, from the birth of Christ to the
destruction of Jerusalem; partly to the time of the seventh angel,
wherein they will be fully accomplished. To the seventh trumpet belongs
all that occurs from Rev. 11:15-22:5. And the third woe, which takes
place under the same, properly stands, [Rev
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#012), 13:1-18.

[Revelation 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 10:8</span></span>

And - what follows from this verse to Rev. 11:13 runs parallel with the
oath of the angel, and with "the fulfilling of the mystery of God," as
it follows under the trumpet of the seventh angel; what is said, [Rev
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#011), concerning St. John's
"prophesying again," is unfolded immediately after; what is said, [Rev
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#007), concerning "the fulfilling the
mystery of God," is unfolded, [Rev
11:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015), and in the following
chapters.

[Revelation 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 10:9</span></span>

Eat it up - The like was commanded to Ezekiel. This was an emblem of
thoroughly considering and digesting it. And it will make thy belly
bitter, but it will be sweet as honey in thy mouth - The sweetness
betokens the many good things which follow, [Rev
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#001), [Rev
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015), &c.; the bitterness, the evils
which succeed under the third woe.

[Revelation 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 10:11</span></span>

Thou must prophesy again - Of the mystery of God; of which the ancient
prophets had prophesied before. And he did prophesy, by "measuring the
temple," [Rev 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#001); as a prophecy may
be delivered either by words or actions. Concerning people, and nations,
and tongues, and many kings - The people, nations, and tongues are
contemporary; but the kings, being many, succeed one another. These
kings are not mentioned for their own sake, but with a view to the "holy
city," [Rev 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002). Here is a reference
to the great kingdoms in Spain, England, Italy, &c., which arose from
the eighth century; or at least underwent a considerable change, as
France and Germany in particular; to the Christian, afterward Turkish,
empire in the east; and especially to the various potentates, who have
successively reigned at or over Jerusalem, and do now, at least
titularly, reign over it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 11](rev011)

</div>
