<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom012)  [Next](rom014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001)

[Romans 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 13:1</span></span>

St. Paul, writing to the Romans, whose city was the seat of the empire,
speaks largely of obedience to magistrates: and this was also, in
effect, a public apology for the Christian religion. Let every soul be
subject to the supreme powers - An admonition peculiarly needful for the
Jews. Power, in the singular number, is the supreme authority; powers
are they who are invested with it. That is more readily acknowledged to
be from God than these. The apostle affirms it of both. They are all
from God, who constituted all in general, and permits each in particular
by his providence. The powers that be are appointed by God - It might be
rendered, are subordinate to, or, orderly disposed under, God; implying,
that they are God's deputies or vicegerents and consequently, their
authority being, in effect, his, demands our conscientious obedience.

[Romans 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 13:2</span></span>

Whosoever resisteth the power - In any other manner than the laws of the
community direct. Shall receive condemnation - Not only from the
magistrate, but from God also.

[Romans 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 13:3</span></span>

For rulers are - In the general, notwithstanding some particular
exceptions. A terror to evil works - Only. Wouldest thou then not be
afraid - There is one fear which precedes evil actions, and deters from
them: this should always remain. There is another fear which follows
evil actions: they who do well are free from this.

[Romans 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 13:4</span></span>

The sword - The instrument of capital punishment, which God authorizes
him to inflict.

[Romans 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 13:5</span></span>

Not only for fear of wrath - That is, punishment from man. But for
conscience' sake - Out of obedience to God.

[Romans 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 13:6</span></span>

For this cause - Because they are the ministers (officers) of God for
the public good. This very thing - The public good.

[Romans 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 13:7</span></span>

To all - Magistrates. Tribute - Taxes on your persons or estates. Custom
- For goods exported or imported. Fear - Obedience. Honour - Reverence.
All these are due to the supreme power.

[Romans 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 13:8</span></span>

From our duty to magistrates he passes on to general duties. To love one
another - An eternal debt, which can never be sufficiently discharged;
but yet if this be rightly performed, it discharges all the rest. For he
that loveth another - As he ought. Hath fulfilled the whole law - Toward
his neighbour.

[Romans 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 13:9</span></span>

If there be any other - More particular. Commandment - Toward our
neighbour; as there are many in the law. It is summed up in this - So
that if you was not thinking of it, yet if your heart was full of love,
you would fulfil it.

[Romans 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 13:10</span></span>

Therefore love is the fulfilling of the law - For the same love which
restrains from all evil, incites us to all good.

[Romans 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 13:11</span></span>

And do this - Fulfil the law of love in all the instances above
mentioned. Knowing the season - Full of grace, but hasting away. That it
is high time to awake out of sleep - How beautifully is the metaphor
carried on! This life, a night; the resurrection, the day; the gospel
shining on the heart, the dawn of this day; we are to awake out of
sleep; to rise up and throw away our night - clothes, fit only for
darkness, and put on new; and, being soldiers, we are to arm, and
prepare for fight, who are encompassed with so many enemies. The day
dawns when we receive faith, and then sleep gives place. Then it is time
to rise, to arm, to walk, to work, lest sleep steal upon us again. Final
salvation, glory, is nearer to us now, than when we first believed - It
is continually advancing, flying forward upon the swiftest wings of
time. And that which remains between the present hour and eternity is
comparatively but a moment.

[Romans 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 13:13</span></span>

Banqueting - Luxurious, elegant feasts.

[Romans 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 13:14</span></span>

But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ - Herein is contained the whole of
our salvation. It is a strong and beautiful expression for the most
intimate union with him, and being clothed with all the graces which
were in him. The apostle does not say, Put on purity and sobriety,
peacefulness and benevolence; but he says all this and a thousand times
more at once, in saying, Put on Christ. And make not provision - To
raise foolish desires, or, when they are raised already, to satisfy
them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 14](rom014)

</div>
