<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom004)  [Next](rom006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001)

[Romans 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 5:1</span></span>

Being justified by faith - This is the sum of the preceding chapters. We
have peace with God - Being enemies to God no longer, [Rom
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010); neither fearing his wrath, [Rom
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#009). We have peace, hope, love, and
power over sin, the sum of the fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth
chapters. These are the fruits of justifying faith: where these are not,
that faith is not.

[Romans 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 5:2</span></span>

Into this grace - This state of favour.

[Romans 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 5:3</span></span>

We glory in tribulations also - Which we are so far from esteeming a
mark of God's displeasure, that we receive them as tokens of his
fatherly love, whereby we are prepared for a more exalted happiness. The
Jews objected to the persecuted state of the Christians as inconsistent
with the people of the Messiah. It is therefore with great propriety
that the apostle so often mentions the blessings arising from this very
thing.

[Romans 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 5:4</span></span>

And patience works more experience of the sincerity of our grace, and of
God's power and faithfulness.

[Romans 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 5:5</span></span>

Hope shameth us not - That is, gives us the highest glorying. We glory
in this our hope, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts -
The divine conviction of God's love to us, and that love to God which is
both the earnest and the beginning of heaven. By the Holy Ghost - The
efficient cause of all these present blessings, and the earnest of those
to come.

[Romans 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 5:6</span></span>

How can we now doubt of God's love? For when we were without strength -
Either to think, will, or do anything good. In due time - Neither too
soon nor too late; but in that very point of time which the wisdom of
God knew to be more proper than any other. Christ died for the ungodly -
Not only to set them a pattern, or to procure them power to follow it.
It does not appear that this expression, of dying for any one, has any
other signification than that of rescuing the life of another by laying
down our own.

[Romans 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 5:7</span></span>

A just man - One who gives to all what is strictly their due The good
man - One who is eminently holy; full of love, of compassion, kindness,
mildness, of every heavenly and amiable temper. Perhaps - one - would -
even - dare to die - Every word increases the strangeness of the thing,
and declares even this to be something great and unusual.

[Romans 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 5:8</span></span>

But God recommendeth - A most elegant expression. Those are wont to be
recommended to us, who were before either unknown to, or alienated from,
us. While we were sinners - So far from being good, that we were not
even just.

[Romans 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 5:9</span></span>

By his blood - By his bloodshedding. We shall be saved from wrath
through him - That is, from all the effects of the wrath of God. But is
there then wrath in God? Is not wrath a human passion? And how can this
human passion be in God? We may answer this by another question: Is not
love a human passion? And how can this human passion be in God? But to
answer directly: wrath in man, and so love in man, is a human passion.
But wrath in God is not a human passion; nor is love, as it is in God.
Therefore the inspired writers ascribe both the one and the other to God
only in an analogical sense.

[Romans 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 5:10</span></span>

If - As sure as; so the word frequently signifies; particularly in this
and the eighth chapter. We shalt be saved - Sanctified and glorified.
Through his life - Who "ever liveth to make intercession for us."

[Romans 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 5:11</span></span>

And not only so, but we also glory - The whole sentence, [Rom
5:3-11](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003), may be taken together thus: We
not only "rejoice in hope of the glory of God," but also in the midst of
tribulations we glory in God himself through our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom we have now received the reconciliation.

[Romans 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 5:12</span></span>

Therefore - This refers to all the preceding discourse; from which the
apostle infers what follows. He does not therefore properly make a
digression, but returns to speak again of sin and of righteousness. As
by one man - Adam; who is mentioned, and not Eve, as being the
representative of mankind. Sin entered into the world - Actual sin, and
its consequence, a sinful nature. And death - With all its attendants.
It entered into the world when it entered into being; for till then it
did not exist. By sin - Therefore it could not enter before sin. Even so
- Namely, by one man. In that - So the word is used also, [Co2
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004). All sinned - In Adam. These words
assign the reason why death came upon all men; infants themselves not
excepted, in that all sinned.

[Romans 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 5:13</span></span>

For until the law sin was in the world - All, I say, had sinned, for sin
was in the world long before the written law; but, I grant, sin is not
so much imputed, nor so severely punished by God, where there is no
express law to convince men of it. Yet that all had sinned, even then,
appears in that all died.

[Romans 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 5:14</span></span>

Death reigned - And how vast is his kingdom! Scarce can we find any king
who has as many subjects, as are the kings whom he hath conquered. Even
over them that had not sinned after the likeness of Adam's transgression
- Even over infants who had never sinned, as Adam did, in their own
persons; and over others who had not, like him, sinned against an
express law. Who is the figure of him that was to come - Each of them
being a public person, and a federal head of mankind. The one, the
fountain of sin and death to mankind by his offence; the other, of
righteousness and life by his free gift. Thus far the apostle shows the
agreement between the first and second Adam: afterward he shows the
differences between them. The agreement may be summed up thus: As by one
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; so by one man
righteousness entered into the world, and life by righteousness. As
death passed upon all men, in that all had sinned; so life passed upon
all men, (who are in the second Adam by faith,) in that all are
justified. And as death through the sin of the first Adam reigned even
over them who had not sinned after the likeness of Adam's transgression;
so through the righteousness of Christ, even those who have not obeyed,
after the likeness of his obedience, shall reign in life. We may add, As
the sin of Adam, without the sins which we afterwards committed, brought
us death ; so the righteousness of Christ, without the good works which
we afterwards perform, brings us life: although still every good, as
well as evil, work, will receive its due reward.

[Romans 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 5:15</span></span>

Yet not - St. Paul now describes the difference between Adam and Christ;
and that much more directly and expressly than the agreement between
them. Now the fall and the free gift differ, In amplitude, [Rom
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#015). He from whom sin came, and He
from whom the free gift came, termed also "the gift of righteousness,"
differ in power, [Rom 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#016). The reason
of both is subjoined, [Rom 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#017). This
premised, the offence and the free gift are compared, with regard to
their effect, [Rom 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#018), and with
regard to their cause, [Rom 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019).

[Romans 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 5:16</span></span>

The sentence was by one offence to Adam's condemnation - Occasioning the
sentence of death to pass upon him, which, by consequence, overwhelmed
his posterity. But the free gift is of many offences unto justification
- Unto the purchasing it for all men, notwithstanding many offences.

[Romans 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 5:17</span></span>

There is a difference between grace and the gift. Grace is opposed to
the offence; the gift, to death, being the gift of life.

[Romans 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 5:18</span></span>

Justification of life - Is that sentence of God, by which a sinner under
sentence of death is adjudged to life.

[Romans 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 5:19</span></span>

As by the disobedience of one man many (that is, all men) were
constituted sinners - Being then in the loins of their first parent, the
common head and representative of them all. So by the obedience of one -
By his obedience unto death; by his dying for us. Many - All that
believe. Shall be constituted righteous - Justified, pardoned.

[Romans 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 5:20</span></span>

The law came in between - The offence and the free gift. That the
offence might abound - That is, the consequence (not the design) of the
law's coming in was, not the taking away of sin, but the increase of it.
Yet where sin abounded, grace did much more abound - Not only in the
remission of that sin which Adam brought on us, but of all our own; not
only in remission of sins, but infusion of holiness; not only in
deliverance from death, but admission to everlasting life, a far more
noble and excellent life than that which we lost by Adam's fall.

[Romans 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 5:21</span></span>

That as sin had reigned - so grace also might reign - Which could not
reign before the fall; before man had sinned. Through righteousness to
eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord - Here is pointed out the source
of all our blessings, the rich and free grace of God. The meritorious
cause; not any works of righteousness of man, but the alone merits of
our Lord Jesus Christ. The effect or end of all; not only pardon, but
life; divine life, leading to glory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 6](rom006)

</div>
