<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Romans Index](rom.md)  
  [Previous](rom007)  [Next](rom009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001.md)

[Romans 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 8:1</span></span>

There is therefore now no condemnation - Either for things present or
past. Now he comes to deliverance and liberty. The apostle here resumes
the thread of his discourse, which was interrupted, [Rom
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007.md).

[Romans 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 8:2</span></span>

The law of the Spirit - That is, the gospel. Hath freed me from the law
of sin and death - That is, the Mosaic dispensation.

[Romans 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 8:3</span></span>

For what the law - Of Moses. Could not do, in that it was weak through
the flesh - Incapable of conquering our evil nature. If it could, God
needed not to have sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh - We
with our sinful flesh were devoted to death. But God sending his own
Son, in the likeness of that flesh, though pure from sin, condemned that
sin which was in our flesh; gave sentence, that sin should be destroyed,
and the believer wholly delivered from it.

[Romans 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 8:4</span></span>

That the righteousness of the law - The holiness it required, described,
[Rom 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#011.md). Might be fulfilled in us,
who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit - Who are guided in
all our thoughts, words, and actions, not by corrupt nature, but by the
Spirit of God. From this place St. Paul describes primarily the state of
believers, and that of unbelievers only to illustrate this.

[Romans 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 8:5</span></span>

They that are after the flesh - Who remain under the guidance of corrupt
nature. Mind the things of the flesh - Have their thoughts and
affections fixed on such things as gratify corrupt nature; namely, on
things visible and temporal; on things of the earth, on pleasure, (of
sense or imagination,) praise, or riches. But they who are after the
Spirit - Who are under his guidance. Mind the things of the Spirit -
Think of, relish, love things invisible, eternal; the things which the
Spirit hath revealed, which he works in us, moves us to, and promises to
give us.

[Romans 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 8:6</span></span>

For to be carnally minded - That is, to mind the things of the flesh. Is
death - The sure mark of spiritual death, and the way to death
everlasting. But to be spiritually minded - That is, to mind the things
of the Spirit. Is life - A sure mark of spiritual life, and the way to
life everlasting. And attended with peace - The peace of God, which is
the foretaste of life everlasting; and peace with God, opposite to the
enmity mentioned in the next verse.

[Romans 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 8:7</span></span>

Enmity against God - His existence, power, and providence.

[Romans 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 8:8</span></span>

They who are in the flesh - Under the government of it.

[Romans 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 8:9</span></span>

In the Spirit - Under his government. If any man have not the Spirit of
Christ - Dwelling and governing in him. He is none of his - He is not a
member of Christ; not a Christian; not in a state of salvation. A plain,
express declaration, which admits of no exception. He that hath ears to
hear, let him hear!

[Romans 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 8:10</span></span>

Now if Christ be in you - Where the Spirit of Christ is, there is
Christ. The body indeed is dead - Devoted to death. Because of sin -
Heretofore committed. But the Spirit is life - Already truly alive.
Because of righteousness - Now attained. From [Rom
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#013.md), St. Paul, having finished what
he had begun, [Rom 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001.md), describes
purely the state of believers.

[Romans 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 8:12</span></span>

We are not debtors to the flesh - We ought not to follow it.

[Romans 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 8:13</span></span>

The deeds of the flesh - Not only evil actions, but evil desires,
tempers, thoughts. If ye mortify - Kill, destroy these. Ye shall live -
The life of faith more abundantly here, and hereafter the life of glory.

[Romans 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 8:14</span></span>

For as many as are led by the Spirit of God - In all the ways of
righteousness. They are the sons of God - Here St. Paul enters upon the
description of those blessings which he comprises, [Rom
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030.md), in the word glorified; though,
indeed, he does not describe mere glory, but that which is still mingled
with the cross. The sum is, through sufferings to glory.

[Romans 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 8:15</span></span>

For ye - Who are real Christians. Have not received the spirit of
bondage - The Holy Ghost was not properly a spirit of bondage, even in
the time of the Old Testament. Yet there was something of bondage
remaining even in those who then had received the Spirit. Again - As the
Jews did before. We - All and every believer. Cry - The word denotes a
vehement speaking, with desire, confidence, constancy. Abba, Father -
The latter word explains the former. By using both the Syriac and the
Greek word, St. Paul seems to point out the joint cry both of the Jewish
and gentile believers. The spirit of bondage here seems directly to
mean, those operations of the Holy Spirit by which the soul, on its
first conviction, feels itself in bondage to sin, to the world, to
Satan, and obnoxious to the wrath of God. This, therefore, and the
Spirit of adoption, are one and the same Spirit, only manifesting itself
in various operations, according to the various circumstances of the
persons.

[Romans 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 8:16</span></span>

The same Spirit beareth witness with our spirit - With the spirit of
every true believer, by a testimony distinct from that of his own
spirit, or the testimony of a good conscience. Happy they who enjoy this
clear and constant.

[Romans 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 8:17</span></span>

Joint heirs - That we may know it is a great inheritance which God will
give us for he hath given a great one to his Son. If we suffer with him
- Willingly and cheerfully, for righteousness' sake. This is a new
proposition, referring to what follows.

[Romans 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 8:18</span></span>

For I reckon - This verse gives the reason why he but now mentioned
sufferings and glory. When that glory "shall be revealed in us," then
the sons of God will be revealed also.

[Romans 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 8:19</span></span>

For the earnest expectation - The word denotes a lively hope of
something drawing near, and a vehement longing after it. Of the creation
- Of all visible creatures, believers excepted, who are spoken of apart;
each kind, according as it is capable. All these have been sufferers
through sin; and to all these (the finally impenitent excepted) shall
refreshment redound from the glory of the children of God. Upright
heathens are by no means to be excluded from this earnest expectation:
nay, perhaps something of it may at some times be found even in the
vainest of men; who (although in the hurry of life they mistake vanity
for liberty, and partly stifle. partly dissemble, their groans, yet) in
their sober, quiet, sleepless, afflicted hours, pour forth many sighs in
the ear of God.

[Romans 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 8:20</span></span>

The creation was made subject to vanity - Abuse, misery, and corruption.
By him who subjected it - Namely, God, [Gen
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#017.md), [Gen
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#029.md). Adam only made it liable to the
sentence which God pronounced; yet not without hope.

[Romans 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 8:21</span></span>

The creation itself shall be delivered - Destruction is not deliverance:
therefore whatsoever is destroyed, or ceases to be, is not delivered at
all. Will, then, any part of the creation be destroyed? Into the
glorious liberty - The excellent state wherein they were created.

[Romans 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 8:22</span></span>

For the whole creation groaneth together - With joint groans, as it were
with one voice. And travaileth - Literally, is in the pains of
childbirth, to be delivered of the burden of the curse. Until now - To
this very hour; and so on till the time of deliverance.

[Romans 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 8:23</span></span>

And even we, who have the first - fruits of the Spirit - That is, the
Spirit, who is the first - fruits of our inheritance. The adoption -
Persons who had been privately adopted among the Romans were often
brought forth into the forum, and there publicly owned as their sons by
those who adopted them. So at the general resurrection, when the body
itself is redeemed from death, the sons of God shall be publicly owned
by him in the great assembly of men and angels. The redemption of our
body - From corruption to glory and immortality.

[Romans 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rom 8:24</span></span>

For we are saved by hope - Our salvation is now only in hope. We do not
yet possess this full salvation.

[Romans 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">rom 8:26</span></span>

Likewise the Spirit - Nay, not only the universe, not only the children
of God, but the Spirit of God also himself, as it were, groaneth, while
he helpeth our infirmities, or weaknesses. Our understandings are weak,
particularly in the things of God our desires are weak; our prayers are
weak. We know not - Many times. What we should pray for - Much less are
we able to pray for it as we ought: but the Spirit maketh intercession
for us - In our hearts, even as Christ does in heaven. With groanings -
The matter of which is from ourselves, but the Spirit forms them; and
they are frequently inexpressible, even by the faithful themselves.

[Romans 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">rom 8:27</span></span>

But he who searcheth the hearts - Wherein the Spirit dwells and
intercedes. Knoweth - Though man cannot utter it. What is the mind of
the Spirit, for he maketh intercession for the saints - Who are near to
God. According to God - According to his will, as is worthy of God. and
acceptable to him.

[Romans 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">rom 8:28</span></span>

And we know - This in general; though we do not always know particularly
what to pray for. That all things - Ease or pain, poverty or riches, and
the ten thousand changes of life. Work together for good - Strongly and
sweetly for spiritual and eternal good. To them that are called
according to his purpose - His gracious design of saving a lost world by
the death of his Son. This is a new proposition. St. Paul, being about
to recapitulate the whole blessing contained in justification, (termed
"glorification," [Rom 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030),.md) first
goes back to the purpose or decree of God, which is frequently mentioned
in holy writ.

To explain this (nearly in the words of an eminent writer) a little more
at large: - When a man has a work of time and importance before him, he
pauses, consults, and contrives; and when he has laid a plan, resolves
or decrees to proceed accordingly. Having observed this in ourselves, we
are ready to apply it to God also; and he, in condescension to us has
applied it to himself.

The works of providence and redemption are vast and stupendous, and
therefore we are apt to conceive of God as deliberating and consulting
on them, and then decreeing to act according to "the counsel of his own
will;" as if, long before the world was made, he had been concerting
measures both as to the making and governing of it, and had then writ
down his decrees, which altered not, any more than the laws of the Medes
and Persians. Whereas, to take this consulting and decreeing in a
literal sense, would be the same absurdity as to ascribe a real human
body and human passions to the ever - blessed God.

This is only a popular representation of his infallible knowledge and
unchangeable wisdom; that is, he does all things as wisely as a man can
possibly do, after the deepest consultation, and as steadily pursues the
most proper method as one can do who has laid a scheme beforehand. But
then, though the effects be such as would argue consultation and
consequent decrees in man, yet what need of a moment's consultation in
Him who sees all things at one view?

Nor had God any more occasion to pause and deliberate, and lay down
rules for his own conduct from all eternity, than he has now. What was
there any fear of his mistaking afterwards, if he had not beforehand
prepared decrees, to direct him what he was to do? Will any man say, he
was wiser before the creation than since? or had he then more leisure,
that he should take that opportunity to settle his affairs, and make
rules (or himself, from which he was never to vary?

He has doubtless the same wisdom and all other perfections at this day
which he had from eternity; and is now as capable of making decrees, or
rather has no more occasion for them now than formerly: his
understanding being always equally clear and bright, his wisdom equally
infallible.

[Romans 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">rom 8:29</span></span>

Whom he foreknew, he also predestinated conformable to the image of his
Son - Here the apostle declares who those are whom he foreknew and
predestinated to glory; namely, those who are conformable to the image
of his Son. This is the mark of those who are foreknown and will be
glorified, [Ti2 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019.md). [Phi
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#010.md), [Phi
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021.md).

[Romans 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">rom 8:30</span></span>

Them he - In due time. Called - By his gospel and his Spirit. And whom
he called - When obedient to the heavenly calling, [Act
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#019.md). He also justified - Forgave and
accepted. And whom he justified - Provided they "continued in his
goodness," [Rom 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#022.md), he in the end
glorified - St. Paul does not affirm, either here or in any other part
of his writings. that precisely the same number of men are called,
justified, and glorified. He does not deny that a believer may fall away
and be cut off between his special calling and his glorification, [Rom
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#022.md). Neither does he deny that many
are called who never are justified. He only affirms that this is the
method whereby God leads us step by step toward heaven. He glorified -
He speaks as one looking back from the goal, upon the race of faith.
Indeed grace, as it is glory begun, is both an earnest and a foretaste
of eternal glory.

[Romans 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">rom 8:31</span></span>

What shall we say then to these things - Related in the third, fifth,
and eighth chapters? As if he had said, We cannot go, think, or wish
anything farther. If God be for us - Here follow four periods, one
general and three particular. Each begins with glorying in the grace of
God, which is followed by a question suitable to it, challenging all
opponents to all which, "I am persuaded," &c., is a general answer. The
general period is, If God be for us, who can be against us? The first
particular period, relating to the past time, is, He that spared not his
own Son, how shall he not freely give us all things? The second,
relating to the present, is, It is God that justifieth. Who is he that
condemneth? The third, relating to the future, is, It is Christ that
died - Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?

[Romans 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">rom 8:32</span></span>

He that - This period contains four sentences: He spared not his own
Son; therefore he will freely give us all things. He delivered him up
for us all; therefore, none can lay anything to our charge. Freely - For
all that follows justification is a free gift also. All things - Needful
or profitable for us.

[Romans 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">rom 8:33</span></span>

God's elect - The above - cited author observes, that long before the
coming of Christ the heathen world revolted from the true God, and were
therefore reprobated, or rejected.

But the nation of the Jews were chosen to be the people of God, and were
therefore styled, "the children" or "sons of God," [Deu
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001.md);

"holy people," [Deu 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#006.md); [Deu
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#002.md);

"a chosen seed," [Deu 4:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#037.md);

"the elect," [Isa 41:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#008.md); [Isa
43:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#010.md);

"the called of God," [Isa 48:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#012.md).

And these titles were given to all the nation of Israel, including both
good and bad.

Now the gospel having the most strict connexion with the Books of the
Old Testament, where these phrases frequently occur; and our Lord and
his apostles being native Jews, and beginning to preach in the land of
Israel, the language in which they preached would of course abound with
the phrases of the Jewish nation. And hence it is easy to see why such
of them as would not receive him were styled reprobated. For they no
longer continued to be the people of God; whereas this and those other
honourable titles were continued to all such Jews as embraced
Christianity. And the same appellations which once belonged to the
Jewish nation were now given to the gentile Christians also together
with which they were invested with all the privileges of "the chosen
people of God;" and nothing could cut them off from these but their own
wilful apostasy.

It does not appear that even good men were ever termed God's elect till
above two thousand years from the creation. God's electing or choosing
the nation of Israel, and separating them from the other nations, who
were sunk in idolatry and all wickedness, gave the first occasion to
this sort of language. And as the separating the Christians from the
Jews was a like event, no wonder it was expressed in like words and
phrases only with this difference, the term elect was of old applied to
all the members of the visible church; whereas in the New Testament it
is applied only to the members of the invisible.

[Romans 8:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">rom 8:34</span></span>

Yea rather, that is risen - Our faith should not stop at his death, but
be exercised farther on his resurrection, kingdom, second coming. Who
maketh intercession for us - Presenting there his obedience, his
sufferings, his prayers, and our prayers sanctified through him.

[Romans 8:35](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">rom 8:35</span></span>

Who shall separate us from the love of Christ - Toward us? Shall
affliction or distress - He proceeds in order, from less troubles to
greater: can any of these separate us from his protection in it ; and,
if he sees good, deliverance from it?

[Romans 8:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">rom 8:36</span></span>

All the day - That is, every day, continually. We are accounted - By our
enemies; by ourselves. [Psa 44:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#022.md).

[Romans 8:37](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">rom 8:37</span></span>

We more than conquer - We are not only no losers, but abundant gainers,
by all these trials. This period seems to describe the full assurance of
hope.

[Romans 8:38](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">rom 8:38</span></span>

I am persuaded - This is inferred from [Rom
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034.md), in an admirable order: - Neither
death" shall hurt us; For "Christ is dead:" "Nor life;" 'is risen" Nor
angels, nor principalities, nor powers; nor things pre - sent, nor
things to come;" "is at the right hand of God:" "Nor height, nor depth,
nor any other creature;" "maketh intercession for us." Neither death -
Terrible as it is to natural men; a violent death in particular, [Rom
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#036.md). Nor life - With all the
affliction and distress it can bring, [Rom
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035.md); or a long, easy life; or all
living men. Nor angels - Whether good (if it were possible they should
attempt it) or bad, with all their wisdom and strength. Nor
principalities, nor powers - Not even those of the highest rank, or the
most eminent power. Nor things present - Which may befal us during our
pilgrimage; or the whole world, till it passeth away. Nor things to come
- Which may occur either when our time on earth is past, or when time
itself is at an end, as the final judgment, the general conflagration,
the everlasting fire. Nor height, nor depth - The former sentence
respected the differences of times; this, the differences of places. How
many great and various things are contained in these words, we do not,
need not, cannot know yet. The height - In St. Paul's sublime style, is
put for heaven. The depth - For the great abyss: that is, neither the
heights, I will not say of walls, mountains, seas, but, of heaven
itself, can move us; nor the abyss itself, the very thought of which
might astonish the boldest creature. Nor any creature - Nothing beneath
the Almighty; visible enemies he does not even deign to name. Shall be
able - Either by force, [Rom 8:35](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035.md); or
by any legal claim, [Rom 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#033.md), &c. To
separate us from the love of God in Christ - Which will surely save,
protect, deliver us who believe in, and through, and from, them all.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 9](rom009.md)

</div>
