<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1009)  [Next](sa1011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 10:1</span></span>

Poured it - Which Is was the usual rite in the designation, as of
priests and prophets, so also of kings, whereby was signified the
pouring forth of the gifts of God's spirit upon him, to fit him for the
administration of his office. These sacred unctions then used, pointed
at the great Messiah, or anointed One, the King of the church, and High
- priest of our profession, who was anointed with the oil of the spirit
without measure, above all the priests and princes of the Jewish church.
Kissed - As a testimony of his sincere friendship and affection to him.
His inheritance - That is, over his own peculiar people. Whereby he
admonisheth Saul, that this people were not so much his, as God's; and
that he was not to rule them according his own will, but according to
the will of God.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 10:2</span></span>

Rachel's sepulchre - In the way to Bethlehem, which city was in Judah;
her sepulchre might be either in Judah, or in Benjamin; for the
possessions of those two tribes were bordering one upon another. The
first place he directs him to was a sepulchre, the sepulchre of one of
his ancestors. There he must read a lecture of his own mortality, and
now he had a crown in his eye, must think of his grave, in which all his
honour would be laid in the dust.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 10:3</span></span>

Plain - Not that at the foot of mount Tabor, which was far from these
parts; but another belonging to some other place. Bethel - Properly so
called, which was in Ephraim, where there was a noted high - place,
famous for Jacob's vision there, [Gen
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#019), where it is probable they
offered sacrifices, in this confused state of things, when the ark was
in one place, and the tabernacle in another.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 10:5</span></span>

Prophets - By prophets he understands persons that wholly devoted
themselves to religious studies and exercises. For the term of
prophesying is not only given to the most eminent act of it, foretelling
things to come; but also to preaching, and to the making or singing of
psalms, or songs of praise to God. And they that wholly attended upon
these things, are called sons of the prophets, who were commonly
combined into companies or colleges, that they might more conveniently
assist one another in God's work. This institution God was pleased so
far to honour and bless, that sometimes he communicated unto those
persons the knowledge of future things. Psaltery - Such instruments of
musick being then used by prophets and other persons, for the excitation
of their spirits in God's service. Prophesy - Either sing God's praises,
or speak of the things of God, by a peculiar impulse of his spirit.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 10:6</span></span>

Will come - Heb. will leap, or rush upon thee. Another man - That is,
thou shalt be suddenly endowed with another spirit, filled with skill of
divine things, with courage, and wisdom, and magnanimity; and other
qualifications befitting thy dignity.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 10:7</span></span>

Thou do - Heb. do what they hand findeth to do; that is, as thou shalt
have a call and opportunity. He doth not intend that he should take the
kingly government upon him, before his call to it was owned by the
people, but that he should dispose his mind to a readiness of
undertaking any public service when he should be called to his office.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 10:8</span></span>

Till I come - This, though now mentioned and commanded, was not
immediately to be performed; as is evident, partly from the whole course
of the story, (which shews, that Saul and Samuel, and the people, first
met at Mizpeh, [Sa1 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#017), &c. where
Saul was chosen by God, and accepted by the people as king; and
afterwards went to Gilgal once before the time here spoken of, [Sa1
11:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#014),) and partly, by comparing
this place with [Sa1 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#008), &c. where
we find Saul charged with the violation of this command, two years after
the giving of it. It seems this is given as a standing rule for Saul to
observe while Samuel and he lived; that in case of any great future
difficulties, as the invasion of enemies, Saul should resort to Gilgal,
and call the people thither, and tarry there seven days, which was but a
necessary time for gathering the people, and for the coming of Samuel
thither. And Gilgal was chosen for this purpose, because that place was
famous for the solemn renewing of the covenant between God and Israel,
[Jos 4:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#019), and for other eminent
instances of God's favour to them, the remembrance whereof was a
confirmation of their faith; and because it was a very convenient place
for he tribes within and without Jordan to assemble, and consult, and
unite their forces together upon such occasions.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 10:10</span></span>

Prophesied - The accomplishment of the two former signs is supposed, and
this only is expressed, because this was more eminent than the former;
the other were only transient acts, which passed in private between two
or three persons meeting together; but this was a more permanent and
notorious sign, done in a more solemn manner, and before many witnesses.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 10:11</span></span>

Is Saul - A man never instructed, nor exercised in, nor inclined to
these matters.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 10:12</span></span>

Who is, &c. - Who is the father of all these prophets, among whom Saul
now is one? Who is it that instructs and inspires them but God? They
have it not from their parents, nor from their education, but by
inspiration from God, who, when he pleaseth, can inspire Saul, or any
other man with the same skill. And therefore wonder not at this matter,
but give God the glory of it. A proverb - Used when any strange, or
unexpected thing happened.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 10:13</span></span>

High place - Returning thither with the prophets, to praise God for
these wonderful favours, and to beg counsel and help from God in this
high business.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 10:16</span></span>

Told not - In obedience to Samuel, who obliged him to secrecy: and from
an humble modesty.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 10:19</span></span>

Now therefore, &c. - He puts them upon chusing their king by lot, that
all might know God had chosen Saul (for the disposal of the lot is of
the Lord) and to prevent all dispute and exception.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 10:20</span></span>

Benjamin - Which tribe was now preferred before Judah, because the
kingdom was freely promised by God to Judah, and was to be given to him
in love; but now the kingdom was in a manner forced from God, and given
them in anger and therefore conferred upon an obscure tribe.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 10:22</span></span>

Enquired - Either by Urim or Thummim, which was the usual way of
enquiry. Or, by Samuel, who by his prayer procured an answer. Stuff -
Among the carriages or baggage of the people there assembled. This he
probably did, from a sense of his own unworthiness.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa1 10:24</span></span>

None like him - As to the height of his bodily stature, which was in
itself, commendable in a king, and some kind of indication of great
endowments of mind. God save the king - Heb. let the king live; that is,
long and prosperously. Hereby they accept him for their king, and
promise subjection to him. None will be losers in the end by their
humility and modesty. Honour, like the shadows, follows them that flee
from it, but flees from them that pursue it.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa1 10:25</span></span>

Manner of the kingdom - The laws and rules by which the kingly
government was to be managed; agreeable to those mentioned [Deu
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#016), &c. Before the Lord - Before
the ark, where it was kept safe from depravation.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa1 10:26</span></span>

Went home - Not being actually inaugurated into his kingdom, he thought
fit to retire to his former habitation, and to live privately 'till he
had an occasion to shew himself in a more illustrious manner. Then went
- To give him safe and honourable conduct to his house, though not to
abide with him there, which did not suit his present circumstance.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa1 10:27</span></span>

No presents - As subjects in those times used to do to their kings. This
was an evidence both of his humility, and the mercifulness of his
disposition. So Christ held his peace, in the day of his patience. But
there is a day of recompense coming.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 11](sa1011)

</div>
