<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1003)  [Next](sa1005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 4:1</span></span>

The word - That is, the word of the Lord revealed to Samuel, and by him
to the people. A word of command, that all Israel should go forth to
fight with the Philistines, as the following words explain it, that they
might he first humbled and punished for their sins, and so prepared for
deliverance. Went out - To meet the Philistines, who having by this time
recruited themselves after their loss by Samson, and perceiving an
eminent prophet arising among them, by whom they were likely to be
united, and assisted, thought fit to suppress them in the beginning of
their hopes.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 4:3</span></span>

Wherefore, &c. - This was strange blindness, that when there was so
great a corruption in their worship and manners, they could not see
sufficient reason why God should suffer them to fall by their enemies.
The ark - That great pledge of God's presence and help, by whose conduct
our ancestors obtained success. Instead of humbling themselves for, and
purging themselves from their sins, for which God was displeased with
them, they take an easier and cheaper course, and put their trust in
their ceremonial observances, not doubting but the very presence of the
ark would give them the victory.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 4:4</span></span>

Bring the ark - This they should not have done without asking counsel of
God.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 4:5</span></span>

Shouted - From their great joy and confidence of success. So formal
Christians triumph in external privileges and performances: as if the
ark in the camp would bring them to heaven, tho' the world and the flesh
reign in the heart.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 4:7</span></span>

Heretofore - Not in our times; for the fore - mentioned removals of the
ark were before it came to Shiloh.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 4:8</span></span>

Wo, &c. - They secretly confess the Lord to be greater than their gods,
and yet presume to oppose him. Wilderness - They mention the wilderness,
not as if all the plagues of the Egyptians came upon them in the
wilderness, but because the last and sorest of all, which is therefore
put for all, the destruction of Pharaoh and all his host, happened in
the wilderness, namely, in the Red - sea, which having the wilderness on
both sides of it, may well be said to be in the wilderness. Altho' it is
not strange if these Heathens did mistake some circumstance in relation
of the Israelitish affairs, especially some hundreds of years after they
were done.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 4:10</span></span>

Tent - To his habitation, called by the ancient name of his tent. There
fell - Before, they lost but four thousand, now in the presence of the
ark, thirty thousand, to teach them that the ark and ordinances of God,
were never designed as a refuge to impenitent sinners, but only for the
comfort of those that repent.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 4:11</span></span>

The ark - Which God justly and wisely permitted, to punish the
Israelites for their profanation of it; that by taking away the
pretences of their foolish confidence, he might more deeply humble them,
and bring them to true - repentance: and that the Philistines might by
this means he more effectually convinced of God's almighty power, and of
their own, and the impotency of their gods, and so a stop put to their
triumphs and rage against the poor Israelites. Thus as God was no loser
by this event, so the Philistines were no gainers by it; and Israel, all
things considered, received more good than hurt by it. If Eli had done
his duty, and put them from the priesthood, they might have lived, tho'
in disgrace. But now God takes the work into his own hands, and chases
them out of the world by the sword of the Philistines.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 4:13</span></span>

The ark - Whereby he discovered a public and generous spirit, and a
fervent zeal for God, and for his honour, which he preferred before all
his natural affections, not regarding his own children in comparison of
the ark, tho' otherwise he was a most indulgent father. And well they
might, for beside that this was a calamity to all Israel, it was a
particular loss to Shiloh; for the ark never returned thither. Their
candlestick was removed out of its place, and the city sunk and came to
nothing.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 4:18</span></span>

He fell - Being so oppressed with grief and astonishment, that he had no
strength left to support him. The gate - The gate of the city, which was
most convenient for the speedy understanding of all occurrences. Old -
Old, and therefore weak and apt to fall; heavy, and therefore his fall
more dangerous. So fell the high - priest and judge of Israel! So fell
his heavy head, when he had lived within two of an hundred years! So
fell the crown from his head, when he had judged Israel forty years:
thus did his sun set under a cloud. Thus was the wickedness of those
sons of his, whom he had indulged, his ruin. Thus does God sometimes set
marks of his displeasure on good men, that others may hear and fear. Yet
we must observe, it was the loss of the ark that was his death, and not
the slaughter of his sons. He says in effect, Let me fall with the ark!
Who can live, when the ordinances of God are removed? Farewell all in
this world, even Life itself, if the ark be gone!

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 4:20</span></span>

Fear not - Indeed the sorrows of her travail would have been forgotten,
for joy that a child was born into the world. But what is that joy to
one that feels herself dying? None but spiritual joy will stand us in
stead then. Death admits not the relish of any earthly joy: it is then
all flat and tasteless. What is it to one that is lamenting the loss of
the ark? What can give us pleasure, if we want God's word and
ordinances? Especially if we want the comfort of his gracious presence,
and the light of his countenance?

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 4:21</span></span>

I - chabod - Where is the glory? The glory - That is, the glorious type
and assurance of God's presence, the ark, which is often called God's
glory, and which wast the great safeguard and ornament of Israel, which
they could glory in above all other nations.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 4:22</span></span>

The ark - This is repeated to shew, her piety, and that the public loss
lay heavier upon her spirit, than her personal or domestic calamity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 5](sa1005.md)

</div>
