<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1011)  [Next](sa1013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 12:1</span></span>

Said - While they were assembled together in Gilgal. And this is another
instance of Samuel's great wisdom and integrity. He would not reprove
the people for their sin, in desiring a king, whilst Saul was unsettled
in his kingdom; lest through their accustomed levity, they should as
hastily cast off their king, as they had passionately desired him, and
therefore he chuseth this season for it; because Saul's kingdom was now
confirmed by an eminent victory; and because the people rejoiced
greatly, applauded themselves for their desires of a king; and
interpreted the success which God had given them, as a divine
approbation of those desires. Samuel therefore thinks fit to temper
their joys, and to excite them to that repentance which he saw wanting
in them, and which he knew to be necessary, to prevent the curse of God
upon their new king, and the whole kingdom.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 12:2</span></span>

Walketh - Ruleth over you. To him I have fully resigned my power, and
own myself one of his subjects. Old - And therefore unable to bear the
burden of government. My sons - Or, among you, in the same states
private persons, as you are; if they have injured any of you, the law is
now open against them; any of you may accuse them, your king can punish
them, I do not intercede for them. Walked before you - That is, been
your guide and governor; partly, as a prophet; and partly, as a judge.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 12:3</span></span>

Behold - I here present myself before the Lord, and before your king,
ready to give an account of all my administrations. And this
protestation Samuel makes of his integrity, not out of ostentation; but
for his own just vindication, that the people might not hereafter for
the defence of their own irregularities, reproach his government, and
that being publickly acquitted from all faults in his government, he
might more freely reprove the sins of the people, and, particularly,
that sin of theirs in desiring a king, when they had so little reason
for it.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 12:7</span></span>

Righteous acts - Heb. the righteousnesses; that is, mercies or benefits
the chief subject of the following discourse; some of their calamities
being but briefly named, and that for the illustration of God's mercy in
their deliverances.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 12:8</span></span>

This place - In this land: in which Moses and Aaron are said to settle
them; because they brought them into, and seated them in part of it,
that without Jordan; because they were, under God, the principal authors
of their entering into the land of Canaan; inasmuch as they brought them
out of Egypt, conducted them through the wilderness; and thereby their
prayers to God, and counsel to them, preserved them from ruin, and gave
command from God for the distribution of the land among them, and
encouraged them to enter into it. And lastly, Moses substituted Joshua
in his stead, and commanded him to seat them there, which he did.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 12:9</span></span>

Forgat - That is, they revolted from him, and carried themselves, as if
they had wholly forgotten his innumerable favours. This he saith to
answer an objection, that the reason why they desired a king, was,
because in the time of the judges they were at great uncertainties, and
often exercised with sharp afflictions: to which he answereth by
concession that they were so; but adds, by way of retortion, that they
themselves were the cause of it, by their forgetting God: so that it was
not the fault of that kind of government, but their transgressing the
rules of it. Fought - With success, and subdued them.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 12:11</span></span>

Bedan - This was either Samson, as most interpreters believe, who is
called Bedan; that is, in Dan, or of Dan, one of that tribe, to signify
that they had no reason to distrust that God, who could raise so eminent
a saviour out of so obscure a tribe: or, Jair the Gileadite, which may
seem best to agree, first, with the time and order of the judges; for
Jair was before Jephthah, but Samson was after him. Secondly, with other
scriptures: for among the sons of a more ancient Jair, we meet with one
called Bedan, [Ch1 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#017), which name
seems here given to Jair the judge, to distinguish him from that first
Jair. Safe - So that it was no necessity, but mere wantonness, that made
you desire a change.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 12:12</span></span>

Your king - That is, when God was your immediate king and governor, who
was both able and willing to deliver you, if you had cried to him,
whereof you and your ancestors have had plentiful experience; so that
you did not at all need any other king; and your desire of another, was
a manifest reproach against God.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 12:13</span></span>

Ye have chosen - Though God chose him by lot, yet the people are said to
chuse him; either generally, because they chose that form of government;
or particularly, because they approved of God's choice, and confirmed
it. The Lord - He hath yielded to your inordinate desire.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 12:14</span></span>

Then, &c. - Heb. then shall - ye - be, (that is, walk, or go) after the
Lord; that is, God shall still go before you, as he hath hitherto done,
as your leader or governor, to direct, protect, and deliver you; and he
will not forsake you, as you have given him just cause to do. Sometimes
this phrase of going after the Lord, signifies a man's obedience to God;
but here it is otherwise to be understood, and it notes not a duty to be
performed, but a privilege to be received upon the performance of their
duty; because it is opposed to a threatening denounced in case of
disobedience, in the next verse.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 12:15</span></span>

Your fathers - Who lived under the judges; and you shall have no
advantage by the change of government, nor shall your kings be able to
protect you against God's displeasure. The mistake, if we think we can
evade God's justice, by shaking off his dominion. If we will not let God
rule us, yet he will judge us.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 12:17</span></span>

Wheat - harvest - At which time it was a rare thing in those parts to
have thunder or rain; the weather being more constant in its seasons
there, than it is with us. Rain - That you may understand that God is
displeased with you; and also how foolishly and wickedly you have done
in rejecting the government of that God, at whose command are all things
both in heaven and in earth.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 12:18</span></span>

Samuel - Who had such power and favour with God. By this thunder and
rain, God shewed them their folly in desiring a king to save them,
rather than God or Samuel, expecting more from an arm of flesh than from
the arm of God, or from the power of prayer. Could their king thunder
with a voice like God? Could their prince command such forces as the
prophet could by his prayers? Likewise he intimates, that how serene
soever their condition was now, (like the weather in wheat harvest) yet
if God pleased, he could soon change the face of their heavens, and
persecute them with his storms.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 12:19</span></span>

Thy God - Whom thou hast so great an interest in, while we are ashamed
and afraid to call him our God.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 12:20</span></span>

Fear not - With a desponding fear, as if there were no hope left for
you.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 12:21</span></span>

Turn aside - After idols; as they had often done before; and,
notwithstanding this warning, did afterwards. Vain things - So idols are
called, [Deu 32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021); [Jer
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#005), and so they are, being mere
nothings, having no power in them; no influence upon us, nor use or
benefit to us.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 12:22</span></span>

His name's sake - That is, for his own honour, which would suffer much
among men, if he should not preserve and deliver his people in eminent
dangers. And this reason God alledgeth to take them off from all conceit
of their own merit; and to assure them, that if they did truly repent of
all their sins, and serve God with all their heart; yet even in that
case their salvation would not be due to their merits; but the effect of
God's free mercy. To make - Out of his own free grace, without any
desert of yours, and therefore he will not forsake you, except you
thrust him away.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa1 12:24</span></span>

Only, &c. - Otherwise neither my prayer nor counsels will stand you in
any stead.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 13](sa1013)

</div>
