<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1015)  [Next](sa1017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 16:1</span></span>

Mourn - And pray for his restitution, which the following words imply he
did. Oil - Which was used in the inauguration of kings. But here it is
used in the designation of a king; for David was not actually made king
by it, but still remained a subject. And the reason of this anticipation
was the comfort of Samuel, and other good men, against their fears in
case of Saul's death, and the assurance of David's title, which
otherwise would have been doubtful. I have provided - This phrase is
very emphatical, and implies the difference between this and the former
king. Saul was a king of the people's providing, he was the product of
their sinful desires: but this is a king of my own providing, to fulfil
all my will, and to serve my glory.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 16:4</span></span>

Trembled - Because it was strange and unexpected to them, this being but
an obscure town, and remote from Samuel, and therefore they justly
thought there was some extraordinary reason for it. Peaceable - The
Hebrew phrase, comest thou in peace, is as much as to say (in our
phrase) is all well?

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 16:5</span></span>

He sanctified - It seems evident that there was something peculiar in
Jesse's invitation. For first, both he and his sons were invited,
whereas the others were only invited for their own persons. Secondly,
the different phrase here used, that he sanctified these, when he only
bade the other sanctify themselves; argues a singular care of Samuel in
their sanctification. Which makes it probable, that the rest were only
to join with them in the act of sacrificing; but these, and only these,
were invited to feast upon the remainders of the sacrifices.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 16:6</span></span>

Before him - That is, in this place where God is now present. For it is
observable, that not only the sacrifice is said to be offered, but even
the feast upon the remainders of it is said, to be eaten before the
Lord, [Deu 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#007), that is, before or
near his altar, where God was present in a special manner. This I take
to be the person I am sent to anoint: wherein yet be was mistaken, as
other prophets sometimes were, when they hastily spake their own
thoughts, before they had consulted God.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 16:10</span></span>

Seven - There are but seven named, [Ch1
2:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#013), because one of them was
either born of a concubine: or, died immediately after this time.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 16:11</span></span>

Keepeth sheep - And consequently is the most unfit of all my sons for
that high employment. Either therefore he did not understand David's
wisdom and valour, or he judged him unfit, by reason of his mean
education. And God so ordered it by his providence, that David's choice
might plainly appear to be God's work, and not Samuel's, or Jesse's.
David signifies beloved: a fit name for so eminent a type of the Beloved
Son. It is supposed, David was now about twenty years old. If so, his
troubles by Saul lasted near ten years: for he was thirty years old when
Saul died. Samuel having done this went to Ramah. He retired to die in
peace, since his eyes had seen the salvation, even the sceptre brought
into the tribe of Judah.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 16:13</span></span>

Anointed him - David's brethren saw David's unction, yet did not
understand, that he was anointed to the kingdom; but were only told by
Samuel, that he was anointed to some great service, which hereafter they
should know. Thus Jesse only, and David, understood the whole business,
and his brethren were able to attest to that act of Samuel's anointing
him, which, with other collateral evidences, was abundantly sufficient
to prove David's right to the kingdom, if need should be. The spirit,
&c, - That is, he was immediately endowed with extraordinary gifts of
God's Spirit, as strength, and courage, and wisdom, and other excellent
qualities which fitted him for, and put him upon noble attempts.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 16:14</span></span>

Departed - God took away that prudence, and courage, and alacrity, and
other gifts wherewith be had qualified him for his public employment.
From the Lord - That is, by God's permission, who delivered him up to be
buffeted of Satan. Troubled - Stirred up in him unruly and tormenting
passions; as envy, rage, fear, or despair. He grew fretful, and peevish,
and discontented, timorous and suspicious, frequently starting and
trembling.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 16:16</span></span>

Be well - And the success confirms their opinion. For although music
cannot directly have an influence upon an evil spirit to drive him away;
yet, because the devil, as it seems, had not possession of him, but only
made use of the passions of his mind, and humours of his body to molest
him: and because it is manifest, that music hath a mighty power to
qualify and sweeten these, and to make a man sedate and chearful; it is
not strange, if the devil had not that power over him when his mind was
more composed, which he had when it was disordered; as the devil had
less power over lunaticks in the decrease, than in the increase of the
moon: [Mat 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#015), [Mat
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#018). And seeing music prepared the
Lord's prophets for the entertainment of the good Spirit, as [Kg2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#015). Why might it not dispose Saul to
the resistance of the evil spirit? And why might not the chearing of his
heart, in some measure strengthen him against those temptations of the
devil, which were fed by his melancholy humour? And by this means, David
without any contrivance of him or his friends, is brought to court, soon
after he was anointed to the kingdom. Those whom God designs for any
service, his providence will concur with his grace, to prepare and
qualify them for it.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 16:18</span></span>

Prudent - Wonder not, that David was so suddenly advanced, from a poor
shepherd, to so great a reputation; for these were the effects of that
Spirit of the Lord which he received when he was anointed. The Lord, &c.
- That is, directs and prospers all his undertakings.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 16:20</span></span>

Sent him - This present, though in our times it would seem contemptible,
yet was very agreeable to the usage of those times, and to the condition
of Jesse, which was but mean in the world. And it seems to have been the
custom of those times, (as it is yet in the eastern countries) when they
made their appearance before princes, or great persons, to bring a
present.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 16:21</span></span>

Stood before him - That is, waited upon him. And he loved him greatly -
So there was something good in Saul still: he had not lost all, tho' he
had lost the kingdom. Armour - bearer - He had that place conferred upon
him, though we do not read that he ever exercised it; for it seems he
was gone back to his father upon some occasion not related; and had
abode with him some considerable time before the war described, 1Sa.
17:1-53, happened.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa1 16:23</span></span>

Departed - Namely, for a season. And the reason of this success, may be,
partly natural, and partly, supernatural, respecting David; whom God
designed by this means to bring into favour with the king, and so to
smooth the way for his advancement.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 17](sa1017)

</div>
