<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1007)  [Next](sa1009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 8:1</span></span>

Old - And so unfit for his former travels and labours. He is not
supposed to have been now above sixty years of age. But he had spent his
strength and spirits in the fatigue of public business: and now if he
thinks to shake himself as at other times, he finds he is mistaken: age
has cut his hair. They that are in the prime of their years, ought to be
busy in doing the work of life: for as they go into years, they will
find themselves less disposed to it, and less capable of it. Judges -
Not supreme judges, for such there was to be but one, and that of God's
chusing; and Samuel still kept that office in his own hands, [Sa1
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#015), but his deputies, to go about
and determine matters, but with reservation of a right of appeals to
himself. He had doubtless instructed them in a singular manner, and
fitted them for the highest employments; and he hoped that the example
he had sent them, and the authority he still had over them, would oblige
them to diligence and faithfulness in their trust.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 8:2</span></span>

Beer - sheba - In the southern border of the land of Canaan, which were
very remote from his house at Ramah; where, and in the neighbouring
places Samuel himself still executing the office of judge.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 8:3</span></span>

Took bribes - Opportunity and temptation discovered that corruption in
them which 'till now was hid from their father. It has often been the
grief of holy men, that their children did not tread in their steps. So
far from it, that the sons of eminently good men, have been often
eminently wicked.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 8:5</span></span>

A king - Their desires exceed their reasons, which extended no farther
than to the removal of Samuel's sons from their places, and the
procuring some other just: and prudent assistance to Samuel's age. Nor
was the grant of their desire a remedy for their disease, but rather an
aggravation of it. For the sons of their king were likely to he as
corrupt as Samuel's sons and, if they were, would not be so easily
removed. Like other nations - That is, as most of the nations about us
have. But there was not the like reason; because God had separated them
from all other nations, and cautioned them against the imitation of
their examples, and had taken them into his own immediate care and
government; which privilege other nations had not.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 8:6</span></span>

Displeased - Because God was hereby dishonoured by that distrust of him,
and that ambition, and itch after changes, which were the manifest
causes of this desire; and because of that great misery, which he
foresaw the people would hereby bring upon themselves. Prayed - For the
pardon of their sin, and direction and help from God in this great
affair.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 8:7</span></span>

Hearken - God grants their desire in anger, and for their punishment.
Rejected me - This injury and contumely, reflects chiefly upon me and my
government. Should not reign - By my immediate government, which was the
great honour, safety, and happiness of this people, if they had had
hearts to prize it.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 8:8</span></span>

So do they - Thou farest no worse than myself. This he speaks for
Samuel's comfort and vindication.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 8:9</span></span>

Ye protest - That, if it be possible, thou mayst yet prevent their sin
and misery. The manner - That is, of the kings which they desire like
the kings of other nations.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 8:11</span></span>

Will take - Injuriously and by violence.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 8:12</span></span>

Will appoint - Heb. To, or for himself; for his own fancy, or glory, and
not only when the necessities of the kingdom require it. And though this
might seem to he no incumbrance, but an honour to the persons so
advanced, yet even in them that honour was accompanied with great
dangers, and pernicious snares of many kinds, which those faint shadows
of glory could not recompense; and as to the public, their pomp and
power proved very burdensome to the people, whose lands and fruits were
taken from them, and bestowed upon these, for the support of their
state. Will set them - At his own pleasure, when possibly their own
fields required all their time and pains. He will press them for all
sorts of his work, and that upon his own terms.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 8:13</span></span>

Daughters - Which would be more grievous to their parents, and more
dangerous to themselves, because of the tenderness of that sex, and
their liableness to many injuries.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 8:14</span></span>

Your fields - By fraud or force, as Ahab did from Naboth. His servants -
He will not only take the fruits of your lands for his own use, but will
take away your possessions to give to his servants.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 8:15</span></span>

The tenth - Besides the several tenths which God hath reserved for his
service, he will, when he pleaseth, impose another tenth upon you.
Officers - Heb. To his eunuchs, which may imply a farther injury, that
he should against the command of God, make some of his people eunuchs;
and take those into his court and favour, which God would have cast out
of the congregation.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 8:16</span></span>

Will take - By constraint, and without sufficient recompense.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 8:17</span></span>

His servants - That is, he will use you like slaves, and deprive you of
that liberty which now you enjoy.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 8:18</span></span>

Cry out - Ye shall bitterly mourn for the sad effects of this inordinate
desire of a king. Will not hear - Because you will not hear, nor obey
his counsel in this day.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 8:20</span></span>

Be like - What stupidity! It was their happiness that they were unlike
all other nations, [Num 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#009); [Deu
33:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#028), as in other glorious
privileges, so especially in this, that the Lord was their immediate
king and lawgiver. But they will have a king to go out before them, and
to fight their battles. Could they desire a battle better fought for
them than the last was, by Samuel's prayers and God's thunders? Were
they fond to try the chance of war, at the same uncertainty that others
did? And what was the issue? Their first king was slain in battle: and
so was Joshua, one of the last and best.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 8:21</span></span>

Rehearsed - He repeated them privately between God and himself; for his
own vindication and comfort: and as a foundation for his prayers to God,
for direction and assistance.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 8:22</span></span>

Go - Betake yourselves to your several occasions, till you hear more
from me in this matter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 9](sa1009)

</div>
