<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1001)  [Next](sa1003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 2:1</span></span>

Prayed - That is, praised God; which is a part of prayer. Rejoiceth -
Or, leapeth for joy: for the words note not only inward joy, but also
the outward demonstrations of it. In the Lord - As the author of my joy,
that he hath heard my prayer, and accepted my son for his service. Horn
- My strength and glory (which are often signified by an horn,) are
advanced and manifested to my vindication, and the confusion of mine
enemies. Mouth enlarged - That is, opened wide to pour forth abundant
praises to God, and to give a full answer to all the reproaches of mine
adversaries. Enemies - So she manifests her prudence and modesty, in not
naming Peninnah, but only her enemies in the general. Salvation -
Because the matter of my joy is no trivial thing, but that strange and
glorious salvation or deliverance which thou hast given me from my
oppressing care and grief, and from the insolencies and reproaches of
mine enemies.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 2:2</span></span>

None holy - None so perfectly, unchangeably and constantly holy. None
beside - Not only none is so holy as thou art, but in truth there is
none holy besides thee; namely, entirely, or independently, but only by
participation from thee. Any rock - Thou only art a sure defence and
refuge to all that flee to thee.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 2:3</span></span>

Talk no more - Thou Peninnah, boast no more of thy numerous off -
spring, and speak no more insolently and scornfully of me. She speaks of
her in the plural number, because she would not expose her name to
censure. Of knowledge - He knoweth thy heart, and all that pride, and
envy, and contempt of me, which thy own conscience knows; and all thy
perverse carriage towards me. Actions - That is, he trieth all mens
thoughts and actions, (for the Hebrew word signifies both) as a just
judge, to give to every one according to their works.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 2:4</span></span>

Bows - The strength of which they boasted. Stumbled - Or, were weak, or
feeble, in body and spirit.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 2:5</span></span>

Hired themselves out for bread - It is the same thing which is expressed
both in divers metaphors in the foregoing, and following verses. Ceased
- That is, ceased to be hungry. Seven - That is, many, as seven is often
used. She speaks in the prophetick style, the past time, for the future;
for though she had actually born but one, yet she had a confident
persuasion that she should have more, which was grounded either upon
some particular assurance from God; or rather upon the prayer or
prediction of Eli. She - That is, Peninnah. Feeble - Either because she
was now past child - bearing: or, because divers of her children, which
were her strength and her glory, were dead, as the Hebrew doctors
relate.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 2:6</span></span>

Killeth - The same person whom he first killeth, or bringeth nigh unto
death, he afterwards raiseth to life. Me, who was almost consumed with
grief, he hath revived. The name of death both in sacred scripture, and
profane writers, is often given to great Calamities.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 2:8</span></span>

From the dunghill - From the most sordid place, and mean estate. Inherit
- Not only possess it themselves, but transmit it to their posterity.
Throne - That is, a glorious throne or kingdom. Pillars - The
foundations of the earth, which God created, and upholds, and wherewith
he sustains the earth, and all its inhabitants, as a house is supported
with pillars; and therefore it is not strange if he disposeth of persons
and things therein as he pleaseth.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 2:9</span></span>

Feet - That is, the steps or paths, their counsels and actions; he will
keep; that is, both uphold, that they may not fall into ruin; and direct
and preserve from wandering, and from those fatal errors that wicked men
daily run into. Silent - Shall be put to silence: they who used to open
their mouths wide against heaven, and against the saints, shall be so
confounded with the unexpected disappointment of all their hopes, and
with God's glorious appearance and operations for his people, that they
shall have their mouths quite stopped. Darkness - Both inward, in their
own minds, not knowing what to say or do; and outward, in a stat e of
deep distress. Prevail - Namely, against God, or against his saints, as
the wicked were confident they should do, because of their great power,
and wealth, and numbers.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 2:10</span></span>

Exalt - Increase, or advance the strength. Of his anointed - Of his
king. This may respect Christ, the singular anointed one of God, and the
special king of his people. In this sense also, the Lord shall judge the
ends of the earth: David's victories and dominions reached far. But God
will give to the Son of David, the uttermost parts of the earth for his
possession. And he will give strength unto his king, for the
accomplishing his great undertaking, and exalt the horn, of the power
and honour of his anointed, till he hath put all his enemies under his
feet.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 2:11</span></span>

Minster - In some way agreeable to his tender years, as in singing, or
playing upon instruments of musick, or lighting the lamps. Before Eli
the priest - That is, under the inspection, and by the direction of Eli.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 2:12</span></span>

Knew not - They did not honour, love, or serve God.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 2:13</span></span>

Boiling - As the Lord's part of the peace - offerings was burnt upon the
altar, so the priest's and offerer's parts were to be boiled.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 2:14</span></span>

Took - Not contented with the breast and shoulder which were allotted
them by God, they took also part of the offerer's share; besides which
they snatched their part before it was heaved and waved; contrary to
[Lev 7:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#034).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 2:15</span></span>

The fat - And the other parts to be burnt with it. So this was all
additional injury; for they took such parts as they best liked whilst it
was raw.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 2:17</span></span>

Abhorred - But we know the validity and efficacy of the sacraments does
not depend on the goodness of those that administer them. It was
therefore folly and sin in the people, to think the worse of God's
institutions. But it was the much greater sin of the priests, that gave
them occasion so to do.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 2:18</span></span>

Ministered - That is, performed his ministration carefully and
faithfully. Before the Lord - In God's tabernacle. Ephod - A garment
used in God's service, and allowed not only to the inferior priests and
Levites but also to eminent persons of the people, and therefore to
Samuel, who, though no Levite, was a Nazarite, from his birth.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 2:21</span></span>

Grew - Not only in age and stature; but especially in wisdom and
goodness. Before the Lord - Not only before men, who might he deceived,
but in the presence and judgment of the all - seeing God.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 2:22</span></span>

Very old - And therefore unfit either to manage his office himself, or
to make a diligent inspection into the carriage of his sons, which gave
them opportunity for their wickedness. To Israel - Whom they injured in
their offerings, and alienated from the service of God. The door - The
place where all the people both men and women waited when they came up
to the service of God, because the altar on which their sacrifices was
offered, was by the door.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa1 2:23</span></span>

He said, &c. - Eli's sin was not only that he reproved them too gently,
but that he contented himself with a verbal rebuke, and did not restrain
them, and inflict those punishments upon them which such high crimes
deserved by God's law, and which he as judge and high - priest ought to
have done, without respect of persons.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa1 2:25</span></span>

The judge - If only man be wronged, man can right it, and reconcile the
persons. Against the Lord - As you have done wilfully and
presumptuously. Who shall, &c. - The offence is of so high a nature,
that few or none will dare to intercede for him, but will leave him to
the just judgment of God. The words may be rendered, Who shall judge for
him? Who shall interpose as umpire, between God and him? Who shall
compound that difference? None can or dare do it, and therefore he must
be left to the dreadful, but righteous judgment of God. They had now
sinned away their day of grace. They had long hardened their hearts. And
God at length gave them up to a reprobate mind, and determined to
destroy them, [Ch2 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#016).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa1 2:27</span></span>

Man of God - That is, a prophet sent from God.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">sa1 2:29</span></span>

Kick ye - Using them irreverently, and profanely; both by abusing them
to your own luxury, and by causing the people to abhor them. He chargeth
Eli with his sons faults. Honourest thy sons - Permitting them to
dishonour and injure me, by taking my part to themselves; chusing rather
to offend me by thy connivance at their sin, than to displease them by
severe rebukes, and just punishments. Fat - To pamper yourselves. This
you did not out of necessity, but out of mere luxury. Chiefest - Not
contented with those parts which I had allotted you, you invaded those
choice parts which I reserved for myself.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">sa1 2:30</span></span>

I said - Where, or when did God say this? To Eli himself, or to his
father, when the priesthood was translated from Eleazar's to Ithamar's
family. Walk - That is, minister unto me as high - priest. Walking is
often put for discharging ones office; before me; may signify that he
was the high - priest, whose sole prerogative it was to minister before
God, or before the ark, in the most holy place. For ever - As long as
the Mosaical law and worship lasts. Far from me - To fulfil my promise,
which I hereby retract.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">sa1 2:31</span></span>

Arm - That is, I will take away thy strength, or all that in which thou
placest thy confidence, either, the ark, which is called God's strength,
[Psa 78:61](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#061), and was Eli's strength,
who therefore was not able to bear the very tidings of the loss of it.
Or, his priestly dignity or employment, whence he had all his honour and
substance. Or rather, his children, to whom the words following here,
and in the succeeding verses, seem to confine it. Father's house - That
is, thy children's children, and all thy family which was in great
measure accomplished, [Sa1 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#016), &c.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">sa1 2:32</span></span>

Shalt see, &c - The words may be rendered; thou shalt see, in thy own
person, the affliction, or calamity of my habitation; that is, either of
the land of Israel, wherein I dwell; or of the sanctuary, called the
habitation by way of eminency, whose greatest glory the ark was, [Sa1
4:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#021), and consequently, whose
greatest calamity the loss of the ark was; for, or instead of all that
good wherewith God would have blessed Israel, having raised up a young
prophet Samuel, and thereby given good grounds of hope that he intended
to bless Israel, if thou and thy sons had not hindered it by your sins.
So this clause of the threatning concerns Eli's person, as the following
concerns his posterity. And this best agrees with the most proper
signification of that phrase, Thou shalt see.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">sa1 2:33</span></span>

Of thine - That is, of thy posterity. Shalt grieve - Shall be so forlorn
and miserable, that if thou wast alive to see it, it would grieve thee
at the heart, and thou wouldst consume thine eyes with weeping for their
calamities. Increase - That is, thy children. Flower - About the
thirtieth year of their age, when they were to be admitted to the full
administration of their office.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">sa1 2:35</span></span>

Raise a priest - Of another line, as it necessarily implied by the total
removal of that office from Eli's line. The person designed is Zadok,
one eminent for his faithfulness to God, and to the king, who, when
Abiather, the last of Eli's line, was deposed by Solomon, was made high
- priest in his stead. Build, &c - That is, give him a numerous
posterity, and confirm that sure covenant of an everlasting priesthood
made to Phinehas, of Eleazar's line, [Num
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#013), and interrupted for a little
while by Eli, of the line of Ithamar, unto him and his children for
ever. Anointed - Before Jesus Christ, who is the main scope and design,
not only of the New, but of the Old Testament, which in all its types
and ceremonies represented him; and particularly, the high - priest was
an eminent type of Christ, and represented his person, and acted in his
name and stead, and did mediately, what John Baptist did immediately, go
before the face of the Lord Christ; and when Christ came, that office
and officer was to cease. The high - priest is seldom or never said to
walk or minister before the kings of Israel or Judah, but constantly
before the Lord, and consequently, before Christ, who, as he was God
blessed for ever, [Rom 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005), was
present with, and the builder and governor of the ancient church of
Israel, and therefore the high - priest is most properly said to walk
before him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 3](sa1003)

</div>
