<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2002)  [Next](sa2004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 3:1</span></span>

Long war - For five years longer: for it is probable, Isbosheth was made
king presently upon Saul's death; and the other tribes did not submit to
David before seven years were expired.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa2 3:3</span></span>

Geshur - A part of Syria, northward from the land of Israel. Her he
married, as it may seem, in policy, that he might have a powerful friend
and ally to assist him against Ishbosheth's party in the north, whilst
himself opposed him in the southern parts. But he paid dear for making
piety give place to policy, as the history of Absolom sheweth.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 3:5</span></span>

Eglah - This is added, either because she was of obscure parentage, and
was known by no other title but her relation to David: or, because this
was his first and most proper wife, best known by her other name of
Michal, who, though she had no child by David after she scoffed at him
for dancing before the ark, [Sa2 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#023),
yet might have one before that time. And she might be named the last,
because she was given away from David, and married to another man. Six
sons in seven years. Some have had as numerous an offspring, and with
much more honour and comfort, by one wife. And we know not that any of
the six were famous: but three were very infamous.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa2 3:6</span></span>

Strong - He used all his endeavours to support Saul's house: which is
mentioned, to shew the reason of his deep resentment of the following
aspersion.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa2 3:12</span></span>

Messengers - Who in his name might treat with David concerning his
reconciliation with him. Thus God over - rules the passions of wicked
men, to accomplish his own wise and holy purposes. And who then dare
contend with that God who makes even his enemies to do his work, and
destroy themselves? Whose, &c. - To whom doth this whole land belong,
but to thee? Is it not thine by Divine right?

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 3:14</span></span>

Ishbosheth - Whose consent was necessary, both to take her away from her
present husband, and to persuade her to return to David. Hereby also
David opened to him a door of hope for his reconciliation, lest being
desperate he should hinder Abner in his present design. My wife - Who,
though she was taken from me by force, and constrained to marry another,
yet is my rightful wife. David demands her, both for the affection he
still retained to her, and upon a political consideration that she might
strengthen his title to the kingdom.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa2 3:19</span></span>

Benjamin - To these he particularly applies himself, because they might
be thought most kind to Saul and his house, and most loath to let the
kingdom go out of their own tribe; and therefore it was necessary that
he should use all his art and power with them, to persuade them to a
compliance with his design; and besides, they were a valiant tribe, and
bordering upon Judah, and situate between them and the other tribes; and
therefore the winning of them, would be of mighty concernment to bring
in all the rest.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa2 3:22</span></span>

A troop - Of robbers, or Philistines, who taking advantage of the
discord between the houses of Saul and David, made inroads into Judah.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">sa2 3:29</span></span>

Let it, &c. - But would not a resolute punishment of the murderer
himself have become David better, than this passionate imprecation on
his posterity?

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">sa2 3:30</span></span>

Abishai - For though Joab only committed the murder, yet Abishai was
guilty of it, because it was done with his consent, and counsel, and
approbation. In battle - Which he did for his own necessary defence; and
therefore it was no justification of this treacherous murder.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">sa2 3:31</span></span>

Joab - Him he especially obliged to it, to bring him to repentance for
his sin, and to expose him to public shame. Followed - That is,
attending upon his corps, and paying him that respect which was due to
his quality. Though this was against the usage of kings, and might seem
below David's dignity; yet it was now expedient to vindicate himself
from all suspicion of concurrence in this action.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">sa2 3:33</span></span>

As a fool - That is, as a wicked man. Was he cut off by the hand of
justice for his crimes? Nothing less; but by Joab's malice and
treachery. It is a sad thing to die as a fool dieth, as they do that any
way shorten their own days: and indeed all they that make no provision
for another world.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">sa2 3:34</span></span>

Not bound - Thou didst not tamely yield up thyself to Joab, to be bound
hand and foot at his pleasure. Joab did not overcome thee in an equal
combat, nor durst he attempt thee in that way, as a general or soldier
of any worth would have done. Wicked men - By the hands of froward, or
perverse, or crooked men, by hypocrisy and perfidiousness, whereby the
vilest coward may kill the most valiant person.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">sa2 3:36</span></span>

Pleased them - They were satisfied concerning David's integrity.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:38](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">sa2 3:38</span></span>

Know ye not, &c. - But how little, how mean are they made by death, who
were the terror of the mighty in the land of the living.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">sa2 3:39</span></span>

Weak - In the infancy of my kingdom, not well settled in it. The
metaphor is taken from a young and tender child or plant. These men -
Joab and Abishai, the sons of thy sister Zeruiah. Too hard - That is,
too powerful. They have so great a command over all the soldiers, and so
great favour with the people, that I cannot punish them without apparent
hazard to my person and kingdom; especially, now when all the tribes,
except Judah, are in a state of opposition against me. But although this
might give some colour to the delay of their punishment, yet it was a
fault that he did not do it within some reasonable time, both because
this indulgence proceeded from a distrust of God's power and
faithfulness; as if God could not make good his promise to him, against
Joab and all his confederates; and because it was contrary to God's law,
which severally requires the punishment of willful murderers. It was
therefore carnal wicked policy, yea cruel pity that spared him. If the
law had had its course against Joab, it is probable the murder of
Ishbosheth, Ammon, and others, had been prevented. So truly was he in
these, and some other respects, a bloody man, which may be observed to
the glory of the Divine grace, in his forgiveness and conversion.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 4](sa2004)

</div>
