<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2.md)  
  [Previous](sa2005)  [Next](sa2007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#001.md)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 6:2</span></span>

On which, &c. - That is, by, or before which, they were to present their
prayers to God for counsel and succour upon all occasions. And this is
mentioned here as the reason why David put himself and his people to so
great trouble and charge, because it was to fetch up the choicest
treasure which they had.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa2 6:3</span></span>

They set, &c. - Being taught, and encouraged to do so, by the example of
the Philistines, who did so without any token of God's displeasure upon
them for so doing. But they did not sufficiently consider, that God
might wink at the Philistines, because they were ignorant of God's laws;
and yet be angry with them for the same thing, because they knew, or
might have known the law of God, which commanded the priests to bear it
upon their shoulders. But their present transports of joy of the happy
change of their affairs, and their greedy desire of having the ark of
God removed, made them inconsiderate. In Gibeah - Or, on the hill, as
[Sa1 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#001.md).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 6:5</span></span>

Played before the Lord - Public joy should always be as before the Lord,
with an eye to him, and terminating in him. Otherwise it is no better
than public madness, and the source of all manner of wickedness.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa2 6:7</span></span>

He died - This may seem very severe, considering his intention was
pious, and his transgression not great. But, besides that, men are
improper judges of the actions of God; and that God's judgments are
always just, though sometimes obscure: it is reasonable, God should make
some present examples of his high displeasure against sins, seemingly
small; partly, for the demonstration of his own exact and impartial
holiness; partly, for the establishment of discipline, and for the
greater terror and caution of mankind, who are very prone to have slight
thoughts of sin, and to give way to small sins, and thereby to be led on
to greater; all which is, or may be prevented by such instances of
severity: and consequently there is more of God's mercy, than of his
justice, in such actions, because the justice is confined to one
particular person, but the benefit of it common to mankind in that, and
all future ages.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 6:8</span></span>

Displeased - Or, grieved, both for the sin, and for God's heavy
judgment; whereby their hopes were dashed, and their joys interrupted.
Perez - uzzah - That is, the breach of Uzzah.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 6:10</span></span>

House of Obed - edom - Obed - edom knew what slaughter the ark had made
among the Philistines and the Bethshemites. He saw Uzzah struck dead;
yet invites it to his house, and opens his doors without fear, knowing
it was a savour of death, only to them that treated it ill. "O the
courage, says Bishop Hall, of an honest and faithful heart! Nothing can
make God otherwise than amiable to him: even his justice is lovely."

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 6:11</span></span>

The Lord blessed, &c. - The same hand that punished Uzzah's presumption,
rewarded Obed - edom's humble boldness. None ever had, or ever shall
have reason to say, that it is in vain to serve God. Piety is the best
friend to prosperity. His household too shared in the blessing. It is
good living in a family that entertains the ark; for all about it will
fare the better for it.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 6:14</span></span>

Danced - To express his thankfulness to God by his outward carriage,
according to the manner of those times. Linen ephod - The usual habit of
the priests and Levites, in their sacred ministrations yet sometimes
worn by others, as it was by the young child Samuel; and so David, who
laid by his royal robes, and put on this robe to declare, that although
he was king of Israel, yet he willingly owned himself to be the Lord's
minister and servant.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa2 6:16</span></span>

Despised - As one of a base and mean spirit, that knew not how to carry
himself with that majesty which became his place.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 6:17</span></span>

David had pitched - For Moses tabernacle was still at Gibeon, [Ch1
16:39](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#039.md), [Ch1
21:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#029.md); [Ch2
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#003.md), which David left there, because
he designed to build a temple at Jerusalem with all speed.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 6:18</span></span>

He blessed - That is, he heartily and solemnly prayed to God for his
blessing upon them: which he did both as a prophet, and as their king,
to whom by office it belongs, by all means, to seek his people's
welfare.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa2 6:20</span></span>

Bless his household - Ministers must not think, that their public
performances will excuse them from family worship: but when they have
blessed the public assembly, they are to return and bless their own
household. And none is too great to do this. It is the work of angels to
worship God; and therefore certainly can be no disparagement to the
greatest of men. Who uncovered - By stripping himself of his royal
robes, that he might put on a Levitical ephod.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa2 6:21</span></span>

Before the Lord - In his presence and service, which though contemptible
to thee, is, and ever shall be honourable in mine eyes. Who chose - Who
took away the honour from him and his, and transferred it unto me,
whereby he hath obliged me to love and serve him with all my might.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa2 6:22</span></span>

More vile than thus - The more we are vilified for well doing, the more
resolute therein we should be, binding our religion the closer to us,
for the endeavours of Satan's agents to shame us out of it. Be base - I
will always be ready to abase myself before God, and think nothing to
mean to stoop to for his honour. Be had in honour - So far will they be
from despising me on this account, that they will honour me the more.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa2 6:23</span></span>

Therefore - Because of her proud and petulant speech and carriage to
David, which God justly punished with barrenness. No child - After this
time.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 7](sa2007.md)

</div>
