<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2.md)  
  [Previous](sa2021)  [Next](kg1001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#001.md)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 23:1</span></span>

Last words - Not simply the last that he spoke, but the last which he
spake by the spirit of God, assisting and directing him in an
extraordinary manner. When we find death approaching, we should
endeavour both to honour God, and to profit others with our last words.
Let those who have had experience of God's goodness, and the
pleasantness of the ways of wisdom, when they come to finish their
course, leave a record of those experiences, and bear their testimony to
the truth of the promise. Raised - Advanced from an obscure estate, to
the kingdom. Whom, God singled out from all the families of Israel, and
anointed to be king. Psalmist - He who was eminent among the people of
God, for composing sweet and holy songs to the praise of God, and for
the use of his church in after ages: these seem not to be the words of
David, but of the sacred penman of this book.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 23:2</span></span>

His word - The following words, and consequently the other words and
Psalms composed and uttered by me upon the like solemn occasions, are
not to be looked upon as human inventions, but both the matter and the
words of them are suggested by God's spirit, the great teacher of the
church.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa2 23:3</span></span>

Rock - He who is the strength, and defence, and protector of his people;
which he manifests by directing kings and rulers so to manage their
power as may most conduce to their comfort and benefit. Ruleth - Here
are the two principal parts of a king's duty, answerable to the two
tables of God's law, justice towards men, and piety towards God, both
which he is to maintain and promote among his people.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa2 23:4</span></span>

Shall be - These words are a farther description of the king's duty,
which is not only to rule with justice and piety, but also with
sweetness, and gentleness, and condescension to the infirmities of his
people; to render his government as acceptable to them, as is the sun -
shine in a clear morning, or the tender grass which springs out of the
earth by the warm beams of the sun after the rain.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 23:5</span></span>

Altho' - Although God knows, that neither I, nor my children have lived
and ruled as we should have done, so justly, and in the fear of the
Lord; and therefore have not enjoyed that uninterrupted prosperity which
we might have enjoyed. Covenant - Notwithstanding all our transgressions
whereby we have broken covenant with God, yet God, to whom all my sins
were known, was graciously pleased to make a sure covenant, to continue
the kingdom to me, and to my seed for ever, [Sa2
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#016.md), until the coming of the Messiah
who is to be my son and successor, and whose kingdom shall have no end.
Ordered - Ordained in all points by God's eternal counsel; and disposed
by his wise and powerful providence which will over - rule all things,
even the sins of my house so far, that although he punished them for
their sins, yet he will not utterly root them out, nor break his
covenant made with me and mine. Sure - Or, preserved, by God's power and
faithfulness in the midst of all oppositions. For this - Or, in this is,
that is, it consists in, and depends upon this covenant. Salvation -
Both mine own eternal salvation, and the preservation of the kingdom to
me and mine. Tho' - Although God as yet hath not made my house or family
to grow; that is, to increase, or to flourish with worldly glory as I
expected; yet this is my comfort, that God will inviolably keep this
covenant. But this refers also to the covenant of grace made with all
believers. This is indeed an everlasting covenant, from everlasting, in
the contrivance of it, and to everlasting, in the continuance and the
consequence of it. It is ordered, well ordered in all things; admirably
well, to advance the glory of God and the honour of the mediator,
together with the holiness and happiness of believers. It is sure, and
therefore sure, because well - ordered: the promised mercies are sure,
on the performance of the conditions. It is all our salvation: nothing
but this will save us, and this is sufficient. Therefore it should be
all our desire. Let me have an interest in this covenant, and I have
enough, I desire no more.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa2 23:6</span></span>

But - Having in the foregoing verses described the nature, and stability
of that kingdom which God had by a sure covenant settled upon him and
his seed; and especially, upon the Messiah, who was to be one of his
posterity; he now describes the nature and miserable condition, of all
the enemies of this holy and blessed kingdom. As thorns - Which men do
not use to handle, but thrust them away. And so will God thrust away
from himself, and from his people, and kingdom, all those who shall
either secretly or openly set themselves against it.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa2 23:7</span></span>

Fenced - He must arm himself with some iron weapon, whereby he may cut
them down; or, with the staff of a spear, or some such thing, whereby he
may thrust them away from himself, that they do him no hurt. Burnt - Or,
if they do not cut them down or thrust them away they will burn and
consume them. The place - Or, in their place, where they grow or stand.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 23:8</span></span>

These - But this catalogue, though placed here, was taken long before,
as is manifest from hence, that Asahel and Uriah are named here. And
whereas there are some difference between this list, and that, 1Ch.
11:10-47, most of them are easily reconciled by these two
considerations; that nothing is more common than for one person to have
divers names. That as some of the worthies died, and others came in
their stead; this must needs cause some alteration in the latter
catalogue, 1Ch. 11:10-47, from this which was the former. Learn hence,
how much religion tends to inspire men with true courage. David both by
his writings and example greatly promoted piety among the grandees of
the kingdom. And when they became famous for piety, they became famous
for bravery. Adino - This was his proper name. Lift up - Which words are
fitly supplied out of [Ch1 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#011.md),
where they are expressed. One time - In one battle, which though it be
strange, yet cannot seem incredible, supposing him to be a person of
extraordinary strength and activity, and his enemies to be discouraged,
and fleeing away.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 23:9</span></span>

Gone away - That is, fled away, [Ch1
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#013.md), being dismayed at the approach
of their enemies.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 23:11</span></span>

Lentiles - Or barley, as it is [Ch1
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#013.md). For both might grow in the same
field, in divers parts of it. And this fact is ascribed to Eleazar, [Ch1
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#012.md), but it is implied, that he had
some partner or partners in it; for it is there said, [Ch1
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#014.md) they set themselves, &c. So
Eleazar might fight in that part where the barley was and Shammah where
the lentiles were.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa2 23:12</span></span>

Lord wrought - How great soever the bravery of the instruments is, the
praise of the achievement is to be given to God. These fought, but God
wrought the victory.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 23:15</span></span>

Said - Being hot and thirsty, he expresses how acceptable a draught of
that water would be to him; but was far from desiring, or expecting that
any of his men should hazard their lives to procure it.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa2 23:16</span></span>

Would not - Lest by gratifying himself upon such terms, he should seem
either to set too high a price upon the satisfaction of his appetite, or
too low a price upon the lives of his soldiers. Poured it - As a kind of
drink offering, and acknowledgment of God's goodness in preserving the
lives of his captains in so dangerous an enterprize; and to shew, that
he esteemed it as a sacred thing, which it was not fit for him to drink.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 23:17</span></span>

These three - Jointly: then two of them are mentioned severally.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa2 23:19</span></span>

Attained not - He fell short of them in strength and valour.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa2 23:21</span></span>

Pit - Where he put himself under a necessity, either of killing, or
being killed. Of snow - When lions are most fierce, both from the
sharpness of their appetite in cold seasons, and from want of
provisions.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa2 23:25</span></span>

Harodite - In [Ch1 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#027.md), Shammoth the
Harorite. Concerning which, and other changes of the names, which will
be observed, by comparing this catalogue with that, it will be
sufficient to suggest, that the same names of persons, or places, are
differently pronounced according to the different dialects of divers
places or ages. That one man had often two names. That David had more
worthies than those here mentioned; and as some of these were slain in
the former part of David's reign, as Asahel was; so others came up in
their stead; and some were added to this number, as appears from 1Ch.
11:10-47, where they are named, but not numbered, as they were here; and
where there is a greater number than is here expressed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 1](kg1001.md)

</div>
