<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol.md)  
  [Previous](sol002)  [Next](sol004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#001.md)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 3:1</span></span>

By night - When others compose themselves to sleep, my affections were
working towards him. I sought - I sought for Christ's gracious and
powerful presence. I sought - This repetition denotes her perseverance
and unweariedness in seeking him. Found him not - For he had withdrawn
the manifestations of his love from me, either because I had not sought
him diligently, or because I had abused his favour.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sol 3:2</span></span>

The city - The city of God, the church in which Christ resides.
Broadways - Not finding him in private prayer, and meditation, I sought
him in the places of public assemblies and ordinances. Found not - He
saw fit still to delay the discoveries of his grace.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sol 3:3</span></span>

The watch - men - The ministers of Christ, and rulers of the church. Go
about - To prevent disorders and dangers. Him - She does not name him,
because she thought it needless, as supposing a person of such
transcendent excellency could not be unknown to men in that capacity.
Their answer is not mentioned, either because they gave her no
satisfactory answer, or because by their silence she gathered that they
were unable to inform her; and being eager in the pursuit, she would not
lose time.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sol 3:4</span></span>

Found him - Christ met me, and manifested his love to me. Mother's house
- As the spouse here, signifies particular believers, so her mother is
the universal church, or the true Jerusalem, which hath its rise from
above, which is the mother of us all, [Gal
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026.md), in which Christ and believers
are united, and have sweet communion together in holy ordinances, into
which believers are said to bring Christ, by faith and prayer. Conceived
me - Christ is as it were the father that begets, and the church the
mother that conceives and brings forth believers.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sol 3:6</span></span>

Who - The persons speaking seem to be the daughters of Jerusalem, who
upon occasion of the bride's speech to them, make this reply. The person
spoken of is the spouse. Wilderness - Believers were to be called, not
only out of the holy land, which was as the garden of God, but also out
of the Gentile - world, which in prophetical writings is frequently
described under the notion of a wilderness. Pillars - Being conducted
out of the wilderness as by a pillar of smoak going before them, as the
Israelites were led through the wilderness to Canaan, by a pillar of
cloud and fire. Perfumed - The spouse is said to be thus perfumed, for
her excellent virtues and religious services which are pleasant and
acceptable to God, and for the merits and graces of Christ, which are a
sweet savour to God, wherewith she is enriched and beautified. Of
merchants - Which are fetched by the merchants from Arabia, or other
remote parts.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sol 3:7</span></span>

Behold - The bride - men continue their speech, and from the admiration
of the bride, proceed to the admiration of the bridegroom. Bed - The bed
seems to denote the church, which is comely through Christ's beauty, and
safe by his protection, in which Christ is glorified, and believers
enjoy sweet fellowship with him. Solomon's - Which is the bed, not of an
ordinary man, but of a great king, whom Solomon typifies, and who is
greater than Solomon. Threescore - Very many, the certain number being
put for an uncertain. He alludes to Solomon's guard, whereby he designs
all those creatures, whether angels, princes, ministers, or others,
whose ministry God uses for the protection of his church.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sol 3:8</span></span>

Every man - Is prepared and ready to fight, to prevent those dangers
which are frequent in the night season. The night may denote the whole
time of this life, which may well be called night in respect of that
ignorance and error wherewith it is attended, (as the future life is
compared to day) this life being the only time wherein such a guard is
necessary.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sol 3:9</span></span>

A chariot - In which the royal bridegroom and bride might ride together
in state. By this chariot he seems to understand the word of Christ
dispensed by his ministers, whereby Christ rides triumphantly in the
world, and believers are carried into heavenly glory. Of Lebanon - Of
cedars, which wood being incorruptible, doth fitly signify the word of
the gospel, which endureth forever, [Pe1
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#025.md).

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sol 3:10</span></span>

He made - There is no necessity that either this or the following
particulars should be distinctly applied to several things in the
gospel; this in the general may suffice, that as all the particulars are
added to shew the perfection and beauty of the chariot, so they do imply
that Christ's word is every way amiable and perfect. The bottom - The
under and lower part. Whereby he may seem to understand the foundation
of the word and promises, which is either God's covenant, or Christ's
mediation, in whom all the promises are yea and amen. Covering - The
uppermost part of it. Midst - The inward parts. Paved - Covered and
adorned. Love - The love of Christ to the sons of men. For the daughters
- For their delight and comfort, who all bear a part in this marriage.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sol 3:11</span></span>

Go - The church bids particular believers go forth to see this sight.
Solomon - The Messiah, of whom Solomon was an illustrious type. The
crown - Which being applied to Solomon, may design that garland or crown
which was usually worn in nuptial solemnities: but being applied to
Christ, it denotes the honour that was given him, which though
principally done by his Father, yet is here ascribed to his mother, the
universal church, which in respect to his humanity may be called his
mother, because he was born in, and of her, and one of her members. In
the day - When the church is married to him, which is done when the
covenant is confirmed between them, or when persons are converted to
Christ, and more compleatly when they are received by Christ into his
immediate fellowship in the kingdom of glory. Gladness - When he
rejoiceth over his bride.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 4](sol004.md)

</div>
