<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](sol007)  [Next](isa001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#001)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 8:1</span></span>

O that - The church here expresses her desire of a stricter union, and
closer communion with Christ. Without - In the open streets.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sol 8:2</span></span>

Instruct me - Or, where she did instruct or educate me. I would - My
gifts and graces should all be employed to serve and glorify thee.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sol 8:5</span></span>

Who - This and the next clause are the words of the bridegroom, who
proposes the question, that he may give the answer following. Her
beloved - He speaks of himself in the third person, which is usual in
the Hebrew language. I raised - When thou wast dead in trespasses and in
the depth of misery. Under - Under my own shadow; for she had compared
him to an apple tree, and declared, that under the shadow of the tree
she had both delight and fruit, [Sol
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#003), which is the same thing with this
raising up. There - Under that tree, either the universal or the
primitive church, did conceive and bring thee forth.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sol 8:6</span></span>

Set me - These are undoubtedly the words of the bride. Let thy heart be
constantly set upon me. He seems to allude to the engraven tablets which
are frequently worn upon the breast, and to the signet on a man's arm or
hand, which they prized at a more than ordinary rate, and which are
continually in their sight. For love - My love to thee. Jealousy - Or,
zeal; my ardent love to thee. Cruel - Heb. hard, grievous and terrible,
and sometimes ready to overwhelm me; therefore have pity upon me, and do
not leave me. Fire - It burns and melts my heart like fire.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sol 8:7</span></span>

Many waters - My love to thee cannot be taken off, either by terrors and
afflictions, which are commonly signified in scripture by waters and
floods; or by temptations and allurements. Therefore, give me thyself,
without whom, and in comparison of whom, I despise all other persons and
things.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sol 8:8</span></span>

We - These are still the words of the bride. The present church, which
was that of the Jews, speaks of a future church, which was to consist of
the Gentiles, which she calls little, because she was the younger
sister, and then scarce had a being; and she calls her sister to
intimate that the Gentile - church should be admitted to the same
privileges with the Jews. She hath - No grown and full breasts, as
virgin have when they are ripe for marriage, [Eze
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#007). This signifies the present state
of the Gentiles, which as yet were not grown up, and wanted the milk or
food of life, as for itself, so also for its members. When spoken for -
In order to her marriage. How shall we supply that defect?

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sol 8:9</span></span>

If - This seems to be Christ's answer to the foregoing question of the
Jewish church. Christ engages himself to provide for her, as suits best
with her condition. If the Gentiles when they are converted shall be
like a wall, strong and firm in faith; We, my Father, and I, and the
Holy Ghost, as the principal builders, and my ministers as workers with,
and under us, will build upon her a palace of silver, will add more
strength and beauty to her, will enlarge and adorn her; and if she be as
a door, which is weaker than a wall; if she be weak in faith, yet we
will not therefore reject her, but we will inclose or (as many others
render the word) strengthen or fortify her with boards of cedar, which
are not only beautiful, but also strong and durable.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sol 8:10</span></span>

I am - These seem to be the words of the Jewish church. O Lord, by thy
grace I am what thou wouldst have my sister to be, and therefore humbly
hope, according to thy promise to her in that case, thou wilt build upon
me a palace of silver. Towers - Which stand out from and above the wall,
and are an ornament and defence to it. Then - When by his grace I was
made a wall, he was well - pleased with me, and with his own workmanship
in me.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sol 8:11</span></span>

Baal - hamon - A place not far from Jerusalem. A thousand - Whereby he
signifies both the vast extent of the vineyard which required so many
keepers, and its singular fertility.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sol 8:12</span></span>

My vineyard - My church, which is here opposed to Solomon's vineyard.
Possibly we may ascribe the first clause to Christ, and the latter to
the spouse: such interlocutions being familiar in this book. Mine - This
repetition is very emphatical, to shew that Christ had a more eminent
title to his vineyard, the church, than Solomon had to his vineyard,
because it was purchased not by his money, but by his blood. Before me -
Is under my own eye and care. Thou - These words are the church's return
to Christ, who is here called Solomon, as he was [Sol
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#009), [Sol
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#011), as elsewhere he is called David.
Dost thou, O Christ, keep thine own vineyard, which Solomon did not?
Then surely it is meet that thou shouldst receive as large a revenue
from thy vineyard, as he did from his. Two hundred - Though the chief
revenue is justly given to thee, yet thy ministers, who serve thee in
thy vineyard, are allowed by thee to receive some encouragement for
their service.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sol 8:13</span></span>

Thou - Christ speaks here to his spouse. The gardens - Not in the
wilderness of the world, but in the church, the garden of God. He saith,
gardens, because of the many particular congregations, into which the
church is divided. Companions - The friends of the bride and bridegroom.
Hearken - Diligently observe all thy words towards me. Cause me - When I
am gone from thee, let me hear thy prayers, and praises, and the
preaching of my gospel in the world.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sol 8:14</span></span>

Make haste - Seeing we must part for a time, make haste, O my beloved
bridegroom, and speedily finish the work which thou hast to do in the
world, that so thou mayest take me to thyself, that I may live in thine
everlasting embraces.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 1](isa001)

</div>
