<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](ecc012)  [Next](sol002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 1:1</span></span>

The song - The most excellent of all songs. And so this might well be
called, whether you consider the author of it, who was a great prince,
and the wisest of all mortal men; or the subject of it, which is not
Solomon, but a greater than Solomon, even Christ, and his marriage with
the church; or the matter of it, which is most lofty, containing in it
the noblest of all the mysteries contained either in the Old or the New
Testament; most pious and pathetical, breathing forth the hottest flames
of love between Christ and his people, most sweet and comfortable, and
useful to all that read it with serious and Christian eyes.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sol 1:2</span></span>

Let him - The beginning is abrupt; but is suitable to, and usual in
writing of this nature, wherein things are not related in an historical
and exquisite order, but that which was first done is brought in, as it
were accidentally, after many other passages: as we see in Homer, and
Virgil, and others. These are the words of the spouse, wherein she
breathes forth her passionate love to the bridegroom, whom she does not
name; because it was needless, as being so well known to the persons, to
whom she speaks, and being the only person who was continually in her
thoughts. By kisses, the usual tokens of love and good - will, she means
the communications of his love and favour, his graces and comforts
breathed into her from the Spirit of Christ. Thy love - This sudden
change of the person is frequent, in pathetic discourses. First she
speaks of him as absent, but speedily grows into more acquaintance with
him, and by ardent desire and faith, embraces him as present. Wine -
Than the most delicious meat or drink, or than all sensible delights,
one kind being put for all.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sol 1:3</span></span>

Ointments - Because of those excellent gifts and graces of God's Spirit
wherewith thou art replenished. Thy name - Thy report, the very mention
of thee, and all those things by which thou makest thyself known to men,
thy word, particularly thine offers of pardon and salvation to sinners;
and all thy works, especially that great work of redemption is most
acceptable, and refreshing. The virgins - called the companions of the
bride, [Psa 45:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#014), particular
believers, who are called virgins, [Co2
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002); [Rev
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#004), who have their senses exercised
to perceive this sweetness and fulness of Christ.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sol 1:4</span></span>

Draw me - By thy grace and holy spirit. We - Both I, thy spouse, and the
virgins, my companions. And this change of numbers teaches us that the
spouse is one great body, consisting of many members. Run - Will follow
thee readily, chearfully, and swiftly. The king - Christ, the king of
his church, hath answered my prayer. Chambers - Where I may freely
converse with him, and enjoy him. He hath taken me into intimate
communion with himself. Remember - This shall be the matter of our
thoughts and discourses.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sol 1:5</span></span>

Black - I confess, as to myself, I am contemptible and deformed. She
alludes to the complexion of Pharaoh's daughter. Comely - Yet I am
glorious within, and comely through the beauty which my husband hath put
upon me, by his graces conferred upon me, in justification and
sanctification. Daughters - By which she understands particular
believers, whose mother, Jerusalem is called, [Gal
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026). The tents - Of the wild
Arabians, the posterity of Kedar, [Gen
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#013), who dwelt in tents, and were
black and uncomely. The curtains - As the hangings wherewith Solomon's
house was furnished, which none can doubt were most beautiful and
glorious. So these two last clauses answer to the two first, and that in
the same order in which they lie.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sol 1:6</span></span>

Look not - With wonder and disdain. Mother's children - False brethren,
who pretend that the church is their mother, when their actions
demonstrate, that God, the husband of the church, is not their father;
hypocritial professors, who are, and ever were, the keenest enemies;
false teachers, and their followers, who by their corrupt doctrines, and
divisions, and contentions, bring great mischief to the church. Made me
- Having prevailed against me, they used me like a slave, putting me
upon the most troublesome services, such as the keeping of the vineyards
was esteemed, [Kg2 25:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#012); [Isa
61:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#005); [Mat
20:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#001). Not kept - They gave me such a
full employment in the drudging work about their vineyards, that they
left me no time to mind my own; they hindered me from doing my own duty,
and from minding my own concerns. And therefore it is no wonder if I be
uncomely and scorched by the sun.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sol 1:7</span></span>

Tell me - Notwithstanding all these discouragements and afflictions
which I suffer for thy sake, and for my love to thee. Being reproached
and persecuted by others, I flee to thee, O my only refuge and joy.
Feedest - Thy flock, discover to me which is thy true church, and which
are those assemblies and people where thou art present. This is the
request of particular believers. At noon - In the heat of the day, when
the shepherds in those hot countries used to lead their flocks into
shady places. Whereby he means the time of persecution, when it is hard
to discover the true church, because she is deformed by it, and because
she is obscured and driven into the wilderness. That turneth - Or, a
wanderer, or vagabond; like a neglected and forlorn creature exposed
both to censure and danger. The flocks - The assemblies of corrupt
teachers and worshippers. These he calls Christ's companions because
they profess the name of Christ, and their conjunction with him in God's
worship.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sol 1:8</span></span>

If - This is Christ's answer. Go - Observe and follow the paths which my
sheep have trodden before thee, my faithful servants, Abraham, and
others. For the church in all ages is one and the same, and there is but
one way for the substance, in which all the saints from the beginning of
the world walk, Christ being the same yesterday, and to day, and
forever. Feed - Take care for the feeding of all, and especially young
and weak Christians. Beside - Under the conduct, and according to the
instruction of my faithful shepherds, chiefly those who have gone before
thee, the prophets and apostles, and in subordination to them, and to
their writings, and to others whom I shall raise from time to time to
feed my people.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sol 1:9</span></span>

Compared thee - For strength and courage, to overcome all thine enemies.
For horses are famous for that property, and the strength of the battle
was then thought to consist much in horses, and chariots, especially in
a company or multitude of them. And the church in this book is
represented not only as fair and beautiful, but also as terrible to her
enemies.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sol 1:10</span></span>

Jewels - Which being fastened to the heads of brides, used to hang down
upon their cheeks, in those times. He mentions the cheeks, as the chief
seat of beauty. Chains - Whereby, as well as by the rows of jewels: he
may seem to design all those persons and things wherewith the church is
made beautiful in the eyes of God, and of men, such as excellent
ministers, and saints, righteous laws, holy ordinances, and the gifts
and graces of God's spirit.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sol 1:11</span></span>

We - I and my father. Will make - Beautiful and honourable ornaments.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sol 1:12</span></span>

The king - My royal husband. Sitteth - With me in his ordinances.
Spikenard - The graces of his spirit conferred upon me, here compared to
those sweet ointments, which the master of the feast caused to be poured
out upon the heads of the guests, [Luk
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#038), in which ointments, spikenard
was a chief ingredient. Sendeth - This denotes the exercise and
manifestation of her graces, which is a sweet smelling savour in the
nostrils of her husband, and of her companies.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sol 1:13</span></span>

Myrrh - Myrrh, was ever reckoned among the best perfumes. Shall lie -
This phrase may denote the churches intimate union with, and hearty
affection to Christ.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sol 1:14</span></span>

Camphire - We are not concerned to know exactly what this was; it being
confessed, that it was some grateful plant, and that it sets forth that
great delight which the church hath in the enjoyment of Christ. Engedi -
A pleasant and well - watered place in the tribe of Judah, where there
were many pleasant plants.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sol 1:15</span></span>

Behold - This is the speech of Christ. The words are doubled to manifest
his fervent affection for her. Doves eyes - Which are mild and harmless,
chaste and faithful. And by the eyes he seems to design both her outward
behaviour, and the inward disposition of her mind.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sol 1:16</span></span>

Behold - The church here again speaks, and retorts Christ's words; thou,
and thou only art fair indeed. Pleasant - As thou art beautiful in
thyself, so thou art amiable and pleasant in thy condescention to me.
Bed - This seems to denote the place where the church enjoys sweet
fellowship with Christ, by his spirit accompanying his ordinances. Green
- Is pleasant, as that colour to the eye.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sol 1:17</span></span>

Cedar - Not only strong, but also fragrant and delightful. Cypress -
Which also was strong and fragrant, and therefore suits well with cedar.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 2](sol002)

</div>
