<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol.md)  
  [Previous](sol004)  [Next](sol006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001.md)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 5:1</span></span>

I come - This is the bridegroom's answer. I have - I have eaten of my
pleasant fruits, I have taken notice of, and delight in the service and
obedience of my people. O friends - Believers are here encouraged with
freedom and chearfulness to eat and drink their spiritual food.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sol 5:2</span></span>

Asleep - I was dull, and sluggish. But - Yet in my very sleep my
thoughts were running upon my beloved. It is - Between sleeping and
waking, I heard his voice. Knocketh - By his word, and providence, and
spirit, at the door of my heart. Open - Inviting me to let him into my
soul. My love - This heap of kind compellations signifies Christ's
fervent affection to his people. With dew - While I wait without thy
door, which signifies his sufferings for the church's good. The drops -
The dew which falls in the night.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sol 5:3</span></span>

My coat - My day clothes, as persons use to do when they go to rest. How
- It is inconvenient and troublesome to do it at this time. Washed my
feet - Which the eastern people commonly did when they went to bed.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sol 5:4</span></span>

By the hole - He assayed to open the door. When his word would not
prevail, his spirit, which is called the finger of God, [Luk
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#020.md), wrought inwardly upon my
conscience. Were moved - With compassion for him and his sufferings, and
with affection to him.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sol 5:5</span></span>

I rose - I went forth to receive him. Dropped - With oil or ointment
made of myrrh, which dropped from the bridegroom's hand upon the door in
great abundance, when he put it into the hole of the door, and
consequently upon her hands and fingers when she touched the door to
open it. By which she signifies, that Christ, though he withdrew himself
from her, yet left a sweet savour behind him. The handles - Heb. with
myrrh passing or flowing upon the handles of the lock, which place the
bridegroom had touched when he attempted to open it.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sol 5:6</span></span>

With - drawn - Denied me his comfortable presence, as a just punishment
for my former neglect. Faded - Heb. went out of me: I fainted and was
ready to die away, for those endearing expressions related, [Sol
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002.md), which then I did not heed. I
sought - By diligent enquiry and importunate prayer.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sol 5:7</span></span>

Watch - men - The governors of the church, who, though by their place
they are obliged to comfort the faithful, do frequently discourage them.
Smote - With bitter calumnies and persecutions. The keepers - The same
with the watchmen, whose office it is to keep the gates and walls of the
city. My vine - Which was an ornament of her sex, and an ensign of her
relation to Christ. And so the taking of this veil away, signifies their
contemptuous usage of her, and endeavours to represent her, as one that
had no relation to Christ.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sol 5:8</span></span>

O daughters - The church having passed the watchmen, proceeds in the
pursuit of her beloved, and enquires of every particular believer whom
she meets concerning him. Tell him - That I am ready to faint for want
of his presence.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sol 5:9</span></span>

What is - Wherein doth he excel them? Believers might ask this, that
they might be more fully informed of it.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sol 5:10</span></span>

White - The white may denote his pure and spotless innocency, and the
ruddy colour his bloody passion.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sol 5:11</span></span>

As gold - It shines like gold, by reason of the crown of pure gold upon
his head. We need not aim at a distinct application of this and the
following particulars, unto some special excellency of Christ, because
such things are mere conjectures, and the only design of this
description is, to set forth the beauty of Christ under the notion of a
most amiable person, in whom there is no defect or blemish, from the
crown of his head to the sole of his feet.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sol 5:12</span></span>

Of doves - Lovely and pleasant, chaste and innocent. Rivers - Where they
delight to abide. Milk - Doves of a milk white colour.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sol 5:13</span></span>

Cheeks - His face or countenance, an eminent part whereof is the cheeks.
Spices - Of aromatic flowers which delight both the eye with a pleasant
prospect, and the smell with their fragrancy. Lillies - Beautiful and
pleasant.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sol 5:14</span></span>

Beryl - Beautiful, and precious, and richly adorned, as it were with
gold rings set with precious stones. Belly - Which seems to be here
used, for the whole body, reaching from the neck to the bottom of the
belly. Saphires - Of a pure and bright white colour, intermixt with blue
veins; for some saphires are of a bright blue colour.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sol 5:15</span></span>

Marble - White, and strait, and well shaped and strong. Gold - His feet
are compared to gold, for their singular brightness, for which they are
compared to fine - brass, [Rev 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#015.md).
Countenance - Heb. his aspect or appearance, his form or person. Lebanon
- In respect of its cedars, tall, and upright, and stately.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sol 5:16</span></span>

Altogether - Not to run out into more particulars.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 6](sol006.md)

</div>
