<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1.md)  
  [Previous](ti1005)  [Next](ti2001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#001.md)

[1 Timothy 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti1 6:1</span></span>

Let servants under the yoke - Of heathen masters. Account them worthy of
all honour - All the honour due from a servant to a master. Lest the
name of God and his doctrine be blasphemed - As it surely will, if they
do otherwise.

[1 Timothy 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ti1 6:2</span></span>

Let them not despise them - Pay them the less honour or obedience.
Because they are brethren - And in that respect on a level with them.
They that live in a religious community know the danger of this; and
that greater grace is requisite to bear with the faults of a brother,
than of an infidel, or man of the world. But rather do them service -
Serve them so much the more diligently. Because they are joint partakers
of the great benefit - Salvation. These things - Paul, the aged, gives
young Timotheus a charge to dwell upon practical holiness. Less
experienced teachers are apt to neglect the superstructure, whilst they
lay the foundation; but of so great importance did St. Paul see it to
enforce obedience to Christ, as well as to preach faith in his blood,
that, after strongly urging the life of faith on professors, he even
adds another charge for the strict observance of it.

[1 Timothy 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti1 6:3</span></span>

If any teach otherwise - Than strict practical holiness in all Its
branches. And consent not to sound words - Literally, healthful words;
words that have no taint of falsehood, or tendency to encourage sin. And
the doctrine which is after godliness - Exquisitely contrived to answer
all the ends, and secure every interest, of real piety.

[1 Timothy 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ti1 6:4</span></span>

He is puffed up - Which is the cause of his not consenting to the
doctrine which is after inward, practical religion. By this mark we may
know them. Knowing nothing - As he ought to know. Sick of questions -
Doatinglyy fond of dispute; an evil, but common, disease; especially
where practice is forgotten. Such, indeed, contend earnestly for
singular phrases, and favourite points of their own. Everything else,
however, like the preaching of Christ and his apostles, is all "law,"
and "bondage," and "carnal reasoning." Strifes of words - Merely verbal
controversies. Whereof cometh envy - Of the gifts and success of others.
Contention - For the pre - eminence. Such disputants seldom like the
prosperity of others, or to be less esteemed themselves. Evil surmisings
- It not being their way to think well of those that differ from
themselves in opinion.

[1 Timothy 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ti1 6:5</span></span>

Supposing that gain is godliness - Thinking the best religion is the
getting of money: a far more common case than is usually supposed.

[1 Timothy 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti1 6:6</span></span>

But godliness with content - The inseparable companion of true, vital
religion. Is great gain - Brings unspeakable profit in time, as well as
eternity.

[1 Timothy 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ti1 6:7</span></span>

Neither can we carry anything out - To what purpose, then, do we heap
together so many things? O, give me one thing, - a safe and ready
passage to my own country!

[1 Timothy 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti1 6:8</span></span>

Covering - That is, raiment and an house to cover us. This is all that a
Christian needs, and all that his religion allows him to desire.

[1 Timothy 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti1 6:9</span></span>

They that desire to be rich - To have more than these; for then they
would be so far rich; and the very desire banishes content, and exposes
them to ruin. Fall - plunge - A sad gradation! Into temptation -
Miserable food for the soul! And a snare - Or trap. Dreadful "covering!"
And into many foolish and hurtful desires - Which are sown and fed by
having more than we need. Then farewell all hope of content! What then
remains, but destruction for the body, and perdition for the soul?

[1 Timothy 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ti1 6:10</span></span>

Love of money - Commonly called "prudent care" of what a man has. Is the
root - The parent of all manner of evils. Which some coveting have erred
- Literally, missed the mark. They aimed not at faith, but at something
else. And pierced themselves with many sorrows - From a guilty
conscience, tormenting passions, desires contrary to reason, religion,
and one another. How cruel are worldly men to themselves!

[1 Timothy 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ti1 6:11</span></span>

But thou, O man of God - Whatever all the world else do. A man of God is
either a prophet, a messenger of God, or a man devoted to God; a man of
another world. Flee - As from a serpent, instead of coveting these
things. Follow after righteousness - The whole image of God; though
sometimes this word is used, not in the general, but in the particular,
acceptation, meaning only that single branch of it which is termed
justice. Faith - Which is also taken here in the general and full sense;
namely, a divine, supernatural sight of God, chiefly in respect of his
mercy in Christ. This faith is the foundation of righteousness, the
support of godliness, the root of every grace of the Spirit. Love - This
St. Paul intermixes with everything that is good: he, as it were,
penetrates whatever he treats of with love, the glorious spring of all
inward and outward holiness.

[1 Timothy 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ti1 6:12</span></span>

Fight the good fight of faith - Not about words. Lay hold on eternal
life - Just before thee. Thou hast confessed the good confession -
Perhaps at his baptism: so likewise, [Ti1
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#013.md); but with a remarkable variation
of the expression. Thou hast confessed the good confession before many
witnesses - To which they all assented. He witnessed the good
confession; but Pilate did not assent to it.

[1 Timothy 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ti1 6:13</span></span>

I charge thee before God, who quickeneth all things - Who hath quickened
thee, and will quicken thee at the great day.

[1 Timothy 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ti1 6:15</span></span>

Which - Appearing. In his own times - The power, the knowledge, and the
revelation of which, remain in his eternal mind.

[1 Timothy 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ti1 6:16</span></span>

Who only hath underived, independent immortality. Dwelling in light
unapproachable - To the highest angel. Whom no man hath seen, or can see
- With bodily eyes. Yet "we shall see him as he is."

[1 Timothy 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ti1 6:17</span></span>

What follows seems to be a kind of a postscript. Charge the rich in this
world - Rich in such beggarly riches as this world affords. Not to be
highminded - O who regards this! Not to think better of themselves for
their money, or anything it can purchase. Neither to trust in uncertain
riches - Which they may lose in an hour; either for happiness or
defence. But in the living God - All the rest is dead clay. Who giveth
us - As it were holding them out to us in his hand. All things - Which
we have. Richly - Freely, abundantly. To enjoy - As his gift, in him and
for him. When we use them thus, we do indeed enjoy all things. Where
else is there any notice taken of the rich, in all the apostolic
writings, save to denounce woes and vengeance upon them?

[1 Timothy 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ti1 6:18</span></span>

To do good - To make this their daily employ, that they may be rich -
May abound in all good works. Ready to distribute - Singly to particular
persons. Willing to communicate - To join in all public works of
charity.

[1 Timothy 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ti1 6:19</span></span>

Treasuring up for themselves a good foundation - Of an abundant reward,
by the free mercy of God. That they may lay hold on eternal life - This
cannot be done by alms - deeds; yet they "come up for a memorial before
God," [Act 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#004.md). And the lack even of
this may be the cause why God will withhold grace and salvation from us.

[1 Timothy 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ti1 6:20</span></span>

Keep that which is committed to thy trust - The charge I have given
thee, [Ti1 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#018.md). Avoid profane empty
babblings - How weary of controversy was this acute disputant! And
knowledge falsely so called - Most of the ancient heretics were great
pretenders to knowledge.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy Chapter 1](ti2001.md)

</div>
