<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac008)  [Next](zac010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001)

[Zechariah 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 9:1</span></span>

Hadrach - This is the name of a city in Celosyria, and here signifies
the country also. It was not far from Damascus. The rest thereof - This
burden shall lie long as well as heavy on Damascus. Towards the Lord -
For as all men's appeals in cases of wrong are to heaven, so they who
have been wronged by Syrian injustice, look to heaven for right.

[Zechariah 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zac 9:2</span></span>

Hamath - A principal town of Syria. Shall border - Shall be so near the
storm, that they shall not quite escape. Very wise - Each of them are
subtle, and think by craft to save themselves, but God derides their
wisdom.

[Zechariah 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zac 9:4</span></span>

Cast her out - Of her inheritance, as the word properly means.

[Zechariah 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 9:5</span></span>

Her expectation - Her hope that Tyre would break Alexander's power, or
hold out against it. Ashamed - Turned into shame and confusion. The king
- The government shall be overthrown. Shall not be inhabited - For many
years.

[Zechariah 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 9:6</span></span>

A bastard - Strangers, who have no right of inheritance.

[Zechariah 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 9:7</span></span>

Take away his blood - Though proud and warlike nations have delighted to
shed blood, and, as it were, to eat the blood of their enemies, yet God
will overthrow their power, and take the prey out of their mouth.
Abominations - Their abominable sacrifices which they offered and
feasted on. God will punish their idolatries, and by destroying the
cities of those abominations, will remove them for ever. The remnant -
That small select number who escape the sword, shall be the Lord's
peculiar ones. As a governor - For the honour which shall be given them.
As a Jebusite - The city is put for the people, and this one city and
people for all the other: all the remaining Philistines shall be as
Jebusites, servants to the people of God.

[Zechariah 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 9:8</span></span>

I will encamp - To defend it from all its enemies. Mine house - This
temple, but as it is an emblem of the church. The army - Of the Persian
and the Grecian army, whose march lay through Judea.

[Zechariah 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 9:9</span></span>

Thy king - The Messiah. He is just - The righteous one, who cometh to
fulfil all righteousness. Having salvation - To bestow on all that
believe in him.

[Zechariah 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 9:10</span></span>

I will cut off - When the Messiah comes and sets up his kingdom, he will
need no external force. Neither chariot, bow nor sword, brought
salvation to him, neither shall they be mentioned in the day of his
conquest. The heathen - The Heathens through him shall be reconciled
unto God, and one another, [Eph 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#017).
From the river - From Euphrates to the utmost end of Canaan, to the
Mediterranean sea; a type of all the world, which was in due time to be
the inheritance of Christ.

[Zechariah 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zac 9:11</span></span>

As for thee - Oh Jerusalem; these words are Christ's words to her. By
the blood - By my blood, in which thy covenant as confirmed; 'tis God's
covenant as made by him, 'tis Zion's covenant as made for her, 'tis
Christ's also as made in him. Sent forth - I have delivered the Jews out
of Babylon: compared to a pit in which no water was, wherein the Jews
must have perished, had not God visited them.

[Zechariah 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zac 9:12</span></span>

Turn ye - The prophet exhorts the Jews to hasten to Christ, who is the
salvation and high tower of the church. Prisoners of hope - Captives,
yet not without hope. Even to - day - In this day of lowest distress.
Double - Twice as much good as thou hast suffered evil.

[Zechariah 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">zac 9:13</span></span>

When I have bent Judah - In the day's when Judah shall be in my hand as
a strong bow, already bent. Ephraim - Ephraim, the remainder of the ten
tribes (which returned with Judah) shall be for a supply of warriors; as
the quiver filled is a supply of arrows to the bow - man. O Greece -
Against the Grecians or Ionians, who had oppressed the Jews, and bought
them for slaves, against whom the Jews took arms, under the conduct of
the Maccabees, to whom Christ made good much of this promise.

[Zechariah 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zac 9:14</span></span>

Shall be seen - Shall manifestly appear for them. His arrow - His
judgments, swift, irresistible, and sudden. As the lightning - Which
breaks forth with violence, and runs from east to west in a moment. The
Lord God - Their God, the God of Israel, shall give the alarm to them,
and sound the call to bring them together. Of the south - In which the
mightiest whirlwinds are raised; some think the prophet alludes to the
tempest at the delivery of the law.

[Zechariah 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">zac 9:15</span></span>

Devour - Destroy their enemies. With sling - stones - As David did
Goliath. Shall drink - In their festivals, when they offer sacrifices of
thanksgiving for their victories. Make a noise - Shout with shouts of
triumph, as men do whose hearts are glad with success, and cheared with
wine. Shall fill - With the blood of the sacrifices they offer.

[Zechariah 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">zac 9:16</span></span>

As the flock - As a shepherd saves his flock. As the stones of a crown -
Precious in my sight. As an ensign - Or trophy.

[Zechariah 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">zac 9:17</span></span>

His goodness - Infinite goodness is the fountain of all the good done
for this people. His beauty - How wonderful the beauty of Divine
Providence in Israel's deliverance and salvation? Corn - Plentiful
harvests shall make the young men chearful in sowing, reaping, and
eating the fruits thereof. New wine - There shall be such plenty of
wine, that all, young and old, shall be cheared with it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 10](zac010)

</div>
