<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bata03)  [Next](bata05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574IW/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Babylonian Talmud in Selection*, by Leo Auerbach, \[1944\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

# AGRICULTURE

# ZERAIM

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span> <span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

### The Portion of the Poor

### (<span class="smallcaps">Tractate Peah</span>)

THE following have no prescribed measure: *Peah*, <span
id="fr_1"></span>[\*](#fn_1.md) First-Fruits, Festival-Offerings, deeds of
kindness, and the study of the Law. And the following are the things the
fruit of which a man enjoys in this world, but the capital fund of which
remains for him in the world to come: The honoring of father and mother,
deeds of kindness, and the making of peace between one man and another,
but the study of the Law is greater than any of them.

One should not leave *Peah* less than one-sixth of the field. And
although there is no prescribed measure it should be fixed according to
the size of the field, the number of the poor, and the need.

One may leave *Peah* in the beginning or in the middle of the field.
Rabbi Simon says: As long as he leaves at the end the prescribed
measure. Rabbi Yehuda says:

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> If he leaves but
one stalk at the end, he has fulfilled his obligation as to Peah; but if
not, whatever he left at the beginning or at the end is regarded as
abandoned property.

A ruling has been established as regards *Peah:* whatever is used as
food, and has to be tended, and is raised from the soil, and is reaped
at one time, and is brought in for storage, requires the leaving of
*Peah;* and this includes grain and pulse.

Of the trees, sumach, carob, nut trees, the almond, vines, the
pomegranate, the olive, and date palm are all subject to *Peah*.

 

THE following serve as boundaries for a field, in all that concerns
*Peah:* A river, a pond, a private road, a public road, and a public
path. Also a private path that is used during the summer and during the
rainy-season, uncultivated soil, fallow-land, and a different variety of
crop. If one cuts the produce of one field for fodder, he makes thereby
a boundary, this is according to Rabbi Meir, but the Sages say: It does
not act as a boundary unless he ploughed it up.

A stream, both sides of which cannot be cut in one operation serves as a
boundary, according to Rabbi Yehuda. The hills that can be ploughed by a
mattock, though the oxen cannot go through them with their plough, is
considered one field, and is subject to only one *Peah*.

Everything serves as a boundary for a sown field, but for trees a fence
only serves as a boundary, but if the branches of the trees intertwine,
then the fence does not

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

constitute a boundary, and all is subject to only one *Peah*.

<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER I</span>

 

*PEAH* is given from what is attached to the soil. From vines and date
palms, the owner takes down some fruit and distributes it to the poor.
Rabbi Simon says: This applies also to nut trees.

If ninety-nine of the poor vote that *Peah* be distributed, and one says
that it should be left for them to help themselves, it is to be done
according to the one because the law is in agreement with him.

But it is not so with vines and date palms; if ninety-nine vote for
helping themselves and one says it should be distributed, he is
followed, because the law is in agreement with him.

If one took some of the *Peah* and threw it over the rest, none of it
belongs to him. If he fell upon it or spread his cloak over it, it must
be taken away from him. The same applies to Gleaning and to Forgotten
Sheaf.

*Peah* must not be cut with a sickle and must not be uprooted with a
hatchet, so that one will not hurt his neighbor.

If a heathen reaped his field and then became a proselyte, he is exempt
from Gleaning, from Forgotten Sheaf, and from *Peah*. Rabbi Yehuda says:
He is subject to the Forgotten Sheaf, because this is given at the time
of binding.

What constitutes Gleaning? Whatever falls down at the time of reaping.
If one cut a handful, or pulled up a handful, and a thorn pricked him
and it fell from his hands to the ground, it belongs to the owner. If it
fell on the inside of the hand or the inside of the sickle, it belongs

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

to the poor; if it fell on the outside of the hand or the back of the
sickle, it belongs to the owner. If it fell over the top of the hand or
the top of the sickle, Rabbi Ishmael says: It belongs to the poor. Rabbi
Akiba says: It belongs to the owner.

<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER II</span>

 

FROM a stack of sheaves beneath which no Gleaning has been taken,
everything that touches the ground belongs to the poor. If the wind
scattered the sheaves from the stack, one must estimate the amount of
gleanings that would be gathered from the field and give it to the poor.
Rabbi Simon ben Gamaliel says: One gives in proportion to the yield of
the field.

If a man sells a field the seller may take the gleanings, but the buyer
must not take any. One must not hire workers with the stipulation that
the worker's son shall gather the gleanings behind him. One who does not
allow the poor to gather, or allows one, and does not allow another; or
if he aids one of them, he is robbing the poor. Of such a one it was
said: (*Proverbs* xxii, 28) *Remove not the ancient landmark which thy
fathers have set*. (The *Mishna* reads the word "Olam" as "Olim" and
translates the second part of the verse: for those that come up.)

<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER VII</span>

 

A POOR man who goes from one place to another should be given not less
than a loaf worth one *Pandion*, and one *Selah's* worth of grain. If he
stays for the night, he should be given his needs for the night. On the
Sabbath he should be given three meals.

If a man has food for two meals, he should not take any food from the
public kitchen. If he has food enough

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

for fourteen meals, he should not take anything from the charity chest.
Money for the charity chest is to be collected by two, and should be
distributed by three.

If a man has two hundred *Zuz*, he must not take Gleanings,
Forgotten-Sheaf, *Peah*, and Poor-man's Tithe. But if he has two hundred
less one *Denar*, even if a thousand was given to him at one time, he
may still take everything that is allowed to a poor man. If his money is
pledged to a debtor, or for his wife's marriage contract, he may take of
the poor man's portions. A man must not be compelled to sell his house
or his tools.

If one has fifty *Zuz*, and he trades with them, he must not take of the
poor man's portions. He who does not need and takes will not die of old
age, until he has been compelled to seek the aid of his fellow man. But
one who needs and does not take any, will not die of old age, till he
shall be in a position to aid others. Of him it was said: (*Jeremiah*
xvii, 7) *Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord, and whose hope
the Lord is*. And this applies also to the judge who renders a true
verdict according to the evidence. And every person who is not lame,
blind or dumb, but pretends that he is; shall not die of old age before
he does become like one of them, for it was said: (*Proverbs* xi, 27)
*He that seeketh mischief, it shall come unto him*. And it was also
said: (*Deuteronomy* xvi, 20) *That which is altogether just shalt thou
follow*. A judge who accepts a bribe and perverts a decision shall not
die from old age until his eyes have become blinded, for it was said:
(*Exodus* xxiii, 8) *And thou shalt take no gift, for the gift blindeth
the wise, and perverteth the words of the righteous*.

<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER VIII</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[49:\*](bata04.htm#fr_1.md) Peah: corner of the
field, the portion of the crop that must be left by the owner to the
poor. See *Leviticus* xix, 9, xxiii, 22.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sabbath (Tractate Sabbath)](bata05.md)

</div>
