<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bata15)  [Next](bata17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574IW/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Babylonian Talmud in Selection*, by Leo Auerbach, \[1944\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

### Flogging

### (<span class="smallcaps">Tractate Macoth</span>)

WHAT is to be done with witnesses who testify falsely? If they say of a
priest: "We testify that such-and-such a one is the son of a divorcee,
or the son of a woman who performed *Halizah*, one cannot say that the
false witness should become the son of a divorcee, or the son of a woman
who performed *Halizah* instead of the priest, but he receives forty
lashes. If they testify that a man should be exiled, one can't say that
they should be exiled in his stead, but they receive forty lashes.

If witnesses said: "We testify that so-and-so owes his neighbor two
hundred *zuz*" and they were found to have testified falsely, they are
flogged and they must, also, pay the sum involved, because the ruling
that inflicts upon them the punishment of lashes is other than that
which governs their liability for payment. This is the opinion of Rabbi
Meir, but the Sages say: If a man is ordered to pay, he is not ordered
to be flogged too.

If they said: "We testify that so-and-so is liable to forty lashes," and
they are found to have testified falsely,

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

they receive forty lashes in accord with the verse: (*Exodus* xx, 16)
*Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor*, and as many
again because: (*Deuteronomy* xix, 19) *Then shall ye do unto him, as he
had thought to do*. This is according to Rabbi Meir, but the Sages say:
They receive only forty lashes.

Penalties of money are divided among the false witnesses, but the
penalty of lashes is not divided. How? If, for instance, they testified
that so-and-so owes two hundred zuz and it was found that they testified
falsely, they divide the fine among them; but if they testified that
so-and-so is liable to forty lashes, and it was found that they
testified falsely, each one receives forty lashes.

The decisions of the Sanhedrin are valid in the country and outside of
it. A Sanhedrin that condemns a man to death once in seven years is
considered a destructive body. Rabbi Eliezer ben Azariah said: Once in
seventy years. Rabbi Tarfon and Rabbi Akiba said: Had we been members of
the Sanhedrin, there never would be anyone condemned to death. Rabbi
Gamaliel said: They too would have increased bloodshed.

(*Mishna*)  
<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER I</span>

 

THE following are banished into exile: Whoever kills someone through an
error; for instance: if one was rolling a roof with a roller, and it
fell and killed a man, or he was lowering a barrel and it fell and
killed a man, or a man was on a ladder and fell on someone and killed
him—all these are banished into exile. But if he was pulling up the
roller and it fell on someone and killed him, or if one was drawing up a
barrel and the rope snapped

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

and caused the barrel to fall on someone and kill him, or if one was
going up a ladder and fell down on a man and killed him—All these are
not exiled. This is the rule: Whoever kills someone coming down is
banished into exile; but otherwise, he is not exiled.

If a man threw a stone into a public place and killed someone, he is
banished into exile. Rabbi Eliezer ben Jacob says: If after the stone
has left the man's hand someone put out his head and it struck him, the
man is not guilty. If a man threw a stone into his own yard and it
killed someone, if that person had the right of entry into the yard, the
man should be banished into exile, but if the person had no right there
the man is not exiled, for it is written: (*Deut*. xix, 5) *As when a
man goeth into the wood with his neighbor*. . . . The wood is a place
where the injured and the injurer have a right to enter. From this
follows that the yard, into which the other has no right of entry,
exempts the householder. Rabbi Abba Saul says: This applies to every
accidental killing in an optional act such as the hewing of wood, but it
excludes the father who hits his son, or the teacher who strikes his
pupil, or the clerk of the court who administers the lashes.

(*Mishna*)

 

IF HE throws a stone into a public place, is he a deliberate offender?
Rabbi Samuel ben Isaac said: If it happens while he is demolishing a
wall? Then he should take precautions. Suppose he was demolishing it at
night,—he should be doubly careful. If he were loading the debris on a
rubbish pile? What sort of a place was it? If it is a public
thoroughfare, then he is guilty of negligence; but if it is not a
thoroughfare, then it is mischance.

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rab Papa said:
This is a case of a rubbish pile which people are apt to pass at night,
but are not using it as a rule during the day time. It so happened that
someone came there during the day time. In this instance it is not a
case of negligence, because no one is expected there during the day
time. It is, however, a case of mischance, because it does occur that
people pass it sometimes.

(*Gemara*)

 

A FATHER may escape into exile for the death of his son, and a son may
escape into exile for the death of his father. All are banished into
exile for the death of an Israelite, and an Israelite goes into exile
for the death of all others with the exception of that of a resident
stranger. And a resident stranger is exiled only for the death of
another stranger. A blind person does not go into exile, so says Rabbi
Yahuda, but Rabbi Meir says: He does go. An enemy of the slain man does
not go into exile. Rabbi Yosi ben Yehuda says: An enemy should be put to
death, because he is a "potential deliberate murderer". Rabbi Simon
says: There is an enemy that may escape into exile, and there is an
enemy that may not escape. This is the rule: All those of whom it may be
said that they killed deliberately, may not escape into exile; but those
of whom it may be said that they killed through accident, they may
escape into exile.

Whither shall they be banished into exile? To the cities of refuge: To
three cities on the other side of the Jordan, and to three cities in
Canaan, as it was said: (*Numbers* xxxv, 14) *Ye shall give three cities
on this side of the Jordan, and three cities shall ye give in the land
of Canaan*.

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

Rabbi Yosi ben Yehuda said: At first they used to send to the cities of
refuge, those that killed deliberately and those that killed through an
accident. The court would then send and bring them from there. Whoever
was condemned to death was executed, if he were not condemned, he went
free; and whoever was sentenced to be banished was returned to the city
of refuge, for it was said: (*Numbers* xxxv, 25) *And the congregation
shall restore him to the city of his refuge*, etc. . . .

If a man-slayer has escaped to a city of refuge, and the citizens of the
town wish to do him honor, he must say to them: "I am a man-slayer." If
they answer: "Even so we wish to do honor unto you," he may accept it
from them, for it was said: (*Deuteronomy* xix, 4) *And this is the case
of the slayer*. They used to pay the salary of the Levites.

Rabbi Meir says: They need not pay them their salaries. He may resume
the office that he held before, this is according to Rabbi Meir, but
Rabbi Yehuda says: He does not resume his former office.

(*Mishna*)  
<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER II</span>

 

THE following receive lashes: He who has intercourse with his sister,
his father's sister, his mother's sister, his wife's sister, his
brother's wife, his father's brother's wife, or a menstruant. A High
Priest who takes a widow unto him, a priest who takes a divorcee or a
*Haluzah*, a layman who takes a bastard or a *Nathina*, or the daughter
of a layman who married a bastard or a *Nathina*. If a High Priest
married a woman that was a widow and a divorcee, he is liable on two
counts, but

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

if he married a woman who is a divorcee and a Haluzah, he is guilty only
on one count.

He is flogged who eats Holy Food while he is unclean, or he who enters
the Sanctuary while he is unclean. He who eats Fat or the Blood, the
Remains or the Refuse of Offerings, or that which became unclean, or who
slaughtered an Offering outside the Temple, or eats leavened food during
Passover, or he who eats or performs work on the Day of Atonement. . . .

(*Mishna*)

 

WE ARE taught here only of those transgressions that incur death at the
hand of the Lord, but not those that incur the death penalty by sentence
of the court. The Mishna here teaches according to the opinion of Rabbi
Akiba. For we have been taught that both those who are liable to death
at the hand of the Lord and those who are liable to the death penalty by
sentence of the court, incur also the penalty of forty lashes.—These are
the words of Rabbi Ishmael. Rabbi Akiba says that only those who are
liable to death at the hand of the Lord incur the penalty of forty
lashes, for if they should repent, the court of Heaven may grant them
forgiveness; while those who incur the death penalty by sentence of the
court are not subject to the penalty of "forty lashes", for if they
should repent, the earthly court cannot grant them forgiveness. Rabbi
Isaac says: Those guilty of incest have already been included in the
penalty of death at the hand of the Lord; what reason is there for
including here the case of the brother and his sister?—To show that this
offense is punishable by extirpation only, and not by forty lashes.

(*Gemara*)

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

IF A man shears his head bald, and rounds out the hair on the corners of
his head, or shaves the corners of his beard, or makes an incision into
his flesh because of the Dead, he is liable to forty lashes. . . .

(*Mishna*)

 

THE Rabbis taught: (*Leviticus* xix, 28) *Ye shall not make any cuttings
in your flesh*. One could believe that a man is liable to lashes if he
cut his flesh because his house has collapsed, or because his ship was
lost at sea. It is stated (*Ibid*.) *For a soul*,—This means that one
incurs punishment only if he cut his flesh because of the dead.

(*Gemara*)

 

IF A man writes on his skin "incision writing" he is liable to forty
lashes. If he wrote but did not tattoo it, or tattooed but did not
imprint it, he is not guilty. He is liable only if he writes and incises
it with ink or with eye-paint or anything that leaves a permanent mark.
Rabbi Simon ben Yehuda says in the name of Rabbi Simon: He is not guilty
unless he has written the name of a god. For it was said: (*Leviticus*
xix, 28) *Nor print any marks upon you: I am the Lord*.

How many lashes are inflicted on a transgressor?—Forty less one, for it
was said: (*Deuteronomy* xxv, 2, 3) *By number forty*. This means a
number close to forty. Rabbi Yehuda says: He gets the full forty; and
where does he receive the fortieth? Between his shoulders.

When they estimate how many lashes he can stand, it must be a number
that is [divisible](errata.htm#8) by three. If they estimated that he
can stand forty, and after he has received part of the flogging, they
say that he cannot stand any

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

more; he is exempt. If they estimated that he can stand eighteen, and
after he had received the eighteen [lashes](errata.htm#9) they say that
he can stand forty, he is exempt from the rest.

(*Mishna*)

 

WHENCE is this?—Had it been written: "*Forty in Number*" I would say it
actually means forty lashes in number, but now that it is written: "*by
number forty*", it means a number close to forty. Raba said: How foolish
are the people who stand up in reverence for the scroll of the *Torah*,
but not for the great men that interpreted the *Torah*. In the *Torah*
it is written forty lashes, but the Rabbis came, and by their
interpretation reduced it by one.

(*Gemara*)

 

HOW is a person to be flogged? His two hands are bound to a post on
either side of him, and the beadle of the synagogue takes hold of his
garments.—If they get torn let them be torn, if they get ripped, let
them be ripped, till his chest is bared. A stone is placed behind him on
which the beadle stands with a strap of calf's hide, it is folded twice
and then folded into four, and two straps are attached to it. The handle
of the strap is one handbreadth long and one handbreadth wide; and its
tip must reach his navel. He gives one-third of the lashes in front, and
two-thirds behind. He strikes him neither in a standing nor in a sitting
position, but only when he is stooped over, for it was said:
(*Deuteronomy* xxv, 2) *The judge shall cause him to lie down*. And the
one that strikes, strikes with this one hand with all his might. And the
reader recites: (*Deut*. xxviii, 58) *If thou wilt not observe to do . .
. Then the Lord will make* 

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

*thy plagues wonderful and the plagues of thy seed*, etc., and resumes
again from the beginning of the text: (*Deut*. xxix, 9) *Keep therefore
the words of the covenant* . . . and he concludes with (*Psalms*
lxxviii, 38) *But he, being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity*,
and resumes again from the beginning of the text. If he die under his
hand, the man that strikes him is not guilty. But if he gave him one
strike more than was ordered; he must escape into exile. If the person
being flogged befouls himself with feces or with urine, he is exempt
from the rest. Rabbi Yehuda says: A man if he befouls himself with
feces, a woman with urine.

(*Mishna*)

 

SAMUEL said: If he was tied down, and he managed to escape from the
court room, he is exempt. A question: If he befouled himself at the
first or the second stroke, he is exempt. If the strap broke at the
second stroke, he is exempt, but if at the first, he is not exempt. Why
is that? Why should this not be the same as in the case of his
escape—because there he actually escaped, but in the second instance he
really has not escaped.

(*Gemara*)

 

ALL those who are liable to death at the hand of the Lord. If they have
been flogged, they are exempt from the punishment of death at the hand
of the Lord: for it was said: (*Deuteronomy* xxv, 3) *Then thy brother
should seem vile unto thee*.—when he has been flogged, he is considered
thy brother. Thus. are the words of Rabbi Hanina ben Gamaliel. Further
Rabbi

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hanina ben
Gamaliel said: If one commits one sin, he forfeits his soul, how much
more, if he performs one precept, shall his soul be restored to him.

(*Mishna*)  
<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER III</span>

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Oaths (Tractate Shebuoth)](bata17)

</div>
