<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bata13)  [Next](bata15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574IW/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Babylonian Talmud in Selection*, by Leo Auerbach, \[1944\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

# LAW

# NEZIKIN

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span> <span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

### Civil Law

### (<span class="smallcaps">Tractate Baba Kamma</span>)

THERE are four primary causes of damage: The ox, the pit, the despoiler
and fire. The ox is not like the despoiler, and the despoiler is not
like the ox. Nor is either of these two, in which there is life, as the
fire in which there is no life; nor are these whose way is to go forth
and create damage, as the pit, whose way is not to go forth and create
damage. The only thing that they have in common is that they cause
damage, and that it is the owner's duty to watch out for them and
prevent their causing any damage. And if any of them has caused any
damage, the man responsible for them must pay for it with the best of
his estate.

(*Mishna*)

 

WHEN we speak of primary causes, then there must also be secondary
causes. Are these other classes of damage equal to the first or not? . .
.

Rab Papa said: Some of the subdivisions are equal to the primary causes
while others are not.

The Rabbis taught: There are three primary classes

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

of damage with regard to the ox. The Horn, the Tooth, and the Hoof.
Whence do we know of the Horn? The Rabbis taught: (*Exodus* xxi, 28) *If
it will gore*. There is no goring, but with a horn, as it was said: (1
*Kings* xxii, 11) *And Zedekaiah the son of Chenaanah made him horns of
iron: and he said, thus saith the Lord, With these shalt thou gore the
Syrians*, and it is further said: (*Deut*. xxxiii, 17) *His glory is
like the firstling of his bullock, and his horns are like the horns of
unicorns: With them he shall gore the people*, etc.

For what purposes is the "further" quotation?—Because one may argue that
the teaching of the Pentateuch cannot be deduced from the Prophets.
Therefore it is stated: *His glory is like*, etc. But is this then a
deduction? Is it not rather only an indication that by "goring" we are
to understand that it means goring with a horn?—Indeed one could believe
that the Almighty made the distinction between the harmless and the
dangerous only as regards the severed horn, while if the horn is still
attached to the animal it is always regarded as dangerous. Therefore it
is said: *His glory is like the firstling of his bullock*, etc.

What are the subdivisions of Horn?—Collision, Biting, Falling and
Kicking. Goring is surely considered a primary cause of damage, for it
is written: (*Exodus* xxi, 35) *If it will gore*. Why should this not
also apply to Collision, for it is written: (*Ibid*.) *If it will
collide*—Here by collision we understand also goring. Indeed we were
taught the passage begins with "collision" and ends with "goring"; this
is to enlighten us that goring and colliding mean the same thing. Why is
the word goring used with regard to humans, while with regard

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

to animals we use the term colliding?—Man who has the faculty, of
judgment is, as a rule, injured through goring, but an animal, which
possesses no such faculty, is, as a rule, injured through collision. . .
.

What are the divisions of Pit? . . . It may refer to a stone, or a
knife, or baggage that one left on a public thoroughfare, which has
caused injury to someone. According to Samuel and Rab, if they were
abandoned they would be in the same class as Pit, but if they were not
abandoned, then, according to Samuel, who maintains that all such
damages are included in the class of Pit, they would be classed as Pit,
while according to Rab, who maintains that all such damages should be
judged according to the rules which apply to the Ox, these would be put
in the same class as the Ox.

(*Gemara*)

 

FIVE are considered harmless, while five are considered dangerous.
Cattle are not considered dangerous whether to gore, to push, to bite,
to fall down, or to kick. The tooth of an animal is considered as a
danger, for an animal will consume everything that is fit for it to eat;
a leg is considered as a danger, for it will break or trample as it goes
along; and so is an ox that has become unmanageable, an ox that causes
damage to private property; and likewise a human being. The wolf, the
lion, the bear, the leopard, and the serpent are all considered as a
danger. Rabbi Eliezer says: if they have been tamed, they are not
considered a danger, but the serpent is always considered a danger. What
is the difference between the harmless and the dangerous? The harmless
pays half damages of its own body while the

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

dangerous pays full damages out of the best of the estate.

(*Mishna*)  
<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER I</span>

 

THE tooth of an animal is considered a danger in that it consumes
everything that is fit to eat. A beast is considered a danger in so far
as it will consume fruit and vegetables; but if it has consumed clothing
or utensils, the owner pays only half damages. This applies only if the
damage was done on the private property of the injured, but if it was
caused in a public place, the owner is exempt from payment. If the beast
derived a benefit from what it consumed, the owner pays to the extent of
the benefit that the animal derived from it. In what instance does the
owner pay for the benefit that the animal derived from it? If the animal
consumed some food from the stalls in the midst of the market, the owner
pays to the extent of the benefit that the animal derived from it; but
if it consumed something from the back alleys of the market; he pays to
the extent of the damage that it caused. If it consumed food from the
entrance of a shop, he pays only to the extent of the benefit, but if
from the inside of the shop, he must pay for the full damage that it
caused.

(*Mishna*)

 

THE Rabbis taught: The tooth is considered a danger in that it consumes
everything that is fit to eat. How? If a beast enters the property of
the injured, and eats food that was fit for it, and drinks liquids that
were fit for it; the owner pays full damages. And this applies, also, to
an animal that has entered the property of the injured and torn an
animal to pieces and eaten its flesh;

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

the owner pays full damages. This applies, also, to a cow that has
consumed barley, or an ass that has consumed beans, or a dog that has
licked up some oil, or a pig that has devoured a piece of meat; for
these, the owner pays full damages. Rab Papa said: Now also we say that
foods which ordinarily are not considered food fit for the particular
animal, but which under pressing circumstances they consume, must be
considered fit food for the animal. In case a cat has eaten dates, or an
ass has eaten fish, the owner must pay full damages.

It happened once that an ass consumed some bread and ruined the basket.
Rab Yehuda ordered payment of full damages for the bread, but only half
damages for the basket.—Why so? If it is usual for the ass to eat bread,
is it not also usual for it to ruin the basket? First it consumed the
bread, and then it ruined the basket. But can we say that bread is the
usual food of an ass? I shall point out a contradiction. If an animal
has consumed bread, meat, or a cooked dish, the payment is only for half
damages. Does this apply to a domestic animal?—No, this applies to a
wild animal. To a wild animal? Does not a wild animal usually eat
meat?—No, the meat was roasted. But if you wish, I can say that this
refers to a deer. If you wish, I can also say that it refers to a
domestic animal when it has consumed the bread that was lying on a
table.

A goat saw some turnips on top of a barrel. It climbed up and ate the
turnips, and in doing so broke the barrel. Rab ordered full damages to
be paid for the turnips and for the barrel. He explained that as it was
usual for a goat to eat turnips, it was also usual for it to climb up
for them.

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

RAB Hisda said to Rami ben Hama: Why weren't you at the academy last
night? Some very interesting matters were discussed there.—"What were
they?"—"Does a man who occupies another's premises, unknown to the
owner, have to pay rent or not?"—Under what circumstances? If the
premises were not for rent, and the man who occupied them was not in the
habit of renting places, we cannot say then that the owner sustained a
loss, or that the other derived a benefit. But if the premises were for
rent, and the other is in the practice of renting places, then the owner
sustained a loss and the other derived a benefit. Then there is the
case, where the premises are not for rent, but the man who occupied them
is in the habit of renting places; the owner may say you have derived a
benefit; while the other may answer; you have sustained no loss. Rami
ben Hama said to Rabbi Hisda: There is a *Mishna* that enlightens us on
this problem.—Which *Mishna?*—If you will render me a service I shall
tell you. Rabbi Hisda took his shawl and folded it carefully. Then Rami
ben Hama told him: "If the animal derived a benefit the owner must pay
damages to the extent of the benefit." Raba remarked: How little an
opponent recognizes one's errors, if one is lucky! This case is not at
all similar to the one in the *Mishna*, but Rab Hisda accepted it. In
that case one derives a benefit and the other sustains a loss, but here
one derives a benefit while the other sustains no loss. Rami ben Hama:
How did he arrive at this conclusion? He was of the opinion that if one
leaves produce in a public place, he probably gave up the title to it.

(*Gemara*)

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

A HUMAN being is considered a danger at all times, whether he causes
damage unwittingly or deliberately, whether awake or asleep. If a man
has blinded his neighbor's eye, or ruined any utensils, he must pay full
damages.

(*Mishna*)  
<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER II</span>

 

IF A man pours out water into a public place and someone is injured by
it, he is liable for damages. If a man hides thorns or glass, or has
made his fence of thorns, or if the fence has fallen into a public
street, and someone is injured by it, he is liable for damages.

If a man put his straw and his stubble into a public place in order to
make manure of it, and someone is injured by it, he is liable for the
damage; and whoever comes first may appropriate the straw. Rabbi
Gamaliel said: Whoever clutters up a public place, and thereby causes
damage to anyone, he is liable for it, and whoever comes first may
appropriate what was left there. If a man has turned up manure in a
public place, and someone was injured by it, he is liable for the
damage.

(*Mishna*)

 

MAY we infer that the *Mishna* is not in accord with the view of Rabbi
Yehuda? For we learned that Rabbi Yehuda said that during the season
when manure is prepared, a man may put out his dung into the public
street, so that men and beasts will tread upon it, for with this
understanding Joshua made the land available to the people.—But you may
say that Rabbi Yehuda concurs in this, for he too maintains that if
damage is caused, restitution must be made for the damage.

(*Gemara*)

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

IF A man walked carrying a barrel and another came carrying a beam, and
the barrel was broken by the beam, the man with the beam is not liable,
for both have the right of way. If the man with the beam came first, and
the man with the barrel came behind him, and the barrel was broken by
the beam, he is not liable. But if the man with the beam stopped
suddenly; he is liable, but if he warned the man with the barrel to
stop, he is not liable. If the man with the barrel came first, and the
man with the beam was behind him, and the barrel was broken by the beam;
the man with the beam is liable, but if the man with the barrel stopped,
he is not liable; but if the first man said to the beam carrier, Stop,
the man with the beam is liable. This applies to one who comes carrying
a candle, while another comes carrying flax.

If a man splits wood in private premises and injures someone in a public
thoroughfare, or if he is doing it in a public thoroughfare and injures
someone on private property, or if he is on private property and injures
someone on another private property, he is liable.

There are instances when a man may be liable for the acts of his ox, but
not liable for his own acts, and then there are instances when a man may
be liable for his own acts, but not for those of his ox. If his ox
caused indignity, he is not liable, but if the man himself caused
indignity, he is liable. If a man's ox blinded the eye of his slave, or
knocked out his tooth, he is not liable, but if he himself blinded the
eye of his slave or knocked out his tooth, he is liable. If an ox
injured his father or his mother, he is liable, but if he himself
injured his father or his mother, he is not liable. If an ox set fire to
a stack of corn on the Sabbath, he is liable; but if the

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

man himself set fire to a stack of corn on the Sabbath, he is not liable
for damages, for in those cases he is subject to capital punishment.

If one ox was running after another ox, and either was found to be
injured, and one owner says: Your ox injured my ox, and the other says:
No, it was injured by a stone, the burden of proof rests with the one
who wants to exact the payment.

(*Mishna*)

 

SAID Rabbi Hiya ben Abba. Here the colleagues of Symachus disagreed with
him, for he maintained that money the ownership of which could not be
ascertained should be equally divided between the two contestants. Said
Rabbi Abba ben Memel to Rabbi Hiya ben Abba: Did Symachus express the
same opinion in a case where both contestants claimed that they were
positive of the ownership of the money involved? Yes, he answered.
Symachus adhered to this opinion even where both contestants claimed to
be certain to whom the money ought to go. But how do you know that the
*Mishna* is treating here of a case where both contestants are positive
of the claim?—Because it states: One says your ox caused the injury,
while the other says, no.

(*Gemara*)  
<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER IV</span>

 

IF A potter brings his pots into the courtyard of a householder without
the permission of the owner, and the householder's beast breaks them,
the householder is not liable. If the beast is injured by the pots, the
potter is liable; but if he brings in the pots by permission, then the
householder is liable. If he brings his produce into the courtyard of
the householder without permission, and

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

the householder's cattle eat it, the householder is exempt from payment,
and if the cattle are harmed by it, the owner of the produce is liable.
But if he brings it in by permission, then the owner of the courtyard is
liable.

If a man brings his ox into the courtyard of a householder without
permission, and an ox belonging to the householder gores it, or his dog
bites it, the householder is exempt from paying for the damage. But if
it gores an ox belonging to the householder, then the man who brought in
the ox is liable. If the ox falls into the householder's well and
pollutes its water, the owner of the ox is liable. If the father or the
son of the householder is in the well, and is killed by the ox, the
owner must pay the ransom price. But if he brings in the ox with the
permission of the householder, then the owner of the courtyard is
liable. Rabbi says: The householder is never liable unless he agrees to
watch over the property that is brought in.

(*Mishna*)

 

THE Rabbis taught: If the householder says: Bring in your ox and watch
it, and if the ox causes damage, the owner of the ox would be liable.
But should the ox be injured, the owner of the yard would not be liable.
If, however, the householder said: Bring in your ox and I will watch it,
then if the ox should be injured the householder is liable, but should
the ox cause any damage, its owner would be exempt from paying for the
damage.

There is here a contradiction: At first you argue: If the owner said:
Bring in your ox and watch it, and if the ox should cause damage, the
owner would be liable, but should the ox be injured the householder
would not be liable. The reason for this is that he plainly says to

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

the owner of the ox: watch it. Thus the owner of the ox is liable, and
the householder is exempt. From this we may infer that if no mention was
made of watching the ox, the owner of the yard would be liable, and the
owner of the ox exempt. In other words by keeping silent the householder
indicates that he will watch the ox. Now the following text reads: If he
said: Bring in your ox and I will watch it, then should the ox be
injured, the householder would be liable, but should it cause damage the
owner of it would be exempt. The reason is that the householder plainly
said: "I will watch it." From this we infer, if the householder kept
silent, the owner of the ox would be liable and the householder would be
exempt. For in this case there is no indication that the householder
will watch the ox. This is in accord with Rabbi who said, that there is
no liability on the part of the householder unless he agreed to watch
over the ox. Is then the first clause according to the Rabbis and the
concluding one according to Rabbi? Rabbi Eleazar said: The contradiction
is quite obvious: whoever taught the first, did not teach the second.
Raba however explained: The entire text can be taken as in accord with
the Rabbis: since in the first part we learn: "watch it" in the second
part we learn: "I will watch it." Rab Papa explained: The whole text is
in accord with Rabbi, for he concurred here with the opinion of Rabbi
Tarfon who said: For the damages caused by "Horn" on private ground, the
owner of the ox is liable for full damages. It therefore indicates, that
where he plainly says: "watch it" he did not transfer to him any rights
to any part of the property, so that it comes under the rule of a Horn
causing damage on private property, and thus the

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

liability is for full damage. Where, however, he did not plainly say:
"watch it" he, it is assumed, granted him the right to some place on his
property, so that this would come under the ruling of the "Horn" causing
damage on property of joint ownership, and the liability, here, is of
payment for half damages.

(*Gemara*)

 

IF A man digs a pit on public property and an ox or an ass fall into it,
he is liable for the damage caused. . . .

If a pit belonged to two partners and one passed over it and did not
cover it, and the second partner did not cover it either, the second is
held liable. If the first one covered it, but the second found it open
and did not cover it, the second is liable. If he covered it properly,
and an ox or an ass fell into it, he is exempt, but if he did not cover
it properly, and an ox or an ass fell into it and was killed, he is
liable.

(*Mishna*)  
<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER V</span>

 

IF A man left his cattle in the sun, or he entrusted them to the care of
a deaf-mute, an imbecile, or a minor, and they came out and caused
damage, he is liable. If he entrusted his flock to a shepherd, the
shepherd takes the place of the owner. If the flock got into a garden
and derived a benefit from it, the owner of the flock pays for the
amount of benefit that it derived. If they went by it in the usual way
and caused damage, he pays for the damage. How does he pay for the
damage? They estimate how much a *seah's* space of ground in the field
was worth before, and how much it is worth now. Rabbi Simon says: If the
cattle ate ripe fruit, he must pay for

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

ripe fruit. If they damaged one seah the owner of the flock shall pay
one seah, if two, he shall pay two.

(*Mishna*)

 

RABBI Joshua said: There are four things for which a man who commits
them is exempt from the judgment of men, but is guilty before the
judgment of Heaven: And these are the following: He that knocks down a
fence in front of his neighbor's cattle; he that bends his neighbor's
stacks of corn towards a fire; he that hires false witnesses, and he
that knows of testimony favorable to his neighbor, and does not testify.

(*Gemara*)

 

IF A man caused a fire through a deaf-mute, an imbecile, or a minor, he
is not liable under the laws of man, but he is guilty under the laws of
Heaven, but if he caused a fire through a person of sound judgment, that
person is liable. If one brought the fire, and then another brought the
wood, the one who brought the wood is liable. If one brought the wood,
then another brought the fire, the one who brought the fire is liable.
If a third person came and fanned the flames, he is liable, but if the
wind fanned the flame, all are exempt.

(*Mishna*)

 

SAID Rabbi Simon ben Lakish in the name of Hezekiah: This interpretation
refers only to the man who handed to one of these a coal, and that one
fanned it; but if he handed one a blazing flame, he is liable. What is
the reason? It was his action that caused the fire. But Rabbi Yohanan
said: Even if he handed one a blazing

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

flame, he is not liable. What is the reason? The reason is that the
actions of the deaf-mute caused the fire. He is not liable unless he
supplied him with wood, shavings, and a light, for in that case it is a
certainty that it was his deed that caused the fire.

 

RABBI Ammi and Rabbi Assi were sitting before Rabbi Isaac the smith. One
asked him to give them a talk on some legal point while the other asked
for a homiletic exposition. When he wanted to discourse on something
homiletic, the first would not let him; and when he tried to talk about
some legal point, the other would not let him. He said to them: I will
tell you a parable. To what can this be likened? To a man who had two
wives, one young and one old; the young would pull out his white hair,
while the old would pull out his black hair, so that he finally became
entirely bald. Whereupon he said to them: I shall tell you something
that will be of interest to both of you: (*Exodus* xxii, 6) *If a fire
breaks out, and catch thorns*, (breaks out means "of itself") *he that
kindled the fire shall surely make restitution*. The Holy One, blessed
be He, said: I ought to make restitution for the fire that I had kindled
in Zion, for it was said: (*Lament*. iv, 11) *And hath kindled a fire in
Zion, and it hath devoured the foundations thereof*, and some day I
shall rebuild it with fire, for it was said: (*Zechariah* ii, 5) *For I,
saith the Lord, will be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be
the glory in the midst of her*. The legal viewpoint: The verse begins
with damages caused by a chattel and concludes with damage caused by a
person. This is to enlighten us that fire means also a human agency.

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

A man once kicked another man's money-box Into the river. The owner came
and said: I had such-and-such valuables in it. Rabbi Ashi sat and
pondered the problem. How should lie decide in a case of this kind?
Whereupon Rabina said to Rabbi Aha ben Raba, or as some say, it was
Rabbi Aha ben Raba who said it to Rabbi Ashi: Is not this the same as
what we learned in the Mishna? There we learned: "The Sages agree with
Rabbi Yehuda, that when a man sets fire to a house, he must make
restitution for everything that was in it, for it is customary for
people to keep their property in their homes." He replied: If he had
asked for money that he kept there, it would have come under the same
ruling. However, in this case, the man contends that he had jewels in
the box. How shall I decide? Do people keep jewels in their money boxes
or not?—This remained without decision.

(*Gemara*)  
<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER VI</span>

 

THERE are more cases of two-fold payments than payments of four-fold and
five-fold. For two-fold payments apply to things that are alive and to
those that have no life in them, while four-fold and five-fold payments
apply only to an ox or a sheep, for it was said: (*Exodus* xxii, 1) *If
a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it; he shall
restore five oxen for an ox and four sheep for a sheep*. If one steals
from a thief he does not have to make two-fold restitution, and if one
slaughters or sells what he steals from a thief, he does not have to
make four-fold or five-fold payments.

Small cattle must not be raised in the Land of Israel, but one may raise
them in Syria and in the deserts that

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

are in the Land of Israel. One must not breed fowls in Jerusalem because
of the Holy Places, but priests must not do so anywhere in the land,
because of uncleanliness. Pigs must not be bred anywhere. A man must not
raise a dog unless he keeps him on a chain. One must not place traps for
pigeons within thirty *ris* from an inhabited place.

(*Mishna*)

 

THE Rabbis taught: If a shepherd repents, he must not be compelled to
sell all at once, but he shall sell a few at a time. The same applies to
a proselyte who inherited dogs and pigs, he must not be compelled to
sell them all at once, but sell them a few at a time. The same is with a
man who has vowed to buy a house, or marry a wife in the Land of Israel,
he does not have to act upon his vow at once, but he may wait till he
finds what suits him. There was a case of a woman whose son was annoying
her. In [exasperation](errata.htm#5) she vowed: Whoever will offer to
marry me, I shall not refuse him. Men who were not suitable presented
themselves to her with an offer of marriage. The matter was laid before
the Sages. They declared: This woman, surely, did not intend to marry
anyone that was not suitable for her.

 

RAB, and Samuel, and Rabbi Assi once went to a circumcision and some say
it was a birthday celebration. Rab would not enter before Samuel, and
Samuel would not enter before Rabbi Assi, and Rabbi Assi would not enter
before Rab, and so they stood there arguing who should enter last. It
was finally decided that Samuel should wait, while Rab and Rabbi Assi
should go in. Rab yielded his precedence out of deference to Samuel to
whom he wanted to show honor, because of that sad

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

occasion, when he had once uttered a curse against him. In the meantime
a cat came by and bit the hand of a child. Whereupon Rab in his lecture
declared: "It is permitted to kill a cat, and one must not keep it. And
furthermore the laws of theft, or the return of a lost object to its
owner do not apply to it. . . ."

Rabbi Simon ben Eleazar said: One may keep village dogs, cats, monkeys,
and porcupines, because they help to keep the house clean. There is no
contradiction here. One refers to a black cat, while the other refers to
a white cat. But was not the biting in Rab's case caused by a black
cat?—Yes, it was a black cat, but it was the offspring of a white one.
Is not this the case of which Rabina raised a question? For Rabina
asked: What should be the ruling in case of a black cat that was an
offspring of a white one?—The question asked by Rabina was in reference
to a black cat that was the offspring of a white one which in turn was
an offspring of a black one. The case of which Rab spoke was that of a
black cat which was the offspring of a white one which in turn was an
offspring of another white cat.

 

THE Rabbis taught: Joshua the son of Nun made ten stipulations: The
cattle may graze in the woods; wood may be gathered in anybody's field,
grasses may also be gathered in any place, except in the field of
planted clover; shoots may be cut in all places, except the stump of the
olive; a spring that has opened for the first time may be used by all
the inhabitants of a town; anyone may fish in the sea of Tiberias,
provided he does not spread a sail, for this would hamper the boats; one
may relieve himself against any fence, even a fence that encloses

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

a field of saffron; anyone may use the paths in a private field, till
the time of the second rains; anyone is permitted to use the sides of
the road because of obstructions on the main road; if one is lost in a
vineyard, he may cut his way through when going up or down; and a corpse
that is found acquires the right to be buried on the spot.

Ezra has enacted ten acts: That the *Torah* be read on the Sabbath at
the afternoon services, that on Mondays and Thursdays the *Torah* should
also be read, that court be held on Mondays and Thursdays, that washing
should be done on Thursdays, that garlic should be eaten on Sabbath eve,
that housewives rise early and bake, that a woman should wear a *sinar*,
that a woman should comb her hair before she enters the public bath,
that peddlers of spices may travel through the towns; and he also
enacted that those who were polluted be required to cleanse themselves.

(*Gemara*)  
<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER VII</span>

 

IF A man injures his fellow he is liable to him for five things: for
damage, for pain, for medical treatment, for loss of time, and for
indignity. How, for damage?—If he blinded him or cut off his hand, or
broke his leg, the injured is looked upon as if he were a slave, that is
being sold in the market. How much was he worth before, and how much is
he worth now? How, for pain?—If he burned him with a spit or a nail,
even though it were only on his fingernails, where it does not cause a
wound; it is estimated how much money a man of equal standing would be
willing to take to suffer that much. How, for medical treatment? If he
struck him

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

he must pay for the medical treatment, if ulcers developed, if it is a
result of the inflicted wound, he is liable, but if not, he is exempt.
If it opened and was healed and then reopened again, he must pay for the
treatments, but if it was once healed completely, he does not become
liable again. Loss of time?—He is looked upon as if he were a watchman
of a field of cucumbers, for he has already been paid the value of his
hand or his leg. Indignity?—All depends on the standing of the man who
inflicted the indignity, and the person who suffered the indignity. If a
man inflicted indignity on a naked person, on a blind person, or on a
sleeping one, he is liable. But if the man was asleep while doing it, he
is exempt. If a man fell from a roof and thereby injured and inflicted
indignity upon someone, he is liable for the injury, but not for the
indignity. A man is not liable for indignity unless he inflicted it with
intention.

(*Mishna*)

 

HOW then? It is written: (*Exodus* xxi, 24) *Eye for an eye*. Does not
the All-Merciful actually mean the eye? Let this enter your mind. For we
learned: One would believe, that if one blinded a fellow's eye, the
offender's eye would be blinded, or if he cut off his arm, the
offender's arm would be cut off, or if he broke his leg, the offender's
leg would be broken. Therefore it was stated: (*Leviticus* xxiv, 17, 18)
*And he that killeth any man shall surely be put to death. And he that
killeth a beast shall make it good; beast for beast*. Just as for the
smiting of a beast a money payment is made, so also in case he smiteth a
man, money should be paid for the damage. But if you would wish to
contend otherwise:—why it was said: (*Numbers* xxxv, 31) *Moreover ye
shall* 

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

*take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer, which is guilty of
death*. This means that for the life of a murderer payment may not be
accepted, but for a limb that cannot grow [back](errata.htm#6), we may
accept payment.

(*Gemara*)

 

THE law, here, is more severe for man than for the ox. A man must pay
for injury, pain, medical treatment, loss of time, indignity and the
value of the unborn child, but in the case of an ox there is no payment
but only for damage caused, and there is also exemption for the value of
the unborn child.

If a man strikes his fellow, he must pay him a *selah*. Rabbi Yehuda
says, in the name of Rabbi Yosi the Galilean, that he pays him a
*maneh*. If he slaps his face, he pays two hundred *zuz;* if he slaps
his face with the back of his hand, he pays him four hundred *zuz*.

If he tore his ear, or pulled his hair, or he spit at him and the saliva
reached him, if he removed his clothing from him, if he uncovered a
woman's head in the market place: he pays four hundred *zuz*. This is
the general rule; it all depends upon the standing of the person
injured. Rabbi Akiba said: Even the poorest in Israel are looked upon as
free men who have lost their fortunes, for they are the children of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

It once happened that a man uncovered the head of a woman in the market
place. She came before Rabbi Akiba, who ordered the offender to pay her
four hundred *zuz*. The man asked for time in which to make the payment,
and Rabbi Akiba granted him time. The man then watched the woman until
he saw her standing at the entrance of her yard. Before her eyes he
broke a

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

jar containing an *isar* of oil. She uncovered her head, scooped up the
oil in her hand and put it to her head. He then brought witnesses to
this affair, and came before Rabbi Akiba and asked: To such a woman must
I pay four hundred *zuz?* Rabbi Akiba answered: You have made no point.
If a man should wound himself, though he has no right to do so, he is
exempt, but if another person wounds him, that other is liable.

Though a person pays for the injury, he is not forgiven, till he begs
forgiveness from the injured person.

If a man says: Blind my eye, or cut off my arm, or break my leg, the man
that does it is guilty. Even if the man said: I agree that you won't be
liable, the other is still guilty. If he says: Tear my garments, or
break my jar, the other man is liable; and if he said to him: I agree
that you won't be liable, he is still liable, whether he injured the
person or his property.

(*Mishna*)  
<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER VIII</span>

 

IF ONE steals wood and makes articles of it, or he steals wool and makes
garments of it, he pays for them according to their value at time of the
theft. If one stole a cow that was pregnant, and it gave birth, or a
sheep with wool, and he sheared it, he pays the value of a cow about to
give birth, or the value of a sheep ready to be sheared. If he stole a
cow which became pregnant in his possession and then gave birth, or a
sheep which grew its wool while in his possession, and then sheared it,
he pays according to the value at the time of the theft. This is the
rule: All robbers pay in accordance with the value of the property at
the time of the robbery.

(*Mishna*)

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

THE Rabbis taught: If robbers or usurers are willing to return property,
one does not accept it from them, and if he does, he does it against the
wishes of the Sages. Rabbi Yohanan said: This doctrine was inaugurated
at the time of Rabbi. Once a certain man wanted to repent and return
stolen property, whereupon his wife said to him: You fool! If you begin
to make restitution, even the girdle that you are wearing belongs to
another, so he stopped and did not repent. It was then inaugurated that
if robbers and usurers are ready to repent and return property, it is
not proper to accept it from them; and whoever accepts it, does so
against the wishes of the Sages.

Come and hear: Robbers and usurers, even if they have already collected
the [money](errata.htm#7), must make restitution.—What has a robber to
collect? They either robbed, or they did not rob—Rather read: Robbers,
that is to say usurers, even if they have already collected the money,
must make restitution. I will tell you, they must make restitution, but
one does not accept it from them. Then why must they make
restitution?—So as to fulfill their duty before Heaven.

Come and hear: For shepherds, tax collectors, and revenue contractors it
is very hard to repent but still they must make restitution to those
they know that they have robbed.

(*Gemara*)  
<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER IX</span>

 

IF A man stole things and fed them to his children, or left it to them
upon his death, they are exempt from making restitution. But if it is
mortgagable property, they must make restitution.

(*Mishna*)

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

RAB said: The law is that a document of indebtedness can be attested
even though the defendant is not present, or even if he is present and
proclaims aloud that it is a forgery. But if he pleads for time to bring
witnesses and disprove the document, he must be given the necessary
time. If he appears, well and good, but if he does not appear, then we
wait till Monday, and Thursday and another Monday. If he still does not
appear, we issue a warrant against him returnable in ninety days. For
the first thirty days we don't take possession of his property for we
take it that he is trying to borrow the money; for the next thirty days
we do not take his property—we think he might not have been able to
raise a loan and is now trying to sell the property, for the last thirty
days we still do not seize his property for we take it that the buyer is
now busy raising the purchase money. It is after he has not appeared all
this time that we issue an order of execution for the seizure of the
property. This procedure takes place only if he pleaded for time, but if
he said: "I will not appear", an order for the seizure of the property
is issued at once. An order of seizure can be issued only on real
estate, but not on movable property, because the creditor can take away
the movable property and dispose of it, and should the defendant later
appear with witnesses to prove the document faulty, he would find naught
which he could recover.

(*Gemara*)

 

ONE does not take change from the box of a tax-gatherer or the purse of
a tax collector, nor may one accept charity from them; but one may
accept it in their own homes or in the market place.

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

If tax-gatherers took a man's ass and gave him another ass, or if
robbers took his cloak and gave him another cloak, he may keep them,
because the original owner has given up all hope of recovery.

One must not buy from shepherds wool or milk or kids, nor fruits or wood
from gardeners, but in Judea one may buy woolen articles from women, and
in Galilee one may buy flax, and in Sharon one may buy calves. But if a
person sell any of these on condition that it be kept hidden, it is
forbidden to buy. Eggs and chickens may be bought anywhere.

(*Mishna*)

 

THE Rabbis taught: From shepherds one must not buy goats or kids or
fleece, nor shreds of wool; but one may buy from them sewn garments, as
these are surely their own. In the desert one may buy from them milk and
cheese, but not in inhabited places. It is further permissible to buy
from them four or five sheep, or four or five fleeces, but one must not
buy two sheep or two fleeces. Rabbi Yehuda says: Domestic animals one
may buy from them, but undomesticated one must not buy. This is the
rule: All things that a shepherd sells that would be noticed by his
master are permissible; but those that might not be noticed by his
master are forbidden.

One may buy fruit from the gardeners if they are offering it for sale
while seated before their baskets with their scales in front of them,
but under no circumstances should one buy if one is told to hide it. One
may also buy fruit from them in front of the garden, but not in back of
it.

(*Gemara*)  
<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER X</span>

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Law of Procedure (Tractate Sanhedrin)](bata15)

</div>
