<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bata09)  [Next](bata11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574IW/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Babylonian Talmud in Selection*, by Leo Auerbach, \[1944\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span> <span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

### The Marriage Contract

### (<span class="smallcaps">Tractate Kethuboth</span>)

A VIRGIN is to be married on the fourth day of the week, and a widow on
the fifth day. Because the court is in session in the towns twice a
week, on the second and on the fifth days of the week. So if a man
questions the virginity of his newly wedded wife, he may bring suit in
court the next morning.

The marriage settlement of a virgin is two hundred *zuz* and of a widow
one hundred *zuz*. A virgin who becomes a widow after betrothal, or a
divorcee or an *Haluzah*, her marriage settlement is two hundred *zuz*,
and if her virginity is questioned, may be taken to court.

An adult who had intercourse with a minor, or a minor who had
intercourse with an adult, or one whose hymen was broken by accident,
her settlement is two hundred *zuz*, according to Rabbi Meir. The sages
say: If it was due to an accident, her settlement is one hundred. A
virgin who becomes a widow after betrothal, a divorcee or an *Haluzah*,
her marriage settlement is one hundred *zuz*, and the question of her
virginity cannot be taken to court.

(*Mishna*)

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

SOMEONE came to Rabban Gamaliel and complained: I have found an "open
door". Said the Rabbi: You might have moved it aside. I will give you an
illustration: A man walked in the darkness of the night; he came upon a
door. If he happened to move it, he found it open; if he did not happen
to move it, it was locked.

Someone came to Rabban Gamaliel ben Rabbi and said: Master, I have had
intercourse with my newly wedded wife and found no blood. The wife said:
Master, I was a virgin. The Rabbi said: Bring me the sheet. When the
sheet was brought he took it and soaked it in water and washed it,
whereupon he found many drops of blood in the water. Then the Rabbi said
to the husband: Go home and be happy with thine lot.

Someone came to Rabban Gamaliel ben Rabbi and said: Master, I have had
intercourse with my newly wedded wife, and found no blood. The wife
said: Master, I am still a virgin. Said the Rabbi: Bring before me two
bondwomen, one a virgin and one that has been with man. They brought him
two bondwomen; one a virgin, and one that had been with a man. He made
them sit on a keg of wine. The one who had been with a man, the aroma of
wine came through her, but the virgin,—the aroma of the wine did not go
through her. He then made the wife sit on a keg of wine, and the smell
did not go through her. The Rabbi then said to the husband: Go home and
be happy with thine lot.

(*Gemara*)

 

IF THE woman lost her marriage contract, or hid it, or it was burnt, and
if she produce witnesses that any one of the following took place: If
they danced before

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

her, played before her, if the cup of glad tidings was passed before
her, or the sheet of virginity was exhibited: if she can produce proof
of any one of these things, her marriage dowry shall be two hundred
*zuz*.

(*Baraitha*)

 

THE Rabbis taught: How does one dance before a bride? The House of
Shamai says: According to what the bride is like. The House of Hillel
argues: You say beautiful, charming bride. The House of Shamai argued
with the House of Hillel: Suppose she is deformed or blind, how can one
say "beautiful and charming bride"? The *Torah* has taught us: (*Exodus*
xxiii, 7) *Keep thee far from a false matter*. The House of Hillel
answered to the House of Shamai: As you wish. If one has brought back a
bad bargain from the market, should one praise his purchase to his face
or deride it?—No doubt one should praise it. Therefore the sages said: A
person should always be pleasant to other people. Rabbi Dimi said: In
the West they sing thus before a bride; No eye-paint, no rouge and no
waving of hair, and still "charming and most beautiful".

When Rabbi Zera was ordained they sang before him: No eye-paint, no
rouge and no waving of hair and still "charming and most beautiful".

When Rabbi Ammi and Rabbi Assi were ordained they sang before them as
follows: Ordain unto us such as these, such as these, but do not ordain
unto us scoundrels and idiots.

When Rabbi Abbahu came from the academy to the palace of the king,
maidens of the court came forth before him and sang; Prince of his
people, leader of his nation, brilliant light, blessed be thy coming in
peace.

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

It is said of Rabbi Yehuda bar Elai that he used to take a twig and
dance before the bride and say: Beautiful and charming bride. Rabbi
Samuel ben Rabbi Isaac would also dance with twigs. Rabbi Zera said:
That Graybeard is putting us to shame. When Rabbi Samuel passed away a
pillar of fire came between him and the whole world. And it has been
known that such a pillar of fire appears only once and at the most twice
in a generation. Rabbi Zera said, it was on account of the twig. Others
said it was because of his fine character, and some said because of his
folly.

Rabbi Aha took the bride on his shoulder and danced. The Rabbis asked
him: May we do the same? He answered: If the bride be on your shoulder
like a beam, you may; otherwise not.

Rabbi Samuel ben Nahmani said in the name of Rabbi Jonathan: One may
gaze upon the face of the bride all the seven days of the wedding
festival, so as to make her husband more desirous of her. But the law is
not in accord with this.

(*Gemara*)  
<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER I</span>

 

THE seducer pays three kinds of compensations. The violator, four kinds.
The seducer must pay for indignity and blemish, and the legal fine. The
violator must add to it compensation for the pain that he caused. What
is the difference between a violator and a seducer? The violator causes
pain; the seducer does not cause pain. The violator pays the penalty at
once; the seducer only if he declines the girl. The violator must drink
out of his pot; but the seducer, if he wishes, may decline the girl.

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

How does the violator drink out of his pot? He is compelled to marry her
even if she be deformed, blind; even if she be afflicted with boils. But
if she was found to be immoral, and therefore not fit to marry an
Israelite, he does not have to live with her. For it is said:
(*Deuteronomy* xxii, 29) *and she shall be his wife*. This means a wife
that is suitable for him.

What is the compensation for indignity? It is all in accordance with the
case of the offender and the offended. And in case of blemish? The girl
is considered as if she were a bondwoman that is put up for sale. How
much was she worth before, and how much is she worth now?

The fine is the same for all, and whenever there is a sum fixed by the
law, it remains the same for all.

(*Mishna*)  
<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER III</span>

 

THE father exercises authority over his daughter as regards her
betrothal, through money, a contract, or intercourse. To him belong all
that she may find and all her handiwork, and he may void her vows. He
also receives her writ of divorce. But he may not use her property
during her lifetime. If she gets married, her husband supersedes the
father, because he has the right to her property during her lifetime;
but the husband is responsible for her maintenance, her ransom, if she
be captured, and for her burial. Rabbi Yehuda said: Even the poorest in
Israel will provide not less than two flute players and one wailing
woman.

(*Mishna*)  
<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER IV</span>

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

THE following are the chores which a woman must perform for her husband:
Grind flour, bake, launder, cook, nurse her son, make ready his bed, and
work at the wool. If she brought him one bondwoman she need not grind
the flour, nor bake, nor launder. If she brought two, she need not cook,
nor nurse her son. If she brought three, she need not make his bed, nor
work at the wool. If she brought four she may sit in a chair all day
long. Rabbi Eleazar said: Even if she brought him a hundred bondswomen,
he should compel her to work at the wool, for idleness leads but to
unchastity. Rabbi Simon ben Gamaliel said: If a man vowed not to permit
his wife to work, he should be made to divorce her, and give her her
marriage settlement, for idleness leads to ennui.

If a man vowed not to sleep with his wife, the House of Shamai says: She
may agree to two weeks. The House of Hillel says: One week only.
Students may go away to the colleges without their wives’ permission for
thirty days; laborers may stay away from their wives only one week. The
Torah prescribed the marital duties as follows: Men who are unoccupied:
every day; laborers, twice a week; ass-drivers, once a week;
camel-drivers once in thirty days; sailors, once in three months. These
are the words of Rabbi Eliezer.

If a woman does not consent to her husband, he may reduce her marriage
allotment by seven *denars* each week. Rabbi Yehuda says: seven
*tropaiks*. How long may he keep on reducing? Until her whole allotment
is used up. Rabbi Yosi says: He may keep it up forever. If, perchance,
an inheritance falls to her lot, he may put a claim upon it. If a man
does not consent to

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

his wife, her allotment is to be increased by seven *denars* each week.
Rabbi Yehuda says: three *tropaiks*.

 

IF A man maintains his wife through a third person, he must allot to her
not less than two measures of wheat or four measures of barley. He must
also give her half a measure of beans and half a *loog* of oil, a
measure of dried figs or a *minah* of pressed figs. If he cannot provide
these he may substitute other fruits in their place. He must also
provide her with a bed, and a mattress. If he has no mattress, a mat. He
must also give her a cap for her head and a girdle for her loins and
shoes at each of the festivals and clothing to the amount of fifty
*zuz*, each year. If he cannot give her new clothes for the summer and
old clothes for the rainy season, he must provide clothes to the value
of fifty *zuz* in the rainy season, and she may clothe herself with worn
garments in the summer. The used garments remain her property. He must
also give her a silver coin for her needs. And she is to dine with him
each Sabbath eve. If he does not give her the silver coin for her needs,
her handiwork belongs to her. How much must she produce for her husband?
In Judea she must weave for him the weight of five *selahs;* in Galillee
ten *selahs*, but if she is nursing a child, they must reduce the amount
of her work and increase her food allowance. This is spoken of the poor,
but the rich must provide according to their standing.

(*Mishna*)

 

GRINDING of flour. How come you to say a thing like that? You can
interpret it: supervise the grinding of flour, but if you will, you can
say: grinding with a

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

hand mill. The *Mishna* does not teach in accordance with the views of
Rabbi Hiya, for Rabbi Hiya taught: A woman is only for beauty, or only
for the sake of the children she will bear. Further Rabbi Hiya taught: A
woman is only good for the finery she wears. And Rabbi Hiya also stated:
Whosoever wishes his woman to look nice should dress her in linen
garments. Whosoever wishes his daughters to have a clear complexion
should feed her young chickens and give her milk to drink before she is
about to attain her maturity.

 

OUR Rabbis taught: A child should be nursed twenty-four months. From
then on, it is as if it sucked a detestable thing. These are the words
of Rabbi Eliezer.

Rabbi Joshua said: The child may nurse even for four or five years, but
if it stopped at twenty-four months and then started again, then it
should be regarded as if it were sucking a detestable thing.

The Rabbis taught: If a woman agrees to nurse someone's child, she must
not nurse her own child or a friend's child at the same time. If she
agreed to a small fee, she still must eat plenty, and while she nurses,
she must not eat anything that will be injurious to the milk.

 

A WOMAN that has her marital relations in a mill will have epileptic
children; one that has intercourse on the ground will have children with
long necks. A woman that steps on the blood of an ass will have scabby
children. If she eats mustard, she will have hot tempered children. One
who eats cress, will have bleary-eyed children. If she eats fish-soup,
she will have children with

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

blinking eyes. If she eats earth, she will have ugly children. One who
partakes of intoxicating drinks will have dark children. The woman who
eats meat and drinks wine will have strong children. If she eats eggs,
her children will have big eyes. If she eats fish, her children will be
very graceful. One who eats parsley will have beautiful children. One
who eats coriander will have stout children. If she eats citrons, her
children will have a pleasing scent. The mother of King Shapor's
daughter ate citrons during her pregnancy, and the daughter used to be
brought before her father as his finest perfume.

 

STUDENTS may go away to college, etc. For how long a period may they go
with the permission of their wives?—For as long as they wish. What
should be the usual time? Rab said: One month at college and one month
at home. As it was said: (1 *Chronicles* xxvii, 1) *In any matter of the
courses which came in and went out month by month throughout all the
months of the year*.

Rabbi Yohanan said: One month at college and two months at home. As it
was said: (1 *Kings* v, 14) *A month they were at Lebanon and two at
home*.

For laborers, twice a week. Were we not taught, laborers once a week;
how is this? Rabbi Hanina answered: There is no contradiction here. One
speaks of those who work in the town where they live, while the other
speaks of those who work away from their home town.

How often should the scholars perform their duties

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

to their wives? Says Rabbi Yehuda in the name of Rabbi Samuel: Every
Sabbath eve.

Yehuda the son of Rabbi Hiya and son-in-law of Rabbi Yanai spent all his
time at the academy but every Sabbath eve he would go home. When he
arrived one could see a pillar of light before him. Once he was so
engrossed in his studies that he forgot to go home. When Rabbi Yanai
missed the sign he said: Cover his bed, because if Yehuda were alive, he
surely would not fail to do his duty towards his wife. This was
(*Ecclesiastes* x, 5) *as an error which proceedeth from the ruler*, for
Yehuda's soul went to its eternal rest.

Rabbi Hanania ben Hakinai went to the academy and remained there twelve
years. When he returned, the streets in the town were changed and he
could not find his home. He sat himself down beside the river. There he
heard someone call: Daughter of Hakinai, daughter of Rabbi Hakinai, fill
thy pitcher with water and we will go home. This maiden must belong to
us, he thought, and he followed her. When they came to the house, his
wife was sitting at the door and sifting flour. When she raised her eyes
and saw him, her heart stopped beating and she passed away. Then the
husband prayed to the Lord: This poor soul, is that her reward? Have
mercy on her. And she came to life again.

Rabbi Akiba was a shepherd in the service of the wealthy Ben Kalba
Sabua, and Sabua's daughter saw how noble and modest he was. She fell in
love with him. One day she addressed him. If I should get betrothed to
you, would you go away and devote your time to study and become a
scholar? Most surely, replied Akiba. They were then secretly betrothed
and she sent him forth to

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

the academy. When her father found out about it, he drove her out of his
house and vowed that she would not receive any inheritance from him.

Rabbi Akiba spent twelve years at the academy; when he returned twelve
thousand disciples followed him. While he was home he heard an old man
say to his wife: How much longer do you choose to remain in living
widowhood? However, she retorted: If he would listen to me, he would
spend another twelve years in the academy.

Whereupon Rabbi Akiba said: It is, then, with her consent that I may go,
and immediately departed to the academy for another twelve years. When
he returned this time there were twenty-four thousand disciples who
followed him.

When his wife was advised that he was on the way, she went forth to
greet him. Her neighbor begged her to borrow some clothes and finery and
attire herself in them. But she answered: (*Proverbs* xii, 10) *A
righteous man regardeth the life of his beast*. When she approached him,
she fell upon her face and kissed his feet. His servants wanted to drive
her away, but Rabbi Akiba said: Leave her alone. All that is mine and
all that is yours belongs to her.

When her father heard that a great man had come to town, he said: I
shall go to him, he may release me from my vow. When he came, Rabbi
Akiba asked him: Would you have made your vow if you knew that your
daughter's husband was a great scholar? Sabua replied: If he but knew
one chapter of the *Torah* or one article of law, I should never have
made my vow. Whereupon Rabbi Akiba said: I am the man. Sabua fell upon

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

his face and kissed his feet and then bestowed upon him half of his
wealth.

The daughter of Rabbi Akiba did the same thing with Ben Azai. This is
just as the people say: One sheep follows another, like the mother so is
the daughter.

 

WHEN Rabbi Yehuda, the Prince, was about to die, he asked for his sons.
When they appeared before him, he said to them: Be careful to respect
your mother. The candles should remain lighted in their place. The table
should always be set in its place, and the bed shall always be made up
in its place. Joseph of Haifa and Simon of Ephrath who attended to me
while I was alive, shall attend to me when I am gone.

Then he asked for the Sages of Israel. When the Sages of Israel arrived,
he said to them: Do not mourn over me in the small towns. Reassemble the
classes in the academy after thirty days. Simon, my son, is wise. My
son, Gamaliel, is Prince, and Hanina ben Hama shall preside over the
academy.

Then he asked for his son, Simon. When Simon came in, he instructed him
in the orders of wisdom. Then he asked for his elder son, Gamaliel. When
Rabbi Gamaliel came, he instructed him in the traditions and conduct of
his office. He said to him: My son, conduct your principality with honor
and cast bile among the disciples.

On the day that Rabbi Yehuda died, a voice appeared and announced: All
those who were present at the death of the Rabbi will be destined for
the world to come. A launderer who used to come to the Rabbi every day
did not appear that day. When he heard of the voice that

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

appeared, he went up to the roof and jumped and was killed. The voice
appeared again and announced: This launderer is also destined for the
world to come.

The day before the Rabbi died, the Sages proclaimed a public fast and
prayers for the life of the Rabbi. They further vowed that whoever would
say the Rabbi died, would be killed.

The Rabbi's maid-servant went up to the roof and prayed: The angels want
the Rabbi to join them and the mortals want the Rabbi to remain on the
earth. May it please the Lord that the mortals be victorious over the
angels. But when she saw how many times he had to go to the lavatory and
how he suffered at the taking off and putting on of the phylacteries,
each time, she prayed: May it please the Lord that the angels be
victorious. But as the Rabbis did not stop their prayers for a moment,
she took a crock and hurled it to the ground. The Rabbis stopped their
prayers, and that moment the soul of Rabbi Yehuda departed.

The Rabbis told Bar Kapra to go in and investigate. When he went in, he
found that the Rabbi was dead. He tore his garments and returned to the
Rabbis and said: The angels and the mortals have gotten hold of the Holy
Ark. The angels overpowered the mortals and the Holy Ark has been
captured. Has his soul departed? they asked of him. You said it, he
replied; I said nothing.

(*Gemara*)  
<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER V</span>

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Adultery (Tractate Sotah)](bata11.md)

</div>
