[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tsoa32)  [Next](tsoa34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1604590467/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VL4BQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Secret of the Ages*, by Robert Collier, \[1926\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_473">p. 473</span>

### XX

### What Do You Lack?

<div style="margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%">

<div style="font-size: 90%;">

"I read the papers every day, and oft encounter tales which show there's
hope for every jay who in life's battle fails. I've just been reading of
a gent who joined the has-been ranks, at fifty years without a cent, or
credit at the banks. But undismayed he buckled down, refusing to be
beat, and captured fortune and renown; he's now on Easy Street. Men say
that fellows down and out ne’er leave the rockly track, but facts will
show, beyond a doubt, that has-beens do come back. I know, for I who
write this rhyme, when forty-odd years old, was down and out, without a
dime, my whiskers full of mold. By black disaster I was trounced until
it jarred my spine; I was a failure so pronounced I didn't need a sign.
And after I had soaked my coat, I said (at forty-three), 'I'll see if I
can catch the goat that has escaped from me.' I labored hard; I strained
my dome, to do my daily grind, until in triumph I came home, my
billy-goat behind. And any man who still has health may with the winners
stack, and have a chance at fame and wealth—for has-beens do come back."

—<span class="smallcaps">Walt Mason</span>. <span
id="fr_12"></span>[\*](#fn_12)

</div>

</div>

<span id="page_474">p. 474</span>

<span id="img_dinit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/dinit.jpg) |

<span class="smallcaps">Do</span> you know why it is that the Bolsheviki
are so opposed to religion?

Because religion, as it is commonly accepted, teaches man resignation to
conditions as they are—teaches, in effect, that God created some men
poor and some rich. That this unequal distribution is a perfectly
natural thing. And that we must not rail against it because it will all
be made right in the next world.

Napoleon, in his early Jacobin days, denounced religion for that very
reason. But when he had won to power, when he planned to make himself
Emperor, then he found he had need for that religion, and re-established
the Church in France.

For, he reasoned, how can people be satisfied without religion? If one
man is starving, near another who is making

<span id="page_475">p. 475</span>

himself sick by eating too much, how can you expect to keep the starving
one resigned to his fate unless you teach him it will all be made right
in some indefinite future state?

Organized society could not exist, as he planned it, without some being
rich and some poor, and to keep the poor satisfied, there must be an
authority to declare—"God wills it thus. But just be patient. In the
hereafter all this will be different. YOU will be the ones then to
occupy the places of honor."

Religion, in other words—as it is ordinarily taught—*is a fine thing to
keep the common people satisfied!*

But Christianity was never meant for a weapon to keep the rich wealthy
and secure, the poor satisfied and in their proper place. On the
contrary, Christianity as taught by Jesus opened the way

<span id="page_476">p. 476</span>

to all Good. And Christianity as it was practiced in its early years was
an idealized form of Socialism that benefited each and all. No one was
wealthier than his neighbors, it is true—but neither was any
poverty-stricken. Theirs was the creed of the Three Musketeers—"All for
one, and one for all!"

"Ask and ye shall receive," said Jesus. "Seek and ye shall find." That
was not directed to the rich alone. That was to ALL men.

Providence has never made a practice of picking out certain families or
certain individuals and favoring them to the detriment of other
people—much as some of our "leading families" would have us believe it.
It is only man that has arrogated to himself that privilege. We laugh
now at the "divine right of Kings." It is just as ridiculous to think
that a few

<span id="page_477">p. 477</span>

have the right to all the good things of life, while the many have to
toil and sweat to do them service.

To quote Rumbold's last words from the scaffold—"I never could believe
that Providence had sent a few men into the world ready booted and
spurred to ride, and millions ready saddled and bridled to be ridden."

There is nothing right in poverty. Not only that, but there is nothing
meritorious in poverty. The mere fact that you are poor and ground down
by fear and worry is not going to get you any forwarder in the
hereafter. On the contrary, your soul is likely to be too pinched by
want, too starved and shrivelled to be able to expand.

"The Kingdom of Heaven is within you." To me that means that Heaven is
here and now. That if we want any

<span id="page_478">p. 478</span>

happiness from it we've got to get it as we go along. I've never been
much of a believer in accepting these promissory notes for happiness.
Every time one of them falls due, you find you just have to renew it for
another six months or a year, until one of these days you wake up and
find that the bank has busted and all your notes are not worth the paper
they are written on.

The Cumæan Sibyl is said to have offered Tarquin the Proud nine books
for what he thought an exorbitant sum. So he refused. She burned three
of the books, and placed the same price on the six as on the original
nine. Again he refused. She burned three more books, and offered the
remainder for the sum she had first asked. This time Tarquin accepted.
The books were found to contain prophecies and invaluable directions

<span id="page_479">p. 479</span>

regarding Roman policy, but alas, they were no longer complete.

So it is with happiness. If you take it as you go along, you get it in
its entirety. But if you keep putting off the day when you shall enjoy
it—if you keep taking promissory notes for happiness—every day will mean
one day less of it that you will have. Yet the cost is just the same.

The purpose of existence is GROWTH. You can't grow spiritually or
mentally without happiness. And by Happiness I don't mean a timid
resignation to the "Will of God." That so-called "Will of God" is more
often than not either pure laziness on the part of the resigned one or
pure cussedness on the part of the one that is "putting something over"
on him. It is the most sanctimonious expression yet devised to excuse
some condition that

<span id="page_480">p. 480</span>

no one has the energy or the ability to rectify.

No—by Happiness I mean the everyday enjoyment of everyday people. I mean
love and laughter and honest amusement. Every one of us is entitled to
it. Every one of us can have it—if he has the WILL and the ENERGY to get
out and get it for himself.

Joyless work, small pay, no future, nothing to look forward to—God never
planned such an existence. It is manmade—and you can be man enough to
unmake it as far as you and yours are concerned.

God never made any man poor any more than He made any man sick. Look
around you. All of Nature is bountiful. On every hand you see
profusion—in the trees, in the flowers, in everything that He planned.
The only Law of Nature

<span id="page_481">p. 481</span>

is the law of Supply. Poverty is un-natural. It is man-made, through the
limits man puts upon himself. God never put them there any more than He
showed partiality by giving to some of His children gifts and blessings
which He withheld from others. His gifts are just as available to you as
to any man on earth. The difference is all in your understanding of how
to avail yourself of the infinite supply all about you.

Take the worry clamps off your mentality and you will make the poverty
clamps loosen up from your finances. Your affairs are so closely related
to your consciousness that they too will relax into peace, order, and
plenty. Divine ideas in your spiritual consciousness will become active
in your business, and will work out as your abundant prosperity.

As David V. Bush says in "Applied

<span id="page_482">p. 482</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Psychology and
Scientific Living"—"Thoughts are things; thoughts are energy; thoughts
are magnets which attract to us the very things which we think.
Therefore, if a man is in debt, he will, by continually thinking about
debt, bring more debts to him. For thoughts are causes, and he fastens
more debts on to himself and actually creates more obligations by
thinking about debts.

"Concentrate and think upon things that you want; not on things which
you ought not to have. Think of abundance, of opulence, of plenty, of
position, harmony and growth, and if you do not see them manifested
today, they will be realized to-morrow. If you must pass through straits
of life where you do not outwardly see abundance, know that you have it
within, and that in time it will manifest itself.

<span id="page_483">p. 483</span>

"I say, if you concentrate on debt, debt is what you will have; if you
think about poverty, poverty is what you will receive. It is just as
easy, when once the mind becomes trained, to think prosperity and
abundance and plenty, as it is to think lack, limitation and poverty."

Prosperity is not limited to time or to place. It manifests when and
where there is consciousness to establish it. It is attracted to the
consciousness that is free from worry, strain, and tension.

So never allow yourself to worry about poverty. Be careful, take
ordinary business precautions—of course. But don't center your thought
on your *troubles*. The more you think of them, the more tightly you
fasten them upon yourself. Think of the *results* you are after—not of
the difficulties in the way. Mind will find the way. It is merely up to
you to

<span id="page_484">p. 484</span>

choose the goal, then keep your thought steadfast until that goal is
won.

The greatest short-cut to prosperity is to *LIVE IT!* Prosperity
attracts. Poverty repels. To quote Orison Swett Marden—"To be ambitious
for wealth and yet always expecting to be poor, to be always doubting
your ability to get what you long for, is like trying to reach East by
travelling West. There is no philosophy which will help a man to succeed
when he is always doubting his ability to do so, and thus attracting
failure."

Again: "No matter how hard you may work for success, if your thought is
saturated with the fear of failure it will kill your efforts, neutralize
your endeavors, and make success impossible."

The secret of prosperity lies in so vividly imaging it in your own mind

<span id="page_485">p. 485</span>

that you literally exude prosperity. You feel prosperous, you look
prosperous, and the result is that before long you ARE prosperous.

I remember seeing a play a number of years ago that was based on this
thought. A young fellow—a chronic failure—was persuaded by a friend to
carry a roll of $1000 counterfeit bills in his pocket, and to show them,
unostentatiously, when the occasion offered. Of course, everyone thought
he had come into some legacy. The natural inference was that anyone who
carried fifty or a hundred thousand dollar bills in his pockets must
have a lot more in the bank. Opportunities flocked to him. Opportunities
to make good. Opportunities to make money. He made good! And that
without having to spend any of this spurious money of his. For most

<span id="page_486">p. 486</span>

business today is done on credit. I know many wealthy men who seldom
carry anything but a little change in their pockets for tips. Everything
they do, everything they buy, is "Charged." And big deals are put
through in the same way. If a man is believed to have plenty of money,
if he has a reputation for honesty and fair-dealing, he may put through
a transaction running into six or seven figures without paying one cent
down. The thing that counts is not the amount of your balance at the
Bank, but what others THINK of you, the IMAGE you have created in your
own and in others minds.

What do you lack? What thing do you want most? Realize that before it or
any other thing can be, it must first be imaged in Mind. Realize, too,
that when you can close your eyes and actually

<span id="page_487">p. 487</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> SEE that thing,
*you have brought it into being*—you have drawn upon that invisible
substance all about you—you have *created something*. Hold it in your
thought, focus your mind upon it, "BELIEVE THAT YOU HAVE IT"—and you can
safely leave its material manifestation to the Genie-of-your-Mind.

God is but another name for the invisible, everywhere-present,
Source-of-things. Out of the air the seed gathers the essences which are
necessary to its bountiful growth; out of the invisible ether our minds
gather the rich ideas that stimulate us to undertake and to carry out
enterprises that bring prosperity to us. Let us see with the eye of the
mind a bountiful harvest; then our minds will be quickened with ideas of
abundance, and plenty will appear, not only in our world, but
everywhere.

<span id="page_488">p. 488</span>

"As the rain cometh down and the snow from heaven, and returneth not
thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud, and
giveth seed to the sower and bread to the eater; so shall my word be
that goeth forth out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but
it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the
thing whereto I sent it."—Isaiah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[473:\*](tsoa33.htm#fr_12) From "Walt Mason—His
Book." Barse & Hopkins, Newark, N. J.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXI. The Sculptor and the Clay](tsoa34)
