[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tsoa34)  [Next](tsoa36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1604590467/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VL4BQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Secret of the Ages*, by Robert Collier, \[1926\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_505">p. 505</span>

### XXII

### Why Grow Old?

<div style="margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%">

<div style="font-size: 90%;">

"And Moses was an hundred and twenty years old when he died: his eye was
not dim, nor his natural force abated."

</div>

</div>

<span id="img_rinit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/rinit.jpg) |

<span class="smallcaps">Remember</span> how you used to plough through
great masses of work day after day and month after month, cheerily,
enthusiastically, with never a sign of tiring or nervous strain?
Remember how you used to enjoy those evenings, starting out as fresh
from your office or shop as if you hadn't just put a hard day's work
behind you? No doubt you've often wondered why you can't work and enjoy
yourself like that now, but solaced yourself with the moth-eaten fallacy
that "As a man grows

<span id="page_506">p. 506</span>

older he shouldn't expect to get the same fun out of life that he did in
his earlier years."

Poor old exploded idea!

Youth is not a matter of time. It is a mental state. You can be just as
brisk, just as active, just as light-hearted now as you were ten or
twenty years ago. Genuine youth is just a perfect state of health. You
can have that health, and the boundless energy and capacity for work or
enjoyment that go with it. You can cheat time of ten, twenty or fifty
years—not by taking thought of what you shall eat or what you shall
drink, not by diet or exercise, but solely through a right understanding
of what you should expect of your body.

"If only I had my life to live over again!" How often you have heard it
said. How often you have thought it.

<span id="page_507">p. 507</span>

But the fact is that you CAN have it. You can start right now and live
again as many years as you have already experienced. Health, physical
freedom and full vigor need not end for you at 35 or 40—nor at 60 or 70.
Age is not a matter of years. It is a state of mind.

In an address before the American Sociological Society a few months ago
Dr. Hornell Hart of Bryn Mawr predicted that—"Babies born in the year
2000 will have something like 200 years of life ahead of them, and men
and women of 100 years will be quite the normal thing. But instead of
being wrinkled and crippled, these centenarians will be in their
vigorous prime."

Thomas Parr, an Englishman, lived to be 152 years old, and was
sufficiently hale and hearty at the age of 120 to take unto himself a
second wife. Even at

<span id="page_508">p. 508</span>

152, his death was not due to old age, but to a sudden and drastic
change in his manner of life. All his days he had lived upon simple
fare, but his fame reaching the King, he was invited to London and there
feasted so lavishly that he died of it.

In a despatch to the New York *Times* on February 14th last, I read of
an Arab now in Palestine, one Salah Mustapha Salah Abu Musa, who at the
age of 105 *is growing his third set of teeth!*

There is an ancient City in Italy which can be approached by sea only
through a long stretch of shallow water full of rocks and cross
currents. There is one safe channel, and it is marked by posts. In the
days of the Sea Rovers the city used to protect itself by pulling up the
posts whenever a rover hove in sight.

Mankind has taken to planting posts

<span id="page_509">p. 509</span>

along its way to mark the flight of time. Every year we put in a new
one, heedless of the fact that we are thus marking a clear channel for
our Arch-Enemy, Age, to enter in from the sea of human belief.

But the fact is that there is no natural reason for man to grow old as
soon as he does, *no biological reason for him to grow old at all!*

Why is it that the animals live eight to ten times their maturity, when
man lives only about twice his? Why? Be-cause man hastens decrepitude
and decay by holding the thought of old age always before him.

Dr. Alexis Carrel, Noble Prize winner and member of the Rockefeller
Institute, has demonstrated that living cells taken from a body,
properly protected and fed, can be kept alive indefinitely.

<span id="page_510">p. 510</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Not only that, but
they *grow!* In 1912 he took some tissue from the heart of an embryo
chick and placed it in a culture medium. It is living and growing yet.

Recently Dr. Carrel showed a moving picture of these living cells before
the American Institute of Electrical Engineers. They grow so fast that
they double in size every twenty-four hours, and have to be trimmed
daily!

The cells of your being can be made to live indefinitely when placed
outside your body. Single-celled animals never die a natural death. They
live on and on until something kills them. Now scientists are beginning
to wonder if multi-cellular animals like man really need to die.

Under the title, "Immortality and Rejuvenation in Modern Biology," M.
Metalnikov, of the Pasteur Institute, has

<span id="page_511">p. 511</span>

just published a volume that should be read by all those who have
decided that it is necessary to grow old and die.

Here is the first sentence of the concluding chapter of the book: "What
we have just written forces us to maintain our conviction that
immortality is the fundamental property of living organisms."

And further on:

"Old age and death are not a stage of earthly existence.…"

And that, mind you, is set forth under the aegis of a scientific
establishment that has no equal in the world, and of a scholar
universally respected.

As the *Journal of Paris* says in reviewing the article:

"Most religious and philosophic systems assert the immortality of the
soul. But the positive sciences have shown

<span id="page_512">p. 512</span>

themselves more skeptical on this point. This idea seems to them quite
contradictory to all that we know, or think we know, of animal life.
Animal life originates as a tiny germ, which becomes an embryo,
developing into an adult organism, which grows old and finally dies.
This means the disappearance of all the faculties of life that so
clearly distinguish it from an inanimate object. There is no scientific
evidence to show that at this moment the 'soul' does not disappear with
the body, and that it continues its existence separately. Biologists
cannot even conceive the possibility of Separation of soul and body, so
strong and indissoluble are the bonds that unite all our psychic
manifestations with our bodily life. For them an immortal soul only can
exist in an immortal body. What if it were so? What if our organism

<span id="page_513">p. 513</span>

is really indestructible? It is this that M. Metalnikov attempts
scientifically to prove.

"Death is a permanent and tangible phenomenon only in the case of man
and the higher animals. It is not so for plants and for the simpler
forms of animal life, the protozoans. These last, composed often of a
single cell, just observable under the microscope, are however without
the chief faculties that characterize the higher animals. They move
about by means of vibratory hair-like processes, sustain themselves,
seek their food, hunt animals still smaller than themselves, react to
irritations of different kinds, and multiply. But this multiplication is
not effected by means of special organs, as among the higher animals,
but by the division of the whole organism into two equal parts. The

<span id="page_514">p. 514</span>

common infusoria which abound in fresh water thus divide once or twice
every twenty-four hours. Each daughter cell continues to live like the
mother cell, of which it is the issue; it feeds, grows, and divides in
its turn. And never, in this constantly renewed cycle in their lives, do
we find the phenomenon of natural death, so characteristic and so
universal in the higher animals. The infusorium is subject only to
accidental death, such as we can cause by the addition of some poisonous
element to the water in which it lives, or by heat.

"Experiments along this line were made long ago. The first were by de
Saussure, in 1679. Having put an infusorium in a drop of water, he saw
it divide under his eye. Four days later it was impossible to count the
number of creatures. However, some authors

<span id="page_515">p. 515</span>

thought that this reproductive facility was not unlimited. Maupas
himself, who made a minute study of it forty years ago and succeeded in
observing 700 successive generations of a single species, thought that
it was finally subject to old age and to death.

"But the more recent works of Joukovsky at Heidelberg, of Koulaghine at
Petrograd, of Calkins in England, of Weissmann, and still others, lead
to an opposite opinion. The degeneration observed by these workers was
due to auto-intoxication, caused by not renewing the culture-medium.

"Decisive experiments were made in Russia, dating from 1907, by Woodruff
and by M. Metalnikov himself. Begun at Tsarskoe Selo, they continued
until the tragic hours of the 1917 revolution, and were renewed at the
University of

<span id="page_516">p. 516</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Crimea. These
investigators took an infusorium found in an aquarium, the Paramoecium
caudatum, whose characteristics are well determined, and in thirteen
years, in 1920, they had obtained 5,000 successive generations.…

"Thus we are bound to say that a unicellular body possesses within
itself the power of immortality.

"And we ourselves are made up only by the juxtaposition of simple
cells."

*The Fountain of Youth*

Four hundred years ago Ponce de Leon set sail into the mysteries of an
unknown world in search of the Fountain of Youth, when all the time the
secret of that fountain was right within himself.

For the fact is, that no matter how many years have passed since you
were

<span id="page_517">p. 517</span>

born, *you are only eleven months old today!* Your body is constantly
renewing itself. The one thing about it you can be surest of is CHANGE.
Every one of the millions of cells of which it is composed is constantly
being renewed. Even your bones are daily renewing themselves in this
way.

These cells are building—building—building. Every day they tear down old
tissue and rebuild it with new. There is not a cell in your body, not a
muscle or tissue, not a bone, that is more than eleven months old! Why
then should you feel age? Why should you be any less spry, any less
cheerful, than these youngsters around you that you have been envying?

The answer is that you need not—if you will but realize your
YOUTHFULNESS. Every organ, every muscle,

<span id="page_518">p. 518</span>

tissue and cell of your body is subject to your subconscious mind. They
rebuild exactly as that mind directs them. What is the model you are
holding before your mind's eye? Is it one of age, of decrepitude? That
is the model that most men use, because they know no better. That is the
result that you see imaged upon their bodies.

But you need not follow their outworn models. You can hold before your
mind's eye only the vision of youth, of manly vigor, of energy and
strength and beauty—*and that is the model that your cells will use to
build upon*.

Do you know what is responsible for the whole difference between Youth
and Age? Just one thing. Youth looks *forward* always to something
better. Age looks backward and sighs over its "lost" youth.

<span id="page_519">p. 519</span>

In youth we are constantly growing. We KNOW we have not yet reached our
prime. We know we can expect to continually IMPROVE. We look forward to
ever-increasing physical powers. We look forward to a finer, more
perfect physique. We look forward to greater mental alertness. We have
been educated to expect these things. Therefore we BELIEVE we shall get
them—and we GET them!

But what happens after we get to be thirty or forty years of age? We
think we have reached our prime. We have been taught that we can no
longer look forward to greater growth—that all we can hope for is to
"hold our own" for a little while, and then start swiftly down-ward to
old age and decay. History shows that no nation, no institution and no
individual can continue for any length

<span id="page_520">p. 520</span>

of time to merely "hold his own." You must go forward—or back. You must
move—or life will pass you by. Yours is the choice. If you will realize
that there is never any end to, GROWTH—that your body is constantly
being rebuilt—that perfection is still so far ahead of you that you can
continue GROWING towards it indefinitely—you need never know age. You
can keep on growing more perfect, mentally and physically, every day.
Every minute you live is a minute of conception and rebirth.

You may be weak and anæmic. You may be crippled or bent. No matter! You
can start today to rebuild along new lines. In eleven months at the
most, every one of those weak and devitalized cells, every one of those
bent and crippled bones, will be replaced by new, strong, vigorous
tissue.

<span id="page_521">p. 521</span>

Look at Annette Kellerman—crippled and deformed as a child—yet she grew
up into the world's most perfectly formed woman. Look at Roosevelt—weak
and anæmic as a young man—yet he made himself the envy of the world for
boundless vigor and energy. And they are but two cases out of thousands
I could quote. Many of the world's strongest men were weaklings in their
childhood. It matters not what your age, what your condition—you can
start now renewing your youth, growing daily nearer the mode! of YOU
that is imaged in Universal Mind.

Arthur Brisbane says that at the age of 85 George F. Baker is doing the
work of ten men.

That is what every man of 85 ought to be doing, for he should have not
only the physical vigor and strength and enthusiasm of 21, but combined
with them

<span id="page_522">p. 522</span>

he should have the skill and experience, the ripened judgment of 85.

There is no more despairing pronouncement than, the belief of the
average man that he matures only to begin at once to deteriorate and
decay. When the actual fact is, as stated in a recent utterance by the
eminent Dr. Hammond, *there is no physiological reason* why a man should
die. He asserted—and the statement is corroborated by scientists and
physiologists—that the human body possesses inherent capacity to renew
and continue itself and its functions indefinitely!

Your body wear out? Of course it does—just as all material things do.
But with this difference—your body is being renewed just as fast as it
wears out! Have you damaged some part of it? Don't worry. Down inside
you is a chemical

<span id="page_523">p. 523</span>

laboratory which can make new parts just as good or better than the old.
Up in your subconscious mind is a Master Chemist with all the formulas
of Universal Mind to draw upon, who can keep that chemical laboratory of
yours making new parts just as fast as you can wear out the old.

But that Master Chemist is like all of us—like you. He is inclined to
lazy a bit on the job—if you let him. Try to relieve him of some of his
functions—and he won't bother about them further. Take to the regular
use of drugs or other methods of eliminating the waste matter from the
body, and your Master Chemist will figure that your conscious mm d has
taken over this duty from him—and be will leave it thereafter to your
conscious mind. Lead him to believe that you no longer expect him to
rebuild your

<span id="page_524">p. 524</span>

body along such perfect lines as in youth—and he will slow down in his
work of removing the old, worn-out tissues, and of replacing them with
new, better material. The result? Arteries clogged with worn-out cells.
Tissues dried and shrunken. Joints stiff and creaky. In short—Old Age.

The fault is not with the Master Chemist. It is with you. You didn't
hold him to the job. When a business or an enterprise or an expedition
fails, it is not the rank and file who are to blame—it is the directing
head. He didn't give his men the right plans to work on. He didn't
supply the proper leadership. He didn't keep them keyed up to their best
work.

What would you think of an engineer who, with the best plans in the
world, the best material with which to build, threw

<span id="page_525">p. 525</span>

away his plans when he was half through with the job and let his men do
as they pleased, ruining all his early work and all his fine material by
putting the rest of it together any which way?

Yet that is what you do when you stop LOOKING FORWARD at 30 or 40, and
decide thereafter to just grow old any which way. You throw away the
wonderful model on which you have been building, you take the finest
material in the world, and let your workmen put it together any way they
like. In fact, you do worse than that. You tell them you don't expect
much from them any more. That any sort of a patched-up job they put
together after that will be about as good as you can look for.

Man alive! What would you expect from ordinary workmen to whom you
talked like that? Your inner workmen

<span id="page_526">p. 526</span>

are no different. You will get from them just what you look for—no more,
no less.

"Your time of life" should be the best time you have yet known. The
engineer who has built forty bridges should be far more proficient than
the one who has built only a few. The model you are passing on to your
Master Chemist now ought to be a vastly more perfect model than the one
you gave to him at twenty. Instead of feeling that your heart is giving
out and your stomach weak, you ought to be boasting of how much better a
heart you are now; making than a few years ago, how much more perfectly
your stomach is functioning than before you learned that you were its
boss.

Of one thing you can be sure. God never decreed a law of decay and
death. If there is any such law, it is man-made—and man can unmake it.
The Life

<span id="page_527">p. 527</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Principle that
came to this planet thousands or millions of years ago brought no Death
Principle with it. For death is like darkness—it is nothing in itself.
Death is merely the absence of life, just as darkness is merely the
absence of light. Keep that life surging—strongly.

In the Book of Wisdom, of the Apocryphal writings, you read:

“For God made not death; neither hath He pleasure in the destruction of
the living.

“For He created all things that they might have being; and the
generative powers of the world are healthsome, and there is no poison of
destruction in them, nor hath death dominion upon the earth.

“For righteousness is immortal:

“But ungodly men with their works and words called death unto them.

“For God created man to be immortal,

<span id="page_528">p. 528</span>

and made Him to be an image of His own proper being.

“But by the envy of the devil came death into the world.”

"Whosoever liveth and believeth in me (understandeth me)," said Jesus,
"shall never die."

And again—"If a man keep my saying, he shall never see death."

Universal Mind knows no imperfection—no decay—no death. It does not
produce sickness and death. It is your *conscious* mind that has decreed
these evils. Banish the thought—and you can banish the effect. Life was
never meant to be measured by years.

I remember reading a story of a traveler who had journeyed to a land of
perpetual sun. Since there was no sunrise and no sunset, no moons or
changing sea-sons, there was no means of measuring

<span id="page_529">p. 529</span>

time. Therefore to the inhabitants of that land, time did not exist. And
having no time, they never thought to measure ages and consequently
never grew old. Like organisms with a single cell, they did not die
except by violence.

There is more truth than fiction to that idea. The measurement of life
by the calendar robs youth of its vigor and hastens old age. It reminds
me of the days of our grandparents, when a woman was supposed to doll
her hat and don a bonnet at 40. And donning a bonnet was like taking the
veil. She was supposed to retire to her chimney corner and make way for
the younger generation.

Men and women ought to *grow* with years into greater health, broader
judgment, maturer wisdom. Instead of becoming atrophied, and dead to all
new ideas, their minds should through practice

<span id="page_530">p. 530</span>

hold ever stronger images before them of youthful vigor and freshness.
The Psalmist says—"But thou art the same, and thy years shall have no
end."

No one need retire to the chimney corner, no matter how many years have
passed over his head. Years should bring wisdom and greater health—not
decrepitude. Many of the world's famous men did their greatest work long
after the age when most men are in their graves. Tennyson composed the
immortal lines of "Crossing the Bar" at the age of 80. Plato still had
pen in hand at 81. Cato learned Greek at the same age. Humboldt
completed his "Cosmos" in his ninetieth year, while John Wesley at 82
said—"It is twelve years now since I have felt any such sensation as
fatigue."

You are only as old as your mind.

<span id="page_531">p. 531</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Every function,
every activity of your body, is controlled by your mind. Your vital
organs, your blood that sends the material for rebuilding to every cell
and tissue, the processes of elimination that remove all the broken down
and waste material, all are dependent for their functioning upon the
energy derived from your mind.

The human body can be compared to an electric transportation system.
When the dynamo runs at full power every car speeds along, and
everything is handled with precision. But let the dynamo slow down and
the whole system lags.

That dynamo is your mind, and your thoughts provide the energy that runs
it. Feed it thoughts of health and vigor and your whole system will
reflect energy and vitality. Feed it thoughts of decrepitude and age,
and you will find it slowing

<span id="page_532">p. 532</span>

down to the halting pace you set for it.

You can grow old at 30. You can be young at 90. It is up to you. Which
do you choose?

If you choose youth, then start this minute renewing your youth. Find a
picture—or, better still, a statuette—of the man you would like to be,
the form you would like to have. Keep it in your room. When you go to
bed at night, *visualize* it in your mind's eye—hold it in your thought
as *YOU*—as the man *YOU ARE GOING TO BE!*

The *Journal of Education* had the idea in their story of "The Prince
and the Statue" in a recent issue:

“There was once a prince who had a crooked back. He could never stand
straight up like even the lowest of his subjects. Because he was a very
proud

<span id="page_533">p. 533</span>

prince his crooked back caused him a great deal of mental suffering.

“One day he called before him the most skilful sculptor in his kingdom
and said to him: 'Make me a noble statue of myself, true to my likeness
in every detail with this exception—make this statue with a straight
back. I wish to see my-self as I might have been.

“For long months the sculptor worked hewing the marble carefully into
the likeness of the prince, and at last the work was done, and the
sculptor went before the prince and said: 'The statue is finished; where
shall I set it up?' One of the courtiers called out: 'Set it before the
castle gate where all can see it,' but the prince smiled sadly, and
shook his head. 'Rather,' said he, 'place it in a secret nook in the
palace garden where only I shall see it.' The statue was

<span id="page_534">p. 534</span>

placed as the prince ordered, and promptly forgotten by the world, but
every morning, and every noon, and every evening the prince stole
quietly away to where it stood and looked long upon it, noting the
straight back and the unlifted head, and the noble brow. And each time
he gazed, something seemed to go out of the statue and into him,
tingling in his blood and throbbing in his heart.

“The days passed into months and the months into years; then strange
rumors began to spread throughout the land. Said one: 'The prince's back
is no longer crooked or my eyes deceive me.' Said another: 'The prince
is more noble-looking or my eyes deceive me.' Said another: 'Our prince
has the high look of a mighty man,' and these rumors came to the prince,
and he listened with a queer

<span id="page_535">p. 535</span>

smile. Then went he out into the garden to where the statue stood and,
behold, it was just as the people said, his back had become as straight
as the statue's, his head had the same noble bearing; he was, in fact,
the noble man his statue proclaimed him to be.”

A novel idea? Not at all! 2,500 years ago, in the Golden Age of Athens,
when its culture led the world, Grecian mothers surrounded themselves
with beautiful statues that they might bring forth perfect children and
that the children in turn might develop into perfect men and women.

Eleven months from now *you* will have an entirely new body, inside and
out. Not a single cell, not a single bit of tissue that is now in you
will be there then. What changes da you want made in that new body? What
improvements?

<span id="page_536">p. 536</span>

Get your new model clearly in your mind's eye. Picture it. VISUALIZE it!
Look FORWARD daily w a better physique, to greater mental power.

Give that model to your Subconscious Mind to build upon—and before
eleven months are out, that model *WILL BE YOU!*   

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Title Page](tsoa36)
