[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tsoa33)  [Next](tsoa35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1604590467/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VL4BQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Secret of the Ages*, by Robert Collier, \[1926\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_489">p. 489</span>

### XXI

### The Sculptor and the Clay

<div style="margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%">

<div style="font-size: 90%;">

"Eternal mind the Potter is,  
 And thought the eternal clay.  
 The hand that fashions is divine;  
 His works pass not away.  
 God could not make imperfect man  
 His model Infinite, Unhallowed thought  
 He could not plan—Love's work and  
 Love must fit."  
                             —<span class="smallcaps">Alice
Dayton</span>.

</div>

</div>

<span id="img_winit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/winit.jpg) |

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> you step into your office on Monday
morning, no doubt you have dreams of wonderful achievement. Your step is
firm, your brain is clear and you have carefully thought out just WHAT
you will do and HOW you will accomplish big things in your business.
Perhaps the very plans you have in mind will influence your whole
business career, and

<span id="page_490">p. 490</span>

you have visions of the dollars that will be yours rolling into your
bank account.

But do these dreams come true?

Are you always able to put through what you had planned to do—does your
day's work have the snap and power you imagined it would have? Are you
ever forced to admit that your dreams of big accomplishment are of ten
shattered because of "fagged nerves" and lack of energy, because you
have not the "pep"?

How easy it is to think back and see how success was in your grasp if
only you had felt equal to that extra bit of effort, if only you had had
the "pep," the energy to reach out and take it. The great men of the
world have been well men, strong men. Sickness and hesitancy go hand in
hand. Sickness means weakness, querulousness, lack of faith, lack of
confidence in oneself and in others.

<span id="page_491">p. 491</span>

But there is no real reason for sickness or weakness, and there is no
reason why you should remain weak or sick if you are so afflicted now.

Remember the story of the sculptor Pygmalion? How he made a statue of
marble so beautiful that every woman who saw it envied it? So perfect
was it that he fell in love with it himself, hung it with flowers and
jewels, spent day after day in rapt admiration of it, until finally the
gods took pity upon him and breathed into it the breath of life.

There is more than Pagan mythology to that story. There is this much
truth in it—that any man can set before his mind's eye the image of the
figure he himself would like to be, and then breathe the breath of life
into it merely by keeping that image before his subconscious

<span id="page_492">p. 492</span>

mind as the model on which to do its daily building.

For health and strength are natural. It is ill-health and weakness that
are unnatural. Your body was meant to be lithe, supple, muscular, full
of red-blooded energy and vitality. A clear brain, a powerful heart, a
massive chest, wrists and arms of steel—all these were meant for you—all
these you can have if you will but *know*, and *feel*, and *think
aright*.

Just take stock of yourself for a moment. Are your muscles tough,
springy and full of vim? Do they do all you ask of them—and then beg for
more? Can you eat a good meal—and forget it?

If you can't, it's your own fault. You can have a body alive with
vitality, a skin smooth and fine of texture, muscles

<span id="page_493">p. 493</span>

supple and virile. You can be the man you have always dreamed of being,
without arduous dieting, without tiresome series of exercises, merely by
following the simple rules herein laid down.

For what is it that builds up the muscles, puts energy and vitality into
your system, gives you the pep and vigor of youth? *Is it exercise?*
Then why is it that so many day laborers are poor, weak, anæmic
creatures, forced to lay off from one to three months every year on
account of sickness? They get plenty of exercise and fresh air. Why is
it that so many athletes die of tuberculosis or of weak hearts? They get
the most scientific exercise year in and year out.

Just the other day I read of the sudden death of Martin A. Delaney, the
famous trainer, known all over the country as a physical director. He
taught

<span id="page_494">p. 494</span>

thousands how to be strong, but "Athletic Heart" killed him at 55.
Passersby saw him running for a car, then suddenly topple over dead.

"Exercise as a panacea for all human ills is dangerously overrated," Dr.
Charles M. Wharton, in charge of health and physical education at the
University of Pennsylvania, said today (March 20, 1926), according to an
Associated Press despatch.

Dr. Wharton, who has been a trainer of men for thirty years and was an
all-American guard on the Pennsylvania football team in 1895 and 1896,
declared the search for the fountain of youth by exercise and diet has
been commercialized to a point of hysteria.

"Some one should cry a halt against this wild scramble for health by
unnatural means," said Dr. Wharton. "This

<span id="page_495">p. 495</span>

indiscriminate adoption of severe physical training destroys the health
of more people than it improves."

Dr. Wharton said he was appalled by the amount of physical defects and
weaknesses developed by overindulgence in athletics by students in
preparatory schools.

“I know I am presenting an unpopular viewpoint, and it may sound strange
coming from a physical director.

“In gymnasium work at the University of Pennsylvania we try to place our
young men in sports *which they will enjoy*, and thus get a physical
stimulation from *relaxed play*.”

*Is it diet?* Then why is it that so many people you know, who have been
dieting for years, are still such poor, flabby creatures? Doesn't it
always work, or is it merely a matter of guess-work—and

<span id="page_496">p. 496</span>

those were the cases where no one happened to guess right? Why is it
that doctors disagree so on what is the correct diet? For years we have
been taught to forswear too much meat. For years we have been told that
it causes rheumatism and gout and hardening of the arteries—and a dozen
or more other ailments.

Now comes Dr. Woods Hutchinson—a noted authority, quoted the world
over—and says: "All the silly old prejudice against meat, that it heated
the blood (whatever that means) and produced uric acid to excess,
hardened the arteries, inflamed the kidneys, caused rheumatism, etc.,
has now been proved to be pure fairy tales, utterly without foundation
in scientific fact.

"Red meats have nothing whatever to do with causing gout and rheumatism,

<span id="page_497">p. 497</span>

because neither of these diseases is due to foods or drinks of any sort,
but solely to what we call local infections. Little pockets of pus
(matter) full of robber germs mostly streptococci—around the roots of
our teeth, in the pouches of our tonsils, in the nasal passages and
sinuses of our foreheads and faces opening into them;…Our belief now is:
'No pockets of pus, no rheumatism or gout.' Food of any kind has
absolutely nothing to do with the case.

"On the other hand, the very worst cases on record in all medical
history of hardening and turning to lime (calcification) of the arteries
all over the body, and in the kidneys and intestines particularly, have
been found in Trappist and certain orders of Oriental monks who live
almost exclusively upon starch and

<span id="page_498">p. 498</span>

pulse—that is, peas, beans, and lentils, and abstain from meat
entirely."

Then what is right? *Is it the combination of diet and exercise?* But
surely the patients in sanitariums and similar institutions would have
every chance to get just the right combination, yet how often you see
them come out little, if any, better off than when they went in.

No. None of these is the answer. As a matter of fact, the principal good
of either diet or exercise is that it keeps before the patient's mind
the RESULT he is working for, and in that way tends to impress it upon
his subconscious mind. That is why physical culturists always urge you
to exercise in front of a mirror. If results are achieved, it is MIND
that achieves them—not the movements you go through or the particular
kind of food you eat.

<span id="page_499">p. 499</span>

Understand, I don't ask you to stop exercising. A reasonable amount of
light, pleasant exercise is good for you mentally and physically. It
develops your will power. It helps to impress upon your subconscious
mind the image you want to see realized in your body. And it takes your
mind off your troubles and worries, centering your thoughts instead upon
your desires. Just where your thoughts should always be.

Outdoor exercise, tennis, horseback, swimming—any sort of active
*game*—is the best rest there is for a tired mind. For mental tiredness
comes from a too steady contemplation of ones problems. And anything
that will take ones mind completely off them, and give the subconscious
time to work out the solution, is good. That is why it so often happens
that you go back to your work after

<span id="page_500">p. 500</span>

a day of play—not merely refreshed, but with so clear a mind that the
problems which before seemed insurmountable are but as child's play to
you.

You who envy the rosy cheek and sparkling eye of youth, who awake in the
morning weary and unrefreshed, who go to your daily tasks with fagged
brain and heavy tread—just remember that Perfect Youth or Perfect Health
is merely a state of mind.

There is only one thing that puts muscles on your bones. There is only
one thing that keeps your organs functioning with precision and
regularity. There is only one thing that builds for you a perfect body.
That one thing is your subconscious mind.

Every cell and tissue, every bone and sinew, every organ and muscle in
your entire body is subject to the control of

<span id="page_501">p. 501</span>

your subconscious mind. As it directs, so they build or function.

True, that subconscious mind accepts suggestions from your conscious
mind. Hold before it the thought that the exercise you are taking is
building muscle upon your arms or shoulders, and your subconscious mind
will fall in readily with the suggestion and strengthen those muscles.
Hold before it the thought that some particular food gives you unusual
energy and "pep," and the subconscious mind will be entirely agreeable
to producing the; added vigor.

But have you ever noticed how some sudden joy (which is entirely a
mental state) energizes and revitalizes you—*more than all the exercise
or all the tonics you can take?* Have you ever noticed how martial music
will relieve the fatigue of marching men? Have you

<span id="page_502">p. 502</span>

ever noticed how sorrow (which is entirely a mental state) will depress
and devitalize you, *regardless of any amount of exercise or health
foods you may take?*

Each of us has within him all the essentials that go to the making of a
Super-Man. But so has every acorn the essentials for making a great oak
tree, yet the Japanese show us that even an oak may be stunted by
continual pruning of its shoots. Negative and weak thoughts, thoughts of
self-doubt, of mistrust, continually prune back the vigorous life ever
seeking so valiantly to show forth the splendor and strength of the
radiant inner self.

Choose what you will be! Your responsibility is to think, speak, act the
true inner self. Your privilege is to show forth in this self, the
fullness of peace and plenty. Keep steadfastly in

<span id="page_503">p. 503</span>

mind the idea of yourself that you want to see realized. Your daily,
hourly, and continual idea of yourself, your life, your affairs, your
world, and your associates, determines the harvest, the showing forth.
Look steadfastly to your highest ideal of self, and your steadfast and
lofty ideal will draw forth blessing and prosperity not only upon you,
but upon ail who know you.

For mind is the only creator, and thought is the only energy. All that
counts is the image of your body that you are holding in your thought.
If heretofore that image has been one of weakness, of ill-health, change
it *now*—TODAY. Repeat to yourself, the first thing upon awakening in
the morning and the last thing before going to sleep at night—"My body
was made in the image and likeness of God. God first

<span id="page_504">p. 504</span>

imagined it in its entirety, therefore every cell and bone and tissue is
perfect, every organ and muscle performing its proper function. That is
the only model of me in Universal Mind. That is the only model of me
that my Subconscious Mind knows. Therefore, since Mind—God—is the only
creator, *that is the only model of me that I can have!*"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXII. Why Grow Old?](tsoa35)
