[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cml09)  [Next](cml11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0809531534/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span> <span id="ch-06"></span>

### CHAPTER VI

### THE GODS ARRIVE

The people of the goddess Danu were not the first divine inhabitants of
Ireland. Others had been before them, dwellers in "the dark backward and
abysm of time". In this the Celtic mythology resembles those of other
nations, in almost all of which we find an old, dim realm of gods
standing behind the reigning Pantheon. Such were Cronos and the Titans,
dispossessed by the Zeus who seemed, even to Hesiod, something of a
*parvenu* deity. Gaelic tradition recognizes two divine dynasties
anterior to the Tuatha Dé Danann. The first of these was called "The
Race of Partholon". Its head and leader came--as all gods and men came,
according to Celtic ideas--from the Other World, and landed in Ireland
with a retinue of twenty-four males and twenty-four females upon the
first of May, the day called "Beltaine", sacred to Bilé, the god of
death. At this remote time, Ireland consisted of only one treeless,
grassless plain, watered by three lakes and nine rivers. But, as the
race of Partholon increased, the land stretched, or widened, under
them--some said miraculously, and others, by the labours of Partholon's
people. At any rate, during the three hundred years they dwelt there, it
grew from one

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

plain to four, and acquired seven new lakes; which was fortunate, for
the race of Partholon increased from forty-eight members to five
thousand, in spite of battles with the Fomors.

These would seem to have been inevitable. Whatever gods ruled, they
found themselves in eternal opposition to the not-gods--the powers of
darkness, winter, evil, and death. The race of Partholon warred against
them with success. At the Plain of Ith, Partholon defeated their leader,
a gigantic demon called Cichol the Footless, and dispersed his deformed
and monstrous host. After this there was quiet for three hundred years.
Then--upon the same fatal first of May--there began a mysterious
epidemic, which lasted a week, and destroyed them all. In premonition of
their end, they foregathered upon the original, first-created
plain--then called *Sen Mag*, or the "Old Plain",--so that those who
survived might the more easily bury those that died. Their funeral-place
is still marked by a mound near Dublin, called "Tallaght" in the maps,
but formerly known as *Tamlecht Muintre Partholain*, the "Plague-grave
of Partholon's People". This would seem to have been a development of
the very oldest form of the legend--which knew nothing of a plague, but
merely represented the people of Partholon as having returned, after
their sojourn in Ireland, to the other world, whence they came--and is
probably due to the gradual euhemerization of the ancient gods into
ancient men.

Following the race of Partholon, came the race

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

of Nemed, which carried on the work and traditions of its forerunner.
During its time, Ireland again enlarged herself, to the extent of twelve
new plains and four more lakes. Like the people of Partholon, the race
of Nemed struggled with the Fomors, and defeated them in four
consecutive battles. Then Nemed died, with two thousand of his people,
from an epidemic, and the remnant, left without their leader, were
terribly oppressed by the Fomors. Two Fomorian kings--Morc, son of Dela,
and Conann, son of Febar--had built a tower of glass upon Tory Island,
always their chief strong-hold, and where stories of them still linger,
and from this vantage-point they dictated a tax which recalls that paid,
in Greek story, to the Cretan Minotaur. Two-thirds of the children born
to the race of Nemed during the year were to be delivered up on each day
of Samhain. Goaded by this to a last desperate effort, the survivors of
Nemed's people attacked the tower, and took it, Conann perishing in the
struggle. But their triumph was short. Morc, the other king, collected
his forces, and inflicted such a slaughter upon the people of Nemed
that, out of the sixteen thousand who had assembled for the storming of
the tower, only thirty survived. And these returned whence they came, or
died--the two acts being, mythologically speaking, the same. <span
id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94)

One cannot help seeing a good deal of similarity between the stories of
these two mythical invasions of Ireland. Especially noticeable is the
account of

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

the epidemic which destroyed all Partholon's people and nearly all of
Nemed's. Hence it has been held that the two legends are duplicates, and
that there was at first only one, which has been adapted somewhat
differently by two races, the Iberians and the Gaels. Professor Rhys
considers <span id="fr_95"></span>[1](#fn_95) the account of Nemed to
have been the original Celtic one, and the Partholon story, the version
of it which the native races made to please themselves. The name
"Partholon", with its initial *p*, is entirely foreign to the genius of
Gaelic speech. Moreover, Partholon himself is given, by the early
chroniclers, ancestors whose decidedly non-Aryan names reappear
afterwards as the names of Fir Bolg chiefs. Nemed was later than
Partholon in Ireland, as the Gaels, or "Milesians", were later than the
Iberians, or "Fir Bolgs".

These "Fir Bolgs" are found in myth as the next colonizers of Ireland.
Varying traditions say that they came from Greece, or from
"Spain"--which was a post-Christian euphemism for the Celtic
Hades. <span id="fr_96"></span>[2](#fn_96) They consisted of three
tribes, called the "Fir Domnann" or "Men of Domnu", the "Fir Gaillion"
or "Men of Gaillion", and the "Fir Bolg" or "Men of Bolg"; but, in spite
of the fact that the first-named tribe was the most important, they are
usually called collectively after the last. Curious stories are told of
their life in Greece, and how they came to Ireland; but these are
somewhat factitious, and obviously do not belong to the earliest
tradition.

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

In the time of their domination they had, we are told, partitioned
Ireland among them: the Fir Bolg held Ulster; the Fir Domnann, divided
into three kingdoms, occupied North Munster, South Munster, and
Connaught; while the Fir Gaillion owned Leinster. These five provinces
met at a hill then called "Balor's Hill", but afterwards the "Hill of
Uisnech". It is near Rathconrath, in the county of West Meath, and was
believed, in early times, to mark the exact centre of Ireland. They held
the country from the departure of the people of Nemed to the coming of
the people of the goddess Danu, and during this period they had nine
supreme kings. At the time of the arrival of the gods, their king's name
was Eochaid <span id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_97) son of Erc, surnamed
"The Proud".

We have practically no other details regarding their life in Ireland. It
is obvious, however, that they were not really gods, but the pre-Aryan
race which the Gaels, when they landed in Ireland, found already in
occupation. There are many instances of peoples at a certain stage of
culture regarding tribes in a somewhat lower one as semi-divine, or,
rather, half-diabolical. <span id="fr_98"></span>[2](#fn_98) The
suspicion and fear with which the early Celts must have regarded the
savage aborigines made them seem "larger than human". They feared them
for the weird magical rites which they practised in their inaccessible
forts among the hills, amid storms and mountain mists. The Gaels, who
held themselves to be the children of light, deemed these "dark
Iberians" children of

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

the dark. Their tribal names seem to have been, in several instances,
founded upon this idea. There were the *Corca-Oidce* ("People of
Darkness") and the *Corca-Duibhne* ("People of the Night"). The
territory of the western tribe of the *Hi Dorchaide* ("Sons of Dark")
was called the "Night Country". <span id="fr_99"></span>[1](#fn_99) The
Celts, who held their own gods to have preceded them into Ireland, would
not believe that even the Tuatha Dé Danann could have wrested the land
from these magic-skilled Iberians without battle.

They seem also to have been considered as in some way connected with the
Fomors. Just as the largest Iberian tribe was called the "Men of Domnu",
so the Fomors were called the "Gods of Domnu", and Indech, one of their
kings, is a "son of Domnu". Thus eternal battle between the gods,
children of Danu, and the giants, children of Domnu, would reflect, in
the supernatural world, the perpetual warfare between invading Celt and
resisting Iberian. It is shadowed, too, in the later heroic cycle. The
champions of Ulster, Aryans and Gaels *par excellence*, have no such
bitter enemies as the Fir Domnann of Munster and the Fir Gaillion of
Leinster. A few scholars would even see in the later death-struggle
between the High King of Ireland and his rebellious Fenians the last
historic or mythological adumbration of racial war. <span
id="fr_100"></span>[2](#fn_100)

The enemies alike of Fir Bolg and Fomor, the

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Tuatha Dé Danann,
gods of the Gaels, were the next to arrive. What is probably the
earliest account tells us that they came from the sky. Later versions,
however, give them a habitation upon earth--some say in the north,
others in the "southern isles of the world". They had dwelt in four
mythical cities called Findias, Gorias, Murias, and Falias, where they
had learned poetry and magic--to the primitive mind two not very
dissimilar things--and whence they had brought to Ireland their four
chief treasures. From Findias came Nuada's sword, from whose stroke no
one ever escaped or recovered; from Gorias, Lugh's terrible lance; from
Murias, the Dagda's cauldron; and from Falias, the Stone of Fál, better
known as the "Stone of Destiny", which afterwards fell into the hands of
the early kings of Ireland. According to legend, it had the magic
property of uttering a human cry when touched by the rightful King of
Erin. Some have recognized in this marvellous stone the same rude block
which Edward I brought from Scone in the year 1300, and placed in
Westminster Abbey, where it now forms part of the Coronation Chair. It
is a curious fact that, while Scottish legend asserts this stone to have
come to Scotland from Ireland, Irish legend should also declare that it
was taken from Ireland to Scotland. This would sound like conclusive
evidence, but it is none the less held by leading modern
archæologists--including Dr. W. F. Skene, who has published a monograph
on the subject <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101)--that the Stone of
Scone and the Stone of

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Tara were never
the same. Dr. Petrie identifies the real *Lia Fáil* with a stone which
has always remained in Ireland, and which was removed from its original
position on Tara Hill, in 1798, to mark the tomb of the rebels buried
close by under a mound now known as "the Croppies' grave". <span
id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_102)

Whether the Tuatha Dé Danann came from earth or heaven, they landed in a
dense cloud upon the coast of Ireland on the mystic first of May without
having been opposed, or even noticed by the people whom it will be
convenient to follow the manuscript authorities in calling the "Fir
Bolgs". <span id="fr_103"></span>[2](#fn_103) That those might still be
ignorant of their coming, the Morrígú, helped by Badb and Macha, made
use of the magic they had learned in Findias, Gorias, Murias, and
Falias. They spread "druidically-formed showers and fog-sustaining
shower-clouds" over the country, and caused the air to pour down fire
and blood upon the Fir Bolgs, so that they were obliged to shelter
themselves for three days and three nights. But the Fir Bolgs had druids
of their own, and, in the end, they put a stop to these enchantments by
counter-spells, and the air grew clear again.

The Tuatha Dé Danann, advancing westward, had reached a place called the
"Plain of the Sea", in Leinster, when the two armies met. Each sent out
a warrior to parley. The two adversaries approached

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

each other cautiously, their eyes peeping over the tops of their
shields. Then, coming gradually nearer, they spoke to one another, and
the desire to examine each other's weapons made them almost friends.

The envoy of the Fir Bolgs looked with wonder at the
"beautifully-shaped, thin, slender, long, sharp-pointed spears" of the
warrior of the Tuatha Dé Danann, while the ambassador of the tribe of
the goddess Danu was not less impressed by the lances of the Fir Bolgs,
which were "heavy, thick, pointless, but sharply-rounded". They agreed
to exchange weapons, so that each side might, by an examination of them,
be able to come to some opinion as to its opponent's strength. Before
parting, the envoy of the Tuatha Dé Danann offered the Fir Bolgs,
through their representative, peace, with a division of the country into
two equal halves.

The Fir Bolg envoy advised his people to accept this offer. But their
king, Eochaid, son of Erc, would not. "If we once give these people
half," he said, "they will soon have the whole."

The people of the goddess Danu were, on the other hand, very much
impressed by the sight of the Fir Bolgs' weapons. They decided to secure
a more advantageous position, and, retreating farther west into
Connaught, to a plain then called Nia, but now Moytura, near the present
village of Cong, they drew up their line at its extreme end, in front of
the pass of Balgatan <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104), which
offered a retreat in case of defeat.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

The Fir Bolgs followed them, and encamped on the nearer side of the
plain. Then Nuada, King of the Tuatha Dé Danann, sent an ambassador
offering the same terms as before. Again the Fir Bolgs declined them.

"Then when", asked the envoy, "do you intend to give battle?"

"We must have a truce," they said, "for we want time to repair our
armour, burnish our helmets, and sharpen our swords. Besides, we must
have spears like yours made for us, and you must have spears like ours
made for you."

The result of this chivalrous, but, to modern ideas, amazing, parley was
that a truce of one hundred and five days was agreed upon.

It was on Midsummer Day that the opposing armies at last met. The people
of the goddess Danu appeared in "a flaming line", wielding their
"red-bordered, speckled, and firm shields". Opposite to them were ranged
the Fir Bolgs, "sparkling, brilliant, and flaming, with their swords,
spears, blades, and trowel-spears". The proceedings began with a kind of
deadly hurley-match, in which thrice nine of the Tuatha Dé Danann played
the same number of the Fir Bolgs, and were defeated and killed. Then
followed another parley, to decide how the battle should be carried on,
whether there should be fighting every day or only on every second day.
Moreover, Nuada obtained from Eochaid an assurance that the battles
should always be fought with equal numbers, although this was, we are
told, "very disagreeable to the Fir Bolg

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

king, because he had largely the advantage in the numbers of his army".
Then warfare recommenced with a series of single combats, like those of
the Greeks and Trojans in the "Iliad". At the end of each day the
conquerors on both sides went back to their camps, and were refreshed by
being bathed in healing baths of medicinal herbs.

So the fight went on for four days, with terrible slaughter upon each
side. A Fir Bolg champion called Sreng fought in single combat with
Nuada, the King of the Gods, and shore off his hand and half his shield
with one terrific blow. Eochaid, the King of the Fir Bolgs, was even
less fortunate than Nuada; for he lost his life. Suffering terribly from
thirst, he went, with a hundred of his men, to look for water, and was
followed, and pursued as far as the strand of Ballysadare, in Sligo.
Here he turned to bay, but was killed, his grave being still marked by a
tumulus. The Fir Bolgs, reduced at last to three hundred men, demanded
single combat until all upon one side were slain. But, sooner than
consent to this, the Tuatha Dé Danann offered them a fifth part of
Ireland, whichever province they might choose. They agreed, and chose
Connaught, ever afterwards their especial home, and where, until the
middle of the seventeenth century, men were still found tracing their
descent from Sreng.

The whole story has a singularly historical, curiously unmythological
air about it, which contrasts strangely with the account of the other
battle of the same name which the Tuatha Dé Danann waged

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

afterwards with the Fomors. The neighbourhood of Cong still preserves
both relics and traditions of the fight. Upon the plain of "Southern
Moytura" (as it is called, to distinguish it from the "Northern Moytura"
of the second battle) are many circles and tumuli. These circles are
especially numerous near the village itself; and it is said that there
were formerly others, which have been used for making walls and dykes.
Large cairns of stones, too, are scattered over what was certainly once
the scene of a great battle. <span id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_105) These
various prehistoric monuments each have their still-told story; and Sir
William Wilde, as he relates in his *Lough Corrib*, <span
id="fr_106"></span>[2](#fn_106) was so impressed by the unexpected
agreement between the details of the legendary battle, as he read them
in the ancient manuscript, and the traditions still attaching to the
mounds, circles, and cairns, that he tells us he could not help coming
to the conclusion that the account was absolutely historical. Certainly
the coincidences are curious. His opinion was that the "Fir Bolgs" were
a colony of Belgæ, and that the "Tuatha Dé Danann" were Danes. But the
people of the goddess Danu are too obviously mythical to make it worth
while to seek any standing-ground for them in the world of reality. In
their superhuman attributes, they are quite different from the Fir
Bolgs. In the epical cycle it is made as clear that the Tuatha Dé Danann
are divine beings as it is that the Fir Bolg, the Fir Domnann, and the
Fir Gaillion stand on exactly

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

the same footing as the men of Ulster. Later history records by what
Milesian kings and on what terms of rack-rent the three tribes were
allowed settlements in other parts of Ireland than their native
Connaught. They appear in ancient, mediæval, and almost modern
chronicles as the old race of the land. The truth seems to be that the
whole story of the war between the gods and the Fir Bolgs is an
invention of comparatively late times. In the earliest documents there
is only one battle of Moytura, fought between the people of the goddess
Danu and the Fomors. The idea of doubling it seems to date from after
the eleventh century; <span id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_107) and its
inventor may very well have used the legends concerning this
battle-field, where two unknown armies had fought in days gone by, in
compiling his story. It never belonged to the same genuine mythological
stratum as the legend of the original battle fought by the Tuatha Dé
Danann, the gods of the Gaels, against the Fomors, the gods of the
Iberians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_94"></span>[67:1](cml10.htm#fr_94) De Jubainville: *Cycle
Mythologique*, chap. V.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[68:1](cml10.htm#fr_95) Rhys: "The
Mythographical Treatment of Celtic Ethnology", *Scottish Review*, Oct.
1890.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[68:2](cml10.htm#fr_96) De Jubainville: *Cycle
Mythologique*, chap. v. Rhys: *Hibbert Lectures*, pp. 90, 91.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[69:1](cml10.htm#fr_97) Pronounced *Ecca* or
*Eohee*.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[69:2](cml10.htm#fr_98) Gomme: *Ethnology in
Folklore*, chap. III--"The Mythic Influence of a Conquered Race"

<span id="fn_99"></span>[70:1](cml10.htm#fr_99) Elton: *Origins of
English History*, note to p. 136.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[70:2](cml10.htm#fr_100) It has been contended
that the Fenians were originally the gods or heroes of an aboriginal
people in Ireland, the myths about them representing the pre-Celtic and
pre-Aryan ideal, as the sagas of the Red Branch of Ulster embodied that
of the Celtic Aryans. The question, however, is as yet far from being
satisfactorily solved.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[71:1](cml10.htm#fr_101) *The Coronation
Stone*, by William Forbes Skene.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[72:1](cml10.htm#fr_102) See *History and
Antiquities of Tara Hill*.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[72:2](cml10.htm#fr_103) Our authorities for
the details of this war between the Tuatha Dé Danann and the Fir Bolgs
are the opening verses of the Harleian MS. 5280, as translated by Stokes
and De Jubainville, and Eugene O’Curry's translations, in his *MS.
Materials of Ancient Irish History* and his *Manners and Customs of the
Ancient Irish*, from a manuscript preserved at Trinity College, Dublin.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[73:1](cml10.htm#fr_104) Now called Benlevi.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[76:1](cml10.htm#fr_105) See Dr. James
Fergusson: *Rude Stone Monuments*, pp. 177-180.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[76:2](cml10.htm#fr_106) *Lough Corrib, Its
Shores and Islands*, by Sir William R. Wilde, chap. VIII.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[77:1](cml10.htm#fr_107) De Jubainville: *Cycle
Mythologique Irlandais*, p. 156.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Rise of the Sun-God](cml11)
