[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cml18)  [Next](cml20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0809531534/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span> <span id="ch-15"></span>

### CHAPTER XV

### THE DECLINE AND FALL OF THE GODS

In spite, however, of the wide-spread popularity of the ballads that
took the form of dialogues between Ossian and Patrick, certain
traditions say that the saint succeeded in converting the hero. Caoilté,
the other great surviving Fenian, was also represented as having gladly
exchanged his pagan lore for the faith and salvation offered him. We may
see the same influence on foot in the later legends concerning the Red
Branch Champions. It was the policy of the first Christianizers of
Ireland to describe the loved heroes of their still half-heathen flocks
as having handed in their submission to the new creed. The tales about
Conchobar and Cuchulainn were amended, to prove that those very pagan
personages had been miraculously brought to accept the gospel at the
last. An entirely new story told how the latter hero was raised from the
dead by Saint Patrick that he might bear witness of the truth of
Christianity to Laogaire the Second, King of Ireland, which he did with
such fervour and eloquence that the sceptical monarch was
convinced. <span id="fr_259"></span>[1](#fn_259)

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

Daring attempts were also made to change the Tuatha Dé Danann from pagan
gods into Christian saints, but these were by no means so profitable as
the policy pursued towards the more human-seeming heroes. With one of
them alone, was success immediate and brilliant. Brigit, the goddess of
fire, poetry, and the hearth, is famous to-day as Saint Bridget, or
Bride. Most popular of all the Irish saints, she can still be easily
recognized as the daughter of the Dagda. Her Christian attributes,
almost all connected with fire, attest her pagan origin. <span
id="fr_260"></span>[1](#fn_260) She was born at sunrise; a house in
which she dwelt blazed into a flame which reached to heaven; a pillar of
fire rose from her head when she took the veil; and her breath gave new
life to the dead. As with the British goddess Sul, worshipped at Bath,
who--the first century Latin writer Solinus <span
id="fr_261"></span>[2](#fn_261) tells us--"ruled over the boiling
springs, and at her altar there flamed a perpetual fire which never
whitened into ashes, but hardened into a stony mass", the sacred flame
on her shrine at Kildare was never allowed to go out. It was
extinguished once, in the thirteenth century, but was relighted, and
burnt with undying glow until the suppression of the monasteries by
Henry the Eighth. This sacred fire might not be breathed on by the
impure human breath. For nineteen nights it was tended by her nuns, but
on the twentieth night it was left untouched, and kept itself alight
miraculously. With so little of her essential character

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

and ritual changed, it is small wonder that the half-pagan,
half-Christian Irish gladly accepted the new saint in the stead of the
old goddess.

Doubtless a careful examination of Irish hagiology would result in the
discovery of many other saints whose names and attributes might render
them suspect of previous careers as pagan gods. But their acceptation
was not sufficiently general to do away with the need of other means of
counter-acting the still living influence of the Gaelic Pantheon.
Therefore a fresh school of euhemerists arose to prove that the gods
were never even saints, but merely worldly men who had once lived and
ruled in Erin. Learned monks worked hard to construct a history of
Ireland from the Flood downwards. Mr. Eugene O’Curry has compiled from
the various pedigrees they elaborated, and inserted into the books of
Ballymote, Lecan, and Leinster an amazing genealogy which shows how, not
merely the Tuatha Dé Danann, but also the Fir Bolgs, the Fomors, the
Milesians, and the races of Partholon and Nemed were descended from
Noah. Japhet, the patriarch's son, was the father of Magog, from whom
came two lines, the first being the Milesians, while the second branched
out into all the other races. <span id="fr_262"></span>[1](#fn_262)

Having once worked the gods, first into universal history, and then into
the history of Ireland, it was an easy matter to supply them with dates
of birth and death, local habitations, and places of burial.

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> We are told with
precision exactly how long Nuada, the Dagda, Lugh, and the others
reigned at Tara. The barrows by the Boyne provided them with comfortable
tombs. Their enemies, the Fomors, became real invaders who were beaten
in real battles. Thus it was thought to make plain prose of their
divinities.

It is only fair, however, to these early euhemerists to say that they
have their modern disciples. There are many writers, of recognized
authority upon their subjects, who, in dealing with the history of
Ireland or the composition of the British race, claim to find real
peoples in the tribes mentioned in Gaelic myth. Unfortunately, the only
point they agree upon is the accepted one--that the "Milesians" were
Aryan Celts. They are divided upon the question of the "Fir Bolgs", in
whom some see the pre-Aryan tribes, while others, led astray by the
name, regard them as Belgic Gauls; and over the really mythological
races they run wild. In the Tuatha Dé Danann are variously found Gaels,
Picts, Danes, Scandinavians, Ligurians, and Finns, while the Fomors rest
under the suspicion of having been Iberians, Moors, Romans, Finns,
Goths, or Teutons. As for the people of Partholon and Nemed, they have
even been explained as men of the Palæolithic Age. This chaos of opinion
was fortunately avoided by the native annalists, who had no particular
views upon the question of race, except that everybody came from
"Spain".

Of course there were dissenters from this prevailing mania for
euhemerization. As late as the

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

tenth century, a poet called Eochaid O’Flynn, writing of the Tuatha Dé
Danann, at first seems to hesitate whether to ascribe humanity or
divinity to them, and at last frankly avows their godhead. In his poem,
preserved in the Book of Ballymote, <span
id="fr_263"></span>[1](#fn_263) he says:

"Though they came to learned Erinn  
Without buoyant, adventurous ships,  
No man in creation knew  
Whether they were of the earth or of the sky.

"If they were diabolical demons,  
They came from that woeful expulsion; <span
id="fr_264"></span>[2](#fn_264)  
If they were of a race of tribes and nations,  
If they were human, they were of the race of Beothach."

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Then he enumerates
them in due succession, and ends by declaring:--

"Though I have treated of these deities in their order,  
Yet I have not adored them".

One may surmise with probability that the common people agreed rather
with the poet than with the monk. Pious men in monasteries might write
what they liked, but mere laymen would not be easily persuaded that
their cherished gods had never been anything more than men like
themselves. Probably they said little, but acted in secret according to
their inherited ideas. Let it be granted, for the sake of peace, that
Goibniu was only a man; none the less, his name was known to be
uncommonly effective in an incantation. This

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

applied equally to Diancecht, and invocations to both of them are
contained in some verses which an eighth-century Irish monk wrote on the
margin of a manuscript still preserved at St. Gall, in Switzerland. Some
prescriptions of Diancecht's have come down to us, but it must be
admitted that they hardly differ from those current among ordinary
mediæval physicians. Perhaps, after that unfortunate spilling of the
herbs that grew out of Miach's body, he had to fall back upon empirical
research. He invented a porridge for "the relief of ailments of the
body, as cold, phlegm, throat cats, and the presence of living things in
the body, as worms"; it was compounded of hazel buds, dandelion,
chick-weed, sorrel, and oatmeal; and was to be taken every morning and
evening. He also prescribed against the effects of witchcraft and the
fourteen diseases of the stomach.

Goibniu, in addition to his original character as the divine smith and
sorcerer, gained a third reputation among the Irish as a great builder
and bridge-maker. As such he is known as the Gobhan Saer, that is,
Goibniu the Architect, and marvellous tales, current all over Ireland
attest his prowess.

"Men call’d him Gobhan Saer, and many a tale  
  Yet lingers in the by-ways of the land  
Of how he cleft the rock, or down the vale  
  Led the bright river, child-like, in his hand:  
Of how on giant ships he spread great sail,  
  And many marvels else by him first plann’d ",

writes a poet of modern Ireland. <span id="fr_265"></span>[1](#fn_265)
Especially were

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

the "round towers" attributed to him, and the Christian clerics
appropriated his popularity by describing him as having been the
designer of their churches. He used, according to legend, to wander over
the country, clad, like the Greek Hephaestus, whom he resembles, in
working dress, seeking commissions and adventures. His works remain in
the cathedrals and churches of Ireland; and, with regard to his
adventures, many strange legends are still, or were until very recently,
current upon the lips of old people in remote parts of Ireland.

Some of these are, as might have been expected, nothing more than
half-understood recollections of the ancient mythology. In them appear
as characters others of the old, yet not quite forgotten gods--Lugh,
Manannán, and Balor--names still remembered as those of long-past
druids, heroes, and kings of Ireland in the misty olden time.

One or two of them are worth retelling. Mr. William Larminie, collecting
folk-tales in Achill Island, took one from the lips of an aged peasant
which tells in its confused way what might almost be called the central
incident of Gaelic mythology, the mysterious birth of the sun-god from
demoniac parentage, and his eventual slaying of his grandfather when he
came to full age. <span id="fr_266"></span>[1](#fn_266)

Gobhan the Architect and his son, young Gobhan, runs the tale, were sent
for by Balor of the Blows to build him a palace. They built it so well
that Balor decided never to let them leave his kingdom alive, for fear
they should build another one

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

equally good for someone else. He therefore had all the scaffolding
removed from round the palace while they were still on the top, with the
intention of leaving them up there to die of hunger. But, when they
discovered this, they began to destroy the roof, so that Balor was
obliged to let them come down.

He, none the less, refused to allow them to return to Ireland. The
crafty Gobhan, however, had his plan ready. He told Balor that the
injury that had been done to the palace roof could not be repaired
without special tools, which he had left behind him at home. Balor
declined to let either old Gobhan or young Gobhan go back to fetch them;
but he offered to send his own son. Gobhan gave Balor's son directions
for the journey. He was to travel until he came to a house with a stack
of corn at the door. Entering it, he would find a woman with one hand
and a child with one eye.

Balor's son found the house, and asked the woman for the tools. She
expected him; for it had been arranged between Gobhan and his wife what
should be done, if Balor refused to let him return. She took Balor's son
to a huge chest, and told him that the tools were at the bottom of it,
so far down that she could not reach them, and that he must get into the
chest, and pick them up himself. But, as soon as he was safely inside,
she shut the lid on him, telling him that he would have to stay there
until his father allowed old Gobhan and young Gobhan to come home with
their pay. And she sent the same message to Balor himself.

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

There was an exchange of prisoners, Balor giving the two Gobhans their
pay and a ship to take them home, and Gobhan's wife releasing Balor's
son. But, before the two builders went, Balor asked them whom he should
now employ to repair his palace. Old Gobhan told him that, next to
himself, there was no workman in Ireland better than one Gavidjeen Go.

When Gobhan got back to Ireland, he sent Gavidjeen Go to Balor. But he
gave him a piece of advice--to accept as pay only one thing: Balor's
gray cow, which would fill twenty barrels at one milking. Balor agreed
to this, but, when he gave the cow to Gavidjeen Go to take back with him
to Ireland, he omitted to include her byre-rope, which was the only
thing that would keep her from returning to her original owner.

The gray cow gave so much trouble to Gavidjeen Go by her straying, that
he was obliged to hire military champions to watch her during the day
and bring her safely home at night. The bargain made was that Gavidjeen
Go should forge the champion a sword for his pay, but that, if he lost
the cow, his life was to be forfeited.

At last, a certain warrior called Cian was unlucky enough to let the cow
escape. He followed her tracks down to the sea-shore and right to the
edge of the waves, and there he lost them altogether. He was tearing his
hair in his perplexity, when he saw a man rowing a coracle. The man, who
was no other than Manannán son of Lêr, came in close to the shore, and
asked what was the matter.

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

Cian told him.

"What would you give to anyone who would take you to the place where the
gray cow is?" asked Manannán.

"I have nothing to give," replied Cian.

"All I ask," said Manannán, "is half of whatever you gain before you
come back."

Cian agreed to that willingly enough, and Manannán told him to get into
the coracle. In the wink of an eye, he had landed him in Balor's
kingdom, the realm of the cold, where they roast no meat, but eat their
food raw. Cian was not used to this diet, so he lit himself a fire, and
began to cook some food. Balor saw the fire, and came down to it, and he
was so pleased that he appointed Cian to be his fire-maker and cook.

Now Balor had a daughter, of whom a druid had prophesied that she would,
some day, bear a son who would kill his grandfather. Therefore, like
Acrisius, in Greek legend, he shut her up in a tower, guarded by women,
and allowed her to see no man but himself. One day, Cian saw Balor go to
the tower. He waited until he had come back, and then went to explore.
He had the gift of opening locked doors and shutting them again after
him. When he got inside, he lit a fire, and this novelty so delighted
Balor's daughter that she invited him to visit her again. After this--in
the Achill islander's quaint phrase--"he was ever coming there, until a
child happened to her." Balor's daughter gave the baby to Cian to take
away. She also gave him the byre-rope which belonged to the gray cow.

 

<span id="img_23600"></span>

[![CIAN FINDS BALOR'S DAUGHTER&lt;br&gt; From the Drawing by H. R.
Millar](tn/23600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/23600.jpg)  
CIAN FINDS BALOR'S DAUGHTER  
From the Drawing by H. R. Millar  

 

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

Cian was in great danger now, for Balor had found out about the child.
He led the gray cow away with the rope to the sea-shore, and waited for
Manannán. The Son of Lêr had told Cian that, when he was in any
difficulty, he was to think of him, and he would at once appear. Cian
thought of him now, and, in a moment, Manannán appeared with his
coracle. Cian got into the boat, with the baby and the gray cow, just as
Balor, in hot pursuit, came down to the beach.

Balor, by his incantations, raised a great storm to drown them; but
Manannán, whose druidism was greater, stilled it. Then Balor turned the
sea into fire, to burn them; but Manannán put it out with a stone.

When they were safe back in Ireland, Manannán asked Cian for his
promised reward.

"I have gained nothing but the boy, and I cannot cut him in two, so I
will give him to you whole," he replied.

"That is what I was wanting all the time," said Manannán; "when he grows
up, there will be no champion equal to him."

So Manannán baptized the boy, calling him "the Dul-Dauna". This name,
meaning "Blind-Stubborn", is certainly a curious corruption of the
original Ioldanach <span id="fr_267"></span>[1](#fn_267) "Master of all
Knowledge". When the boy had grown up, he went one day to the sea-shore.
A ship came past, in which was a man. The traditions of Donnybrook Fair
are evidently prehistoric, for the boy, without troubling to ask who

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

the stranger was, took a dart "out of his pocket", hurled it, and hit
him. The man in the boat happened to be Balor. Thus, in accordance with
the prophecy, he was slain by his grandson, who, though the folk-tale
does not name him, was obviously Lugh.

Another version of the same legend, collected by the Irish scholar
O’Donovan on the coast of Donegal, opposite Balor's favourite haunt,
Tory Island, is interesting as completing the one just narrated. <span
id="fr_268"></span>[1](#fn_268) In this folk-tale, Goibniu is called
Gavida, and is made one of three brothers, the other two being called
Mac Kineely and Mac Samthainn. They were chiefs of Donegal, smiths and
farmers, while Balor was a robber who harassed the mainland from his
strong-hold on Tory Island. The gray cow belonged to Mac Kineely, and
Balor stole it. Its owner determined to be revenged, and, knowing the
prediction concerning Balor's death at the hands of an as yet unborn
grandson, he persuaded a kindly fairy to spirit him in female disguise
to Tor Mor, where Balor's daughter, who was called Ethnea, was kept
imprisoned. The result of this expedition was not merely the one son
necessary to fulfil the prophecy, but three. This apparent superfluity
was fortunate; for Balor drowned two of them, the other being picked out
of the sea by the same fairy who had been incidentally responsible for
his birth, and handed over to his father, Mac Kineely, to be brought up.
Shortly after this, Balor managed to [capture](errata.htm#5) Mac
Kineely, and, in retaliation for the wrong done him, chopped off his
head upon a large white

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

stone, still known locally as the "Stone of Kineely". Satisfied with
this, and quite unaware that one of his daughter's children had been
saved from death, and was now being brought up as a smith by Gavida,
Balor went on with his career of robbery, varying it by visits to the
forge to purchase arms. One day, being there during Gavida's absence, he
began boasting to the young assistant of how he had compassed Mac
Kineely's death. He never finished the story, for Lugh--which was the
boy's name--snatched a red-hot iron from the fire, and thrust it into
Balor's eye, and through his head.

Thus, in these two folk-tales, <span id="fr_269"></span>[1](#fn_269)
gathered in different parts of Ireland, at different times, by different
persons, survives quite a mass of mythological detail only to be found
otherwise in ancient manuscripts containing still more ancient matter.
Crystallized in them may be found the names of six members of the old
Gaelic Pantheon, each filling the same part as of old. Goibniu has not
lost his mastery of smithcraft; Balor is still the Fomorian king of the
cold regions of the sea; his daughter Ethniu becomes, by Cian, the
mother of the sun-god; Lugh, who still bears his old title of
*Ioldanach*, though it is strangely corrupted into a name meaning almost
the exact opposite, is still fostered by Manannán, Son of the Sea, and
in the end grows up to destroy his grandfather by a blow in the one
vulnerable place, his death-dealing eye. Perhaps, too, we may claim to
see a genuine, though

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

jumbled tradition, in the Fomor-like deformities of Gobhan's wife and
child, and in the story of the gray cow and her byre-rope, which recalls
that of the Dagda's black-maned heifer, Ocean.

The memories of the peasantry still hold many stories of Lugh, as well
as of Angus, and others of the old gods. But, next to the Gobhan Saer,
the one whose fame is still greatest is that ever-potent and
ever-popular figure, the great Manannán.

The last, perhaps, to receive open adoration, he is represented by
kindly tradition as having been still content to help and watch over the
people who had rejected and ceased to worship him. Up to the time of St.
Columba, he was the special guardian of Irishmen in foreign parts,
assisting them in their dangers and bringing them home safe. For the
peasantry, too, he caused favourable weather and good crops. His fairy
subjects tilled the ground while men slept. But this is said to have
come to an end at last. Saint Columba, having broken his golden chalice,
gave it to a servant to get repaired. On his way, the servant was met by
a stranger, who asked him where he was going. The man told him, and
showed him the chalice. The stranger breathed upon it, and, at once, the
broken parts reunited. Then he begged him to return to his master, give
him the chalice, and tell him that Manannán son of Lêr, who had mended
it, desired to know in very truth whether he would ever attain paradise
"Alas," said the ungrateful saint, "there is no forgiveness for a man
who does such works as this!" The servant went back with the answer, and
Manannán,

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

when he heard it, broke out into indignant lament. "Woe is me, Manannán
mac Lêr! for years I've helped the Catholics of Ireland, but I'll do it
no more, till they're as weak as water. I'll go to the gray waves in the
Highlands of Scotland." <span id="fr_270"></span>[1](#fn_270)

And there he remained. For, unless the charming stories of Miss Fiona
Macleod are mere beautiful imaginings and nothing more, he is not
unknown even to-day among the solitary shepherds and fishers of "the
farthest Hebrides". In the *Contemporary Review* for October,
1902, <span id="fr_271"></span>[2](#fn_271) she tells how an old man of
four-score years would often be visited in his shieling by a tall,
beautiful stranger, with a crest on his head, "like white canna blowing
in the wind, but with a blueness in it", and "a bright, cold, curling
flame under the soles of his feet". The man told him many things, and
prophesied to him the time of his death. Generally, the stranger's hands
were hidden in the folds of the white cloak he wore, but, once, he moved
to touch the shepherd, who saw then that his flesh was like water, with
sea-weed floating among the bones. So that Murdo MacIan knew that he
could be speaking with none other than the Son of the Sea.

Nor is he yet quite forgotten in his own Island of Man, of which local
tradition says he was the. first inhabitant. He is also described as its
king, who kept it from invasion by his magic. He would cause mists to
rise at any moment and conceal the island,

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

and by the same glamour he could make one man seem like a hundred, and
little chips of wood which he threw into the water to appear like ships
of war. It is no wonder that he held his kingdom against all-comers,
until his sway was ended, like that of the other Gaelic gods, by the
arrival of Saint Patrick. After this, he seems to have declined into a
traditionary giant who used to leap from Peel Castle to Contrary Head
for exercise, or hurl huge rocks, upon which the mark of his hand can
still be seen. It is said that he took no tribute from his subjects, or
worshippers except bundles of green rushes, which were placed every
Midsummer Eve upon two mountain peaks, one called Warrefield in olden
days, but now South Barrule, and the other called Man, and not now to be
identified. His grave, which is thirty yards long, is pointed out, close
to Peel Castle. The most curious legend connected with him, however,
tells us that he had three legs, on which he used to travel at a great
pace. How this was done may be seen from the arms of the island, on
which are pictured his three limbs, joined together, and spread out like
the spokes of a wheel. <span id="fr_272"></span>[1](#fn_272)

An Irish tradition tells us that, when Manannán left Ireland for
Scotland, the vacant kingship of the gods or fairies was taken by one
Mac Moineanta; to the great grief of those who had known Manannán. <span
id="fr_273"></span>[2](#fn_273) Perhaps this great grief led to Mac
Moineanta's being deposed, for the present king of the

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Irish fairies is
Finvarra, the same Fionnbharr to whom the Dagda allotted the *sídhe* of
Meadha after the conquest of the Tuatha Dé Danann by the Milesians, and
who takes a prominent part in the Fenian stories. So great is the
persistence of tradition in Ireland that this hill of Meadha, now spelt
Knockma, is still considered to be the abode of him and his queen,
Onagh. Numberless stories are told about Finvarra, including, of course,
that very favourite Celtic tale of the stolen bride, and her recapture
from the fairies by the siege and digging up of the *sídh* in which she
was held prisoner. Finvarra, like Mider of Bri Leith, carried away a
human Etain--the wife, not of a high king, but of an Irish lord. The
modern Eochaid Airem, having heard an invisible voice tell him where he
was to look for his lost bride, gathered all his workmen and labourers
and proceeded to demolish Knockma. Every day they almost dug it up, but
every night the breach was found to have been repaired by fairy workmen
of Finvarra's. This went on for three days, when the Irish lord thought
of the well-known device of sanctifying the work of excavation by
sprinkling the turned-up earth with salt. Needless to say, it succeeded.
Finvarra gave back the bride, still in the trance into which he had
thrown her; and the deep cut into the fairy hill still remains to
furnish proof to the incredulous. <span id="fr_274"></span>[1](#fn_274)

Finvarra does not always appear, however, in

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

such unfriendly guise. He was popularly reputed to have under his
special care the family of the Kirwans of Castle Hacket, on the northern
slope of Knockma. Owing to his benevolent influence, the castle cellars
never went dry, nor did the quality of the wine deteriorate. Besides the
wine-cellar, Finvarra looked after the stables, and it was owing to the
exercise that he and his fairy followers gave the horses by night that
Mr. John Kirwan's racers were so often successful on the Curragh. That
such stories could have passed current as fact, which they undoubtedly
did, is excellent proof of how late and how completely a mythology may
survive among the uncultured. <span id="fr_275"></span>[1](#fn_275)

Finvarra rules to-day over a wide realm of fairy folk. Many of these,
again, have their own vassal chieftains, forming a tribal hierarchy such
as must have existed in the Celtic days of Ireland. Finvarra and Onagh
are high king and queen, but, under them, Cliodna <span
id="fr_276"></span>[2](#fn_276) is tributary queen of Munster, and rules
from a *sídh* near Mallow in County Cork, while, under her again, are
Aoibhinn <span id="fr_277"></span>[3](#fn_277), queen of the fairies of
North Munster, and Ainé, queen of the fairies of South Munster. These
names form but a single instance. A map of fairy Ireland could without
much difficulty be drawn, showing, with almost political exactness, the
various kingdoms of the Sídhe.

Far less easy, however, would be the task of ascertaining the origin and
lineage of these fabled

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

beings. Some of them can still be traced as older gods and goddesses. In
the eastern parts of Ireland, Badb and her sisters have become
"banshees" who wail over deaths not necessarily found in battle. Aynia,
deemed the most powerful fairy in Ulster, and Ainé, queen of South
Munster, are perhaps the same person, the mysterious and awful goddess
once adored as Anu, or Danu. Of the two, it is Ainé who especially seems
to carry on the traditions of the older Anu, worshipped, according to
the "Choice of Names", in Munster as a goddess of prosperity and
abundance. Within living memory, she was propitiated by a magical ritual
upon every Saint John's Eve, to ensure fertility during the coming year.
The villagers round her *sídh* of Cnoc Ainé (Knockainy) carried burning
bunches of hay or straw upon poles to the top of the hill, and thence
dispersed among the fields, waving these torches over the crops and
cattle. This fairy, or goddess was held to be friendly, and, indeed,
more than friendly, to men. Whether or not she were the mother of the
gods, she is claimed as first ancestress by half a dozen famous Irish
families.

Among her children was the famous Earl Gerald, offspring of her alliance
with the fourth Earl of Desmond, known as "The Magician". As in the
well-known story of the Swan-maidens, the magician-earl is said to have
stolen Ainé's cloak while she was bathing, and refused to return it
unless she became his bride. But, in the end, he lost her. Ainé had
warned her husband never to show surprise at anything done by their son;
but a wonderful

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

feat which he performed made the earl break this condition, and Ainé was
obliged, by fairy law, to leave him. But, though she had lost her
husband, she was not separated from her son, who was received into the
fairy world after his death, and now lives under the surface of Lough
Gur, in County Limerick, waiting, like the British Arthur, for the hour
to strike in which he shall lead forth his warriors to drive the
foreigners from Ireland. But this will not be until, by riding round the
lake once in every seventh year, he shall have worn his horse's silver
shoes as thin as a cat's ear. <span id="fr_278"></span>[1](#fn_278)

Not only the tribe of Danu, but heroes of the other mythical cycles
swell the fairy host to-day. Donn, son of Milé, who was drowned before
ever he set foot on Irish soil, lives at "Donn's House", a line of
sand-hills in the Dingle Peninsula of Kerry, and, as late as the
eighteenth century, we find him invoked by a local poet, half in jest,
no doubt, but still, perhaps also a little in earnest. <span
id="fr_279"></span>[2](#fn_279) The heroes of Ulster have no part in
fairyland; but their enemy, Medb, is credited with queenly rule among
the Sídhe, and is held by some to have been the original of "Queen Mab".
Caoilté, last of the Fenians, was, in spite of his leanings towards
Christianity, enrolled among the Tuatha Dé Danann, but none of his kin
are known there, neither Ossian, nor Oscar, nor even Finn himself. Yet
not even to merely historical mortals are the gates of the gods
necessarily closed. The Barry, chief of the barony

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

of Barrymore, is said to inhabit an enchanted palace in Knockthierna,
one of the Nagles Hills. The not less traditionally famous O’Donaghue,
whose domain was near Killarney, now dwells beneath the waters of that
lake, and may still be seen, it is said, upon May Day. <span
id="fr_280"></span>[1](#fn_280)

But besides these figures, which can be traced in mythology or history,
and others who, though all written record of them has perished, are
obviously of the same character, there are numerous beings who suggest a
different origin from that of the Aryan-seeming fairies. They correspond
to the elves and trolls of Scandinavian, or the silenoi and satyrs of
Greek myth. Such is the Leprechaun, who makes shoes for the fairies, and
knows where hidden treasures are; the Gan Ceanach, or "love-talker", who
fills the ears of idle girls with pleasant fancies when, to merely
mortal ideas, they should be busy with their work; the Pooka, who leads
travellers astray, or, taking the shape of an ass or mule, beguiles them
to mount upon his back to their discomfiture; the Dulachan, who rides
without a head; and other friendly or malicious sprites. Whence come
they? A possible answer suggests itself. Preceding the Aryans, and
surviving the Aryan conquest all over Europe, was a large non-Aryan
population, which must have had its own gods, who would retain their
worship, be revered by successive generations, and remain rooted to the
soil. May not these uncouth and half-developed

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Irish Leprechauns,
Pookas, and Dulachans, together with the Scotch Cluricanes, Brownies,
and their kin, be no "creations of popular fancy", but the dwindling
figures of those darker gods of "the dark Iberians"?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_259"></span>[227:1](cml19.htm#fr_259) The story, contained
in the Book of the Dun Cow, is called *The Phantom Chariot*. It has been
translated by Mr. O’Beirne Crowe, and is included in Miss Hull's
*Cuchulinn Saga*.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[228:1](cml19.htm#fr_260) See Elton, *Origins
of English History*, pp. 269-271.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[228:2](cml19.htm#fr_261) Caius Julius Solinus,
known as Polyhistor, chap. XXIV.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[229:1](cml19.htm#fr_262) It is appended to his
translation of the tale of the *Exile of the Children of Usnach* in
*Atlantis*, Vol. III.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[231:1](cml19.htm#fr_263) See Cusack's *History
of Ireland*, pp. 160-16a.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[231:2](cml19.htm#fr_264) *I.e.* from Heaven.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[232:1](cml19.htm#fr_265) Thomas D'Arcy M’Gee:
*Poems*, p. 78, "The Gobhan Saer".

<span id="fn_266"></span>[233:1](cml19.htm#fr_266) Larminie: *West Irish
Folk-Tales*, pp. 1-9.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[237:1](cml19.htm#fr_267) Pronounced *Ildāna*.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[238:1](cml19.htm#fr_268) It is told in Rhys's
*Hibbert Lectures*, pp. 314-317.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[239:1](cml19.htm#fr_269) For still other
folk-tale versions of this same myth see Curtin's *Hero Tales of
Ireland*.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[241:1](cml19.htm#fr_270) A Donegal story,
collected by Mr. David Fitzgerald and published in the *Revue Celtique*,
Vol. IV, p. 177.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[241:2](cml19.htm#fr_271) The paper is called
"Sea-Magic and Running Water".

<span id="fn_272"></span>[242:1](cml19.htm#fr_272) Moore: *Folklore of
the Isle of Man*.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[242:2](cml19.htm#fr_273) See an article in the
*Dublin University Magazine* for June, 1864.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[243:1](cml19.htm#fr_274) The story is among
those told by Lady Wilde in her *Ancient Legends of Ireland*, Vol. I,
pp. 77-82.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[244:1](cml19.htm#fr_275) Dublin University
Magazine, June, 1864.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[244:2](cml19.htm#fr_276) Pronounced *Cleena*.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[244:3](cml19.htm#fr_277) Pronounced *Evin*.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[246:1](cml19.htm#fr_278) See Fitzgerald,
*Popular Tales of Ireland*, in Vol. IV of the *Revue Celtique*.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[246:2](cml19.htm#fr_279) *Dublin University
Magazine*, June, 1864.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[247:1](cml19.htm#fr_280) For stories of these
two Norman-Irish heroes, see Crofton Croker's *Fairy Legends and
Traditions of the South of Ireland*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. The Gods of the Britons](cml20)
