[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zfa05)  [Next](zfa07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875482732/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G99RLG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

### IMMORTALITY <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24)

ONE of the many questions which I am very often requested to answer from
the Buddhist point of view concerns the immortality of the soul .
Thinking that this will also interest you, I wish to present my view on
the question here.

It seems, everything depends upon the conception of the soul. Both you
and I may use the same term, but if it is understood differently we
cannot expect to come to any definite conclusion. I often think that if
every notion, every concept, every sentiment we may happen to have, is
so clearly defined as not to leave any point in obscurity, a great bulk
of philosophical and religious controversy, which seems almost to make
up the history of thought, will vanish. However this may be, let me
first try to show you what I understand by the soul.

Buddhism uses the term Atman in place of soul and makes it signify that
mysterious something which lurks in the background of our mental
activities, and which soars up to an

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

unknown quarter usually known as heaven after its departure from the
body, within which it has been imprisoned, and on which account it used
to long for liberation. The âtman or soul, according to this conception,
is not material, exactly speaking, but something very much akin to it,
for it is an individual existence and therefore subject to the
limitations of space and time as well as to the law of causation. Though
it is impossible to think the soul other than material if it is at all
individual as conceived by ordinary people, yet they make it at once
spiritual and individual--two qualities impossible to reconcile.
Therefore, in point of fact, they materialize the soul by their
unwarranted--though pious enough--attempt to make it immaterial and
spiritual. They are not indeed spiritualistic in spite of their
persistent claim to be so. They are in fact materialistic. For if things
are truly spiritual and immaterial, in them there must be the absence of
all those qualities which make up materiality, that is, they must not be
bound by the conditions of space and time. The existence of a soul of
this nature is most positively denied by Buddhism. And those who aspire
after its immortality are designated ignorant, however wise and
intelligent they may be in affairs other than religious.

It needs a certain amount of reflective power to see in the popular
conception of the soul a grievous error which Buddhism endeavors to

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

remove. It may be more readily comprehended by the majority of people
when we say that there is a mysterious metaphysical something in the
mind which directs all its functions and operations according to its
whimsical will, and which makes us believe in the reality of an
ego-substance; than when we say that the so-called soul is no more than
the unity of consciousness which is liable at any moment to dissolve,
and which comes to exist when there is a certain co-ordination of all
mental faculties. If you make the soul signify the notion which is
popularly more intelligible, Buddhism will give you a very poor
consolation, as it denies even the existence of such a shadowy object,
not to speak of its continuance after the decay and dismemberment of the
corporeal existence.

If this is found by you to be a little too abstract to be quite
comprehensible, let me give you a favorite illustration frequently used
by Buddhists to show the fallacy of belief in the existence of the soul.
Do you think there-is such a thing as the soul of the house who picks up
the beams, roof, floor, walls, windows, etc., and puts them together in
such a fashion as to make a house, and then hides himself in it
somewhere, though altogether unrecognizable? Do you think again there is
what is to be called the spirit of water who mixes up a certain amount
of hydrogen with a portion of oxygen in order to make that most familiar
and useful liquid and then convert

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

it into his own hiding-place? When the intellect had not yet attained
the present stage of development, people thought that there was in
everything a spirit or a soul residing and living, and who, when in
wrath, found expression in raising a tempest, in creating a hurricane,
or in quaking the foundation of the earth. But that time seems to have
departed forever.

A house is here when all the necessary things, such as walls, pillars,
beams, etc., are brought together according to a certain form. Water
comes into existence when hydrogen and oxygen combine themselves, each
in a certain definite percentage, according to their inherent
constitution. It will be ridiculous, then, to imagine that whenever we
observe the waves stirring or a mountain-stream rushing there is a soul
in the water who makes all these phenomena. The conception of the human
ego-soul is in perfect parallel with that of the water soul-entity. if
waves, cataracts, whirlpools, or fountains are possible without
presuming the existence of a water-ego, why do we hypostatize mentality
and conceive the ego as an ultimate reality? Even scientifically
speaking, this hypothesis does not at all satisfactorily explain our
mental phenomena, but instead involves us in more difficulties and
complications. Accordingly, those who hanker after the immortality of
the soul are said to be pursuing fata morgana which vanish into airy
nothingness as you approach.

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

Buddhism seems to be perfectly justified in declining to acknowledge the
ego-soul.

What will then become of our innate desire after immortality? This is
the question which will naturally come to you after you have followed me
so far. To this I will answer: Seek that which is above birth and death,
identify yourselves with it, and in that measure in which your
identification is complete you will acquire immortality, and your
religious sentiment will be thoroughly satisfied. Buddhism does not seek
enlightenment in egoism, does not realize Nirvâna in the assertion of
selfishness. Have your self-will removed and put in its place the divine
will. "Not my will, but thy will," as Christians say, is that which is
immortal in us, as well as that which constitutes the reason of our
individual existences. As long as you have your selfish desires, impure
motives, ignorant impulses, your immortality will never be gained. To be
egoistic and to be immortal is to make "a" equal to "not-a," or to mix
water with oil, as a Japanese saying goes; they exclude each other, and
the result is unspeakable tribulation of spirit.

The problem of immortality has never troubled Buddhists, to speak
frankly. When we were first asked about it, we did not know exactly how
to grapple with it, for Buddhists are used to look at the matter from a
totally different point of view. Their first effort is to comprehend the

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

whole, leaving the details behind. They first want to grasp that which
is changeless, is above the transiency of phenomenality. When this is
accomplished, they find that they themselves are part and parcel of that
imperishable something. Though mortal as individual, particular beings,
they are a manifestation of the Great All, and as such they will most
assuredly survive all forms of change and transformation. They have then
nothing to trouble themselves concerning soul or no-soul and much less
with its immortality. All that they have to do is to come to a clear
consciousness of the reason of the universe and to make its realization
in them as perfect as they can. Whether they live or not after the
expiration of their physical lives does not concern them at all. Let
"thy will be done," and everything else will run its own course, and are
we not relieved of the useless, wasteful worry and anxiety?

If, in spite of all this, you feel somehow inconsolable on account of
nothing concrete surviving after you but cold ashes and crumbling bones,
I would give you the immortality of work (karma) instead of the
immortality of the soul. Or we might say that what you wish to
understand by the soul does not exist in the ego-entity but in the work
you do, in the sentiment you feel, in the thought you think, and if all
these are in accordance with "thy will" which disposes, they will be
what is left after you, that is to say,

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

you will forever live in them. When we stand before a canvas painted by
a great painter, do we not feel the presence of the artist, as his ideas
and feelings are embodied in it? Cannot we say that the artist is still
living in his work? We do not know whether his soul has gone up to the
heavens and is enjoying the celestial happiness, but we do know for
certain that he is still living among ourselves and inspiring us to
higher ideals of life.

Do you prefer the immortality of the soul as popularly understood to
this kind of immortality that I have endeavored to expound here? If you
do, I have nothing further to say, but that the immortality of work or
deed or thought or sentiment seems to be more in accordance with the
result of modern scientific investigation--not only that, but to be more
satisfactory to our religious consciousness.

Before concluding, there is one thing I should like to ask the believers
in a materialistic, individual soul and its immortality; that is, What
do you want to do up in heaven when you are ushered in there after you
have finished your earthly career? Is it your wish to sit quietly beside
your Father and among the host of celestial beings and passively enjoy
inexpressible blessings? If this is your wish for individual
immortality, I fail to see the purpose and significance of this life on
earth. The history of civilization seems to lose its purport when you
are away from here.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

Buddhists think otherwise than Christians in this respect. We consider
our existence here below as a sort of link in the eternal chain of the
divine revelation in the universe. We have not come on earth, each
singly and separately, to assert only our individuality; but our fates
are most solidly linked to our ancestors and their civilization as well
as to our successors and their destiny. What we are to-day is due to the
karma of our predecessors and at the same time Will determine the fates
of posterity. If we fail to enrich and ennoble our spiritual inheritance
which originally came from the hand of the Dharmakâya, we entirely
ignore the meaning of the history of humanity, we altogether disregard
our responsibility to our forefathers and grandchildren. We must not go
to heaven and selfishly enjoy our individual immortality. On the
contrary, we must abide where we are, and co-operate with one another
for the ennoblement and enrichment of our earthly life. We must not be
ungrateful for what our ancestors did for us, nor must we be
inconsiderate of the welfare and enlightenment of coming generations. We
must behave nobly, we must think rationally, we must feel unselfishly,
and let us live in this karma which endureth forever, even after the
dissolution of this physical existence.

Again, according to Buddhism, this universe is a sort of spiritual
laboratory, in which all our ideal possibilities are experimented upon
and

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

developed and perfected. When this material garment wears out after a
long use, we throw it away and put on a new one and appear in the same
laboratory (and not anywhere else, not even in Heaven, let me remind
you) as our own successors. We examine what our former lives have
accomplished and apply all our moral and spiritual energy to the
furtherance and perfection of the karma. The doctrine that the Buddha
was able to reach his ideal eminence after his untiring practice of the
six virtues of perfection (*pâramitâs*)} <span
id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25) throughout his innumerable lives since the
dawn of consciousness, is no more than the Buddhist conception of
immortality and of the eternal striving after ideals. Let us, therefore,
go not anywhere else after death even if an indulging benefactor should
attempt to persuade us to join his celestial hosts; but let us remain in
this universe, let the karma we have accumulated here bear its fruit and
be brought to a happy consummation; for we are not strong enough to
stand the grave charge to be preferred by posterity to the effect that
we have scattered all our precious ancestral legacy to the four winds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_24"></span>[53:1](zfa06.htm#fr_24) Read before Green Acre
Fellowship, Washington, D. C., April, 1906.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[61:1](zfa06.htm#fr_25) (1) Charity, (2)
Observation of Moral Precepts, (3) Meekness, (4) Energy, (5) Meditation,
(6) Wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Buddhist Faith](zfa07)
