[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zfa10)  [Next](zfa12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875482732/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G99RLG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

### THE WHEEL OF THE GOOD LAW

BUDDHISM is a religion which originated in India some five hundred years
before the Christian Era. Its founder was Siddhartha Gautama, of royal
lineage, who, becoming dissatisfied with the life he was born to enjoy,
turned away from all forms of ease and luxury which surrounded him. He
retired into the Himalaya Mountains when he was nineteen years old, or,
according to another tradition, at the age of twenty-nine. He then
devoted himself to penance and mortification, which was at the time
considered a necessary discipline for those who sought wisdom and
enlightenment. He visited many saints and philosophers whose virtue and
wisdom were recognized by the people. Some years of rigorous ascetic
life passed, and he was acknowledged by his religious comrades as their
spiritual leader. But Gautama himself was not satisfied with this,
because he was quite convinced that asceticism was not at all conducive
to moral culture and spiritual enlightenment. He then altogether
abandoned the practice of fasting and other modes of self-torture, and
for taking this course of life he was

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

deserted by his comrades. But his conviction and determination were not
to be shaken by such trifling affairs; he kept on following what he
thought would help him best to attain to wisdom and enlightenment.

After several years of deep meditation he awoke one morning under the
Bodhi tree and most clearly perceived the way of enlightenment. He was
now no more Gautama, a royal prince, but a Buddha, the enlightened one.
He was so overjoyed with the revelation that he spent about a week most
profoundly absorbed in contemplation, and it is even said that he was
not at all inclined to come out of his transcendental ecstasy and
self-reflection and to engage in active propaganda work in the world.
But in the meantime his great compassionate heart asserted itself. His
thought turned toward the miserable spiritual conditions under which his
former associates were laboring and from which he was now completely
free. He went back to the woods where they were living. At first, they
were disposed to deride their former leader, but as he approached his
serene countenance and majestic demeanor completely unnerved them, and
they prostrated themselves before him and asked his instruction. They
were all converted to his view and came to enjoy the real bliss of life
and enlightenment.

Buddha now thought of the world at large: "Though the masses are
wretchedly struggling

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

under delusion, prejudice, narrow-mindedness, bigotry, and superstition,
there must be some in the world who are open to conviction, seeking the
light of Dharma, Good Law, and those must be saved by all means. If they
become enlightened, they will be able to perpetuate my teaching,
posterity will learn through them of wisdom and enlightenment, and the
truth will not be lost among sentient beings." Thus resolved, the Buddha
came out into the world and made Deer Park in Central India the place of
his first missionary activity. In describing this event, the Buddhists
say that the Wheel of the Good Law, Dharmachakra, has been caused to
revolve in this place for the first time in the history of mankind,
marking the formal establishment of Buddhism.

The Buddha's long life of near ninety years consisted in never-tiring
peregrinations along the banks of the Ganges and over the plains of
Central India. He died while thus traveling, and there were present at
the time only a few of his disciples surrounding his death-bed. His body
was cremated and distributed among eight principal Buddhist kings of
India who wished to honor their spiritual benefactor, each by erecting a
splendid stupa or pagoda over his earthly remains.

\*      \*      \*

Having thus roughly sketched the life of the founder of Buddhism, we ask
now what is the

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Wheel of the Good
Law caused by him to revolve more than twenty-four centuries ago.

The most powerful motive that influenced Buddha, who was a royal prince,
to abandon all his claims to the earthly advantages and to live a
monkish, retiring, contemplative life, was his deep insight into the
nature of life. He knew that life as it is lived by most of sentient
beings was no more than a series of sufferings, for in trying to escape
one misery they invariably fall into another misery which is perhaps
greater and heavier to endure. He asked himself whether this misery
could be exterminated. To ascertain this it was necessary to find out
the real fundamental cause of it all. The removal of the cause was the
removal of the effect.

In *Ignorance* he found the cause of misery that surrounds and oppresses
us, sentient beings.

People are ignorant as to the real significance of existence; they
blindly crave for it and its continuance merely for its own enjoyment;
they do not know what destiny is awaiting them at the end of their
earthly career; they do not know how pregnant of meaning is their every
act, their every thought, their every feeling; they do not know under
what conditions a phenomenon called life is possible, and finally they
have a very confused notion concerning the true nature of the soul which
they identify with the ego, simple, permanent, and absolute. On account
of this ignorance, they suffer; on account

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

of this ignorance, they keep on augmenting the causes of misery, and are
unable to see the light of wisdom.

Buddha declares, there is no doubt that life is suffering, but it also
affords enjoyment. The Buddhist life, however, is not to cling to
either, for its real purpose is above the concatenation of pain and
pleasure, sorrow and joy. Let us first be enlightened and not deviate
from the path of righteousness, and we are saved.

The world in which we abide is a world of contrasts; the life we live is
a life of opposites. We have the day and the night, we have the spring
and the fall, we have men and women. Some are young, others are old;
some are just breathing their last, others have now come to the world.
The elements attract and repulse one another. The moon waxes and wanes.
The waves are rising and receding. The stars are running toward one
another and running away from one another. This is the world of constant
change, of eternal motion, where takes place a never-ending interaction
of forces. It is one force or one set of forces now that predominates,
and then another. The point of concentration is eternally shifting. This
is the actual experience of life and also its necessary condition.

Therefore, they will come inevitably to grief--they that disregard this
experience and condition of life, they that seek in this world nothing
but an everlasting continuation of pleasant,

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

agreeable sensations. They want to live, and they do not know that their
living is really their death. This contradiction causes them an
immeasurable amount of suffering. Apparently they are living, that is,
they are moving bodily in the world of contrasts and opposites, of
pleasures and pains, of sorrows and joys, of good and evil; and yet they
want to escape from this actual state of things, they want to enter into
a region where they have only monotony, stagnation, and abeyance, and
even extinction. For are they not trying to keep the pendulum of life
always up on one side only? The pendulum owes its existence to a
constant swinging from one side to the other. When this is stopped, it
ceases to be itself and exists no more. To live is to move, to change,
to walk up and down, to come in and out, to enjoy and to suffer, to
-smile and to weep. To refuse to do so is simply courting death. Life is
a fabric interwoven with the woof of pain and the warp of pleasure. It
cannot be a monotonous series of pleasures, nor that of pains.
Therefore, to enjoy life is not to crave for agreeable stimulations
alone, nor is it to shun evils. It is to be above them, both pain and
pleasure. It is to use the world, as not abusing it, to state it from
the Christian point of view.

But many are they that are ignorant of this our actual experience of
life. How hard they endeavor to create as much pleasure as they can

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

and to cling to it as long as they can, utterly regardless of the true
meaning of life! But it is altogether outside of their power to check
the approaching shadow of misery which gradually and stealthily but
surely envelops them in the end. The greater the joy of the moment, the
stronger its reverse. For where the mountains are high, the seas are
deep; and the blackness of a raven looks blacker in the whiteness of
snow. It is therefore well to remind these hedonists of the necessary
condition of life, that there is no pleasure that is not mingled with
pain, that there is no bliss which can be obtained without struggle.
Whatever blind pleasure-seekers think to be bliss or curse is no other
than the products of sensualism and egoism, so long as they are bound
with the iron chain of ignorance. Their deeds, sentiments, and thoughts
have no moral or religious significance whatever. Their lives are like
the bubbles or foam that vanish without leaving any mark on the water.
They die just as they are born, blind, ignorant, and benighted.

Life, according to Buddhism, is worth living, because it enables us to
do something, because it gives us a chance to work, to apply ourselves,
because it is the condition which makes possible the realization of our
moral and spiritual aspirations. Even if it is thought by some to be
worth living because it supplies us with pleasures of passing moments or
because it is desirable for its own sake, Buddhists will not hesitate to
surrender

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

their lives once for all and will most gladly be absorbed in the eternal
abyss of death. Life has nothing in itself worth clinging to, if it did
not promise us an opportunity to work. As sentient, conscious beings
that we are, it would be most degrading in us to live the life of a
stone, to exist just for the sake of existence and for no other purpose.

All conscientious Buddhists realize that there are laws, natural as well
as spiritual, in this universe, and that those who dare to infringe upon
them are unerringly and even mercilessly punished therefor. It does not
make any difference that this infringement is unknowingly or knowingly
done, nor does it help the violator to ask for a special grace. An evil
act is committed, and the universe is sorrowful for it, as it retards so
much the progress and realization of goodness. But it will not let the
evil-doer go unpunished. Therefore, this existence has a purpose to
attain, an end to reach, an ideal to manifest; and all beings animate
and inanimate are working for this universal goal. Our limited
consciousness may not have a very clear conception as to every phase of
the significance of life, but all enlightened minds are aware of this,
that life is not for mere living, but that it is the path which leads to
goodness, suchness, and oneness. The moral and spiritual laws are
instrumental for these causes, and as long as we are moving in
conformity to the laws of conduct, we are promoting the

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

noble, worthy ideals, and our duties of life are thereby discharged.
Pleasures and pains, joys and sorrows are merely accidents of life. They
do not enter into its essential fabric. And consequently they are
ignored by the Buddhists. They are not taken into any serious
consideration in the determination or selection of duties of life.

Therefore, let us work, let us develop all our possibilities; not for
ourselves, but for our fellow-creatures. Let us be enlightened in our
efforts, let us strive after the general welfare of humanity and indeed
of all creations. We are born here to do certain things. Life may be
misery or not; it concerns us not; let us do what we have to do. We are
not here wholly alone, we are not the center of the universe, everything
is not coming to us. But our existence is conditioned. The fact that we
are here at all is due to our mutual support and dependence. We cannot
save ourselves unless others are saved. We cannot advance unless the
general progress is assured. We must help one another, we must abandon
our vulgar ego-centric ideas, we must expand ourselves so that the
entire universe is identified with us, and so that our interests are
those of humanity. It is therefore most evident that the assertion of
the self-will and the giving way to the clamors of the ego-soul is
against the reason of life. The attainment of Nirvâna and the
manifestation of the Buddhist life is possible

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

only through the denial of selfhood and through the united labor of all
our brother creatures.

This is the doctrine proclaimed by the Buddha after many years of
profound meditation on the bank of the Ganges, and constitutes the
essence of the Wheel of the Good Law which has been in fact revolving
ever since the dawn of sentiency.

The statements above made are usually put down in formula and called the
Fourfold Noble Truth; viz., (1) Life is suffering, (2) There is cause
for it, which is ignorance, (3) Nirvâna, which transcends pain and
pleasure, is the goal of our life, and (4) To reach it the moral laws
must be put into practice. <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_31"></span>[110:1](zfa11.htm#fr_31) As for what is the
practical ethics of Buddhism, read the article entitled "Buddhist
Ethics." ([p. 69](zfa08.htm#page_69).)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Phenomenal And The Supraphenomenal](zfa12)
