[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zfa11)  [Next](zfa13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875482732/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G99RLG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

### THE PHENOMENAL AND THE SUPRAPHENOMENAL <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Anicâ vata sankhâra,  
Uppâdavaya dhammino;  
Uppajjitvâ nirujjanti;  
Tesam vûpasamo sukho <span id="fr_33"></span>[2](#fn_33)</span>

</div>

BEFORE entering upon an exposition of this stanza which I have selected
for the subject of this morning's discourse, I wish to make a short
preliminary remark concerning Buddhism generally.

In the study of Buddhism, one important thing which should be borne in
mind by scholars is that the religion of Buddha has nothing to do with
supernaturalism. Adhering to facts and their plain statements, Buddhists
are always reluctant to give themselves away to personal authority or
supernatural--which is, in fact, unnatural--revelation. Buddhism may
therefore appear to some people rather flat, prosaic,

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

and unentertaining, lacking in the fertility and brilliancy of
imagination--though this is by no means the case--and they call it
sometimes a sort of ethical culture society and not a religious
institution. For they think that no religion can exist without a belief
in something extraordinary, miraculous, or supramundane which cannot be
logically proved and individually experienced. But Buddha most
emphatically insists that what he teaches is nothing unusual, being
simply the recognition of a plain fact which can be attested by every
mortal, that truth is not revealed to us from an unknown source, but is
discovered by ourselves through the exercise of a faculty that can be
acquired by all self-conscious beings, and that Buddhism is to be
believed rationally and not blindly, to be believed because it is true
and not because it has been proclaimed by some mythical personage.
Whatever defects the teaching of Buddha may possess, I consider its
rationality and matter-of-factness as one of its most characteristic and
important features, distinguishing it from many another religion.

Further, this rationality of Buddhism is perhaps one of the many causes
which make Buddhists remarkably tolerant and broad-minded toward their
rival religionists. It is the pride of every conscientious Buddhist that
the history of his faith is perfectly free from the stain of blood. When
we of modern days turn over the pages of religious cruelty and
barbarism, we are

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

struck with a bitter sense of irony. It seems incredible that a religion
proclaiming the gospel of love could practise such inhumanity. But I
regret to say that even to-day there are some who are so hopelessly
dogmatic and fanatical as to think that the rose could be sweet and
fragrant only under its own name, that truth loses its worth and verity
when known by any other name than their own, and that they would fight
even unto death in order to replace one set of superstitions with
another.

Science is steadily making its progress in various fields of human
knowledge, and our intellectual sphere is being constantly widened;
while pious, God-fearing religionists are still dreaming of the by-gone
days, when their forefathers were engaged in the so-called holy wars, or
when they were conducting the most atrocious, most diabolical outrage
against humanity called the Inquisition. These facts often make me pause
and think of their ultimate significance, wondering how slow man's
progress is in things spiritual.

However this may be, Buddhism through its rationality and
matter-of-fact-ness has never been intolerant and narrow-minded. It has
always borne in mind that howsoever many avenues there may be to the
summit of enlightenment, the position once gained will allow us all,
regardless of racial and national variations, to see but one universal.
light of truth. The highest being is known under various names and
appellations,

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

among various peoples on earth, according to their culture, education,
and environment. Humanity, being essentially the same everywhere, it
will sooner or later come to the knowledge of a supreme moral and
spiritual power which governs the universe and whose commands we are
compelled under penalty of annihilation to respect and obey. Whatever
circumstances may lead to a difference of conception as to the details
of its operation, the power of religion is fundamentally love,--love
that does not exclude nor discriminate nor particularize; and this kind
of love is realizable only when we recognize naturally and rationally
and humanly the divinity of all existence and the universality of truth,
in whatever divers aspects they may be considered and by whatever
different paths they may be approached.

\*      \*      \*

Now to return to the subject-proper of this discourse. Buddhism views
the world under two aspects, phenomenal and supra-phenomenal. In the
phenomenal world, the law of birth and death rules supreme, and here is
nothing that will endure forever. Everything that exists under the sun
is fleeting; it passes away as rapidly as the swift ships or as the
eagle that swoopeth on the prey. The sun that has risen will set, the
mountains so towering will crumble, the turbulent ocean will be drained,
and the earth itself will be shaken from its foundations. That which has
been is no more, and that which is is changing

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

fast. Indeed, the world is no more than a constant flux of becoming.
Therefore, the Buddha declares: "Transitory, verily, are things, subject
to the law of birth and death; and things born are doomed to die."

Mutability or impermanence is one of the most universal facts of the
world, and any one who has his eyes wide open will certainly have to
recognize it. And this recognition, when logically carried out, will
again certainly lead to nonattachment; and non-attachment will in turn
bring out in us the desire for immortality. The reason why we cling to
worldliness is because we are not thoroughly acquainted with its true
character. Its superficiality, its vainglory, its illusiveness, its
butterfly-like carelessness and capriciousness,--all this seems to have
a peculiar fascination for the sensuous. They have no time to reflect
deeply on the nature of these attractions, for they find themselves
hopelessly involved in the whirlpool of vanities before they can at all
think of extricating themselves therefrom. They look aghast at those who
remind them of the mutability of things and of the evanescent nature of
pleasures.

We can well imagine how desperate is the situation of an undisciplined,
unreflective mind that almost mechanically pursues objects of sense as
the moth follows the flame. But as soon as the mind is awakened to the
real state of the phenomenal world, it is unspeakably mortified at its

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

past folly and infatuation, and it will gradually develop the desire for
non-attachment or freedom, in which it becomes estranged from its
sensuous surroundings.

But can a mortal secure anything approaching eternity in this phenomenal
realm? If everything here is subject to the irrefragable law of birth
and death, we cannot in any way give satisfaction to our inner craving
for things everlasting and immortal. Buddhism knows this our spiritual
demand and teaches us that there exists a region which is
supra-phenomenal and of which the spirit can drink to its satiety.

This supra-phenomenal world has no material limitations and therefore is
not subject to the law of birth and death. As it is thus transcendent,
it is beyond the reach of pain and pleasure, which is the pendulum that
regulates the motive and conduct of the sensuous man. This latter is
therefore unable to have even a glimpse of this heavenly region that
lies beyond. He only who has freed himself from the shackle of
phenomenality is no more affected by its mutability, and he is said to
be living on the higher plane of existence. The mountains may be removed
from their foundation, and the oceans may be exhausted, but a spiritual
man will be above all such material vicissitudes, living a life of
eternal peace. He calmly reviews the course of existence as it comes and
disappears. He serenely abides in the realm of supra-phenomenality. He

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

sees the lamp of eternity shining through the mist of transiency. He
rises from the howling tempest of birth and death. Physically, he is,
and will be no more, but spiritually he is living forever, unborn and
imperishable. Because he has founded his kingdom in the Pure Land; where
the waves of being and non-being beat no more; where the veil of
ignorance and misery no longer hangs low; where the transitoriness, of
particulars is forever gone; where love, pure and infinite, embraces,
absorbs, unifies every separate existence; and where joy inexpressible
flows from the well of eternal peace. Therefore, the stanza above
recited concludes with this line: "The termination of birth and death is
bliss."

\*      \*      \*

Now, the question again arises, Is this supraphenomenal absolutely
separated from the phenomenal world? If so, how can we of the latter
ever expect or aspire to raise ourselves to the higher level of
existence? If not, how can the supra-phenomenal be the phenomenal, and
vice versa, seeing that they each have apparently irreconcilable
characteristics? Learned Buddhist scholars will tell us how the identity
of the supraphenomenal and the phenomenal can be metaphysically
established, and that our mental constitution demands this oneness, or,
otherwise, a dualism, which inevitably results, will destroy the
fundamental harmony of our logical reasoning. But we who are aiming at
the practical

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

result of religious discipline would better eschew the theoretical part
and be content with our inner individual experience. We would best avoid
theorization and state the verdict of Buddhism on this problem rather
dogmatically, which is: All depends upon our spiritual condition. If it
is irreproachable and immaculate, supra-phenomenal is phenomenal,
phenomenal is supraphenomenal. Both are one and the same. Our earthly
life is most exalted, most sacred, most divine, most religious. But if
the spirit be defiled and corrupted, even a manifestly holy life is no
more than gross blasphemy. All hinges on how we keep the spirit, pure or
impure. Buddhism is thus thoroughly idealistic, as every true religion
ought to be. It teaches the purification of the heart as the beginning
and the end of an religious training.

Therefore, the heart holds the key which opens either the portal of
sensuality or that of spirituality. In fact, these different portals do
not exist objectively. The universe is one and the same for the just as
well as for the unjust, but they approach it from various points of view
and color it with their own inner pigment. Some are ignorant and
selfish, and they interpret life accordingly. Others are simple-hearted
and defilement-free, and thus they read the world. Conventionally, a
distinction is made between the two worlds, supra-phenomenal and
phenomenal, or sensual and spiritual, or worldly and

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

saintly; in reality this is our own creation. Let us be free from
delusion and sensualism, and things will present themselves in their own
true color and form.

The termination of birth and death, pain and pleasure, desire and
satisfaction, in short, of all sorts of dualism, does not mean to escape
from the world and to lead an ascetic life, nor does it mean to commit
suicide and put an end to existence, which is thought the root of all
evil. Buddhism understands by the last line of the stanza recited at the
beginning of this discourse the purification of the heart from all its
selfish desires and defiled sentiments arising from ignorance and
prejudice. For the self is no more than an illusory existence, and the
separation of "me" from "thee" is fata morgana, and those who believe in
their absolute reality are said to be confused. The heart essentially
free and pure becomes contaminated as soon as it is caught in the meshes
of egoism, and the result is the production of the three venomous
desires <span id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34) and the five consuming
passions. <span id="fr_35"></span>[2](#fn_35) Of course, it would be
madness to deny the relative reality of objects of the senses; no one
can refute it. But if we go one step further and declare that their
reality is final and ultimate, we logically put ourselves in the most
awkward position and morally stand on the most unsteady ground. The
irreconcilable egoism which characterizes

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

the life of the ordinary man is no more than the natural outcome of this
fatal realism. To be saved, we must lift the veil of ignorance and come
out into the realm of "calm radiance," which is the abode of the
enlightened.

The conclusion of the whole affair, then, is: The world is characterized
by mutability and impermanence; those who do not rise above worldliness
are tossed up and down in the whirlpool of passion. But those who know
the constitution of things see the infinite in the finite and the
supra-phenomenal in the phenomenal, and are blessed in the midst of
sufferings and tribulations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_32"></span>[111:1](zfa12.htm#fr_32) A sermon
[delivered](errata.htm#0) at the Buddhist Mission of San Francisco,
November, 1905.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[111:2](zfa12.htm#fr_33) Translated into
English:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Transitory, verily, are things,  
Subject to law of birth and death;  
Things born are doomed to die;  
Their termination is bliss.

</div>

<span id="fn_34"></span>[119:1](zfa12.htm#fr_34) Avarice, hatred, and
infatuation.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[119:2](zfa12.htm#fr_35) Inordinate desires
arising from the five senses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Reply to a Christian Critic](zfa13)
