[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sjf00)  [Next](sjf02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

# PREFACE.

The Second Edition of *Dibré Aboth ha-Olam* or *Sayings of the Jewish
Fathers* may be shortly described as a reprint of the work as published
in 1877, with a section of ADDITIONAL NOTES. Interspersed with the
reprint are insertions in square brackets, a few things are omitted, and
short new notes fill up pages 26, 41, 77, 98. With the two titles of the
book compare *Shebach* ABOTH OLAM in the Hebrew of Ecclesiasticus and
its Greek rendering Πατέρων ύ?μνος {Greek *Patérwn ú?mno<u>s</u>*}.

An Appendix not yet published contains the CATALOGUE of Manuscripts
referred to in the Introduction, which was announced as undertaken "with
especial reference to disputed readings," followed by critical Notes on
the Text of Aboth. It is complete as first planned, but awaits a
supplement describing Manuscripts examined or to be examined by Mr
Schechter, Reader in Talmudic and Rabbinic in the University of
Cambridge, to whose learning and acumen I am indebted for the suggestion
of additions and improvements throughout the work.

The collection of Manuscripts lately brought from Egypt by Mr Schechter,
with the generous consent of the Grand Rabbi

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

of Cairo, includes some fragments of the Old Testament in Greek with the
TETRAGRAMMATON written repeatedly in Hebrew characters ου? το&ιcιρc;ς
ν&υcιρc;ν α?λλὰ το&ιcιρc;σ α?ρχαιοτάτοισ {Greek *ou? toî<u>s</u> nûn
a?llà toîs a?rxaiotátois*}, in accordance with the remark of Origen on
Psalm ii. (*Opp*. II. 539) that it so stood ε?ν το&ιcιρc;σ
α?κριβεστέροισ τω^ν α?ντιγράφων {Greek *e?n toîs a?kribestérois tw^n
a?ntigráfwn*}, and the confirmatory testimony of St Jerome (*Praef. in
Sam. et Malachim*) "Et nomen Domini tetragrammaton in quibusdam Graecis
voluminibus usque hodie antiquis expressum litteris invenimus." The Name
is so written in the annexed specimen of Aquila's version of the Old
Testament (p. viii).

In the same collection is being found more and more of the long lost
original Hebrew of ECCLESIASTICUS (p. 169), a book which furnishes not a
few apt illustrations of Aboth, although the precise degree of its
affinity in thought and diction to the New Hebrew is still under
discussion.

Of the innumerable works on ABOTH it must suffice to make mention here
of Professor Dr H. L. Strack's concise and thoroughly practical edition
Die Sprüche der Väter.

C. TAYLOR.

13*th* *August* 1897.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](sjf02)
