[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sjf03)  [Next](sjf05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

# CHAPTER II.

1\. Rabbi said, Which is the right course that a man should choose for
himself? Whatsoever is a pride to him that pursues it, (and) brings him
honour from men. And

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

be attentive to a light precept as to a grave, for thou knowest not the
assigned reward of precepts,; and reckon the loss for a duty against its
gain, and the gain by a transgression against its loss. And consider
three things, and thou wilt not fall into the hands of transgression:
know what is above thee-a seeing eye, and a hearing ear, and all thy
deeds written in a book.

2\. Rabban Gamliel, son of R. Jehudah ha-Nasi, said,

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

Excellent is Thorah study together with worldly business, for the
practice of them both puts iniquity out of remembrance; and all Thorah
without work must fail at length, and occasion iniquity. And let all who
are employed with the congregation act with them in the name of Heaven,
for the merit of their fathers sustains them, and their righteousness
stands for ever. And ye yourselves shall have reward reckoned unto you
as if ye had wrought.

3\. Be cautious with (those in) authority, for they let not a man
approach them but for their own purposes; and they appear like friends
when it is to their advantage, and stand not by a man in the hour of his
need.

4\. He used to say, Do His will as if it were thy will, that He may do
thy will as if it were His will. Annul thy will before His will, that He
may annul the will of others before thy will.

5\. Hillel said, Separate not thyself from the congregation, and trust
not in thyself until the day of thy death; and judge

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

not thy friend until thou comest into his place; and say not of a word
which may be heard that in the end it shall be heard; and say not, When
I have leisure I will study; perchance thou mayest not have leisure.

6\. He used to say, No boor is a sinfearer; nor is the vulgar pious; nor
is the shamefast apt to learn, nor the passionate

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

to teach; nor is every one that has much traffic wise. And in a place
where there are no men endeavour to be a man.

7\. Moreover he saw a skull which floated on the face of the water, and
he said to it, Because thou drownedst they drowned thee, and in the end
they that drowned thee shall be drowned.

8\. He used to say, More flesh, more worms: more treasures, more care:
more maidservants, more lewdness: more menservants, more theft: more
women, more witchcrafts:

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

more Thorah, more life: more wisdom, more scholars: more righteousness,
more peace. He who has gotten a good name has gotten it for himself. He
who has gotten to himself words of Thorah, has gotten to himself the
life of the world to come.

9\. Rabban Jochanan ben Zakai received from Hillel and

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

from Shammai. He used to say, If thou hast practised Thorah much, claim
not merit to thyself, for thereunto wast thou created.

10\. Five disciples were there to Rabban Jochanan 'ben Zakai, and these
were they: R. Li'ezer ben Hyrqanos, and R. Jehoshua' ben Chananiah, and
R. Jose the Priest, and

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

R. Shime'on ben Nathanael, and R. Ele'azar ben 'Arak. He used to recount
their praise: Eli'ezer ben Hyrqanos is a plastered cistern, which loseth
not a drop; Jehoshua' ben Chananiah--happy is she that bare him; Jose
the Priest is pious; Shim'eon ben Nathanael is a sinfearer; Ele'azar ben
'Arak is a welling spring.

11\. He used to say, If all the wise of Israel were in a scale of the
balance, and Eli'ezer ben Hyrqanos in the other scale, he would outweigh
them all. Abba Shaul said in his name, If all the wise of Israel were in
a scale of the balance, and Eli'ezer ben Hyrqanos with them, and
Ele'azar ben 'Arak in the other scale, he would outweigh them all.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

12\. He said to them, Go and see which Is the good way that a man should
cleave to. Rabbi Li'ezer said, A good eye: R. Jehoshua' said, A good
friend: and R. Jose said, A good neighbour: and R. Shime'on said, He
that foresees what is to be: R. La'zar said, A good heart. He said to
them, I approve the words of Ele'azar ben 'Arak rather than your words,
for his words include your words.

13\. He said to them, Go and see which is the evil way that a man should
shun. R. Li'ezer said, An evil eye: and R. Jehoshua' said, An evil
companion: and R. Jose said, An evil neighbour: and R. Shime'on said, He
that borroweth and repayeth not--he that borrows from man is the same as
if he borrowed from God (blessed is He)--for it is said, The wicked
borroweth, and payeth not again, but the righteous is merciful and
giveth: R. La'zar said, An evil heart. He said to them, I approve the
words of Ele'azar ben 'Arak

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

rather than your words, for your words are included in his words.

14\. And they said (each) three things. R. Li'ezer said, Let the honour
of thy friend be dear unto thee as thine own; and be not easily
provoked; and repent one day before thy death. And warm thyself before
the fire of the wise, but beware of their embers, perchance thou mayest
be singed, for their bite is the bite of a fox, and their sting the
sting of a scorpion, and their hiss the hiss of a fiery-serpent, and all
their words are as coals of fire.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

15\. R. Jehoshua' said, An evil eye, and the evil nature,

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

and hatred of the creatures put a man out of the world.

16\. R. Jose said, Let the property of thy friend be precious unto thee
as thine own; set thyself to learn Thorah, for it is not an heirloom
unto thee; and let all thy actions be to the name of Heaven.

17\. R. Shime'on said, Be careful in reading the Shema' *and in Prayer*;
and when thou prayest, make not thy prayer

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

an ordinance, but an entreaty before God, blessed is He, *for it is
said, For God is compassionate and easily-entreated*,

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

longsuffering, and plenteous in grace; and be not wicked unto thyself.

18\. R. La'zar said, Be diligent to learn *Thorah*, wherewith thou
mayest make answer to Epicurus; and know before whom thou toilest; and
who is the Master of thy work.

19\. R. Tarphon said, The day is short, and the task is

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

great, and the workmen are sluggish, and the reward is much, and the
Master of the house is urgent. He said, It is not for thee to finish the
work, nor art thou free to desist therefrom; if thou hast learned much
Thorah, they give thee much reward; and faithful is the Master of thy
work, who will pay thee the reward of thy work, and know that the
recompence of the reward of the righteous is for the time to come.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III.](sjf05)
