[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Apollonius of Tyana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](toe02) 
[Next](toe04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674996143/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../laot/img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Treatise of Eusebius Against the Life of Apollonius by
Philostratus*, by Eusebius, tr. F.C. Conybeare, \[1912\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXI

<span class="margnote">CHAP. XXI Folly of questions asked in India by
Apollonius</span><span class="smallcaps">After</span> this there was
general conversation and some serious discussion among the philosophers,
in the course of which Iarchas explained that his own soul had once been
in the body of another man who was a king, and that in that state he had
performed this and that exploit; while Apollonius told them that he had
once been the pilot of a ship in Egypt, and had accomplished all sorts
of exploits which he enumerated to them. Then they put questions to each
other, and received answers, which in the name of wisdom have scant
title to be recorded at all. Thus we learn that Apollonius asked if they
had any golden water among them. What a clever and marvellous question!
And he also asked about men who live underground, and about others
called pigmies, and shadow-footed men, and he asked if they had among
them a four-footed animal called a martichora, which has a head like
that of a man, but

<span id="page_536">p. 536</span> <span id="page_537">p. 537</span>

rivals a lion in size, while from its tail projects hairs like thorns a
cubit long, which it is accustomed to shoot out like arrows at those who
hunt it. Such then were the questions which Apollonius put to the sages,
and Iarchas instructed him about the pigmies, and told him that they
were indeed people dwelling underground, but spent their lives on the
other side of the river Ganges; but as to the other things which he
asked about, Iarchas said that they never had existed at all.

### XXII

<span class="margnote">CHAP. XXII Silly tales of the
Brahmans</span><span class="smallcaps">After</span> that Philostratus
described a wool which the earth grew for them to supply material for
their dress, from which we must infer that these philosophers plied the
loom and occupied themselves with spinning wool in order to make their
raiment, for we do not hear of any woman being smuggled into their
community; but perhaps he means that by a miracle the wool grew of its
own initiative into their sacred garments. And we hear that each of them
carried a staff and a ring which was imbued with mysterious power. <span
class="margnote">Eusebius doubts the miracles of healing wrought by
Iarchas</span>There follow a series of miraculous performances on the
part of the Brahman,—how for example he recalled to his senses by means
of a letter one who was possessed with a demon, how by stroking a man
who was lame he healed his dislocated hip, how he vouchsafed to restore
a man's hand that was withered, and to a blind man gave sight. Our
blessings on an author who saves us so much trouble. Can we doubt that
these stories are true, when his very insistence on

<span id="page_538">p. 538</span> <span id="page_539">p. 539</span>

the truth of his earlier tales, I refer to those of lightning and wind
kept in jars, and of tripods of stone walking about of their own accord
and of cup-bearers of bronze passing round the cups in a circle, fully
betrays and exposes the mythical character of everything else which he
has to tell us. Philostratus moreover declares that Damis related how
carefully Apollonius excluded himself from being present at the
philosophical sessions which he held with Iarchas; and he says that
Apollonius was given by the latter seven rings which were called after
the stars, and that he wore these one by one upon the days respectively
called by their names.

Though we learn this much on this occasion from a gentleman who is
esteemed by the Lover of Truth to have had a respect for facts, further
on in his book, as if by way of condemning the wizardry of the Brahmans,
and as if he was anxious to acquit Apollonius of the charge of having
dabbled therein, he adds the following remark, which I repeat textually:
"But when he saw among the Indians the tripods and the cup-bearers and
the other figures which I have said entered of their own accord, he did
not either ask how they were contrived, or desire to learn; but although
he praised them, he disclaimed any wish to imitate them." And how, my
good fellow, did he disclaim any wish of the kind? Is this the man who
was careful to exclude Damis from the philosophical seances he held with
them, and who thought it his duty to conceal from his only companion all
that he had done in those seances? And how could he have disclaimed any
wish to imitate them when he accepted the seven rings named after the
stars, and held it needful to wear these all through the

<span id="page_540">p. 540</span> <span id="page_541">p. 541</span>

rest of his life upon the days severally named after them, and that
although, as you say yourself, they had a secret power in them. Even if
we grant that he did not aspire to imitate these inventions, it is clear
that his disclaimer was not due to their being uncanny. How then could
he praise things which he disdained to imitate? If he praised them, as
being divinely operated, why did he not imitate things so praiseworthy?
To crown all, on his return after he had stayed with them, we learn that
he arrived with his companions at the country of the Oritae, where he
found the rocks and the sand and the dust which the rivers bring down to
the sea, all alike made of bronze.

### XXIII

<span class="margnote">CHAP. XXIII The predictions of
Apollonius</span><span class="smallcaps">All</span> this is contained in
the third book of Philostratus, and let us now pass on to those which
follow. We learn that when he had returned from the country of the
Indians to the land of Hellas, the gods themselves proclaimed him to be
the companion of the gods, inasmuch as they sent on to him the sick to
be healed. And, indeed, as if his visit to the Arabs and to the Magi and
to the Indians had turned him into some miraculous and divine being, our
author, now that he has got him home again, plunges straight into a
lengthy description of his miracles. And yet one might fairly argue that
if he had been of a diviner than merely human nature, then he ought long
before, and not only now, after entering into relation with other
teachers, to have begun his career of wonder-working; and it was

<span id="page_542">p. 542</span> <span id="page_543">p. 543</span>

superfluous for him to take so much trouble to acquire the multifarious
lore of Arabs and of Magi and of Indians, if he was really what the
initial assumption made by Philostratus assumes him to have been. But
anyhow, according to this truth-loving author, we have now got him back
again, ready to show off the wisdom which he has acquired from so great
masters; and as one fresh from Arabia and equipped with the science of
augury in vogue among the inhabitants of that country, he begins by
interpreting to the bystanders what the sparrow wanted and intended when
it summoned its fellows to their dinner. Next he has a presentiment of
the plague in Ephesus, and warns the citizens of what is coming. And he
himself sets before us in his Apology to Domitian the explanation of
this presentiment. For when the latter asked him what was the ground of
his prediction, he answered: "Because, my prince, I use a very light
diet, I was the first to scent the danger."

<span class="margnote">Story of the Ephesian plague</span>And then he
relates a third miracle of him, which was nothing less than that of his
averting the plague. Although the author has been careful not to include
this story in the final counts retained against Apollonius, probably
because it was impossible for him to rebut a charge founded upon it by
any defence which he could offer, we nevertheless will, if you will
allow us, publish the story and give it full publicity, because our
doing so will render needless any further criticism of it. For if
anybody feels the shadow of doubt about the matter, the very manner in
which the story is told will convince him that fraud and make-believe
was in this case everything, and that if

<span id="page_544">p. 544</span> <span id="page_545">p. 545</span>

ever anything reeked of wizardry this did. For he pretends that the
plague was seen in the form of an aged man, a beggar and dressed in
rags; who, when Apollonius ordered the mob to stone him, began by
shooting fire from his eyes, but afterwards, when he had been
overwhelmed by the stones thrown at him, he appeared as a dog all
crushed and vomiting foam, as mad dogs do. And he writes that Apollonius
mentioned this episode also in the defence he addressed to the autocrat
Domitian, as follows: "For the form of the plague—and it resembled an
aged beggar—was both seen by me, and when I saw it I overcame it, not by
staying the course of the disease, but by utterly destroying it." Who, I
would ask, after reading this would not laugh heartily at the
miracle-mongering of this thaumaturge? For we learn that the nature of
the plague was a living creature and as such exposed at once to the eyes
of the bystanders and to the showers of stones they hurled at it, and
that it was crushed by men, and vomited foam, when all the time a plague
is nothing in the world but a corruption and vitiation of the
atmosphere, the circumambient air being changed into a morbid condition
composed of noxious and evil exhalations, as medical theory teaches us.
And on other grounds, too, this story of the phantom plague can be
exploded; for the story tells us that it only afflicted the city of
Ephesus, and did not visit the neighbouring populations; and how could
this not have been the case, if the surrounding atmosphere had undergone
vitiation? for the infection could not have been confined to one spot,
nor have beset the air of Ephesus alone.

<span id="page_546">p. 546</span> <span id="page_547">p. 547</span>

### XXIV

<span class="margnote">CHAP XXIV The ghost of Achilles</span><span
class="smallcaps">The</span> fourth wonder which he relates is how the
soul of Achilles appeared close by his own sepulchre, dressed the first
time in a tunic, and five cubits high, and subsequently growing till it
was twelve cubits in stature, and accusing the Thessalians for not
continuing according to custom to offer him the due funeral rites, and
furthermore still nursing wrath against the Trojans for the wrongs which
they had committed against him, and bidding Apollonius ask him questions
on five topics, such as he himself might desire to learn about, and the
Fates permit him to know of. We next learn that the omniscient one, who
boasted of his prescience of future events, was still ignorant of
whether Achilles had been buried, and of whether the Muses and Nereids
had bestowed their dirges upon him. And accordingly he asked Achilles
about these matters, and enquires most earnestly whether Polyxena had
been slain over his tomb, and whether Helen had really come to
Troy,—questions surely of a most solemn kind, and such as to stimulate
others to lead the philosophical life of the hero, besides being in
themselves of much importance. Thereupon he falls to wondering if there
had ever been among the Hellenes so many heroes all at one time, and
whether Palamedes had ever reached Troy. Surely it was disgraceful in
the extreme that one who was the companion of gods, whether seen or
unseen, should know so little of such matters as to need to ask
questions again and again about them? Unless, indeed, because in this
scene he is introduced as associating with the dead, the

<span id="page_548">p. 548</span> <span id="page_549">p. 549</span>

author intentionally gives a frigid turn to his questions, in order to
avert the suspicion of his having irreligiously pryed into the secrets
of magic. For we may notice he represents him as arguing in his Apology
that there was no colour of necromancy in the manner in which the
spectre appeared to him, and says: "For without digging any trench like
Odysseus, and without tempting the souls of the dead with the blood of
lambs, I managed to converse with Achilles, merely by using the prayers
which the Indians declare we ought to make use of in addressing heroes."
This is how Apollonius now brags to his companion, although our author
testifies that he had learned nothing from the Indians nor felt
attracted by their wisdom.

### XXV

<span class="margnote">CHAP. XXV Eusebius suggests that an evil spirit
appeared to Apollonius</span><span class="smallcaps">What</span> then is
the reason, my good fellow, supposing that there was no devilish
curiosity here at work, why he would not allow Damis, whom you admit to
have been his sole and genuine and single companion, to share with him
in this marvellous vision and interview? And why, too, was he not able
to do all this by daytime, instead of doing it in the dead of night and
alone? Why, too, did the mere cry of the cocks drive away the soul of
the hero? For he says, "It vanished with a mild flash of lightning, for
indeed the cocks were already beginning to crow." I cannot but think
that evil demons would have found such an hour seasonable and
appropriate for their devilish interviews, rather than the soul of a
hero which, having been freed from the

<span id="page_550">p. 550</span> <span id="page_551">p. 551</span>

crass matter of the body, must necessarily be good and unsullied. In any
case the demon conjured up on this occasion is represented as of a
malignant and envious disposition, both rancorous and mean in humour.
For how else can we characterise one who drove away Antisthenes, a poor
youth so serious that he was endeavouring to become a follower of the
philosopher Apollonius? For Achilles insists that he shall not initiate
him in his philosophy, and he adds the reason: "For," says he, "he is
too much of a descendant of Priam, and the praise of Hector is never out
of his mouth." And how could he be other than rancorous and mean, if he
was wrath with the Thessalians for not sacrificing to him, and still
refused to be reconciled, to the Trojans, because thousands of years
before they had sinned against him, and that although the latter were
continually sacrificing and pouring out libations to him? The only
exception is that he ordered Apollonius to restore the tomb of
Palamedes, which together with his statue had fallen into decay.

### XXVI

<span class="margnote">CHAP. XXVI</span><span
class="smallcaps">The</span> fifth and sixth miracles however in this
book do not stand in need of much argument and discussion, so thoroughly
do they prove our writer's easy credulity. For Apollonius, as they say,
drives out one demon with the help of another. The first of the demons
is expelled from an incorrigible youth, while the second disguises
itself by assuming the form of a woman: and the latter our clever author

<span id="page_552">p. 552</span> <span id="page_553">p. 553</span>

<span class="margnote">The girl raised from the dead in Rome</span>calls
by no other names than those of Empusa and Lamia. As for the damsel whom
he is said subsequently to have brought back again to life in Rome after
she had died, the story clearly impressed Philostratus himself as being
extremely incredible, and we may safely reject it. Anyhow he hesitates
and doubts, whether after all a spark of life might have not lingered on
in the girl unnoticed by her attendants. For he says that according to
report "it was raining at the time, and a vapour exhaled from the face
of the girl." Anyhow if such a miracle had really been wrought in Rome
itself, it could not have escaped the notice first of the emperor and
after him of his subordinate magistrates, and least of all of the
philosopher Euphrates who at the time was in the country and was staying
in Rome, who indeed, as we learn later on, is related to have launched
against Apollonius the accusation of being no other than a wizard. It
would certainly too, had it actually occurred, have been included by the
accuser among the other charges levelled against him. Well, just these
and no more are the more particular and special achievements of
Apollonius, although there are a myriad other cases in the book in which
his Booth-sayings and prophecies are set down to his gift of
foreknowledge; and we learn that at Athens, when he desired to be
initiated in the Eleusinian mysteries, the priest there would not admit
him, and declared that he would never initiate a wizard nor throw open
the Eleusinian mysteries to a man who was addicted to impure rites. We
also hear about a lewd fellow who went begging about Rome, rehearsing
the songs of Nero on his lyre for pay; and we are told that

<span id="page_554">p. 554</span> <span id="page_555">p. 555</span>

this most philosophic of teachers out of fear of Nero ordered his
companions to bestow alms on him in recognition of his clever
accomplishments.

### XXVII

<span class="margnote">CHAP. XXVII The charge of wizardry
true</span><span class="smallcaps">Such</span> are the contents of the
fourth book, and in the fifth book of his history, after a few remarks
about his gift of prescience, our author is so lost in admiration as to
add the following remark, which I repeat textually. "That then he was
enabled to make such forecasts by some divine impulse, and that it is no
sound inference to suppose, as some people do, that Apollonius was a
wizard, is clear from what I have said. But let us consider the
following facts: wizards, whom for my part I reckon to be the most
unfortunate of mankind, claim to alter the course of destiny, either by
tormenting the ghosts whom they encounter, or by means of barbaric
sacrifices, or by means of certain incantations or anointings. But
Apollonius himself submitted to the decrees of the Fates, and foretold
that they must needs come to pass; and his foreknowledge was not due to
wizardry, but derived from what the gods revealed to him. And when among
the Indians he beheld their tripods, and their dumb waiters and other
automata which I described as entering the room of their own accord, he
neither asked how they were contrived, nor wished to learn. He only
praised them, but did not aspire to imitate them." Such a passage as the
above clearly exhibits in the light of wizards the famous philosophers
of India.

<span id="page_556">p. 556</span> <span id="page_557">p. 557</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For notice that
when he is arguing about wizards, he mentions them too and says that
their marvels were cleverly contrived indeed, but that his hero held
himself carefully aloof from such their contrivances, on the ground that
they were not moral. If therefore we find Apollonius calling these
Indians gods, and enrolling himself as their disciple, we have no
alternative but to bring him also under the imputation under which his
teachers lay. And accordingly he is introduced as saying among the
so-called Naked sages of the Egyptians, the following,—I quote his very
words: "It is then not unreasonable on my part, I think, to have yielded
myself to a philosophy so highly elaborated, to a philosophy which, if I
may use a metaphor from the stage, the Indians mount, as it deserved to
be mounted, upon a lofty and divine mechanism before they wheel it out
upon the stage. And that I was right to admire them, and that I am right
in considering them wise and blessed, it is now time to learn." And
after a little he says: "For they are not only gods, but are adorned
with all the gifts of the Pythian prophetess." And he is introduced to
Domitian with these words on his lips: "What war have you with Iarchas
or with Phraotes, both of them Indians, whom I consider to be the only
men that are really gods and that deserve this appellation?" And there
are other passages also in which this history of Philostratus recognises
the persons above mentioned as gods and teachers of the sage, and admits
him to have accepted rings from them, but now he forgets all about it,
and does not see that in maligning the teachers, he maligns the
disciple.

<span id="page_558">p. 558</span> <span id="page_559">p. 559</span>

### XXVIII

<span class="margnote">CHAP. XXVIII Apollonius the kingmaker</span><span
class="smallcaps">And</span> a little lower down in the book he brings a
flute-player upon the stage, and he relates at length how Apollonius
delivered himself with great gravity of long essays upon the different
modes of playing the flute, as if it were the most important and clever
of the sciences. And he relates how the Emperor Vespasian offered him
prayers just as if he were a god, for we learn that Vespasian said in a
tone of prayer: "Do thou make me Emperor," whereupon Apollonius
answered: "I have made you so." What else can anyone do but loathe this
utterance for its boastfulness, so nearly does it approach downright
madness, for one who was the pilot of a ship in Egypt to boast of being
himself a god already and a maker of kings? For Apollonius himself has
informed us a little before in the course of his conversation with the
Indian that his soul had previously been that of a pilot.

### XXIX

<span class="margnote">CHAP. XXIX Relations with Euphrates</span><span
class="smallcaps">And</span> to the same Emperor, when the latter asks
him to notify to him those whom he most approved of among philosophers
as advisers and counsellors of his policy, Apollonius replies in these
words: "'These gentlemen here are also good advisers in such matters,'
and he pointed to Dion and to Euphrates, because he had not yet
quarrelled with the latter." And again, he said, "My sovereign,
Euphrates and Dion have long been known to you

<span id="page_560">p. 560</span> <span id="page_561">p. 561</span>

and they are at your door, and are much concerned for your welfare.
Summon them also therefore to your conference, for they are both of them
wise." Whereupon Vespasian answered: "I throw my doors open wide to wise
men." What can we think of the prescience of our hero? On this occasion
Euphrates is both good and wise, because he has not yet quarrelled with
him; but when he has,—and before long he is going to, then see how the
same person writes to the Emperor Domitian: "And yet if you want to know
how much a philosopher may attain by flattery of the mighty you have
only to look at the case of Euphrates. For in his case why do I speak of
wealth from that source? Why, he has perfect fountains of wealth, and
already at the banks he discusses prices as a merchant might or a
huckster, or a tax-gatherer or a low money-changer; for all these rôles
are his if there is anything to buy or sell. And he clings like a limpet
to the doors of the mighty, and you see him standing at them more
regularly than any doorkeeper would do; indeed he is often caught by the
doorkeepers, just as greedy dogs might be. But he never yet bestowed a
farthing on a philosopher, but he walls up all his wealth within his
house; only supporting this Egyptian out of other people's money, and
sharpening his tongue against me, when it ought to be cut out. However I
will leave Euphrates to yourself: for unless you approve of flatterers,
you will find the fellow worse than I represent him." Surely one who
first bears witness to Vespasian the father that Euphrates is a wise and
good man, and then inveighs against him in this style to his son, is
openly convicted of praising

<span id="page_562">p. 562</span> <span id="page_563">p. 563</span>

and blaming the same person. Was it then the case that this man, who was
endowed with knowledge of the future, did not know what the character of
Euphrates was, nor what it was going to be? For it is not now the first
time, but already in the case of Vespasian himself he is inclined to
accuse him of being the worst of characters. How then is it that he
recommended such a person to the sovereign so warmly, that in
consequence of his recommendation the latter threw open wide the doors
of his palace to him? Why, is it not clear to a blind man, as they say,
that in the matter of foreknowledge the fellow is traduced by his own
historian; though on other ground he might be regarded as an honest man,
if we could suppose that originally, and before he learned by
experience, he wished to gain access to the palace as freely for his
friends, Euphrates included, as for himself, but was afterwards moved by
his quarrel to use such language of him. I have no wish in thus arguing
to accuse Apollonius of having falsely blamed Euphrates, who was the
most distinguished philosopher of all the men of his age, so much so
that his praises are still on the lips of students of philosophy. Not
but what anyone who was minded to do so could take this as a palmary
example of slander and back-biting and use it against Apollonius. For if
Euphrates be really by their admission a leader in all philosophy, it is
proper to credit him with aversion to knavery when he denounces the
strange performances of his rival, and proper for the latter to be
invested with an evil reputation because he was thus attacked by him for
pursuing,—that was the accusation,—a life so little satisfactory to a
philosopher.

<span id="page_564">p. 564</span> <span id="page_565">p. 565</span>

### XXX

<span class="margnote">CHAP. XXX The visit to the Naked Sages of
Ethiopia</span><span class="smallcaps">In</span> the sixth book our
story-teller resumes his tale of miracles; for he brings his hero,
together with his companions, on camel-back to see those whom he calls
the Naked philosophers of Egypt. Here then at the bidding of one of
these sages an elm-tree, we are told, spoke to Apollonius in an
articulate but feminine voice, and this is the sort of thing which the
Lover of Truth expects us to believe. Then he has a story of pigmies who
live on the other side of their country and of man-eaters and of
shadow-footed men and of a satyr whom Apollonius made drunk. From these
sages Apollonius is brought back again to Hellas, where he renews his
interviews and his prophesies to Titus. Then we hear about a youth who
was bitten by a mad dog. He is rescued from his distress by Apollonius,
who forthwith proceeds to divine whose soul it was that the dog had
inside him; and we learn that it was that of Amasis, a former king of
Egypt, for the sage's humanity extended to dogs. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[565:1](toe03.htm#fr_2) Eusebius confuses the mad
dog of VI 43 with the tame lion of V 42.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapters XXXI to XL](toe04)
