[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Apollonius of Tyana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](toe00.md) 
[Next](toe02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674996143/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../laot/img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Treatise of Eusebius Against the Life of Apollonius by
Philostratus*, by Eusebius, tr. F.C. Conybeare, \[1912\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_484">p. 484</span> <span id="page_485">p. 485</span>

### I

<span class="margnote">CHAP. I Most of the *Philalethes* already
answered by Origen</span><span class="smallcaps">So</span> then, my dear
friend, you find worthy of no little admiration the parallel <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) which, embellished with many marvels, this
author has drawn between the man of Tyana and our own Saviour and
teacher. For against the rest of the contents of the "Lover of Truth"
(Philalethes), for so he has thought fit to entitle his work against us,
it would be useless to take my stand at present; because they are not
his own, but have been pilfered in the most shameless manner, not only I
may say in respect of their ideas, but even of their words and
syllables, from other authorities. Not but what these parts also of his
treatise call for their refutation in due season; but to all intents and
purposes they have, even in advance of any special work that might be
written in answer to them, been upset and exposed beforehand in a work
which in

<span id="page_486">p. 486</span> <span id="page_487">p. 487</span>

as many as eight books Origen composed against the book which Celsus
wrote and—even more boastfully than the "Lover of Truth,"—entitled "True
Reason." The work of Celsus is there subjected to an examination in an
exhaustive manner and on the scale above mentioned by the author in
question, who in his comprehensive survey of all that anyone has said or
will ever say on the same topic, has forestalled any solution of your
difficulties which I could offer. To this work of Origen I must refer
those who in good faith and with genuine "love of truth" desire
accurately to understand my own position. I will therefore ask you for
the present to confine your attention to the comparison of Jesus Christ
with Apollonius which is found in this treatise called the "Lover of
Truth," without insisting on the necessity of our meeting the rest of
his arguments, for these are pilfered from other people. We may
reasonably confine our attention for the present to the history of
Apollonius, because Hierocles, of all the writers who have ever attacked
us, stands alone in selecting Apollonius, as he has recently done, for
the purposes of comparison and contrast with our Saviour.

### II

<span class="margnote">CHAP II Hierocles blames the deifying of
Jesus</span><span class="smallcaps">I need</span> not say with what
admiring approval he attributes his thaumaturgic feats not to the tricks
of wizardry, but to a divine and mysterious wisdom; and he believes they
were truly what he supposes them to have been, though he advances no
proof of this contention. Listen then to his very words: "In their
anxiety to exalt Jesus, they run up and down prating of how he made the
blind to see and worked

<span id="page_488">p. 488</span> <span id="page_489">p. 489</span>

certain other miracles of the kind." Then after an interval he adds as
follows: "Let us note however how much better and more sensible is the
view which we take of such matters, and explain the conception which we
entertain of men gifted with remarkable powers." And thereupon after
passing heedlessly by Aristeas of Proconnesus and Pythagoras as somewhat
too old, he continues thus: "But in the time of our own ancestors,
during the reign of Nero, there flourished Apollonius of Tyana, who from
mere boyhood when he became the priest in Aegae of Cilicia of Asclepius,
the lover of mankind, worked any number of miracles, of which I will
omit the greater number, and only mention a few." Then he begins at the
beginning and enumerates the wonders worked by Apollonius, after which
he continues in the following words: "What then is my reason for
mentioning these facts? It was in order that you may be able to contrast
our own accurate and well-established judgment on each point, with the
easy credulity of the Christians. For whereas we reckon him who wrought
such feats not a god, but only a man pleasing to the gods, they on the
strength of a few miracles proclaim their Jesus a god." To this he adds
after a little more the following remark: "And this point is also worth
noticing, that whereas the tales of Jesus have been vamped up by Peter
and Paul and a few others of the kind,—men who were liars and devoid of
education and wizards,—the history of Apollonius was written by Maximus
of Aegae, and by Damis the philosopher who lived constantly with him,
and by Philostratus of Athens, men of the highest education, who out of
respect for the truth and their love of mankind determined to give the
publicity

<span id="page_490">p. 490</span> <span id="page_491">p. 491</span>

they deserved to the actions of a man at once noble and a friend of the
gods." These are the very words used by Hierocles in his treatise
against us which he has entitled "Lover of Truth."

### III

<span class="margnote">CHAP. III Sources of Life of
Apollonius</span><span class="smallcaps">Now</span> Damis who spent so
much of his time with Apollonius was a native of Assyria, where for the
first time, on his own soil, he came into contact with him; and he wrote
an account of his intercourse with the person in question from that time
onwards. Maximus however wrote quite a short account of a portion only
of his career. Philostratus, however, the Athenian, tells us that he
collected all the accounts that he found in circulation, using both the
book of Maximus and that of Damis himself and of other authors; so he
compiled the most complete history of any of this person's life,
beginning with his birth and ending with his death.

### IV

<span class="margnote">CHAP. IV Inferior role accomplished by
Apollonius</span><span class="smallcaps">If</span> then we may be
permitted to contrast the reckless and easy credulity which he goes out
of his way to accuse us of, with the accurate and well-founded judgment
on particular points of the "Lover of Truth," let us ask at once, not
which of them was the more divine nor in what capacity one worked more
wondrous and numerous miracles than the other; nor let us lay stress on
the point that our Saviour and Lord Jesus Christ was the only man of

<span id="page_492">p. 492</span> <span id="page_493">p. 493</span>

whom it was prophesied, thanks to their divine inspiration, by Hebrew
sages who lived far back thousands of years ago, that he should once
come among mankind; nor on the fact that he converted to his own scheme
of divine teaching so many people; nor that he formed a group of genuine
and really sincere disciples, of whom almost without exaggeration it can
be said that they were prepared to lay down their lives for his teaching
at a moment's call; nor that he alone established a school of sober and
chaste living which has survived him all along; nor that by his peculiar
divinity and virtue he saved the whole inhabited world, and still
rallies to his divine teaching races from all sides by tens of
thousands; nor that he is the only example of a teacher who, after being
treated as an enemy for so many years, I might almost say, by all men,
subjects and rulers alike, has at last triumphed and shown himself far
mightier, thanks to his divine and mysterious power, than the infidels
who persecuted him so bitterly, those who for a season rebel against his
divine teaching being now easily punished by him, while the divine
doctrine which he firmly laid down and handed on has come to prevail for
ages without end all over the inhabited world; nor that even now he
displays the virtue of his godlike might in the expulsion, by the mere
invocation of his mysterious name, of sundry troublesome and evil demons
which beset men's bodies and souls, as from our own experience we know
to be the case. To look for such results in the case of Apollonius, or
even to ask about them, is absurd. So we will merely examine the work of
Philostratus, and by close scrutiny of it show that

<span id="page_494">p. 494</span> <span id="page_495">p. 495</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Apollonius was not
fit to be classed, I will not say among philosophers, but even among men
of integrity and good sense, much less to be compared with our Saviour
Christ, so far as we can depend on the work of a writer who, though
according to the "Lover of Truth," he was highly educated, was in any
case no respecter of truth. For such is his description of Philostratus
the Athenian among others. In this way we shall easily appreciate the
value of the rest of the authorities, who though, according to him, they
were most highly educated, yet never by actual sifting of the facts,
established them with any accuracy in the case of Apollonius. For when
we have thoroughly examined these facts, we shall no doubt obtain a
clear demonstration of the solidity and, as he imagines to himself, of
the accuracy in detail of the condemnation which the "Lover of Truth,"
who has at the same time taken possession of the supreme courts all over
the province, passes on Christians, and at the same time of what they
are pleased to call our reckless and facile credulity, for we are
accounted by them to be mere foolish and deluded mortals.

### V

<span class="margnote">CHAP. V The laws of Nature</span><span
class="smallcaps">Another</span> controversialist, by way of beginning
the affray, would without demur abuse and malign the man against whom he
directed his arguments, on the ground that he was his enemy and
adversary; I, however, my friend, used to regard the man of Tyana as
having been, humanly speaking, a kind of sage, and I am still freely
disposed to adhere to this

<span id="page_496">p. 496</span> <span id="page_497">p. 497</span>

opinion; and I would like to set before you, if you ask it, my own
personal opinion of him. If anyone wishes to class him with any
philosopher you like, and to forget all the legends about him and not
bore me with them, I am quite agreeable. Not so if anyone ventures,
whether he be Damis the Assyrian, or Philostratus, or any other compiler
or chronicler, to overleap the bounds of humanity and transcend
philosophy, and while repelling the charge of wizardry in word, yet to
bind it in act rather than in name upon the man, using the mask of
Pythagorean discipline to disguise what he really was. For in that case
his reputation for us as a philosopher will be gone, and we shall have
an ass instead concealed in a lion's skin; and we shall detect in him a
sophist in the truest sense, cadging for alms among the cities, and a
wizard, if there ever was one, instead of a philosopher.

### VI

<span class="margnote">CHAP VI.</span><span class="smallcaps">Do</span>
you ask me what I mean and what are my reasons for speaking thus? I will
tell you. There are bounds of nature which prescribe and circumscribe
the existence of the universe in respect of its beginnings and of its
continuance and of its end, being limits and rules imposed on
everything. By these this entire mechanism and edifice of the whole
universe is constantly being brought to perfection; and they are
arranged by unbreakable laws and indissoluble bonds, and they guard and
observe the all-wise will of a Providence which dispenses and disposes
all things. Now no one can change or alter the place and order of
anything that has been once

<span id="page_498">p. 498</span> <span id="page_499">p. 499</span>

arranged; and if anyone is so venturesome as to wish to transcend his
limits, he is restrained from transgressing divine law by the rule and
decree of nature. So it is that the fish that lives in the waters is
unable in defiance of nature to change on to dry land and live there;
and on the other hand the creature bred on dry land will not plunge into
the waters, and embrace there any permanent repose or abode; nor by any
huge leap can any tenant of earth raise himself aloft into the air, from
a desire to soar about with the eagles; and in turn, although of course
the latter can alight upon the earth, by depressing and lowering their
faculty of flight, and by relaxing the working of their wings, and
renouncing the privilege of nature, for this too is determined by the
divine laws, namely that beings able to soar aloft are able to descend
from on high,—yet the converse is not possible, so that the lowly
habitant of earth should ever raise himself into the welkin. In this way
then the mortal race of men, while provided with soul and body, is yet
circumscribed by divine bounds. Consequently he can never traverse the
air with his body, however much he scorns to linger upon the paths of
earth, without instantly paying the penalty of his folly; nor by
spiritual exaltation can he in his thinking attain to the unattainable,
without falling back into the disease of melancholy.

It is wisest then for him, on the one hand to transport his body along
the ground with the feet given him for the purpose, and on the other
hand to sustain his soul with education and philosophy. But he may well
pray that some one may come to <span class="margnote">Possibility of a
Saviour descending to earth.</span>help him from aloft from the paths of
heaven, and reveal himself to him as a teacher of the salvation that is

<span id="page_500">p. 500</span> <span id="page_501">p. 501</span>

there. For the following is a valid example to use: as it is right for
the physician to visit the sick, and for the teacher to accommodate
himself to the pupil who is entering upon his studies, and for a
superior to quit his heights and condescend to the lowly, yet the
converse is not right or possible. It follows then that there is no
reason to prevent a divine nature, being beneficent and inclined to save
and take providential care of things to come, from associating itself
with men, for this is allowed also by the rule of divine providence; for
according to Plato God was good, and no good being can ever feel any
jealousy of any thing. It follows that the controller of this universe,
being good, will not care for our bodies alone, but much more for our
souls, upon which he has conferred the privilege of immortality and
free-will. On these then, as lord of the entire economy and of gifts of
grace his bestowal of which will benefit our nature, he will, they being
able to appreciate his bounty, bestow plenteously an illumination as it
were of the light which streams from him, and will despatch the most
intimate of his own messengers from time to time, for the salvation and
succour of men here below. Of these messengers anyone so favoured by
fortune, having cleansed his understanding and dissipated the mist of
mortality, may well be described as truly divine, and as carrying in his
soul the image of some great god. Surely so great a personality will
stir up the entire human race, and illuminate the world of mankind more
brightly than the sun, and will leave the effects of his eternal
divinity for the contemplation of future ages, in no less a degree
affording an example of the divine and inspired nature than creations of
artists

<span id="page_502">p. 502</span> <span id="page_503">p. 503</span>

made of lifeless matter. To this extent then human nature can
participate in the super-human; but otherwise it cannot lawfully
transcend its bounds, nor with its wingless body emulate the bird, nor
being a man must one meddle with what appertains to demons.

### VII

<span class="margnote">CHAP. VII Was Apollonius a divine
being?</span><span class="smallcaps">In</span> what light then, this
being so, do you envisage for us Apollonius, my good compiler? If as a
divine being and superior to a philosopher, in a word as one superhuman
in his nature, I would ask you to keep to this point of view throughout
your history, and to point me out effects wrought by his divinity
enduring to this day. For surely it is an absurdity that the works of
carpenters and builders should last on ever so long after the craftsmen
are dead, and raise as it were an immortal monument to the memory of
their constructive ability; and yet that a human character claimed to be
divine should, after shedding its glory upon mankind, finish in darkness
its short-lived career, instead of displaying for ever its power and
excellence. Instead of being so niggardly liberal to some one individual
like Damis and to a few other short-lived men, it should surely make its
coming among us the occasion of blessings, conferred on myriads not only
of his contemporaries, but also of his posterity. This I ween is how the
sages of old raised up earnest bands of disciples, who continued their
tradition of moral excellence, sowing in men's hearts a spirit truly
immortal of progress and reform. If on the other hand you attribute to
this

<span id="page_504">p. 504</span> <span id="page_505">p. 505</span>

man a mortal nature, take care lest by endowing him with gifts which
transcend mortality, you convict yourself of fallacy and miscalculation.

### VIII

<span class="margnote">CHAP. VIII</span><span
class="smallcaps">But</span> enough of this. His hero is introduced to
us as a divine man, who assumes from birth the guise and personality of
a demon of the sea. For he says that to his mother when she was about to
bear her child, there appeared the figure of a demon of the sea, namely
Proteus, who in the story of Homer ever changes his form. But she, in no
way frightened, asked him what she would bring to birth; and he replied:
"Myself." Then she asked: "And who are you?" "Proteus," he replied, "of
Egypt." And then he writes about a certain meadow and about swans, that
assisted the lady to bear her child, though without telling us whence he
derived this particular; for assuredly he does not attribute this story
to Damis the Assyrian writer. But a little further on in the same
history the represents Apollonius as using, in token of his being of a
divine nature these very words to Damis himself: "I myself, my
companion, understand all languages though I have learned none." And
again he says to him: "Do not be surprised, for I know what men are
thinking about, even when they are silent." And again in the temple of
Asclepius he was much honoured by the god, and is said to have possessed
a certain natural gift of prescience, which he did not acquire by
learning, from very childhood. We learn, in a word, that he was born
superior to mankind in

<span id="page_506">p. 506</span> <span id="page_507">p. 507</span>

general, and so he is described from the first moment of his birth
throughout his history. Anyhow on one occasion after he had loosed
himself from his bonds, his historian adds the remark: "Then Damis
declares he for the first time clearly understood the nature of
Apollonius, that it was divine and superior to humanity. For without
offering any sacrifice,—for how could he offer one in the prison?—and
without offering any prayer, without a single word, he just laughed at
his fetters." And at the end of the book <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) we learn that his grave was nowhere to be
found on earth; but that he went to heaven in his physical body
accompanied by hymns and dances. Naturally if he was so great as he is
described in the above, he may be said "to have wooed philosophy in a
more divine manner than Pythagoras, or Empedocles, or Plato." For these
reasons we must surely class the man among the gods.

### IX

<span class="margnote">CHAP. IX If Apollonius was divine why did he need
schooling?</span><span class="smallcaps">Well</span>, we will not grudge
him his natural and self-taught gift of understanding all languages. But
if he possessed it, why was he taken to a school-master, and if he had
never learnt any language whatever, why does his historian malign him
and declare that, not by nature, but by dint of close study and
application, he acquired the Attic dialect? For he tells us outright
"that as he advanced in youth he displayed a knowledge of letters and
great power of memory, and force of application, and that he spoke the
Attic dialect." We also learn that "when he reached his fourteenth year
his father took him to Tarsus, to Euthydemus of Phoenicia, who was a
good

<span id="page_508">p. 508</span> <span id="page_509">p. 509</span>

rhetor, and gave him his education, while Apollonius clung to his
teacher." We further learn that "he had as fellow-students members of
the school of Plato and of Chrysippus and members of the Peripatetic
set. That he also diligently listened to the doctrines of Epicurus,
because he did not despise even them, though he grasped the teachings of
Pythagoras with a certain indescribable wisdom." So varied was the
education of one who had never learnt any language, and who by his
divine power anticipated "the thoughts of men even when they are
silent."

### X

<span class="margnote">CHAP. X He knew the language of
animals</span><span class="smallcaps">And</span> after an interval our
author again expresses his admiration at the ease with which Apollonius
understood the language of animals, and he goes on to tell us the
following: "And moreover he acquired an understanding of the language of
animals; and he learnt this, too, in the course of his travels through
Arabia, where the inhabitants best know this language and practise it.
For the Arabians have a way of understanding without difficulty swans
and other birds when they presage the future in the same way as oracles.
And they get to understand the dumb animals by eating, so they say, some
of them the heart and others the liver of dragons." In this instance,
then, it seems anyhow to have been the case that the Pythagorean who
abstained from animal food and could not even bring himself to sacrifice
to the gods, devoured the heart and liver of dragons, in order to
participate in a form of wisdom that was in vogue among the Arabs. After
learning

<span id="page_510">p. 510</span> <span id="page_511">p. 511</span>

under such masters, how could he attain to their accomplishments
otherwise than by imitating their example? We must therefore add to the
teachers whom we have already enumerated the sages of Arabia who taught
him his knowledge of augury; and this no doubt inspired him subsequently
to foretell what the sparrow meant when he called his fellows to a meal,
and so to impress the bystanders with the idea that he had worked a
mighty miracle. And in the same way when he saw the freshly-slain
lioness with her eight whelps by the side of the road which led into
Assyria, he immediately conjectured from what he saw the length of their
future stay in Persia, and made a prophecy thereof.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[485:1](toe01.htm#fr_0.md) Or perhaps we should
render "the parallel this writer has paradoxically drawn," etc.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[507:1](toe01.htm#fr_1.md) Or reader: "And at death
we," etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapters XI to XX](toe02.md)
