[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Apollonius of Tyana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](toe03.md) 
[Next](toe05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674996143/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../laot/img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Treatise of Eusebius Against the Life of Apollonius by
Philostratus*, by Eusebius, tr. F.C. Conybeare, \[1912\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXXI

<span class="margnote">CHAP. XXXI Apollonius’ miracles due to the
co-operations of evil demons</span><span class="smallcaps">These</span>
then are the achievements which preceded his accusation, and it behoves
us to notice throughout the treatise that, even if we admit the author
to tell the truth in his stories of miracles, he yet clearly shows that
they were severally performed by Apollonius with the co-operation of a
demon. For his

<span id="page_566">p. 566</span> <span id="page_567">p. 567</span>

presentiment of the plague, though it might not seem to be magical and
uncanny, if he owed it, as he himself said, to the lightness and purity
of his diet, yet might quite as well have been a premonition imparted to
him in intercourse with a demon. For though the other stories of his
having grasped and foretold the future by virtue of his prescience can
be refuted by a thousand arguments which Philostratus’ own text
supplies, nevertheless, if we allow this particular story to be true, I
should certainly say that his apprehension of futurity was anyhow in
some cases, though it was not so in all, due to some uncanny contrivance
of a demon that was his familiar. This is clearly proved by the fact
that he did not retain his gift of foreknowledge uniformly and in all
cases; but was at fault in most cases, and had through ignorance to make
enquiries, as he would not have needed to do, if he had been endowed
with divine power and virtue. And the very cessation of the plague,
according to the particular turn which was given to the drama, has
already been shown to have been a delusion and nothing more. Moreover,
the soul of Achilles should not have been lingering about his own
monument, quitting the Islands of the Blest and the places of repose, as
people would probably say. In this case too it was surely a demon that
appeared to Apollonius and in whose presence he found himself? Then
again the licentious youth was clearly the victim of an indwelling
demon; and both it and the Empusa and the Lamia which is said to have
played off its mad pranks on Menippus, were probably driven out by him
with the help of a more important demon; the same is

<span id="page_568">p. 568</span> <span id="page_569">p. 569</span>

true also of the youth who had been driven out of his mind by the mad
dog; and the frenzied dog itself was restored to its senses by the same
method. You must then, as I said, regard the whole series of miracles
wrought by him, as having been accomplished through a ministry of
demons; for the resuscitation of the girl must be divested of any
miraculous character, if she was really alive all the time and still
bore in herself a vital spark, as the author says, and if a vapour rose
over her face.<span class="margnote">Ch. 29</span> For it is impossible,
as I said before, that such a miracle should have been passed over in
silence in Rome itself, if it happened when the sovereign was close by.

### XXXII

<span class="margnote">CHAP. XXXII</span><span
class="smallcaps">There</span> are a thousand other examples then which
we may select from the same books, where the narrative refutes itself by
its very incongruities, so enabling us to detect its mythical and
miracle-mongering character. At the same time we need not devote too
much attention and study to the gentleman's career, seeing that those of
our contemporaries among whom his memory survives at all, are so far
from classing him among divine and extraordinary and wonderful beings,
that they do not even rank him among philosophers. This being so, let us
be content with the remarks we have made, and proceed to consider the
seventh book of his history.

<span id="page_570">p. 570</span> <span id="page_571">p. 571</span>

### XXXIII

<span class="margnote">CHAP. XXXIII</span><span
class="smallcaps">Here</span> then we find him categorically accused of
being a wizard. Next we find Demetrius the philosopher trying to
dissuade him from going on to Rome, and Apollonius rejects his advice in
words which are full of vulgar effrontery and fulsome praise of himself.
They are as follows: "But I know most human affairs, seeing that I know
everything; at the same time I reserve my knowledge partly for good men,
partly for the wise, partly for myself, partly for the gods." And yet
the man who in these words brags about his omniscience, before he goes
much further is accused by the text itself of an ignorance in certain
matters. Next Apollonius disguises Damis, for the latter conceals the
fact of his being a philosopher because he is afraid of death. Listen
then to the words in which our author apologises for him: "This was the
reason then of Damis’ putting off his Pythagorean dress. For he says
that it was not cowardice that led him to make the change, nor regret at
having worn it; but he did it because the device recommended itself as
suggested by the expedience of the moment."

### XXXIV

<span class="margnote">CHAP. XXXIV</span><span
class="smallcaps">After</span> this Philostratus sets forth four counts
of the indictment which he imagines it will be easy for his hero to
defend himself from, and he admits that he has collected these out of a
great many others. Of these the first was: What induced him

<span id="page_572">p. 572</span> <span id="page_573">p. 573</span>

to wear a different robe from everybody else? and the second: Why was it
that men esteemed him to be a god? the third, How had he managed to
predict the plague to the Ephesians? and last of all: In whose behoof
had he gone to a certain field and cut up the Arcadian boy? To meet
these then he alleges Apollonius to have written an apology. But first
of all he relates how he was cast into prison, and the miracle which he
wrought there. For we hear that Damis was extremely downcast at the
misfortunes which he imagined had befallen his teacher; whereupon
Apollonius showed him his leg released without effort from the chain.
Then having thus alleviated his follower's grief, he put his foot back
again into its former condition and habit. After that he was brought to
trial before the Emperor Domitian, and we read that he was acquitted on
the charges, and that after being so acquitted he, with curious
inopportuneness, as it seems to me, cried out in the court exactly as
follows: "Accord me too, if you will, an opportunity to speak; but if
not, then send someone to take my body, for my soul you cannot take. Nay
you cannot even take my body, 'for thou shalt not slay me, since I tell
thee I am not mortal.'" And then after this famous utterance, we are
told that he vanished from the court, and this is the conclusion of the
whole drama.

### XXXV

<span class="margnote">CHAP. XXXV</span><span
class="smallcaps">Now</span> in regard to the miracle in the prison,
which it seems was an illusion, imposed on the eyes of Damis by the
familiar demon, our author adds the

<span id="page_574">p. 574</span> <span id="page_575">p. 575</span>

following remark; "Damis says that it was then for the first time that
he truly understood the nature of Apollonius, to wit that it was divine
and superhuman; for without offering any sacrifice,—and how indeed in
prison could he have offered one?—and without a single prayer, without
even a word, he quietly laughed at the fetters, and then inserting his
leg in them afresh, he comported himself like any other prisoner." I
should be the last to accuse his pupil of being a dull-witted man,
because, after being with him all his life, and witnessing him work
miracles by means of certain uncanny agencies, he failed to regard him
as in any way superior to the rest of mortal men; but now after such a
display of thaumaturgic energy as the above, he is still ignorant of his
true character; and taking him to be a mere man he is full of anxiety
(as in that case he might well be), and full of apprehension in his
behalf, lest any affliction should come upon him against his own wish
and will. But if indeed it was now for the first time, after having
passed so long a time with him, that he realised that he was indeed
divine, and superior to the rest of the human race, then it behoves us
to scrutinize the reason which our author alleges for his doing so, in
these words: "For without any sacrifice, and without a single prayer,
and without uttering a single mysterious word" he saw that he had
wrought this miracle. It follows that the fellow's earlier feats were
accomplished by the help of some uncanny trick, and that is why, as he
says, Damis was not astounded at these things, nor filled with wonder by
them. Naturally, then he now for the first time experienced these
feelings, because he felt that his master had accomplished

<span id="page_576">p. 576</span> <span id="page_577">p. 577</span>

something which was quite unusual and contrary to his habitual
performances. In reference however to the phantom chains shown to Damis
and to his departure from the law-courts, I will quote the words which
Apollonius himself addresses to Domitian. For when the monarch ordered
him to be thrown into chains, Apollonius, with perfect consistency,
argued as follows: "If you think me a wizard, how will, you bind me? And
if you bind me, how can you say that I am a wizard?" Surely one may
invert this argument and use it against him somewhat as follows, keeping
to his own premisses: If you are not a wizard, then how was your leg
liberated from the chains? and if it was liberated, then how are you not
a wizard? And if, because he submits to the chains, he is not a wizard,
then if he does not submit to them, he is a wizard by his own admission.
And again if, because he submitted to be brought to trial, he was not a
wizard, he was yet clearly revealed as such when he ran off and eluded
the court and retinue of the Emperor, I mean of course the bodyguard
that stood round him. Now I believe that our author is aware of this,
and endeavours to gloze over the fact, when he pretends that this
miracle was exhibited without sacrifice or any sort of incantation by
some ineffable and superhuman power.

### XXXVI

<span class="margnote">CHAP. XXXVI</span><span
class="smallcaps">Moreover</span> we have not got to go far, before a
fresh test of his character is supplied to us; for presently a messenger
presents himself and says: "O Apollonius, the Emperor releases you from
these chains, and permits you to reside in the jail where

<span id="page_578">p. 578</span> <span id="page_579">p. 579</span>

prisoners are not bound"; whereupon Apollonius, who is superior to
mankind and has foreknowledge of what is coming, and according to the
poet

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Hath understanding of the dumb and heareth him who speaks not "

</div>

is so overjoyed, as well he might be, at the news, that he suddenly
drops out of his gift of foreknowledge, and asks outright: "Who then
will get me out of this place?" and the messenger replied: "I myself, so
follow me."

### XXXVII

<span class="margnote">CHAP. XXXVII</span><span
class="smallcaps">Next</span> this most divine of men composes in the
most careful of manners an harangue in defence of himself, quite unaware
that after all his composition would prove a mere waste of effort. For
he imagines that the Emperor will listen to his defence of his case, and
on that assumption he arranges his apology along extremely plausible
lines; but the latter by refusing to wait, renders all his trouble
useless and unnecessary. I would ask you then to listen to the
following, for what he says is a refutation of himself: "But inasmuch as
he had composed an oration which he meant to deliver in defence of
himself by the clock, only the tyrant confined him to the questions
which I have enumerated, I have determined to publish this oration
also." Note then how utterly at fault this entirely divinest of beings
was about the future, if he took so much trouble and care to proportion
the length of his apology to the time allowed him by the water-clock.

<span id="page_580">p. 580</span> <span id="page_581">p. 581</span>

### XXXVIII

<span class="margnote">CHAP. XXXVIII</span><span
class="smallcaps">But</span> we must not omit to pass in review the
defence which he so vainly composed, for it contains among many examples
of the arrogance with which he addressed Domitian, the following
utterance, to wit, when he says "as Vespasian made you Emperor, so I
made him." Heavens, what braggadocio! No ordinary person anyhow, nor any
real philosopher either, transcending the rest of mankind, could indulge
in such high-faluting bombast without exposing himself in the eyes of
sensible men to a charge of being mad. Next in trying to rid himself of
the suspicion which weighed upon him, he holds the following language
concerning magicians and wizards; "But I call wizards men of false
wisdom, for with them the unreal is made real, and the real becomes
incredible." One may learn then from the whole treatise and from the
particular episodes set forth therein, whether we ought to rank him
among divine and philosophic men or among wizards. We have only to
observe what he himself has said about wizards and falsely wise men
together with what is published in his own history. For when oak trees
and elms talk in articulate and feminine tones, and tripods move of
their own accord, and waiters of copper serve at table, and jars are
filled with showers and with winds, and water of sandarac and all the
other things of the kind are introduced among those whom he accounted
gods and also did not hesitate to entitle his teachers, of whom else are
all these things characteristic, except of people who can exhibit "the
unreal as real and the real as

<span id="page_582">p. 582</span> <span id="page_583">p. 583</span>

incredible"? In himself calling the latter wizards, he shows that they
are people whose wisdom is false. Is it then on the strength of these
things that this divine man, endowed with all virtue and the darling of
the gods, is to bind on his brow the prize of wisdom, and to be
accounted truly more divine than Pythagoras and his successors, and to
be considered far more blessed than he; is he not rather to be found
guilty of false wisdom and carry off the first prize for wretches?

### XXXIX

<span class="margnote">CHAP. XXXIX The discourse about the Fates in
Ionia</span><span class="smallcaps">In</span> the same book we are told
that he had reasoned in Ionia about the power of the Fates, and had
taught that the threads they spin are so immutable that, if they decree
a kingdom to another which already belongs to some one, then, even if
that other were slain by the possessor for fear lest he should ever have
it taken away by him, the latter would yet be raised from the dead and
live again in fulfilment of the decrees of the Fates; and he continues
in these very words: "He who is destined to become a carpenter, will
become one, even though his hands have been cut off; and he who has been
predestined to carry off the prize for running in the Olympic games,
will never fail to win, even though he break his leg; and the man to
whom the Fates have decreed that he shall be an eminent archer, will not
miss the mark, even though he lose his eyesight." And then by way of
flattering the sovereign he adds the following: "And in drawing

<span id="page_584">p. 584</span> <span id="page_585">p. 585</span>

my examples from royalty, I had reference, I admit, to the Acrisii and
to the house of Laïus, and to Astyages, the Mede, and to many other
monarchs who thought that they were making good provision in such cases
and supposed, some that they had slain their own children and others
their descendants, yet were deprived by them of their thrones, when they
grew up and issued forth against them out of obscurity in accordance
with destiny. Well, if I were inclined to flattery I should have said
that I had your own history in my mind, when you were blockaded by
Vitellius, and the temple of Jupiter was burnt on the brow of the hill
overlooking the city. And Vitellius declared that his own fortune was
assured, so long as you did not escape him, although you were at the
time quite a stripling, and not the man you are now. And yet because the
Fates had decreed otherwise, he perished with all his counsels, while
you are now in possession of his throne. However, since I abhor the
forced concords of flattery, for it seems to me that they are everything
that is out of time and out of tune, let me at once cut this string out
of my lyre, and request you to consider that on that occasion I had not
your fortunes in my mind." In this passage, a treatise written
ostensibly in the interest of truth draws a picture of a man who was at
once a flatterer and a liar, and anything rather than a philosopher; for
after inveighing so bitterly on the earlier occasion against Domitian,
he now flatters him, generous fellow that he is, and pretends that the
doctrines he mooted in Ionia about the Fates and Necessity, so far from
being directed against him rather told in his favour.

<span id="page_586">p. 586</span> <span id="page_587">p. 587</span>

Take then your history, my author, and regaining your sobriety after
your fit of drunkenness, read out loud and in a truth-loving tone the
passages you wrote on a former occasion, without concealing anything;
read how when he was staying in Ephesus he did his best "to alienate his
friends from Domitian, and encouraged them to espouse the cause of the
safety of all, and as it occurred to him that intercourse with them by
letter was dangerous to them, he would take now one and now another of
the most discreet of his own companions aside and say to them: 'I have a
most important secret business to entrust to yourselves, so you must
betake yourself to Rome to such and such persons, and converse with
them!'" And of how "he delivered a discourse on the subject of the Fates
and Necessity, and argued that not even tyrants can overpower the
decrees of the Fates." And how "directing the attention of his audience
to a brazen statue of Domitian which stood close by that of the Meles,
he said: 'Thou fool, how much art thou mistaken in thy views of
Necessity and of the Fates. For even if thou shouldst slay the man who
is fated to be despot after thyself, he shall come to life again.'" The
man then who, after holding such language as this, proceeds to flatter
the tyrant, and cynically pretends that none of this language was
directed against him, how can we judge him other than capable of all
villainy and meanness; unless indeed you assume that the authors who
have handed down to us these details of him were lying fellows who meant
to accuse their hero and not true historians? But in that case what
becomes, to use the language of the Lover of Truth, of those who "were
historians

<span id="page_588">p. 588</span> <span id="page_589">p. 589</span>

at once most highly educated and respectful of the truth, namely Damis
the philosopher who even lived with the man in question and Philostratus
the Athenian?" For these are the authors who lay these facts before us,
and they are clearly convicted by the light of truth, since they thus
contradict themselves, of being vapouring braggarts and nothing else,
convicted by their inconsistencies of being downright liars, men devoid
of education and charlatans.

### XL

<span class="margnote">CHAP. XL Apollonius refused at
Lebadea</span><span class="smallcaps">The</span> story proceeds to tell
us that after all this, Apollonius, liberated from the court, made up
his mind to descend into the cave of Trophonius in Lebadea; but the
people there would not allow him to do so, because they too regarded him
as a wizard. Surely it is legitimate in us to be puzzled, when one
compares what one reads at the beginning of the book of Philostratus, I
mean the passage where he owns that he is puzzled at people having
regarded his hero as a wizard, and expresses his surprise at the
circumstance, remarking withal, that "although Empedocles and Pythagoras
and Democritus had consorted with the same Magi without ever stooping to
the magic art, and Plato had derived much from the priests and prophets
in Egypt, and had mingled their ideas with his own discourses, without
ever being held by anyone to be a magician, yet men so far had failed to
recognise his hero as one inspired by the purest wisdom, but had long
since accounted him a magician and still did so, because he had

<span id="page_590">p. 590</span> <span id="page_591">p. 591</span>

consorted with the Magi of Babylon and the Brahmans of India, and the
Naked sages of Egypt." What answer then can we make to him, except
this?—My good fellow, what was your hero up to in this line, for him
alone to have been regarded both long ago and now as a wizard in
contrast with these great men; who though, as you admit, they had made
trial of the same teachers as he, yet were eminent both in the age in
which they flourished, and also bequeathed to posterity in their
philosophy a gift of such excellence that its praises are still sung. is
such a contrast possible, unless he was caught by men of good sense
meddling with things that were unlawful? There are still among our
contemporaries those who say that they have found superstitious devices
dedicated in the name of this man; though I admit I have no wish to pay
attention to them. <span class="margnote">Death of
Apollonius</span>However as regards his death, although Philostratus
follows in his book the accounts of earlier writers, he declares that he
knows nothing of the truth; for he says that people in Ephesus related
that Apollonius died there, while others said that he died in Lindus
after entering the temple of Athene, and others in Crete; and after
shedding so much doubt on the manner of his end, he yet inclines to
believe that he went to heaven body and all. For he says that after he
had run into the temple, the gates were closed and a strange hymn of
maidens was heard to issue from the building, and the words of their
song were: "Come, come, to heaven, come." But he says that he had never
come across any sepulchre or cenotaph of his hero, although he had
visited the greater part of the whole earth; but what he would like us
to believe is that his hero never encountered

<span id="page_592">p. 592</span> <span id="page_593">p. 593</span>

death at all, for on a former occasion when he is canvassing the manner
in which he died, he adds the proviso: "If he did die." But in a later
passage he declares in so many words that he went to heaven. This is why
he avows, no less in the exordium of his book than throughout it, that
it was by reason of his being such as he was that he wooed philosophy in
a diviner manner than Pythagoras and Empedocles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapters XLI to XLII](toe05.md)
