[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](argr01)  [Next](argr03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88F0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Astrology and Religion Among the Greeks and Romans*, by Franz Cumont,
\[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# ANNOUNCEMENT

The American Lectures on the History of Religions are delivered under
the auspices of the American Committee for Lectures on the History of
Religions. This Committee was organised in 1892, for the purpose of
instituting "popular courses in the History of Religions, somewhat after
the style of the Hibbert Lectures in England, to be delivered by the
best scholars of Europe and this country, in various cities, such as
Baltimore, Boston, Brooklyn, Chicago, New York, Philadelphia, and
others."

The terms of association under which the Committee exists are as
follows:

1.--The object of this Association shall be to provide courses of
lectures on the history of religions, to be delivered in various cities.

2.--The Association shall be composed of delegates from the institutions
agreeing to co-operate, with such additional members as may be chosen by
these delegates.

3.--These delegates--one from each institution, with the additional
members selected--shall constitute themselves a Council under the name
of the "American Committee for Lectures on the History of Religions."

4.--The Council shall elect out of its number a Chairman, a Secretary,
and a Treasurer.

5.--All matters of local detail shall be left to the co-operating
institution under whose auspices the lectures are to be delivered.

6.--A course of lectures on some religion, or phase of religion, from an
historical point of view, or on a subject germane to the study of
religions, shall be delivered annually, or at such intervals as may be
found practicable, in the different cities represented by this
Association.

7.--The Council (*a*) shall be charged with the selection of the
lecturers, (*b*) shall have charge of the funds, (*c*) shall assign vii

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

the time for the lectures in each city, and perform such other functions
as may be necessary.

8.--Polemical subjects, as well as polemics in the treatment of
subjects, shall be positively excluded.

9.--The lectures shall be delivered in the various cities between the
months of September and June.

10.--The copyright of the lectures shall be the property of the
Association.

11.--The compensation of the lecturer shall be fixed in each case by the
Council.

12.--The lecturer shall be paid in instalments after each course, until
he shall have received half of the entire compensation. Of the remaining
half, one half shall be paid to him upon delivery of the manuscript,
properly prepared for the press, and the second half on the publication
of the volume, less a deduction for corrections made by the author in
the proofs.

The Committee as now constituted is as follows:

Prof. Crawford H. Toy, Chairman, 7 Lowell St., Cambridge, Mass.; Rev.
Dr. John P. Peters, Treasurer, 227 W. 99th St., New York City; Prof.
Morris Jastrow, Jr., Secretary, 248 S. 23rd St., Philadelphia, Pa.;
President Francis Brown, Union Theological Seminary, New York City;
Prof. Richard Gottheil, Columbia University, New York City; Prof. Robert
F. Harper, University of Chicago, Chicago, Ill.; Prof. Paul Haupt, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, Md.; Prof. F. W. Hooper, Brooklyn
Institute of Arts and Sciences; Prof. E. W. Hopkins, Yale University,
New Haven, Conn.; Prof. Edward Knox Mitchell, Hartford Theological
Seminary, Hartford, Conn.; President F. K. Sanders, Washburn College,
Topeka, Kan.; Prof. H. P. Smith, Meadville Theological Seminary,
Meadville, Pa.

The lecturers in the course of American Lectures on the History of
Religions and the titles of their volumes are as follows:

1894-1895--Prof. T. W. Rhys-Davids, Ph.D.--Buddhism.

1896-1897--Prof. Daniel G. Brinton, M.D., LL.D.--Religions of Primitive
Peoples.

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

1897-1898--Rev. Prof. T. K. Cheyne, D.D. Jewish Religious Life after the
Exile.

1898-1899--Prof. Karl Budde, D.D.--Religion of Israel to the Exile.

1904-1905--Prof. George Steindorff, Ph.D.--The Religion of the Ancient
Egyptians.

1905-1906--Prof. George W. Knox, D.D., LL.D.--The Development of
Religion in Japan.

1906-1907--Prof. Maurice Bloomfield, Ph.D., LL.D.--The Religion of the
Veda.

1907-1908--Prof. A. V. W. Jackson, Ph.D., LL.D.--The Religion of
Persia. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

1909-1910--Prof. Morris Jastrow, Jr., Ph.D.--Aspects of Religious Belief
and Practice in Babylonia and Assyria.

1910-1911--Prof. J. J. M. DeGroot.--The Development of Religion in
China.

The lecturer for 1911-1912 was Prof. Franz Cumont of Brussels,
recognised as the leading authority on Greek Astrology and Mithraism.
From 1892 until his resignation in 1910, Prof. Cumont held the Chair of
Roman Institutions at the University of Ghent. Since 1899, he has been
Curator of the Royal Museums of Antiquities at Brussels. Prof. Cumont's
great work on the Mithra Cult was published in 1894-1900, and is the
standard work on that subject. This was followed by a smaller summary,
*Les Mystères de Mithra*, of which an English translation, under the
title "Mysteries of Mithra," was published in 1903. A series of lectures
delivered at the College de France on *Les Religions Orientales dans le
Paganisme Romain* 

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (Paris, 1907; 2nd
ed. 1910) has also appeared in an English garb (Oriental Religions in
Roman Paganism. Chicago, 1911).

In 1900 and again in 1907, Prof. Cumont conducted archeological
explorations in Asia Minor and in Northern Syria, the results of which
were embodied in his *Studia Pontica* (Brussels, 1906) and in a volume
of Greek and Latin inscriptions published in 1911.

In 1898, in collaboration with several scholars, M. Cumont undertook a
catalogue, with detailed descriptions and copious extracts, of all Greek
astrological codices (*Catalogus Codicum Astrologorum Graecorum*), of
which monumental work, up to the present, ten volumes have appeared. A
Bibliography of Prof. Cumont's writings, including numerous articles
contributed by him to archeological, historical, and philosophical
journals of various countries, was published in 1908 by the Royal
Academy of Belgium, of which body M. Cumont has been a member since
1902. He is also a corresponding member of the Institute de France and
of the Academies of Berlin, Göttingen, and Munich.

The lectures contained in this volume are a summary in a popular form of
extensive researches carried on by Prof. Cumont for many years. They
were delivered before the following institutions: The Lowell Institute,
Hartford Theological Seminary, Johns Hopkins University, University of
Pennsylvania, University of Chicago, Brooklyn Institute of Arts and
Sciences, Meadville Theological Seminary, and Columbia University.

<div align="right">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="228"><p>JOHN P. PETERS,<br />
C. H. Toy,<br />
Committee on Publication</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

*December*, 1911

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[ix:1](argr02.htm#fr_0) This course was not
published by the Committee, but will form part of Prof. Jackson's volume
on the Religion of Persia in the series of "Handbooks on the History of
Religions," edited by Prof. Morris Jastrow, Jr., and published by
Messrs. Ginn & Company of Boston. Prof. Jastrow's volume is, therefore,
the eighth in the series. Prof. De Groot's lectures have not yet been
published, but will appear in 1912. Prof. Cumont's volume is, therefore,
the ninth in the series.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](argr03)
