[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](argr05)  [Next](argr07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88F0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Astrology and Religion Among the Greeks and Romans*, by Franz Cumont,
\[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span> <span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

# Astrology and Religion among the Greeks and Romans

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

### LECTURE I. The Chaldeans

During the period of the French Revolution citizen Dupuis, in three
bulky volumes "On the Origin of all Forms of Worship" (1794), developed
the idea that the primary source of religion was the spectacle of
celestial phenomena and the ascertainment of their correspondence with
earthly events, and he undertook to show that the myths of all peoples
and all times were nothing but a set of astronomical combinations.
According to him, the Egyptians, to whom he assigned the foremost place
among "the inventors of religions," had conceived, some twelve or
fifteen thousand years before our era, the division of the ecliptic into
twelve constellations corresponding to the twelve months; and when the
expedition of Bonaparte discovered in the temples of the Nile valley,
notably at Denderah, some zodiacs to which a fabulous antiquity was
attributed, these extraordinary theories appeared to receive an
unexpected confirmation. But the bold mythological fabric reared in the
heavens by the *savant* of the Revolution fell to pieces when Letronne
proved that the zodiac of Denderah dated, not from an epoch anterior to
the most ancient of the known Pharaohs, but from that of the Roman
emperors.

Science in her cycles of hypotheses is liable to repeat herself. An
attempt has recently been made to restore to favour the fancies of
Dupuis, by renovating them with greater erudition. Only, the mother
country of "astral mythology" is to be sought, not on the banks of the
Nile, but on those of the Euphrates. The "Pan-Babylonists," as they have
been called, maintain that

<span class="small">Behind the literature and cults of Babylon and
Assyria, behind the legends and myths, behind the Pantheon and religious
beliefs, behind even the writings which appear to be purely historical,
lies an astral conception of the universe and of its phenomena,
affecting all thoughts, all beliefs, all practices, and penetrating even
into the</span>

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

<span class="small">domain of purely secular intellectual activity,
including all branches of science cultivated in antiquity. According to
this astral conception, the greater gods were identified with the
planets, and the minor ones with the fixed stars. A scheme of
correspondences between phenomena in the heavens and occurrences on
earth was worked out. The constantly changing appearance of the heavens
indicates the ceaseless activity of the gods, and since whatever
happened on earth was due to divine powers, this activity represented
the preparation for terrestrial phenomena, and more particularly those
affecting the fortunes of mankind. . . . Proceeding further, it is
claimed that the astral-mythological cult of ancient Babylonia became
the prevailing *Weltanschauung* of the ancient Orient, and that whether
we turn to Egypt or to Palestine, to Hittite districts or to Arabia, we
shall find these various cultures under the spell of this
conception.</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It furnishes the
key to the interpretation of Homer as well as of the Bible. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4) In particular, all the Old Testament should
be explained by a series of sidereal myths. The patriarchs are
"personifications of the sun or moon," and the traditions of the Sacred
Books are "variations of certain 'motifs,' whose real significance is to
be found only when they are transferred to phenomena in the heavens."

Such is a wholly impartial summary of the theories professed by the
advocates of the *Altorientalische Weltanschauung*. I borrow it, with
slight abbreviation, from an address delivered by Morris Jastrow, Jr.,
at the Oxford Congress in 1908. <span id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5) Now of
this system. it may be said that what is true in it is not new, and what
is new is not true. That Babylon was the mother of astronomy,
star-worship, and astrology, that thence these sciences and these
beliefs spread over the world, is a fact already told us by the
ancients, and the course of these lectures will prove it clearly. But
the mistake of the Pan-Babylonists, whose wide generalisations rest on
the narrowest and flimsiest of bases, lies in the fact that they have
transferred to the nebulous origins of history conceptions which were
not developed at the beginning but quite at the end of Babylonian
civilisation. This

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

vast theology, founded upon the observation of the stars, which is
assumed to have been built up thousands of years before our era,--nay,
before the Trojan War,--and to have imposed itself on all still
barbarous peoples as the expression of a mysterious wisdom, cannot have
been in existence at this remote period, for the simple reason that the
data on which it would have been founded, were as yet unknown.

How often, for instance, has the theory of the precession of the
equinoxes been brought into the religious cosmology of the East! But
what becomes of all these symbolical explanations, if the fact be
established that the Orientals never had a suspicion of this famous
precession before the genius of Hipparchus discovered it? <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6) Just as the dreams of Dupuis vanished when
the date of the Egyptian zodiacs was settled, so the Babylonian mirage
was dispelled when scholars advanced methodically through the desert of
cuneiform inscriptions and determined the date when astronomy began to
take shape, as an exact science, in the observatories of Mesopotamia.
This new delusion will depart to the realm of dreams to join the idea,
so dear to poets of old, of Chaldean shepherds discovering the causes of
eclipses while watching their flocks.

When we have to ascertain at what date oriental star-worship effected
the transformation of Syrian and Greek paganism, we shall not find it
necessary to plunge into the obscurity of the earliest times; we shall
be able to study the facts in the full light of history. "An astral
theory of the universe is not an outcome of popular thought, but the
result of a long process of speculative reasoning carried on in
restricted learned circles. Even astrology, which the theory presupposes
as a foundation, is not a product of primitive popular fancies but is
rather an advanced scientific hypothesis." <span
id="fr_7"></span>[2](#fn_7) In this first lecture, then, we shall have
to begin by asking ourselves at what date a scientific astronomy and
astrology were developed at Babylon, and then proceed to examine how
they led to the formation of

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

a learned theology and gave to Babylonian religion its ultimate
character.

<span id="img_sep"></span> ![](img/sep.jpg)

Let us consult, the historians of astronomy. The original documents of
Chaldean erudition have been deciphered and published during these last
twenty years mainly by the industry of Strassmaier and Kugler, <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8) and we are able to-day to realise to some
extent what knowledge the Babylonians possessed at different periods.

Now here is one first discovery pregnant with consequences: before the
eighth century no scientific astronomy was possible owing to the absence
of one indispensable condition, namely, the possession of an exact
system of chronology. The old calendar already in use about the year
2500, and perhaps earlier, was composed of twelve lunar months. But as
twelve lunar periods make only 354 days, a thirteenth month was from
time to time inserted to bring the date at which the festivals recurred
each year, into harmony with the seasons. It was only little by little
that greater precision was attained by observing at what date the heliac
rising of certain fixed stars took place. So inaccurate a computation of
time allowed of no precise calculations and consequently of no astronomy
worthy of the name. In fact, during the first twenty or thirty centuries
of Mesopotamian history nothing is found but empirical observations,
intended chiefly to indicate omens, and the rudimentary knowledge which
these observations display, is hardly in advance of that of the
Egyptians, the Chinese, or the Aztecs. These early observers could
employ only such methods as do not necessitate the record of periodic
phenomena. For instance, the determination of the four cardinal points
by means of the rising and setting of the sun, for use in the
orientation of temples, was known from the very earliest antiquity.

But by degrees, direct observation of celestial phenomena, intended
either to enable soothsayers to make predictions or to fix the calendar,
led to the establishment of the fact that certain

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

of these phenomena recurred at regular intervals, and the attempt was
then made to base predictions on the calculation of this recurrence or
periodicity. This necessitated a strict chronology, at which the
Babylonians did not arrive till the middle of the eighth century B.C.:
in 747 they adopted the so-called "era of Nabonassar." This was not a
political or religious era, or one signalised by any important event. It
merely indicated the moment when, doubtless owing to the establishment
of a lunisolar cycle, they kept properly constructed chronological
tables. Farther back there was no certainty in regard to the calculation
of time. It is from that moment that the records of eclipses begin which
Ptolemy used, and which are still sometimes employed by men of science
for the purpose of testing their lunar theories. The oldest is dated
March 21, 721 B.C. <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9)

For the period of the Sargonides, who reigned over Nineveh from the year
722, the documents of the famous library of Ashurbanapal, and especially
the reports made to these Assyrian kings by the official astrologers,
allow us to form a sufficiently clear idea of the state of their
astronomical knowledge. They had approximately traced the ecliptic, that
is, the line which the sun seems to follow in the sky during its annual
course, and they had divided it into four parts corresponding to the
four seasons. Without having succeeded in establishing the real zodiac,
they attempted at any rate, with the object of testing the calendar, to
draw up the list of constellations whose heliac rising corresponded to
the various months. From the fixed stars they already distinguished the
planets to the number of five; they had traced their course, now
forwards now backwards, and determined, at least approximately, the
duration of their synodic revolutions,--for instance, one tablet
calculates that this duration in the case of Venus is 577.5 days,
instead of the actual 584. But as yet they had no idea of their
respective distances from the earth, for the order in which the seven
principal stars are enumerated in the inscriptions of Nineveh,--the
Moon, the Sun, Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, Mercury, Mars,

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> --has no relation
to any astronomical fact. Jupiter, or Marduk, is put at the head of the
five planets, because Marduk is the principal god of Babylon. Finally,
those priests had not only fixed with remarkable accuracy the duration
of the lunar period at a little more than twenty-nine and one half days,
but, having ascertained that eclipses occurred with a certain
periodicity, they had gone so far as frequently--but not regularly--to
predict their recurrence. In their reports to the kings of Nineveh
astrologers often prided themselves on the fact that an eclipse which
they had foreseen, had occurred. This was their great achievement.

The destruction of Nineveh in the year 606 B.C. did not interrupt the
conquests of astronomy. Under Nebuchadnezzar (604-561) Babylon returned
to the days of her past glory, and in this ancient sanctuary of science,
amid the general prosperity, astronomy received a new impetus, which was
not checked by the almost voluntary submission of the old Semitic
capital to the kings of Persia in 539. A valuable tablet, dated 523,
shows the astonishing advance made since the fall of Assyria. Here for
the first time we find the relative positions of the sun and the moon
calculated in advance; we find, noted with their precise dates, the
conjunctions of the moon with the planets and of the planets with each
other, and their situation in the signs of the zodiac, which here
appears definitely established,--or, to put it more briefly, the monthly
ephemerides of the sun and the moon, the principal phenomena of the
planets, and eclipses. All this indicates an intensity of thought and a
perseverance in observation of which we have as yet no other example,
and F. X. Kugler has therefore very properly regarded this tablet as the
oldest known document of the *scientific* astronomy of the Chaldeans.
True science is at length disencumbered of the empirical determinations
which had accumulated in the course of many centuries. From that time
some fifty documents, now deciphered,--the most recent of which belongs
to the year 8 B.C.,--enable us to follow its development under the
dominion of the Persians, the Macedonians, and the Parthians until about
the commencement of our era. There is noticeable a continual advance and
an

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

increasing improvement in the methods employed, at least up to the end
of the second century B.C., to which belong the most perfect examples
which we possess. Chronological reckonings are rendered more accurate by
the adoption of a lunisolar cycle of nineteen years; the zodiac is
definitely established by the substitution for the ancient
constellations of variable sizes of a geometrical division of the circle
in which the planets move, into twelve equal parts, each subdivided into
three portions or decans, equivalent to ten of our degrees. If the
Babylonians were not aware of the precession of the equinoxes before the
Greeks, at least they discovered the inequality of the seasons,
resulting from a variation in the apparent speed of the sun. Above all,
they calculated with astonishing accuracy the duration of the various
lunar months, and, if they did not fully grasp the data of the problem
of solar eclipses, they determined the conditions under which those of
the moon took place. Finally,--and this was a still more arduous and
complicated problem,--having determined the periods of the sidereal and
synodic revolutions of the planets, they constructed perpetual
ephemerides giving year by year the variations in the position of these
five stars; then in the second century before our era they became so
bold as to attempt an *a priori* calculation of planetary phenomena,
such as they had previously worked out for the moon and the sun.

We have been obliged to introduce into this description certain
technical details in order to fix exactly the period at which Chaldean
science became established. It was not, as we have been asked to
believe, in the remote obscurity of the fourth or even the fifth
millennium that the mighty fabric of their astronomy was reared. It was
during the first millennium that it was laboriously and gradually
constructed. From this it follows that in Babylonia and in Greece, the
two nations among whom the methodical study of the heavens led to the
construction of systems which imposed themselves on the world, the
development of these theories was partly contemporaneous. In the sixth
century, when Thales is said to have predicted an eclipse, the Greeks
began by being disciples of the Orientals, from whom they borrowed the
rudiments of their knowledge.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But towards the
middle of the fifth century they soared aloft on their own wings and
soon reached greater heights than their former teachers.

The Babylonians after all had studied astronomy only empirically. By
applying to it trigonometry, of which their predecessors were ignorant,
the Greeks attained a certainty hitherto unknown, and obtained results
previously impossible. But for several centuries the development of the
two sciences went on side by side in East and West, and to a large
extent independently. It would now be impossible to say to whom amongst
the Greeks or the Babylonians belongs the credit of certain
discoveries. <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) But it is the peculiar
distinction of the Chaldeans that they made *religion* profit by these
new conceptions and based upon them a learned theology. In Greece
science always remained laic, in Chaldea it was sacerdotal.

<span id="img_sep"></span> ![](img/sep.jpg)

There is every reason for believing that religious origins were much the
same among the Babylonians as among other Semitic peoples. Here as
elsewhere differentiation comes only with progress. Numerous traces are
found of a primitive "animism" which regarded as divinities animals,
plants, and stones, as well as wind, rain, and storm, and believed them
to have mysterious relations with mankind. Being experts in divination,
the Chaldeans devoted themselves from the first to the practice of
deriving omens from phenomena and occurrences in which they saw
manifestations of the will of that motley host of spirits which filled
the universe: movements of the clouds, direction of the wind, thunder
and lightning, earthquakes and floods, as well as the birth of monstrous
animals, the inspection of the liver, or even the appearance of locusts
seemed to be portents favourable or unfavourable to human undertakings.
All this was set down in writing and codified by the priests--for, every
kind of superstition was codified by these Semites as well as the laws
of Hammurabi. But among the countless multitude of gods who peopled the
realm of nature, the Babylonians attributed a particularly

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

powerful influence to the stars. These brilliant objects, which they saw
moving unceasingly over the vault of heaven,--conceived as a solid dome
quite close to the earth,--inspired them with superstitious fear. Any
one who has experienced the impression produced by the splendour of an
Eastern night will understand this sense of awe. They believed that in
the complicated patterns of the stars, which gleamed in the night, they
could recognise fantastic shapes of polymorphous monsters, of strange
objects, of sacred animals, of imaginary personages,--some of which
still figure on our celestial maps. These formidable powers might be
favourable or inimical. In the clearness of their transparent atmosphere
the Chaldean priests continually watched their puzzling courses: they
saw them appear and disappear, hide themselves under the earth to return
at the other extremity of the horizon, rising again to a new life after
a transitory death, always victorious over the darkness; they observed
them losing themselves in the brilliance of the sun to emerge from it
presently, like a young bridegroom entering the bridal chamber to issue
forth again in the morning; they followed also the windings of the
planets, whose complicated path seemed to aim at throwing off the track
an enemy who threatened their course; they were astonished that in
eclipses the moon and even the sun himself could grow dim, and they
believed that a huge black dragon devoured them or concealed them from
view. The sky was thus unceasingly the scene of combats, alliances, and
amours, and this marvellous spectacle gave birth to a luxuriant
mythology in which there appeared, subject to no law but their own
passions, all the heroes of fable, all the animals of creation, all the
phantoms of imagination.

Between beings and objects, all alike conceived as living, primitive
animism everywhere establishes hidden and unexpected relations, which it
is the object of magic to discover and utilise. In particular, the
influence which the stars exerted upon our world seemed undeniable. Did
not the rising and setting of the sun every day bring heat and cold, as
well as light and darkness? Did not the changes of the seasons
correspond to a certain state of the sky? What wonder, therefore, that
by

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

induction men arrived at the conclusion that even the lesser stars and
their conjunctions had a certain connection with the phenomena of nature
and the events of human life. At an early time--and here the
Pan-Babylonists are right--arose the idea that the configuration of the
sky corresponds to the phenomena of the earth. Everything in sky and
earth alike is incessantly changing, and it was thought that there
existed a correspondence between the movements of the gods above and the
alterations which occurred here below. This is the fundamental idea of
astrology. Perhaps in this scheme of coincidences the Babylonians even
went so far as to divide the firmament into countries, mountains, and
rivers, corresponding to the geography known to them.

Here, as everywhere, the human mind long sought the way of truth in the
maze of conjectures and chimeras. But the very delusion which peopled
the heavenly abodes with kindly or hostile powers, whose incessant
evolutions were a menace or a promise to mankind, urged the Chaldeans to
study assiduously their appearances, evolutions, and disappearances.
With indefatigable patience they observed them, and noted the most
important social or political events which had accompanied or followed
such and such an aspect of the heavens, in order to assure themselves
that a given coincidence would be regularly repeated. Thus they engraved
on their tablets with scrupulous care all the astronomical or
meteorological phenomena from which they derived their prognostications:
phases of the moon, situation and conjunctions of the planets, eclipses,
comets, falls of aerolites, and halos.

The purely empirical and very simple determinations, accompanied by
predictions, which have been preserved to us, are naive and almost
puerile: even in the time of the Sargonides there is nothing in them
which recalls the learned precision of a Greek horoscope. But from this
mass of documents, laboriously collected in the archives of the temples,
the laws of the movements of the heavenly bodies were disengaged with
increasing precision. Primitive man commonly believes that new stars are
produced each time they disappear, that the sun dies and is born each
day or at least each winter, that the moon is swallowed

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

up during eclipses, and that another takes its place. To these early
ideas, all vestiges of which did not disappear, nay, have not
disappeared--we speak still of a "new moon"--there succeeded the
discovery that the same stars always traversed the upper spheres with a
brightness which increased and diminished by turns. With the
irregularity of atmospheric disturbances was necessarily contrasted the
regularity of side-real revolutions and occultations. Little by little
the priestly astronomers, as we have seen, succeeded in constructing an
astronomical calendar and foretelling the return, at a fixed date, of
phenomena previously described, and they were able to predict to the
astonished crowds the arrival of the eclipses which terrified them.
There is nothing surprising in the fact that, as they ascribed to the
heaven itself the revelation of this marvellous knowledge, they should
have seen in astronomy a divine science.

It is impossible to exaggerate the religious importance which an
eminently superstitious people attached to these discoveries.
Schiaparelli, a most competent historian of the exact sciences in
antiquity, has remarked that "the tendency which dominates the whole
Babylonian astronomy is to discover all that is periodic in celestial
phenomena, and to reduce it to a numerical expression in such a manner
as to be able to *predict* its repetition in the future." <span
id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) The scientific discoveries which were made
from the Assyrian period onwards enabled astrologers, as we have seen,
to foresee certain events with an absolute certainty which no other kind
of prognostication attained. An endless perspective reaching far into
the future was opened to minds astonished at their own audacity.
Divination by means of the stars was thus elevated above all other
methods which were in contemporary use. It is beyond doubt that the
pre-eminence henceforth assigned to astrology was bound to lead to a
transformation of the whole of theology. "The science of the observation
of the heavens, which had been perfected little by little by the
priests, became in their hands a body of astral doctrine, which never
lost the flavour of the school, but which

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

nevertheless permeated the entire Babylonian religion, and at least in
part transformed it." <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12)

The development of the old Babylonian religion bears no relation to
astronomical theories. It was rather political circumstances which gave
to certain gods in turn the primacy among the multitude of divinities
worshipped in the land of Sumer and Accad, and, in accordance with a
process which is repeated everywhere, caused the functions of other
local powers to be attributed to their all-usurping and all-absorbing
personality. When Babylon is the capital of the kings, it is the patron
of this city, Marduk, identified with Bel, that occupies the foremost
place in the Pantheon; when Nineveh is the seat of empire, it is Ashur.
Even the groupings and hierarchies, which most plainly betray the
intervention of priestly combination, do not appear to be prompted by
astronomical speculations. In the system of triads, which theologians
conceived, the primacy was given to Anu, Enlil, and Ea, spirits of
Heaven, Earth, and Water; below these they placed Sin, Shamash, or
Ramman, and Ishtar, the genii of the Sun and the Moon or the atmosphere
and the goddess of the fertility of the earth, identified with the
planet Venus. In spite of the presence in this symmetrical arrangement
of the two luminaries at all times worshipped in that country, and
sometimes of the most brilliant of the stars, it is impossible to see an
astral principle in this grouping. Prof. Jastrow, the best judge in
these matters, does not hesitate to regard the truly sidereal cult,
which grew up at Babylon under the influence of the learned theories
developed by the priestly caste, as *a new religion*. I quote his
words: <span id="fr_13"></span>[2](#fn_13)

<span class="small">The Star-worship which developed in Babylon and
Assyria in connection with the science of the observation of the heavens
was at bottom a new religion, the victory of which brought about the
decadence of the old popular belief. In point of fact, in the ritual of
worship, in ceremonies of incantation and purification, in hymns and
prayers, in the chants of ceremonial lamentation, in old festivals, in
honour of the gods of nature, just as in hepatoscopy (or</span>

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

<span class="small">examination of the livers of victims) and in the
other kinds of divination, which were maintained up to the end of the
Babylonian empire, popular ideas always survived. The priests would have
been careful not to destroy or imperil the dominion which they exercised
over the multitude by changing the forms of worship in the direction of
the new religion. But astral doctrines could not, for all that, fail to
make their influence felt little by little as a dissolvent force.</span>

The new doctrines were reconciled or combined after a fashion with the
old creeds by placing the abode of the gods in the stars, or by
identifying them with the latter. By a logical and fully justified
development of primitive belief, which attributed to the sun and moon a
powerful effect upon the earth, a preponderating influence over the
determination of destiny had also been assigned to the five planets,
which like the former traversed the constellations of the zodiac. These
were therefore identified with the principal figures of the
Assyrio-Babylonian pantheon. In accordance with the rank which was
assigned to them and in accordance also with the brightness, colour, or
duration of the revolution of the stars, relations were established
between stars and gods. To Marduk, the foremost of the latter, was
assigned Jupiter, whose golden light burns most steadily in the sky,
Venus fell to Ishtar, Saturn to Ninib, Mercury to Nebo, Mars, by reason
of its blood-red colour, to Nergal, patron of war. As for the fixed
stars, singly or grouped in constellations, they were correlated with
the less important lords, heroes, or genii. This was no impediment to
regarding Ishtar, for instance, always as the goddess of the fertility
of the earth, and worshipping her as such. Thus, as in the paganism of
the Roman period, divinities assumed a double character, the one
traditional and based on ancient beliefs, the other adventitious and
inspired by learned theories.

The origin of this religious evolution goes back far into the past, but
we are not able at the present day to mark the stages of its development
and to assign dates to them. Perhaps it will be possible some day to
follow the progress of Babylonian astronomy in the cuneiform tablets,
and to show how an ever-widening conception of the heavens little by
little transformed the modes of belief. Doubtless the theories of
astronomers never

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

completely eliminated the naive tales which tradition related about the
divine stars; here, as elsewhere, the enquiry into physical causes
failed to get rid of mythical survivals, and the doctrines of oriental
cosmographers continued to be encumbered with absurd notions. In order
to be convinced on this point it is sufficient to glance at the
astronomic curiosities of the Book of Enoch, which as late as the first
century before our era echoes the old Chaldean doctrines.

It may be regarded as proved that this astral religion succeeded in
establishing itself in the sixth century B.C., during the period of the
short-lived glory of the second Babylonian empire, and after its fall,
when new ideas derived from East and West were introduced, first by the
Persians and afterwards by the Greeks, into the valley of the
Euphrates. <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14) If, as we shall
show, <span id="fr_15"></span>[2](#fn_15) the Platonic dialogue, the
*Epinomis*, is inspired by this religion, it had already formulated some
of its chief dogmas before the fourth century. The essential
characteristics of its theology are known to us, not from native texts,
but from the information supplied by Western writers on "Chaldean"
beliefs. The word Χαλδαῖος, *Chaldaeus*, bore amongst the ancients very
different meanings from time to time. These terms designated first of
all the inhabitants of Chaldea, that is, lower Mesopotamia, and next the
members of the Babylonian priesthood. Thus at the period of the
Achamenid kings, in the official processions of Babylon, there walked
first the magi, as Quintus Curtius states, <span
id="fr_16"></span>[3](#fn_16) that is to say the Persian priests
established in the conquered capital, then the *Chaldaei*, that is the
native sacerdotal body. Later the epithet Χαλδαῖος was applied as a
title of honour to the Greeks who had studied in the Babylonian schools
and proclaimed themselves disciples of the Babylonians; finally it
served to denote all those charlatans who professed to foretell the
future according to the stars. The variations in meaning of this
ethnical term, which ultimately became, like the term *magi*, a
professional designation, have produced in turn an immense exaggeration
of the antiquity,

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

or an undue depreciation of the worth, of the data furnished us by
Diodorus Siculus, <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) Philo of
Alexandria, and other writers on the religious and cosmic system of the
"Chaldeans." These pieces of information, as might be expected, are of
value only for the period immediately preceding these authors. They
apply to those conceptions which were current among the priests of
Mesopotamia under the Seleucids at the moment when the Greeks entered
into continuous relations with them. Some of these conceptions are
certainly very much older, and go back to ancient sacerdotal traditions.
Diodorus contrasts the unity of the doctrines of the hereditary caste of
the Chaldeans with the divergent views of the Greek philosophers on the
most essential principles; but it is possible that the speculative mind
of the Greeks had contributed to the clear formulation of these ancient
beliefs and to the co-ordination of the dogmas of this religion, as it
had done also in the case of astrology, which is a part of that
religion.

<span id="img_sep"></span> ![](img/sep.jpg)

The following are the broad lines of this theology.

From the leading fact established by them, namely, the invariability of
the sidereal revolutions, the Chaldeans had naturally been led to the
idea of a Necessity, superior to the gods themselves, since it commanded
their movements; and this Necessity, which ruled the gods, was bound, *a
fortiori*, to hold sway over mankind. The conception of a fatality
linked with the regular movements of the heavens originated at Babylon,
but this universal determinism was not there carried to its ultimate
logical consequences. A sovereign providence had, it is true, by an
irrevocable decree regulated the harmony of the world. But certain
disturbances in the heavens, irregular occurrences such as appearances
of comets or showers of falling stars, sufficed to maintain the belief
in the exceptional operation of a divine will interfering arbitrarily in
the order of nature. Priests foretold the future according to the stars,
but by purifications, sacrifices, and incantations they professed to

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

drive away evils, and to secure more certainly the promised blessings.
This was a necessary concession to popular beliefs which the very
maintenance of the cult demanded. But under normal conditions, as
experience proved, the divine stars were subject to an inflexible law,
which made it possible to calculate Beforehand all that they would bring
to pass.

In oriental civilisations, which are priestly civilisations, the
intimate union of learning and belief everywhere characterises the
development of religious thought. But nowhere does this alliance appear
more extraordinary than at Babylon, where we see a practical polytheism
of a rather gross character combined with the application of the exact
sciences, and the gods of heaven subjected to the laws of mathematics.
This strange association is to us almost incomprehensible, but it must
be remembered that at Babylon a *number* was a very different thing from
a *figure*. Just as in ancient times and, above all, in Egypt, the
*name* had a magic power, and ceremonial words formed an irresistible
incantation, so here the number possesses an active force, the number is
a symbol, and its properties are sacred attributes. Astrology is only a
branch of mathematics, which the heavens have revealed to mankind by
their periodic movements.

From their, main discovery, that of the invariability of astronomical
laws, the Chaldeans had deduced another important conclusion, namely,
the eternity of the world. The world was not born in the beginning, it
will not be subject to destruction in the future; a divine providence
has from the out-set ordered it as it shall be for ever. The stars, in
fact, perform their revolutions according to ever invariable cycles of
years, which, as experience proves, succeed each other to infinity. Each
of these cosmic cycles will be the exact reproduction of those which
have preceded it, for when the stars resume the same position, they are
bound to act in precisely the same manner as before. The life of the
universe, then, was conceived as forming a series of vast periods, which
the most probable estimate fixed at 432,000 years. As early as the
beginning of the third century before our era, Berosus, a priest of Bel,
expounded to the Greeks the theory of the eternal return of

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

things, which Nietzsche prided himself on having discovered.

In the same way as it regarded numbers as sacred, this religion of
astronomers defied Time, the course of which was bound up with the
revolutions of the heavens. At regular intervals it brought back the
moon, the sun, the stars to their starting-point, and as it seemed to
govern their movements, it was naturally regarded as a divine power. It
was the heavenly bodies that by their regular movements taught man to
divide into successive sections the unbroken chain of moments. Each of
the periods marked in the unending flight of time shared the divinity of
the stars, particularly the Seasons. In their worship old festivals of
nature were combined with ideas derived from astrology.

Babylonian theology had never entirely broken with the primitive
veneration with which Semitic tribes regarded all the mysterious forces
surrounding man. In the time of Hammurabi the supreme triad was
composed, as we have said, of the gods of Heaven, Earth, and Water.
Sidereal theology had systematised this very ancient cult of the powers
of nature by connecting them with astronomical theories. A vast
pantheism had inherited and codified the ideas of ancient animism. The
eternal world is wholly divine, either because it is itself God, or
because it is conceived as containing within it a divine soul which
pervades all things. The great reproach which Philo the Jew casts upon
the Chaldeans is precisely this, that they worship the creation instead
of the Creator.

This world is worshipped in its entirety, and worship is paid also to
its various parts: first of all, to Heaven, not only in virtue of a
reminiscence of the old Babylonian religion, which gave the foremost
place in the Pantheon to Anu, but also because it is the abode of the
higher powers. Among the stars the most important were conceived to be
the moon and the sun,--for it is in this order that they were
placed,--then the five planets, which were, as we have seen, dedicated
to, or identified with, the principal divinities of mythology. To them
was given the name of *Interpreters*, because, being endowed with a
particular movement, not possessed by the fixed stars, which are

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

subject to a motion of their own, they above all others make manifest to
man the purposes of the gods. But worship was also bestowed on all the
constellations of the firmament, as the revealers of the will of Heaven,
and in particular on the twelve signs of the zodiac, and the thirty-six
decans, which were called the *Counsellor Gods*; then, outside the
zodiac, on twenty-four stars, twelve in the northern, and twelve in the
southern hemisphere, which, being sometimes visible, sometimes
invisible, became the *Judges* of the living and the dead. All these
heavenly bodies, whose variable movements and activities had been
observed from the remotest times, announced not only hurricanes, rains,
and scorching heats, but the good or evil fortune of countries, nations,
kings, and even of mere individuals.

The domain of the divine god did not end at the zone of the moon, which
is the nearest to us. The Chaldeans also worshipped, as beneficent or
formidable powers, the Earth, whether fruitful or barren, the Ocean and
the Waters that fertilise or devastate, the Winds which blow from the
four points of the horizon, Fire which warms and devours. They
confounded with the stars under the generic name of Elements (στοιχεῖα)
these primordial forces, which give rise to the phenomena of nature. The
system which recognises only four elements, prime sources of all things,
is a creation of the Greeks.

If all the movements of the heavens inevitably have their reactions upon
the earth, it is, above all, the destiny of man that depends upon them.
The Chaldeans admitted, it appears, that the principle of life, which
warms and animates the human body, was of the same essence as the fires
of heaven. From these the soul received its qualities at birth, and at
that moment the stars determined its fate here below. <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18) Intelligence was divine, and allowed the
soul to enter into relations with the gods above. By contemplating the
stars the faithful received from them the revelation of all knowledge as
well as all prescience. The priestly astrologers were always to some
extent visionaries, who regarded as inspirations from on high all the
ideas which sprang up in their own minds. Doubtless they had already
conceived the idea that after death pious souls re-ascend

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

to the divine stars, whence they came, and in this celestial abode
obtain a glorious immortality. <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19)

To sum up, at the moment when the Greeks conquered Mesopotamia under
Alexander, they found above a deep substratum of mythology a learned
theology, founded on patient astronomical observations, which professed
to reveal the nature of the world regarded as divine, the secrets of the
future, and the destinies of man. In our next lecture we shall attempt
to show what influence the Babylonian religion in contact with Hellenism
exerted and underwent in turn, and how it was combined with the Stoic
philosophy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[4:1](argr06.htm#fr_4) See e.g. Fries, *Studien
zur Odyssee* (Mitt. Vorderasiat. Gesellschaft), 1910.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[4:2](argr06.htm#fr_5) *Transactions of the Third
International Congress for the History of Religions*. Oxford, 1908, i,
p. 234; cf. Jastrow, *Die Religion Babyloniens and Assyriens*, ii
(1910), p. 432.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[5:1](argr06.htm#fr_6) See below, Lecture II, [p.
34](argr07.htm#page_34).

<span id="fn_7"></span>[5:2](argr06.htm#fr_7) Jastrow, *l.c.*, p.
236.--Since this lecture was written, an excellent paper on this subject
has been published by Carl Bezold, *Astronomie, Himmelschau and
Astrallehre bei den Babyloniern* (Sitzungsb. Akad. Heidelberg, 1911,
Abh. No. 2).

<span id="fn_8"></span>[6:1](argr06.htm#fr_8) F. X. Kugler, S. J., *Die
Babylonische Mondrechnung*, 1900, and *Sternkunde and Sterndienst in
Babel*, 1907--1909 (in progress). A clear and able resume of Kugler's
researches has been given by Schiaparelli; see below, [p. 13](#page_13).

<span id="fn_9"></span>[7:1](argr06.htm#fr_9) One of these eclipses is
noted both in Ptolemy's *Almagest* and in a cuneiform tablet, see Boll,
in Pauly-Wissowa's *Realencyclopädie*, s. v. "Finsternisse," col. 2354.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[10:1](argr06.htm#fr_10) See below, Lecture II,
[p. 26](argr07.htm#page_26), on the cycle of Meton.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[13:1](argr06.htm#fr_11) Schiaparelli, *I
Primordi ed i Progressi dell’ Astronomia presso i Babilonesi* (Extr. of
"Scientia," Rivista di Scienza, iii), Bologna, 1908, p. 22.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[14:1](argr06.htm#fr_12) Jastrow, Die Religion
Babyloniens and Assyriens, ii, p. 432.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14:2](argr06.htm#fr_13) Jastrow, op. cit., ii,
p. 455.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[16:1](argr06.htm#fr_14) Jastrow, *l.c.*

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16:2](argr06.htm#fr_15) See below, Lecture II,
[p. 28](argr07.htm#page_28).

<span id="fn_16"></span>[16:3](argr06.htm#fr_16) Quint. Curtius, v, 1,
22.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[17:1](argr06.htm#fr_17) Diodor. Sic., ii,
29--31; Philo, *De Migr. Abrah.*, 32; *Quis Rerum div. Heres sit*, 20
etc.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[20:1](argr06.htm#fr_18) See below, Lecture II,
[p. 31](argr07.htm#page_31).

<span id="fn_19"></span>[21:1](argr06.htm#fr_19) See below, Lecture VI.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lecture II. Babylon and Greece](argr07)
