[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wgp04)  [Next](wgp06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Phallic Amulets

The use of priapic figures as amulets, to be carried on the person as
preservatives against the evil eye and other noxious influences, which
we have spoken of as so common among the Romans, was certainly continued
through the middle ages, and, as we shall see presently, has not
entirely disappeared. It was natural enough to believe that if this
figure were salutary when merely looked upon, it must be much more so
when carried constantly on the person. The Romans gave the name
*fascinum*, in old French *fesne*, to the phallic amulet, as well as to
the same figure under other circumstances. It is an object of which we
could hardly expect to find direct mention in mediæval writers, but we
meet with examples of the object itself, usually made of lead (a

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

proof of its popular character), and ranging in date perhaps from the
fourteenth to the earlier part of the sixteenth century. As we owe our
knowledge of these phallic amulets almost entirely to one collector, M.
Forgeais of Paris, who obtained them chiefly from one source--the river
Seine, our present acquaintance with them may be considered as very
limited, and we have every reason for believing that they had been in
use during the earlier period. We can only illustrate this part of the
subject by describing a few of these mediæval phallic amulets, which are
preserved in some private collections; and we will first call attention
to a series of objects, the real purpose of which appears to be very
obscure. They are small leaden tokens or medalets, bearing on the
obverse the figure of the male or female organ, and on the reverse a
cross, a curious intimation of the adoption of the worship of the
generative powers among Christians. These leaden tokens, found in the
river Seine, were first collected and made known to antiquaries by M.
Forgeais, who published examples of them in his work on the leaden
figures found in that river. <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) We
give five examples of the medals of each sex, obverse and reverse. <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) It will be seen that the phalli

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

 

<span id="img_pl09"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl09.jpg)  
PLATE IX  
ORNAMENTS FROM THE CHURCH OF SAN FEDELE

 

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

on these tokens are nearly all furnished with wings; one has a bird's
legs and claws; and on another there is an evident intention to
represent a bell suspended to the neck. These characteristics show
either a very distinct tradition of the forms of the Roman phallic
ornament, or an imitation of examples of Roman phalli then
existing--possibly the latter. But this is not necessary, for the bells
borne by two examples, given in our next plate, and also taken from the
collection of M. Forgeais are mediæval, and not Roman bells, though
these also represent well-known ancient forms of treating the subject.
In the first, <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) a female is riding
upon the phallus, which has men's legs, and is held by a bridle. This
figure was evidently intended to be attached to the dress as a brooch,
for the pin which fixed it still remains on the back. Two other examples
 <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) present figures of winged phalli,
one with a bell, and the other with the ring remaining from which the
bell has no doubt been broken. One of these has the dog's legs. A fourth
example <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) represents an enormous
phallus attached to the middle of a small man. In another, <span
id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) which was evidently intended for
suspension, probably

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

at the neck, the organs of the two sexes are joined together. Three
other leaden figures, <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) apparently
amulets, which were in the Forgeais collection, offer a very peculiar
variety of form, representing a figure, which we might suppose to be a
male by its attributes, though it has a very feminine look, and wears
the robe and hood of a woman. Its peculiarity consists in having a
phallus before and behind. We have on the same plate  <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) a still more remarkable example of the
combination of the cross with the emblems of the worship of which we are
treating, in an object found at San Agati di Goti, near Naples, which
was formerly in the Beresford Fletcher collection, and is now in that of
Ambrose Ruschenberger, Esq., of Boston, U. S. It is a *crux ansata*,
formed by four phalli, with a circle of female organs round the centre;
and appears by the loop to have been intended for suspension. As this
cross is of gold, it had no doubt been made for some personage of rank,
possibly an ecclesiastic; and we can hardly help suspecting that it had
some connection with priapic ceremonies or festivities. The last figure
on the same plate is also taken from the collection of M.
Forgeais. <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) From the monkish cowl and
the cord

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

round the body, we may perhaps take it for a satire upon the friars,
some of whom wore no breeches, and they were all charged with being
great corruptors of female morals.

In Italy we can trace the continuous use of these phallic amulets down
to the present time much more distinctly than in our more Western
countries. There they are still in very common use, and we give two
examples <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](wgp06.htm#fn_55) of bronze amulets
of this description, which are commonly sold in Naples at the present
day for a carlo, equivalent to fourpence in English money, each. One of
them, it will be seen, is encircled by a serpent. So important are these
amulets considered for the personal safety of those who possess them,
that there is hardly a peasant who is without one, which he usually
carries in his waistcoat pocket.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_46"></span>[60:47](wgp05.htm#fr_46) Notice sur des Plombs
Historiés trouvés dans la Seine, et recueillis par Arthur Forgeais. 8vo.
Paris, 1858.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[60:48](wgp05.htm#fr_47) See our [Plate
IX](#img_pl09).

<span id="fn_48"></span>[63:49](wgp05.htm#fr_48) [Plate X, Fig.
1](wgp06.htm#img_pl10).

<span id="fn_49"></span>[63:50](wgp05.htm#fr_49) [Plate X, Figs. 2 and
3](wgp06.htm#img_pl10).

<span id="fn_50"></span>[63:51](wgp05.htm#fr_50) [Plate X, Fig.
4](wgp06.htm#img_pl10).

<span id="fn_51"></span>[63:52](wgp05.htm#fr_51) [Plate X, Fig.
5](wgp06.htm#img_pl10).

<span id="fn_52"></span>[64:53](wgp05.htm#fr_52) [Plate XI, Figs. 1, 2,
and 3](wgp07.htm#img_pl11).

<span id="fn_53"></span>[64:54](wgp05.htm#fr_53) [Plate XI, Fig.
4](wgp07.htm#img_pl11).

<span id="fn_54"></span>[64:55](wgp05.htm#fr_54) [Plate XI, Fig.
5](wgp07.htm#img_pl11).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The 'Fig'](wgp06)
