[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wgp08)  [Next](wgp10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### May-day

In mediæval poetry and romance, the month of May was celebrated above
all others as that consecrated to Love, which seemed to pervade all
nature, and to invite mankind to partake in the general enjoyment.
Hence, among nearly all peoples, its approach was celebrated with
festivities, in which, under various forms, worship was paid to Nature's
reproductiveness. The Romans welcomed the approach of May with their
Floralia, a festival we have already described as remarkable for
licentiousness; and there cannot be a doubt that our Teutonic
forefathers had also their festival of the season long before they
became acquainted with the Romans. Yet much of the mediæval celebration
of May-day, especially in the South, appears to have been derived from
the Floralia of the latter people. As in the Floralia, the arrival of
the festival was announced

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

by the sounding of horns during the preceding night, and no sooner had
midnight arrived than the youth of both sexes proceeded in couples to
the woods to gather branches and make garlands, with which they were to
return just at sunrise for the purpose of decorating the doors of their
houses. In England the grand feature of the day was the Maypole. This
maypole was the stem of a tall young tree cut down for the occasion,
painted of various colours, and carried in joyous procession, with
minstrels playing before, until it reached the village green, or the
open space in the middle of a town, where it was usually set up. It was
there decked with garlands and flowers, the lads and girls danced round
it, and people indulged in all sorts of riotous enjoyments. All this is
well described by a Puritan writer of the reign of Queen
Elizabeth--Philip Stubbes--who says that, "against Maie," "every
parishe, towne, and village assemble themselves together, bothe men,
women, and children, olde and yong, even all indifferently; and either
goyng all together, or devidyng themselves into companies, they goe some
to the woodes and groves, some to the hilles and mountaines, some to one
place, some to another, where they spend all the night in pleasant
pastymes, and in the mornyng thei returne, bryngyng with them birch
bowes and braunches of trees to deck their assemblies withall, . . . .
But

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

their cheerest jewell thei bryng from thence is their Maie pole, whiche
thei bryng home with greate veneration, as thus: Thei have twentie or
fourtie yoke of oxen, every oxe havyng a sweete nosegaie of flowers
placed on the tippe of his hornes, and these oxen drawe home this Maie
poole (this stinckyng idoll rather), whiche is covered all over with
flowers and hearbes, bound rounde about with strynges, from the top to
the bottome, and sometyme painted with variable colours, with twoo or
three hundred men, women, and children following it, with greate
devotion. And thus beyng reared up, with handekerchiefes and flagges
streamyng on the toppe, thei strawe the grounde aboute, binde greene
boughes about it, sett up sommer haules, bowers, and arbours hard by it.
And then fall thei to banquet and feast, to leape and daunce aboute it,
as the heathen people did, at the dedication of their idolles, whereof
this is a perfect patterne, or rather the thyng itself." <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64.md)

The Puritans were deeply impressed with the belief that the maypole was
a substantial relic of Paganism; and they were no doubt right. There
appears to be reason sufficient for supposing that, at a period which
cannot now be ascertained, the maypole had taken the place of the
phallus. The ceremonies attending

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

the elevation of the two objects were identical. The same joyous
procession in the Roman festivals, described above, conducted the
phallus into the midst of the town or village, where in the same manner
it was decked with garlands, and the worship partook of the same
character. We may add, too, that both festivals were attended with the
same licentiousness. "I have heard it credibly reported," says the
Puritan Stubbes, "and that *viva voce* by menne of greate gravitie and
reputation, that of fourtie, three score, or a hundred maides goyng to
the woode over night, there have scarcely the third part returned home
again undefiled."

The day generally concluded with bonfires. These represented the
need-fire, which was intimately connected with the ancient priapic
rites. Fire itself was an object of worship, as the most powerful of the
elements; but it was supposed to lose its purity and sacred character in
being propagated from one material to another, and the worshippers
sought on these solemn occasions to produce it in its primitive and
purest form. This was done by the rapid friction of two pieces of wood,
attended with superstitious ceremonies; the pure element of fire was
believed to exist in the wood, and to be thus forced out of it, and
hence it was called need-fire (in Old German *not-feur*, and in
[Anglo-Saxon](errata.htm#2), *neod-fyr*.md), meaning literally a forced

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

fire, or fire extracted by force. Before the process of thus extracting
the fire from the wood, it was necessary that all the fires previously
existing in the village should be extinguished, and they were afterwards
revived from the bonfire which had been lit from the need-fire. The
whole system of bonfires originated from this superstition; they had
been adopted generally on occasions of popular rejoicing, and the
bonfires commemorating the celebrated gunpowder plot are only particular
applications of the general practice to an accidental case. The
superstition of the need-fire belongs to a very remote antiquity in the
Teutonic race, and existed equally in ancient Greece. It is proscribed
in the early capitularies of the Frankish emperors of the Carlovingian
dynasty. The universality of this superstition is proved by the
circumstance that it still exists in the Highlands of Scotland,
especially in Caithness, where it is adopted as a protection for the
cattle when attacked by disease which the Highlanders attribute to
witchcraft. <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65.md) It was from the
remotest ages the custom to cause cattle, and even children, to pass
across the need-fire, as a protection to them for the rest of their
lives. The need-fire was kindled at Easter, on May-day, and especially
at the

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

summer solstice, on the eve of the feast of St. John the Baptist, or of
Midsummer-day. <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](wgp10.htm#fn_66.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[93:65](wgp09.htm#fr_64.md) Stubbes, *Anatomie of
Ahuses*, fol. 94, 8vo. London, 1583.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[95:66](wgp09.htm#fr_65.md) Logan, *The Scottish
Gael*, vol. ii, p. 64, and Jamieson's *Scottish Dictionary*, Suppl. sub.
v. *Neidfyre*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Midsummer Night](wgp10.md)
