[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wgp00)  [Next](wgp02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_pl01"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl01.jpg)  
PLATE I

 

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

# THE WORSHIP OF THE GENERATIVE POWERS:

#### DURING THE MIDDLE AGES OF WESTERN EUROPE

### Antiquity

RICHARD PAYNE KNIGHT has written with great learning on the origin and
history of the worship of Priapus among the ancients. This worship,
which was but a part of that of the generative powers, appears to have
been the most ancient of the superstitions of the human race, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) has prevailed more or less among all known
peoples before the introduction of Christianity, and, singularly enough,
so deeply it seems to have been implanted in human nature, that even the
promulgation of the Gospel did not abolish it, for it continued to
exist, accepted and often encouraged by the mediæval clergy. The
occasion of Payne Knight's work was the discovery that

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

this worship continued to prevail in his time, in a very remarkable
form, at Isernia in the kingdom of Naples, a full description of which
will be found in his work. The town of Isernia was destroyed, with a
great portion of its inhabitants, in the terrible earthquake which so
fearfully devastated the kingdom of Naples on the 26th of July, 1805,
nineteen years after the appearance of the book alluded to. Perhaps with
it perished the last trace of the worship of Priapus in this particular
form; but Payne Knight was not acquainted with the fact that this
superstition, in a variety of forms, prevailed throughout Southern and
Western Europe largely during the Middle Ages, and that in some parts it
is hardly extinct at the present day; and, as its effects were felt to a
more considerable extent than people in general suppose in the most
intimate and important relations of society, whatever we can do to throw
light upon its mediæval existence, though not an agreeable subject,
cannot but form an important and valuable contribution to the better
knowledge of mediæval history. Many interesting facts relating to this
subject were brought together in a volume published in Paris by Monsieur
J. A. Dulaure, under the title, *Des Divinités Génératices chez les
Anciens et les Modernes*, forming part of an *Histoire Abrégée des
differens Cultes*,

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

by the same author. <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) This book,
however, is still very imperfect; and it is the design of the following
pages to give, with the most interesting of the facts already collected
by Dulaure, other facts and a description and explanation of monuments,
which tend to throw a greater and more general light on this curious
subject.

The mediæval worship of the generative powers, represented by the
generative organs, was derived from two distinct sources. In the first
place, Rome invariably carried into the provinces she had conquered her
own institutions and forms of worship, and established them permanently.
In exploring the antiquities of these provinces, we are astonished at
the abundant monuments of the worship of Priapus in all the shapes and
with all the attributes and accompaniments, with which we are already so
well acquainted in Rome and Italy. Among the remains of Roman
civilization in Gaul, we find statues or statuettes of Priapus, altars
dedicated to him, the gardens and fields entrusted to his care, and the
phallus, or male member, figured in a variety of shapes as a protecting
power against evil influences of various kinds. With this idea the
well-known figure was sculptured on the walls of public buildings,

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

placed in conspicuous places in the interior of the house, worn as an
ornament by women, and suspended as an amulet to the necks of children.
Erotic scenes of the most extravagant description covered vessels of
metal, earthenware, and glass, intended, on doubt, for festivals and
usages more or less connected with the worship of the principle of
fecundity.

At Aix in Provence there was found, on or near the site of the ancient
baths, to which it had no doubt some relation, an enormous phallus,
encircled with garlands, sculptured in white marble. At Le Chatelet, in
Champagne, on the site of a Roman town, a colossal phallus was also
found. Similar objects in bronze, and of smaller dimensions, are so
common, that explorations are seldom carried on upon a Roman site in
which they are not found, and examples of such objects abound in the
museums, public or private, of Roman antiquities. The phallic worship
appears to have flourished especially at Nemausus, now represented by
the city of Nîmes in the south of France, where the symbol of this
worship appeared in sculpture on the walls of its amphitheatre and on
other buildings, in forms some of which we can hardly help regarding as
fanciful, or even playful. Some of the more remarkable of these are
figured in our plates, [II](#img_pl02) and [III](#img_pl03).

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

 

<span id="img_pl02"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl02.jpg)  
PLATE II  
ROMAN SCULPTURE FROM NIMES

 

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

The first of these, <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) is the figure of a
double phallus. It is sculptured on the lintel of one of the vomitories,
or issues, of the second range of seats of the Roman amphitheatre, near
the entrance-gate which looks to the south. The double and the triple
phallus are very common among the small Roman bronzes, which appear to
have served as amulets and for other similar purposes. In the latter,
one phallus usually serves as the body, and is furnished with legs,
generally those of the goat; a second occupies the usual place of this
organ; and a third appears in that of a tail. On a pilaster of the
amphitheatre of Nîmes we see a triple phallus of this description, <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) with goat's legs and feet. A small bell is
suspended to the smaller phallus in front; and the larger organ which
forms the body is furnished with wings. The picture is completed by the
introduction of three birds, two of which are pecking the unveiled head
of the principal phallus, while the third is holding down the tail with
its foot.

Several examples of these triple phalli occur in the *Musée Secret* of
the antiquities of Herculaneum and Pompeii. In the examples figured in
that work, the hind part of the main phallus assumes clearly

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

the form of a dog; <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) and to most of them
are attached small bells, the explanation of which appears as yet to be
very unsatisfactory. The wings also are common attributes of the phallus
in these monuments. Plutarch is quoted as an authority for the
explanation of the triple phallus as intended to signify multiplication
of its productive faculty. <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5)

On the top of another pilaster of the amphitheatre at Nîmes, to the
right of the principal western entrance, was a bas-relief, also
representing a triple phallus, with legs of dog, and winged, but with a
further accompaniment. <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) A female,
dressed in the Roman stola, stands upon the phallus forming the tail,
and holds both it and the one forming the body with a bridle. <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) This bas-relief was taken down in 1829, and
is now preserved in the museum of Nîmes.

A still more remarkable monument of this class was found in the course
of excavations made at

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

 

<span id="img_pl03"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl03.jpg)  
MONUMENT FOUND AT NIMES IN 1825

 

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Nîmes in 1825. It is engraved in our plate XXVI,
and represents a bird, apparently intended for a vulture, with spread
wings and phallic tail, sitting on four eggs, each of which is designed,
no doubt, to represent the female organ. The local antiquarians give to
this, as to the other similar objects, an emblematical signification;
but it may perhaps be more rightly regarded as a playful conception of
the imagination. A similar design, with some modifications, occurs not
unfrequently among Gallo-Roman antiquities. We have engraved a figure of
the triple phallus governed, or guided, by the female, <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) from a small bronze plate, on which it
appears in bas-relief; it is now preserved in a private collection in
London, with a duplicate, which appears to have been cast from the same
mould, though the plate is cut through, and they were evidently intended
for suspension from the neck. Both came from the collection of M. Baudot
of Dijon. The lady here bridles only the principal phallus; the legs
are, as in the monument last described, those of a bird, and it is
standing upon three eggs, apple-formed, and representing the organ of
the other sex.

In regard to this last-mentioned object, another very remarkable
monument of what appears at Nîmes to have been by no means a secret
worship,

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

was found there during some excavations on the site of the Roman baths.
It is a squared mass of stone, the four sides of which, like the one
represented in our engraving, are covered with similar figures of the
sexual characteristics of the female, arranged in rows. <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) It has evidently served as a base, probably
to a statue, or possibly to an altar. This curious monument is now
preserved in the museum at Nîmes.

As Nîmes was evidently a centre of this Priapic worship in the south of
Gaul, so there appear to have been, perhaps lesser, centres in other
parts, and we may trace it to the northern extremities of the Roman
province, even to the other side of the Rhine. On the site of Roman
settlements near Xanten, in lower Hesse, a large quantity of pottery and
other objects have been found, of a character to leave no doubt as to
the prevalence of this worship in that quarter. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) But the Roman settlement which occupied
the site of the modern city of Antwerp appears to have been one of the
most remarkable seats of the worship of

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Priapus in the north of Gaul, and it continued
to exist there till a comparatively modern period.

When we cross over to Britain we find this worship established no less
firmly and extensively in that island. Statuettes of Priapus, phallic
bronzes, pottery covered with obscene pictures, are found wherever there
are any extensive remains of Roman occupation, as our antiquaries know
well. The numerous phallic figures in bronze, found in England, are
perfectly identical in character with those which occur in France and
Italy. In illustration of this fact, we give two examples of the triple
phallus, which appears to have been, perhaps in accordance with the
explanation given by Plutarch, an amulet in great favour. The first was
found in London in 1842. <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) As in the
examples found on the continent, a principal phallus forms the body,
having the hinder parts of apparently a dog, with wings of a peculiar
form, perhaps intended for those of a dragon. Several small rings are
attached, no doubt for the purpose of suspending bells. Our second
example  <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) was found at York in 1844.
It displays a peculiarity of action which, in this case at least, leaves
no doubt that the hinder parts were intended to be those of a dog. All
antiquaries of any experience know the great number

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

of obscene subjects which are met with among the fine red pottery which
is termed Samian ware, found so abundantly in all Roman sites in our
island. They represent erotic scenes in every sense of the word,
promiscuous intercourse between the sexes, even vices contrary to
nature, with figures of Priapus, and phallic emblems. We give as an
example one of the less exceptional scenes of this description, copied
from a Samian bowl found in Cannon Street, London, in 1828. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) The lamps, chiefly of earthenware, form
another class of objects on which such scenes are frequently portrayed,
and to which broadly phallic forms are sometimes given. One of these
phallic lamps is here represented, on the same plate with the bowl of
Samian ware just described. <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) It is
hardly necessary to explain the subject represented by this lamp, which
was found in London a few years ago.

All this obscene pottery must be regarded, no doubt, as a proof of a
great amount of dissoluteness in the morals of Roman society in Britain,
but it is evidence of something more. It is hardly likely that such
objects could be in common use at the family table; and we are led to
suppose that they were employed on special occasions, festivals,
perhaps, connected with the licentious worship of which we are

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

speaking, and such as those described in such strong terms in the
satires of Juvenal. But monuments are found in this island which bear
still more direct evidence to the existence of the worship of Priapus
during the Roman period.

In the parish of Adel, in Yorkshire, are considerable traces of a Roman
station, which appears to have been a place of some importance, and
which certainly possessed temples. On the site of these were found
altars, and other stones with inscriptions, which, after being long
preserved in an outhouse of the rectory at Adel, are now deposited in
the museum of the Philosophical Society at Leeds. One of the most
curious of these, which we have here engraved for the first time, <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) appears to be a votive offering to
Priapus, who seems to be addressed under the name of Mentula. It is a
rough, unsquared stone, which has been selected for possessing a
tolerably flat and smooth surface; and the figure and letters were made
with a rude implement, and by an unskilled workman, who was evidently
unable to cut a continuous smooth line. The middle of the stone is
occupied by the figure of a phallus, and round it we read very
distinctly the words:--

PRIMINVS MENTLA.

 

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The author of the inscription may have been an
ignorant Latinist as well as unskilful sculptor, and perhaps mistook the
ligulated letters, overlooking the limb which would make the L stand for
VL, and giving A for AE. It would then read *Priminus Mentalæ*, Priminus
to Mentula (the object personified), and it may have been a votive
offering from some individual named Priminus, who was in want of an
heir, or laboured under some sexual infirmity, to Priapus, whose
assistance he sought. Another interpretation has been suggested, on the
supposition that Mentla, or perhaps (the L being designed for IL
ligulated) Mentila or Mentilla, might be the name of a female joined
with her husband in this offering for their common good. The former of
these interpretations seems, however, to be the most probable. This
monument belongs probably to rather a late date in the Roman period.
Another *ex voto* of the same class was found at Westerwood Fort in
Scotland, one of the Roman fortresses on the wall of Antoninus. This
monument  <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) consisted of a square
slab of stone, in the middle of which was a phallus, and under it the
words EX : VOTO. Above were the letters

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

 

<span id="img_pl04"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl04.jpg)  
PLATE IV  
PHALLIC MONUMENTS FOUND IN SCOTLAND

 

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

XAN, meaning, perhaps, that the offerer had laboured ten years under the
grievance of which he sought redress from Priapus. We may point also to
a phallic monument of another kind, which reminds us in some degree of
the finer sculptures at Nîmes. At Housesteads, in Northumberland, are
seen the extensive and imposing remains of one of the Roman stations on
the Wall of Hadrian named Borcovicus. The walls of the entrance gateways
are especially well preserved, and on that of the guard-house attached
to one of them, is a slab of stone presenting the figure given in our
[plate IV, fig. 3](#img_pl04). It is a rude delineation of a phallus
with the legs of a fowl, and reminds us of some of the monuments in
France and Italy previously described. These phallic images were no
doubt exposed in such situations because they were supposed to exercise
a protective influence over the locality, or over the building, and the
individual who looked upon the figure believed himself safe, during that
day at least, from evil influences of various descriptions. They are
found, we believe, in some other Roman stations, in a similar position
to that of the phallus at Housesteads.

Although the worship of which we are treating prevailed so extensively
among the Romans and throughout the Roman provinces, it was far from
being peculiar to them, for the same superstition

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

formed part of the religion of the Teutonic race, and was carried with
that race wherever it settled. The Teutonic god, who answered to the
Roman Priapus, was called, in Anglo-Saxon, Fréa, in Old Norse, Freyr,
and, in Old German, Fro. Among the Swedes, the principal seat of his
worship was at Upsala, and Adam of Bremen, who lived in the eleventh
century, when paganism still retained its hold on the north, in
describing the forms under which the gods were there represented, tells
us that "the third of the gods at Upsala was Fricco \[another form of
the name\], who bestowed on mortals peace and pleasure, and who was
represented *with an immense priapus*;" and he adds that, at the
celebration of marriages, they offered sacrifice to Fricco. This god,
indeed, like the Priapus of the Romans, presided over generation and
fertility, either of animal life or of the produce of the earth, and was
invoked accordingly. Ihre, in his *Glossarium Sueco-Gothicum*, mentions
objects of antiquity dug up in the north of Europe, which clearly prove
the prevalence of phallic rites. To this deity, or to his female
representative of the same name, the Teutonic Venus, Friga, the fifth
day of the week was dedicated, and on that account received its name, in
Anglo-Saxon, Frige-dæg, and in modern English, Friday. Frigedæg appears
to have been a name sometimes given in Anglo-Saxon to Frea himself; in

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

a charter of the date of 959, printed in Kemble's *Codex Diplomaticus*,
one of the marks on a boundary-line of land is Frigedæges-Tréow, meaning
apparently Frea's tree, which was probably a tree dedicated to that god,
and the scene of Priapic rites. There is a place called Fridaythorpe in
Yorkshire, and Friston, a name which occurs in several parts of England,
means, probably, the stone of Frea or of Friga; and we seem justified in
supposing that this and other names commencing with the syllable Fri or
Fry, are so many monuments of the existence of the phallic worship among
our Anglo-Saxon forefathers. Two customs cherished among our old English
popular superstitions are believed to have been derived from this
worship, the need-fires, and the procession of the boar's head at the
Christmas festivities. The former were fires kindled at the period of
the summer solstice, and were certainly in their origin religious
observances. The boar was intimately connected with the worship of
Frea. <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17)

From our want of a more intimate knowledge of this part of Teutonic
paganism, we are unable to decide whether some of the superstitious
practices of the middle ages were derived from the Romans or from the
peoples who established themselves in the

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

provinces after the overthrow of the western empire; but in Italy and in
Gaul (the southern parts especially), where the Roman institutions and
sentiments continued with more persistence to hold their influence, it
was the phallic worship of the Romans which, gradually modified in its
forms, was thus preserved, and, though the records of such a worship are
naturally accidental and imperfect, yet we can distinctly trace its
existence to a very late period. Thus, we have clear evidence that the
phallus, in its simple form, was worshipped by the mediæval Christians,
and that the forms of Christian prayer and invocation were actually
addressed to it. One name of the male organ among the Romans was
*fascinum*; it was under this name that it was suspended round the necks
of women and children, and under this name especially it was supposed to
possess magical influences which not only acted upon others, but
defended those who were under its protection from magical or other evil
influences from without. Hence are derived the words to *fascinate* and
*fascination*. The word is used by Horace, and especially in the
epigrams of the *Priapeia*, which may be considered in some degree as
the exponents of the popular creed in these matters. Thus we have in one
of these epigrams the lines,--

"Placet, Priape? qui sub arboris coma  
Soles, sacrum revincte pampino caput,  
Ruber sedere cum rebente *fascino*."  
                         *Priap. Carm*. lxxxiv.

It seems probable that this had become the popular, or vulgar, word for
the phallus, at least taken in this point of view, at the close of the
Roman power, for the first very distinct traces of its worship which we
find afterwards introduce it under this name, which subsequently took in
French the form *fesne*. The mediæval worship of the *fascinum* is first
spoken of in the eighth century. An ecclesiastical tract entitled
*Judicia Sacerdotalia de Criminibus*, which is ascribed to the end of
that century, directs that "if any one has performed incantation to the
*fascinum*, or any incantation whatever, except any one who chaunts the
Creed or the Lord's Prayer, let him do penance on bread and water during
three lents." An act of the council of Châlons, held in the ninth
century, prohibits the same practice almost in the same words; and
Burchardus repeats it again in the twelfth century, <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) a proof of the continued existence of
this worship. That it was in full force long after this is proved by the
statutes of the synod of Mans, held in 1247, which enjoin similarly the
punishment for him "who has sinned to the fascinum, or has performed

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

any incantations, except the creed, the pater noster, or other canonical
prayer." This same provision was adopted and renewed in the statutes of
the synod of Tours, held in 1396, in which, as they were published in
French, the Latin *fascinum* is represented by the French *fesne*. The
*fascinum* to which such worship was directed must have been something
more than a small amulet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[7:1](wgp01.htm#fr_0) There appears to be a
chance of this worship being claimed for a very early period in the
history of the human race. It has been recently stated in the
"Moniteur," that, in the province of Venice, in Italy, excavations in a
bone-cave have brought to light, beneath ten feet of stalagmite, bones
of animals, mostly postertiary, of the usual description found in such
places, flint implements, with a needle of bone having an eye and point,
and a plate of an argillaceous compound, on which was scratched a rude
drawing of a phallus.--*Moniteur*, Jan. 1865.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[9:2](wgp01.htm#fr_1) The second edition of this
work, published in 1825, is by much the best, and is considerably
enlarged from the first.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[13:3](wgp01.htm#fr_2) [Plate II, Fig.
1](#img_pl02).

<span id="fn_3"></span>[13:4](wgp01.htm#fr_3) See our [Plate II, Fig.
2](#img_pl02).

<span id="fn_4"></span>[14:5](wgp01.htm#fr_4) The writer of the text to
the *Musée Secret* supposes that this circumstance has some reference to
the double meaning given to the Greek word κύων, which was used for the
generative organ.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[14:6](wgp01.htm#fr_5) See Auguste Pelet,
*Catalogue du Musée de Nîmes*.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[14:7](wgp01.htm#fr_6) [Plate II, Fig.
3](#img_pl02).

<span id="fn_7"></span>[14:8](wgp01.htm#fr_7) A French antiquary has
given an emblematical interpretation of this figure. "Perhaps," he says,
"it signifies the empire of woman extending over the three ages of man;
on youth, characterized by the bell; on the age of vigour, the ardour of
which she restrains; and on old age, which she sustains." This is
perhaps more ingenious than convincing.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[17:9](wgp01.htm#fr_8) See our [Plate III, Fig.
3](#img_pl03).

<span id="fn_9"></span>[18:10](wgp01.htm#fr_9) See [Plate II, Fig.
4](#img_pl02).

<span id="fn_10"></span>[18:11](wgp01.htm#fr_10) Two Roman towns, Castra
Vetera and Colonia Trajana, stood within no great distance of Xanten,
and Ph. Houben, a "notartius" of this town, formed a private museum of
antiquities found there, and in 1839, published engravings of them, with
a text by Dr. Franz Fiedler. The erotic objects form a separate work
under the title, *Antike erotische Bildwerke in Houbens Antiquarium zu
Xanten*.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[19:12](wgp01.htm#fr_11) See [Plate I, Fig.
3](#img_pl01).

<span id="fn_12"></span>[19:13](wgp01.htm#fr_12) [Plate I, Fig.
4](#img_pl01).

<span id="fn_13"></span>[20:14](wgp01.htm#fr_13) [Plate I, Fig.
1](#img_pl01).

<span id="fn_14"></span>[20:15](wgp01.htm#fr_14) [Plate I, Fig.
2](#img_pl01).

<span id="fn_15"></span>[21:16](wgp01.htm#fr_15) [Plate IV, Fig.
1](#img_pl04).

<span id="fn_16"></span>[22:17](wgp01.htm#fr_16) See [Plate IV, Fig.
2](#img_pl04). Horseley, who engraved this monument in his *Brittania
Romana*, Scotland, fig. xix. has inserted a fig-leaf in place of the
phallus, but with slight indications of the form of the object it was
intended to conceal. We are not aware if this monument is still in
existence.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[27:18](wgp01.htm#fr_17) See Grimm's Deutsche
Mythologie, p. 139, first edition.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[28:19](wgp01.htm#fr_18) D. Burchardi
*Decretorum libri*, lib. x, c 49.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Middle Ages and Renaissance](wgp02)
