[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wgp13)  [Next](wgp15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Knights Templar

But the most remarkable, and at the same time the most celebrated,
affair in which these accusations of secret and obscene ceremonies were
brought to bear, was that of the trial and dissolution of the order of
the knights templars. The charges against the knights templars were not
heard of for the first time at the period of their dissolution, but for
many years it had been whispered abroad that they had secret opinions
and practices of an objectionable character. At length the wealth of the
order, which was very great in France, excited the cupidity of King
Philippe IV, and it was resolved to proceed against them, and despoil
them of their possessions. The grounds for these proceedings were
furnished by two templars, one a Gascon, the other an Italian, who were
evidently men of bad character, and who, having been imprisoned for some
offence or offences, made a confession of the secret practices of their
order, and upon these confessions certain articles of accusation were
drawn up. These appear to have

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

been enlarged afterwards. In 1307, Jacques de Molay, the grand master of
the order, was treacherously allured to Paris by the king, and there
seized and thrown into prison. Others, similarly committed to prison in
all parts of the kingdom, were examined individually on the charges
urged against them, and many confessed, while others obstinately denied
the whole. Amongst these charges were the following: 1. That on the
admission of a new member of the order, after having taken the oath of
obedience, he was obliged to deny Christ, and to spit, and sometimes
also to trample, upon the cross; 2. That they then received the kiss of
the templar, who officiated as receiver, on the mouth, and afterwards
were obliged to kiss him in ano, on the navel, and sometimes on the
generative member; 3. That, in despite of the Saviour, they sometimes
worshipped a cat, which appeared amongst them in their secret conclave;
4. That they practised unnatural vice together; 5. That they had idols
in their different provinces; in the form of a head, having sometimes
three faces, sometimes two, or only one, and sometimes a bare skull,
which they called their saviour, and believed its influence to be
exerted in making them rich, and in making flowers grow and the earth
germinate; and 6. That they always wore about their bodies a

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

cord which had been rubbed against the head, and which served for their
protection. <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81)

The ceremonies attending the reception into the order were so
universally acknowledged, and are described in terms which have so much
the appearance of truthfulness, that we can hardly altogether disbelieve
in them. The denial was to be repeated thrice, no doubt in imitation of
St. Peter. It appears to have been considered as a trial of the strength
of the obedience they had just sworn to the order, and they all pleaded
that they had obeyed with reluctance, that they had denied with the
mouth but not with the heart; and that they had intentionally spit
beside the cross and not upon it. In one instance the cross was of
silver, but it was more commonly of brass, and still more frequently of
wood; on one occasion the cross painted in a missal was used, and the
cross on the templar's mantle often served the purpose. When one
Nicholas de Compiegne protested against these two acts, all the templars
who were present told him that he must do them, for it was the custom of
the order. <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) Baldwin de St. Just at
first refused, but the receptor warned him that if he persisted in his
refusal, it would be the worse for him (*aliter male accideret sibi*),
and then "he was so

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

much alarmed that his hair stood on end." Jacques de Trecis said that he
did it under fear, because his receptor stood by with a great naked
sword in his hand. <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) Another,
Geoffrey de Thatan, having similarly refused, his receptor told him that
they were "points of the order," and that if he did not comply, "he
should be put in such a place that he would never see his own feet." And
another who refused to utter the words of denial was thrown into prison
and kept there until vespers, and when he saw that he was in peril of
death, he yielded, and did whatever the receptor required of him, but he
adds that he was so troubled and frightened that he had forgotten
whether he spat on the cross or not. Gui de la Roche, a presbyter of the
diocese of Limoges, said that he uttered the denial with great weeping.
Another, when he denied Christ, "was all stupified and troubled, and it
seemed as if he were enchanted, not knowing what counsel to take, as
they threatened him heavily if he did not do it." When Etienne de Dijon
similarly refused to deny his Saviour, the preceptor told him that he
must do it because he had sworn to obey his orders, and then "he denied
with his mouth," he said, "but not with his heart; and he did this with
great grief," and he adds that when it

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

was done, he was so conscience-struck that "he wished he had been
outside at his liberty, even though it had been with the loss of one of
his arms." When Odo de Dompierre, with great reluctance, at length spat
on the cross, he said that he did it with such bitterness of heart that
he would rather have had his two thighs broken. Michelet, in the account
of the proceedings against the templars in his "History of France,"
offers an ingenious explanation of these ceremonies of initiation which
gives them a typical meaning. He imagines that they were borrowed from
the figurative mysteries and rites of the early Church, and supposes
that, in this spirit, the candidate for admission into the order was
first presented as a sinner and renegade, in which character, after the
example of Peter, he was made to deny Christ. This denial, he suggests,
was a sort of pantomime in which the novice expressed his reprobate
state by spitting on the cross; after which he was stripped of his
profane clothing, received, through the kiss of the order, into a higher
state of faith, and clothed with the garb of its holiness. If this were
the case, the true meaning of the performance must have been very soon
forgotten.

This was especially the case with the kiss. According to the articles of
accusation, one of the ceremonies of initiation required the novice to
kiss the

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

receiver on the mouth, on the *anus*, or the end of the spine, on the
navel, and on the *virga virilis*. The last is not mentioned in the
examinations, but the others are described by so many of the witnesses
that we cannot doubt of their truth. From the depositions of many of the
templars examined, it would appear that the usual order was to kiss the
receptor first *in ano*, next on the navel, and then on the mouth. <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) The first of these was an act which
would, of course, be repulsive to most people, and the practice arose
gradually of only kissing the end of the spine, or, as it was called in
mediæval Latin, *in anca*. Bertrand de Somorens, of the diocese of
Amiens, describing a reception at which more than one new member was
admitted, says that the receiver next told them that they must kiss him
*in ano*; but, instead of kissing him there, they lifted up his clothes
and kissed him on the spine. The receptor, it appears, had the power of
remitting this kiss when he judged there was a sufficient reason.
Etienne de Dijon, a presbyter of the diocese of Langres, said that, when
he was admitted into the order, the preceptor told him that he ought,
"according to the observances of the order," to kiss his receiver *in
ano*, but that in consideration of his being a presbyter, he would spare
him and remit this kiss. Pierre de Grumenil, also a

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

presbyter, when called upon to perform this act, refused, and was
allowed to kiss his receiver on the navel only. A presbyter named Ado de
Dompierre was excused for the same reason, <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) as well as many others. Another templar,
named Pierre de Lanhiac, said that, at his reception into the order, his
receptor told him that he must kiss him *in ano*, because that was one
of the points of the order, but that, at the earnest supplication of his
uncle, who was present, and must therefore have been a knight of the
order, he obtained a remission of this kiss.

Another charge against the templars was still more disgusting. It was
said that they proscribed all intercourse with women, and one of the men
examined stated, which was also confessed by others, that his receptor
told him that, from that hour, he was never to enter a house in which a
woman lay in labour, nor to take part as godfather at the baptism of any
child, but he added that he had broken his oath, for he had assisted at
the baptism of several children while still in the order, which he had
left about a year before the seizure of the templars, for the love of a
woman of whom he had become enamoured. On the other hand, those who
replied to the interrogatory of the king's officers in this process,
were all but unanimous in the avowal that on entering the order

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

they received the permission to commit sodomy amongst themselves. Two or
three professed not to have understood this injunction in a bad sense,
but to have supposed that it only meant that, when the brethren were
short of beds, each was to be ready to lend half of his bed to his
fellow. One of them, named Gillet de Encraye, said that he at first
supposed it to be meant innocently, but that his receptor immediately
undeceived him, by repeating it in less covert terms, at which he was
himself so horrified that he wished himself far away from the chapel in
which the ceremony took place. A great number of templars stated that,
after the kisses of initiation, they were informed that if they felt
moved by natural heat, they might call any one of the brethren to their
relief, and that they ought to relieve their brethren when appealed to
under the same circumstances. This appears to have been the most common
form of the injunction. In one or two instances the receiver is
described as adding that this was an act of contempt towards the other
sex, which may perhaps be considered as showing that the ceremony was
derived from some of the mysteries of the strange sects which appeared
in the earlier ages of Christianity. Jean de St. Loup, who held the
office of master of the house of templars at Soisiac, said that, on his
reception into the order, he received the injunction not

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

to have intercourse with women, but, if he could not persevere in
continence, he might have the same intercourse with men; and others were
told that it would "be better to satisfy their lust among themselves,
whereby the order would escape evil report, than if they went to women."
But although the almost unanimity of the confessions leave hardly room
for a doubt that such injunctions were given, yet on the other hand they
are equally unanimous in denying that these injunctions were carried
into practice. Almost every templar, as the questions were put to him,
after admitting that he was told that he might indulge in such vice with
the other brethren, asserted that he had never done this, and that he
had never been asked to do so by any of them. Theobald de Taverniac,
whose name tells us that he came from the south, denied indignantly the
existence of such a vice among their order but in terms which themselves
told not very much in favour of the morality of the templars in other
respects. He said that, "as to the crime of sodomy," he believed the
charge to be totally untrue, "because they could have very handsome and
elegant women when they liked, and that they did have them frequently
when they were rich and powerful enough to afford it, and that on this
account he and other brothers of the order were removed from their
houses, as he said." We have

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

an implied acknowledgment that the templars did not entirely neglect the
other sex in a statement quoted by Du Puy that, if a child were born
from the intercourse between a templar and a virgin, they roasted it,
and made an unguent of its fat, with which they anointed their idol.
Those who confessed to the existence of the vice were so few, and their
evidence so indefinite or indirect, that they are deserving of no
consideration. One had heard that some brethren beyond the sea had
committed unnatural vices. <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) Another,
Hugh de Faure, had heard say that two brothers of the order, dwelling in
the Chateau Pelerin, had been charged with sodomy; that, when this
reached the ears of the master, he gave orders for their arrest, and
that one had been killed in the attempt to escape, while the other was
taken and imprisoned for life. Peter Brocart, a templar of Paris,
declared that one of the order, one night, called him and committed
sodomy with him; adding that he had not refused, because he considered
himself bound to obedience by the rules of the order. <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) The evidence is decidedly strong against
the prevalence of such a vice among the templars, and the alleged
permission was perhaps a mere form of words, which concealed some occult
meaning unknown to the mass of the

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

templars themselves. We are not inclined to reject altogether the theory
of the baron von Hammer-Pürgstall, that the templars had adopted some of
the mysterious tenets of the eastern Gnostics.

In regard to the secret idolatry with which the templars were charged,
it is a subject involved in great obscurity. The cat is but little
spoken of in the depositions. Some Italian knights confessed that they
had been present at a secret chapter of twelve knights held at Brindisi,
when a grey cat suddenly appeared amongst them, and they worshipped it.
At Nismes, some templars declared that they had been present at a
chapter at Montpellier, when the demon appeared to them in the form of a
cat, and promised them worldly prosperity, but they appear to have been
visionaries not to be trusted, for they stated that at the same time
devils appeared in the shape of women. An English templar, examined in
London, deposed that in England they did not adore the cat, or the idol,
but that he had heard it positively stated that the cat and the idol
were worshipped by the templars in parts beyond sea. A solitary
Freshman, examined in Paris, Gillet de Encreyo, spoke of the cat, and
said that he had heard, but had forgotten who were his informants, and
did not believe them, that beyond sea a certain cat had appeared to the
templars in their battles. The cat belongs to a lower

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

class of popular superstitions, perhaps, than that of the templars.

This, however, was not the case with the idol, which was generally
described as the figure of a human head, and appears only to have been
shown in the more secret chapter meetings on particular occasions. Many
of the templars examined before the commissioners, said that they had
heard this idol head spoken of as existing in the order, and others
deposed to having seen it. It was generally described as being about the
natural size of a man's head, with a very fierce-looking face and a
beard, the latter sometimes white. Different witnesses varied as to the
material of which it was made, and, indeed, in various other
particulars, which lead us to suppose that each house of the templars,
where the idol existed, had its own head, and that they varied in form.
They agreed generally that this head was an object of worship. One
templar deposed that he was present at a chapter of the order in Paris,
when the head was brought in, but he was unable to describe it at all,
for, when he saw it, he was so struck with terror that he hardly knew
where he was. Another, Ralph de Gysi, who held the office of receptor
for the province of Champagne, said that he had seen the head in many
chapters; that, when it was introduced, all present threw themselves on
the ground and adored

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

it: and when asked to describe it, he said, on his oath, that its
countenance was so terrible, that it seemed to him to be the figure of a
demon--using the French word *un maufé*, and that as often as he saw it,
so great a fear took possession of him, that he could hardly look upon
it without fear and trembling. Jean Taylafer said that, at his reception
into the order, his attention was directed to a head upon the altar in
the chapel, which he was told he must worship; he described it as of the
natural size of a mans head, but could not describe it more
particularly, except that he thought it was of a reddish colour. <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) Raynerus de Larchent saw the head twice
in a chapter, especially once in Paris, where it had a beard, and they
adored and kissed it, and called it their saviour. Guillermus de
Herbaleyo saw the head with its beard, at two chapters. He thought it
was of silver gilt, and wood inside. He "saw the brethren adore it, and
he went through the form of adoring it himself, but he did it not in his
heart." According to one witness, Deodatus Jaffet, a knight from the
south of France who had been received at Pedenat, the receptor showed
him a head, or idol, which appeared to have three faces, and said to
him, "You must adore this as your saviour, and the saviour of the order
of the temple," and he added that he was made to worship the idol,

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

saying, "Blessed be he who shall save my soul!" Another deponent gave a
very similar account. Another knight of the order, Hugo de Paraudo, said
that, in a chapter at Montpellier, he had both seen, held, and felt, the
idol or head, and that he and the other brothers adored it but he, like
the others, pleaded that he did not adore it in his heart. He described
it as supported on four feet, two before and two behind. <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) Guillaume de Arrablay, the king's almoner
(*eleemosynarius regius*), said that in the chapter at which he was
received, a head made of silver was placed on the altar, and adored by
those who formed the chapter; he was told that it was the head of one of
the eleven thousand virgins, and had always believed this to be the
case, until after the arrest of the order, when, hearing all that was
said on the matter, he "suspected" that it was the idol; and he adds in
his deposition that it seemed to him to have two faces, a terrible look,
and a silver beard. It does not appear very clear why he should have
taken a head with two faces, a fierce look, and a beard, for one of the
eleven thousand virgins, but this is, perhaps, partly explained by the
deposition of another witness, Guillaume Pidoye, who had the charge of
the relics, &c., belonging to the Temple in Paris, and who produced a
head of silver gilt, having

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

a woman's face, and a small skull, resembling that of a woman, inside,
which was said to be that of one of the eleven thousand virgins. At the
same time another head was brought forward, having a beard, and supposed
to be that of the idol. <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) Both these
witnesses had no doubt confounded two things. Pierre Garald, of Mursac,
another witness, said that after he had denied Christ and spitten on the
cross, the receptor drew from his bosom a certain small image of brass
or gold, which appeared to represent the figure of a woman, and told him
that "he must believe in it, and have faith in it, and that it would be
well for him." Here the idol appears in the form of a statuette. There
was also another account of the idol, which perhaps refers to some
further object of superstition among the templars. According to one
deponent, it was an old skin embalmed, with bright carbuncles for eyes,
which shone like the light of heaven. Others said that it was the skin
of a man, but agreed with the others in regard to the carbuncles. <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) In England a minorite friar deposed that
an English knight of the Temple had assured him that the templars had
four principal idols in this country, one in the sacristy of the Temple
in London, another at Bristelham, a third at Brueria (Bruern in

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

Lincolnshire), and the fourth at some place beyond the Humber. <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92)

Another piece of information relating to this "idol," which has been the
subject of considerable discussion among modern writers, was elicited
from the examination of some knights from the south. Gauserand de
Montpesant, a knight of Provence, said that their superior showed him an
idol made in the form of Baffomet; another, named Raymond Rubei,
described it as a wooden head, on which the figure of Baphomet was
painted, and adds, "that he worshipped it by kissing its feet, and
exclaiming, 'Yalla,' which was," he says, "*verbum Saracenorum*," a word
taken from the Saracens. <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) A templar
of Florence declared that, in the secret chapters of the order, one
brother said to the other, showing the idol, "Adore this head--this head
is your god and your Mahomet." The word Mahomet was used commonly in the
middle ages as a general term for an idol or false god; but some writers
have suggested that Baphomet is itself a mere corruption of Mahomet, and
suppose that the templars had secretly embraced Mahometanism. A much
more remarkable explanation of this word has, however, been proposed,
which is, at the least, worthy of very great consideration, especially

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

as it comes from so distinguished an orientalist and scholar as the late
baron Joseph von Hammer-Pürgstall. It arose partly from the comparison
of a number of objects of art, ornamented with figures, and belonging
apparently to the thirteenth century. These objects consist chiefly of
small images, or statuettes, coffers, and cups.

Von Hammer has described, and given engravings of, twenty-four such
images, which it must be acknowledged answer very well to the
descriptions of their "idol" given by the templars in their
examinations, except only that the templars usually speak of them as of
the size of life, and as being merely heads. Most of them have beards,
and tolerably fierce countenances. Among those given by Von Hammer are
seven which present only a head, and two with two faces, backwards and
forwards, as described in some of the depositions. These two appear to
be intended for female heads. Altogether Von Hammer has described
fifteen cups and goblets, but a much smaller number of coffers. Both
cups and coffers are ornamented with extremely curious figures,
representing a continuous scene, apparently religious ceremonies of some
kind or other, but certainly of an obscene character, all the persons
engaged in which are represented naked. It is not a part of our subject
to enter into a detailed examination of these mysteries.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The most interesting of the coffers described by
Von Hammer, which was preserved in the private museum of the duc de
Blacas, is of calcarous stone, nine inches long by seven broad, and four
and a half deep, with a lid about two inches thick. It was found in
Burgundy. On the lid is sculptured a figure, naked, with a head-dress
resembling that given to Cybele in ancient monuments, holding up a chain
with each hand, and surrounded with various symbols, the sun and moon
above, the star and the pentacle below, and under the feet a human
skull. <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) The chains are explained by
Von Hammer as representing the chains of æons of the Gnostics. On the
four sides of the coffer we see a series of figures engaged in the
performance of various ceremonies, which are not easily explained, but
which Von Hammer considers as belonging to the rites of the Gnostics and
Ophians. The offering of a calf figures prominently among these rites, a
worship which is said still to exist among the Nossarii, or Nessarenes,
the Druses, and other sects in the East. In the middle of the scene on
one side, a human skull is seen, raised upon a pole. On another side an
androgynous figure is represented as the object of worship of two
candidates for initiation,

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

 

<span id="img_pl14"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl14.jpg)  
PLATE XIV  
PRIAPIC ILLUSTRATIONS FROM OLD BALLADS

 

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

who wear masks apparently of a cat, and whose form of adoration reminds
us of the kiss enacted at the initiation of the templars. <span
id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) This group reminds us, too, of the
pictures of the orgies in the worship of Priapus, as represented on
Roman monuments. The second of the coffers in the cabinet of the duc de
Blacas was found in Tuscany, and is rather larger than the one just
described, but made of the same material, though of a finer grain. The
lid of this coffer is lost, but the sides are covered with sculpture of
a similar character. A large goblet, or bowl, of marble, in the imperial
museum at Vienna, is surrounded by a series of figures of similar
character, which are engraved by Von Hammer, who sees in one group of
men (who are furnished in the original with prominent phalli) and
serpents, a direct allusion to Ophite rites. Next after these comes a
group which we have reproduced in our plate, <span
id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) representing a strange figure seated upon
an eagle, and accompanied with two of the symbols represented on the
coffer found in Burgundy, the sun and moon. The two symbols below are
considered by Von Hammer to represent, according to the rude mediæval
notions of its form, the womb, or matrix; the fecundating organ is
penetrating the one, while the infant is emerging from the other. The
last figure in this series, which we have also copied, <span
id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97)

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

is identical with that on the lid of the coffer found in Burgundy, but
it is distinctly represented as androgynous. We have exactly the same
figure on another coffer, in the Vienna museum, <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) with some of the same symbols, the star,
pentacle, and human skull. Perhaps, in this last, the beard is intended
to show that the figure must be taken as androgynous.

On an impartial comparison we can hardly doubt that these curious
objects,--images, coffers, cups, and bowls,--have been intended for use
in some secret and mysterious rites, and the arguments by which Von
Hammer attempts to show that they belonged to the templars seem at least
to be very plausible. Several of the objects represented upon them, even
the skull, are alluded to in some of the confessions of the templars,
and these evidently only confessed a part of what they knew, or
otherwise they were very imperfectly acquainted with the secrets of
their order. Perhaps the most secret doctrines and rites were only
communicated fully to a small number. There is, however, another
circumstance connected with these objects which appears to furnish an
almost irresistible confirmation of Von Hammer's theory. Most of them
bear inscriptions, written in Arabic, Greek, and Roman characters. The
inscriptions on the images appear to be merely proper names, probably
those of

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

their possessors. But with the coffers and bowls the case is different,
for they contain a nearly uniform inscription in Arabic characters,
which, according to the interpretation given by Von Hammer, contains a
religious formula. The Arabic characters, he says, have been copied by a
European, and not very skilful, carver, who did not understand them,
from an Eastern original, and the inscriptions contain corruptions and
errors which either arose from this circumstance, or, as Von Hammer
suggests, may have been introduced designedly, for the purpose of
concealing the meaning from the uninitiated. A good example of this
inscription surrounds the lid of the coffer found in Burgundy, and is
interpreted as follows by Von Hammer, who regards it as a sort of parody
on the *Cantate laudes Domini*. In fact, the word under the feet of the
figure, between them and the skull, is nothing more than the Latin
*cantate* expressed in Arabic letters. The words with which this
*Cantate* begins are written above the head of the figure, and are read
by Von Hammer as *Fah la Sidna*, which is more correctly *Fella Sidna*,
i. e. O God, our Lord! The formula itself, to which this is an
introduction, commences on the right side, and the first part of it
reads *Houvè Mete Zonar feseba* (or *sebaa*) *B. Mounkir teaala tiz*.
There is no such word in Arabic as *mete*, and Von Hammer considers it
to be

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

simply the Greek word μῆτις, wisdom, a personification in what we may
perhaps call the Gnostic mythology answering to the Sophia of the
Ophianites. He considers that the name Baphomet is derived from the
Greek words Βαφη μητοες, i. e. the baptism of Metis, and that in its
application it is equivalent with the name Mete itself. He has further
shown, we think conclusively, that Baphomet, instead of being a
corruption of Mahomet, was a name known among the Gnostic sects in the
East. *Zonar* is not an Arabic word, and is perhaps only a corruption or
error of the sculptor, but Von Hammer thought it meant a girdle, and
that it alluded to the mysterious girdle of the templars, of which so
much is said in their examinations. The letter *B* is supposed by Von
Hammer to stand here for the name Baphomet, or for that of Barbalo, one
of the most important personages in the Gnostic mythology. *Mounkir* is
the Arabic word for a person who denies the orthodox faith. The rest of
the formula is given on the other side of the figure, but as the
inscription here presents several corruptions, we will give Von Hammer's
translation (in Latin) of the more correct copy of the formula inscribed
on the bowl or goblet preserved in the museum at Vienna. In the Vienna
bowl, the formula of faith is written on a sort of large placard, which
is held up to view by a figure apparently intended for

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

 

<span id="img_pl15"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl15.jpg)  
PLATE XV  
"IDOL" OF THE KNIGHTS TEMPLARS

 

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

another representation of Mete or Baphomet. Von Hammer translates it:--

"Exaltetur Mete germinans, stirps nostra ego et septem fuere, *tu
renegans reditus* ῶρωκτὸς *fis*."

This still is, it must be confessed, rather mysterious, and, in fact,
most of these copies of the formula of faith are more or less defective,
but, from a comparison of them, the general form and meaning of the
whole is made perfectly clear. This may be translated, "Let Mete be
exalted, who causes things to bud and blossom! he is our root; it (the
root) is one and seven; abjure (the faith), and abandon thyself to all
pleasures." The number seven is said to refer to the seven archons of
the Gnostic creed.

There are certainly several points in this formula which present at
least a singular coincidence with the statements made in the
examinations of the templars. In the first place the invocation which
precedes the formula, Yalla (Jah la), agrees exactly with the statement
of Raymond Rubei, one of the Provencal templars that when the superior
exhibited the idol, or figure of Baphomet, he kissed it and exclaimed
"Yalla!" which he calls "a word of the Saracens," i. e. Arabic. <span
id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) It is evident that, in this case, the
witness not only knew the word, but that he knew to what language it
belonged. Again, the epithet *germinans*,

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

applied to Mete, or Baphomet, is in accord with the statement in the
formal list of articles of accusation against the templars, that they
worshipped their idol because "it made the trees to flourish and the
earth to germinate." The abjuration of the formula on the monuments
seems to be identical with the denial in the initiation of novices to
the order of the Temple; and it may be added, that the closing words of
the formula involve in the original an idea more obscene than is
expressed in the translation, an allusion to the unnatural vice in which
the templars are stated to have received permission to indulge. There is
another curious statement in the examinations which seems to point
directly to our images and coffers--one of the English witnesses under
examination, named John de Donington, who had left the order and become
a friar at Salisbury, said that an old templar had assured him that
"some templars carried such idols in their coffers." They seem to have
been treasured up for the same reason as the mandrake, for one article
in the articles against the templars is that they worshipped their idol
because "it could make them rich, and that it had brought all their
great wealth to the order."

The two other classes of what the Baron Von Hammer supposed to be relics
of the secret worship of the templars, appear to us to be much less
satisfactorily

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

explained. These are sculptures on old churches, and coins or medals.
Such sculptures are found, according to Von Hammer, on the churches of
Schöngraber, Waltendorf, and Bercktoldorf, in Austria; in that of
Deutschaltenburg, and in the ruins of that of Postyén, in Hungary; and
in those of Murau, Prague, and Egra, in Bohemia. To these examples we
are to add the sculptures of the church of Montmorillon, in Poitou, some
of which have been engraved by Montfaucon, <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) and those of the church of Ste. Croix,
in Bordeaux. We have already <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101)
remarked the rather frequent prevalence of subjects more or less obscene
in the sculptures which ornament early churches, and suggested that they
may be explained in some degree by the tone given to society by the
existence of this priapic worship; but we are not inclined to agree with
Von Hammer's explanation of them, or to think that they have any
connection with the templars. We can easily understand the existence of
such direct allusions on coffers or other objects intended to be
concealed, or at least kept in private; but it is hardly probable that
men who held opinions and practised rites the very rumour of which was
then so full of danger, would proclaim them publicly on the walls of
their buildings, for the wall

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

of a church was then, perhaps, the most effectual medium of publication.
The question of the supposed templar medals is very obscure. Von Hammer
has engraved a certain number of these objects, which present various
singular subjects on the obverse, sometimes with a cross on the reverse,
and sometimes bracteate. Antiquaries have given the name of abbey tokens
to a rather numerous class of such medals, the use of which is still
very uncertain, although there appears to be little doubt of its being
of a religious character. Some have supposed that they were distributed
to those who attended at certain sacraments or rites of the Church, who
could thus, when called up, prove by the number of their tokens, the
greater or less regularity of their attendance. Whether this were the
case or not, it is certain that the burlesque and other societies of the
middle ages, such as the feast of fools, parodied these "tokens," and
had burlesque medals, in lead and sometimes in other metals, which were
perhaps used for a similar purpose. We have already spoken more than
once of obscene medals, and have engraved specimens of them, which were
perhaps used in secret societies derived from, or founded upon, the
ancient phallic worship. It is not at all improbable that the templars
may have employed similar medals, and that those would contain allusions
to the rites in which

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

they were employed. The medals published by Von Hammer are said to have
been found chiefly on the sites of settlements of the order of the
Temple. However, the comparison of facts stated in the confessions of
many of the templars, as preserved in the official reports, with the
images and sculptured cups and coffers given by Von Hammer-Pürgstall,
lead to the conclusion that there is truth in the explanation he gives
of the latter, and that the templars, or at least some of them, had
secretly adopted a form of the rites of Gnosticism, which was itself
founded upon the phallic worship of the ancients. An English templar,
Stephen de Staplebridge, acknowledged that "there were two 'professions'
in the order of the Temple, the first lawful and good, the second
contrary to the faith." He had been admitted to the first of these when
he first entered the order, eleven years before the time of his
examination, but he was only initiated into the second or inner
mysteries about a year afterwards; and he gives almost a picturesque
description of this second initiation, which occurred in a chapter held
at "Dineslee" in Herefordshire. Another English templar, Thomas de
Tocci, said that the errors had been brought into England by a French
knight of high position in the order. <span
id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_80"></span>[123:81](wgp13.htm#fr_80) Baronius, *Annales
Ecclesiastici*, tom. xxi, p. 89, where the two bulls are printed, and
where the details of the history of the Stedingers will be found.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[125:82](wgp14.htm#fr_81) *Procès des
Templiers*, edited by M. Michelet, vol. i, pp. 90-92.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[125:83](wgp14.htm#fr_82) *Procès des
Templiers*, ii, 418.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[126:84](wgp14.htm#fr_83) *Procès*, i, 254.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[128:85](wgp14.htm#fr_84) See the *Procès*, ii.
286, 362, 364.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[129:86](wgp14.htm#fr_85) *Procès*, i, 307.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[132:87](wgp14.htm#fr_86) *Procès*, ii, 213.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[132:88](wgp14.htm#fr_87) *Procès*, ii, 294.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[135:89](wgp14.htm#fr_88) *Procès*, i, 190.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[136:90](wgp14.htm#fr_89) *Procès*, ii, 363.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[137:91](wgp14.htm#fr_90) *Procès*, ii, 218.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[137:92](wgp14.htm#fr_91) Du Puy, *Hist. des
Templ*., pp. 22, 24.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[138:93](wgp14.htm#fr_92) Wilkins, *Concil*.,
vol. ii, p. 363.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[138:94](wgp14.htm#fr_93) Du Puy, *Hist. des
Templiers*, p. 21.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[140:95](wgp14.htm#fr_94) See our [plate
XIV](#img_pl14).

<span id="fn_95"></span>[143:96](wgp14.htm#fr_95) [Plate XV, fig.
1](#img_pl15).

<span id="fn_96"></span>[143:97](wgp14.htm#fr_96) [Plate XV, fig.
2](#img_pl15).

<span id="fn_97"></span>[143:98](wgp14.htm#fr_97) [Plate XV, fig.
3](#img_pl15).

<span id="fn_98"></span>[144:99](wgp14.htm#fr_98) [Plate XV, fig.
4](#img_pl15).

<span id="fn_99"></span>[149:100](wgp14.htm#fr_99) Du Puy, *Hist. des
Templiers*, p. 94.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[151:101](wgp14.htm#fr_100) Montfaucon,
*Antiquité Expliquée*, Suppl. tom. ii, plate 59.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[151:102](wgp14.htm#fr_101) See before, [p.
139](#page_139).

<span id="fn_102"></span>[153:103](wgp14.htm#fr_102) Wilkins, *Concil*.,
ii, 387.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Witches' Sabbath](wgp15)
