[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Wicca and
Paganism](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kjd02)  [Next](kjd04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE PREFACE

### to the Reader.

THE fearefull aboundinge at this time in this countrie, of these
detestable slaues of the Deuill, the Witches or enchaunters, hath moved
me (beloued reader) to dispatch in post, this following treatise of
mine, not in any wise (as I protest) to serue for a shew of my learning
& ingine, but onely (mooued of conscience) to preasse / thereby, so
farre as I can, to resolue the doubting harts of many; both that such
assaultes of Sathan are most certainly practized, & that the
instrumentes thereof, merits most severly to be punished: against the
damnable opinions of two principally in our age, wherof the one called
SCOT

an Englishman, is not ashamed in publike print to deny, that ther can be
such a thing as Witch-craft: and so mainteines the old

{p. xii}

error of the Sadducees, in denying of spirits. The other called
VVIERVS*, a German Phisition, sets out a publick apologie for al these
craftesfolkes, whereby, procuring for their impunitie, he plainely
bewrayes himselfe to haue bene one of that Profession. And for to make
this treatise the more pleasaunt and facill, I haue put it in forme of a
Dialogue, which I haue diuided into three bookes: The first spea- / king
of Magie in general, and Necromancie in special. The second of Sorcerie
and Witch-craft: and the thirde, conteines a discourse of all these
kindes of spirits, & Spectres that appeares & trobles persones: together
with a conclusion of the whol work. My intention in this labour, is only
to proue two things, as I haue alreadie said: the one, that such
diuelish artes haue bene and are. The other, what exact trial and seuere
punishment they merite: & therefore reason I, what kinde of things are
possible to be performed in these arts, & by what naturall causes they
may be, not that I touch every particular thing of the Deuils power, for
that were infinite: but onelie, to speak scholasticklie, (since this can
not bee spoken in our language) I reason vpon* genus

leauing

{p. xiii}

species, *and* differentia

to be comprehended therein. / As for example, speaking of the power of
Magiciens, in the first book & sixt Chapter: I say, that they can
suddenly cause be brought vnto them, all kindes of daintie disshes, by
their familiar spirit: Since as a thiefe he delightes to steale, and as
a spirite, he can subtillie & suddenlie inough transport the same. Now
vnder this genus, may be comprehended al particulars, depending
thereupon; Such as the bringing Wine out of a Wall, (as we haue heard
oft to haue bene practised) and such others; which particulars, are
sufficientlie proved by the reasons of the general. And such like in the
second booke of Witch-craft in speciall, and fift Chap. I say and proue
by diuerse arguments, that Witches can, by the power of their Master,
cure or cast on disseases: Now by these same reasones, that proues their
power by the / Deuil of disseases in generall, is aswell proued their
power in speciall: as of weakening the nature of some men, to make them
vnable for women: and making it to abound in others, more then the
ordinary course of nature would permit. And such like in all other
particular sicknesses; But one thing I will pray thee

{p. xiv}

to obserue in all these places, where I reason vpon the deuils power,
which is the diferent ends & scopes, that God as the first cause, and
the Devill as his instrument and second cause shootes at in all these
actiones of the Deuil, (as Gods hang-man:) For where the deuilles
intention in them is euer to perish, either the soule or the body, or
both of them, that he is so permitted to deale with: God by the
contrarie, drawes euer out of that euill glorie to himselfe, either by
the wracke of the wicked in his justice, or / by the tryall of the
patient, and amendment of the faithfull, being wakened vp with that rod
of correction. Hauing thus declared vnto thee then, my full intention in
this Treatise, thou wilt easelie excuse, I doubt not, aswel my
pretermitting, to declare the whole particular rites and secretes of
these vnlawfull artes: as also their infinite and wounderfull practises,
as being neither of them pertinent to my purpose: the reason whereof, is
giuen in the hinder ende of the first Chapter of the thirde booke: and
who likes to be curious in these thinges, he may reade, if he will here
of their practises, BODINVS Dæmonomanie, *collected with greater
diligence*,

{p. xv}

then written with judgement, together with their confessions, that haue
bene at this time apprehened. If he would know what hath bene the
opinion of the Aunci- / entes, concerning their power: he shall see it
wel descrybed by HYPERIVS, & HEMMINGIVS*, two, late Germaine writers:
Besides innumerable other neoterick Theologues, that writes largelie
vpon that subject: And if he woulde knowe what are the particuler rites,
& curiosities of these black arts (which is both vnnecessarie and
perilous,) he will finde it in the fourth book of* CORNELIVS Agrippa*,
and in* VVIERVS

, whomof spak. And so wishing my pains in this Treatise (beloued Reader)
to be effectual, in arming al them that reades the same, against these
aboue mentioned erroures, and recommending my goodwill to thy friendly
acceptation, I bid thee hartely fare-well.

JAMES R.

{p. 1}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dæmonologie: The First Booke.](kjd04.md)
