[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shamanism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sis03)  [Next](sis05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FL4VJ8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Shamanism in Siberia*, by M.A. Czaplicka, \[1914\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### B. THE SHAMAN'S PREPARATORY PERIOD.

#### I. Palaeo-Siberians.

The Chukchee. The Chukchee call the preparatory period of a shaman by a
term signifying 'he gathers shamanistic power'. For the weaker shamans
and for female shamans the preparatory period is less painful, and the
inspiration comes mainly through dreams.

But for a strong man this stage is very painful and long; in some cases
it lasts for one, two, or more years. Some young people are afraid to
take a drum and call on the 'spirits', or to pick up stones or other
objects which might prove to be amulets, for fear lest the 'spirit'
should call them to be shamans. Some youths prefer death to obedience to
the call of spirits.\[4\] Parents possessing only one child fear his
entering this calling on account of the danger attached to it; but when
the family is large, they like to have one of its members a shaman.
During the time of preparation the shaman has to pass through both a
mental and a physical training. He is, as a rule, segregated, and goes
either to the forests and hills under the pretext of hunting or watching
the herds, 'often without taking along any

\[1 Tretyakoff, *The Country of Turukhansk*, 1871, p. 223.

2 Sieroszewski, op. cit., p. 395; Potanin, Troshchanski.

3\. Wierbicki, *The Natives of the Altai*, p. 44.

4\. Bogoras, *The Chukchee*, p. 450.\]

arms or the lasso of the herdsman'\[1\]; or else he remains in the inner
room the whole time. 'The young novice, the "newly inspired" (*turene
nitvillin*), loses all interest in the ordinary affairs of life. He
ceases to work, eats but little and without relishing his food, ceases
to talk to people, and does not even answer their questions. The greater
part of his time he spends in sleep.' This is why 'a wanderer . . . must
be closely watched, otherwise he might lie down on the open tundra and
sleep for three or four days, incurring the danger in winter of being
buried in drifting snow. When coming to himself after such a long sleep,
he imagines that he has been out for only a few hours, and generally is
not conscious of having slept in the wilderness at all., \[2\]

However exaggerated this account of a long sleep may be, we learn from
Bogoras that the Chukchee, when ill, sometimes 'fall into a heavy and
protracted slumber, which may last many days, with only the necessary
interruptions for physical needs'.\[3\]

The Koryak. The mental part of the training consists in coming into
contact with the right spirits, i.e. with the spirits who are to be the
shaman's protectors in his shamanistic practice. 'Every \[Koryak\]
shaman', says Jochelson, 'has his own guardian spirits, who help him in
his struggle with disease-inflicting *kalau* in his rivalry with other
shamans, and also in attacks upon his enemies. The shaman spirits
usually appear in the form of animals or birds. The most common guardian
spirits are the wolf, the bear, the raven, the sea-gull, and the
eagle.'\[4\] One of the two shamans whom Jochelson met among the Koryak
related to him how the spirits of the wolf, raven, bear, sea-gull, and
plover appeared to him (the shaman) in the desert-now in the form of
men, now in that of animals-and commanded him to become a shaman, or to
die. Thus we see that, while they are in solitude, 'the spirits appear
to them in visible form, endow them with power, and instruct them.' But
Bogoras describes the mental training of a new shaman differently. 'The
process of gathering inspiration is so painful to young shamans, because
of their mental struggle against the call, that they are sometimes said
to sweat blood on the forehead and the temples. Afterwards every
preparation of a shaman for a performance is considered a sort of
repetition of the initiative process: hence it is said that the Chukchee
shamans during that time are easily susceptible to haemorrhage, and even
to bloody sweat.'\[5\]

\[1. Op. cit., p. 420.

2\. Op. cit., p. 421.

3 Ibid.

4\. Jochelson, *The Koryak*, p. 47.

4\. Bogoras, op. cit., p. 420.\]

Bogoras himself saw two cases of nose-bleeding and one of bloody sweat
among the shamans; but in the last instance he suspected the shaman of
smearing his temples with the blood from his nose.\[1\]

As to the physical training of a novice, he must learn singing, dancing,
various tricks, including ventriloquism, and how to beat the drum.

'The beating of the drum, notwithstanding its seeming simplicity,
requires some skill, and the novice must spend considerable time before
he can, acquire the desired degree of perfection. This has reference
especially to the performer's power of endurance. The same may be said
of the singing. The manifestations continue for several weeks, during
which time the shaman exercises the most violent activity with scarcely
a pause. After the performance he must not show any signs of fatigue,
because he is supposed to be sustained by the "spirits", and, moreover,
the greater part of the exercise is asserted to be the work of the
spirits themselves, either after entering the shaman's body or while
outside his body. The amount of endurance required for all this, and the
ability to pass quickly from the highest excitement to a state of normal
quietude, can, of course, be acquired only by long practice. Indeed, all
the shamans I conversed with said that they had to spend a year, or even
two years, before sufficient strength of hand and freedom of voice were
given to them by the spirits. Some asserted that, during all this
preparatory time, they kept closely to the inner room, taking up the
drum several times a day, and beating it as long as their strength would
allow.'\[2\]

Of course a certain diet must be adhered to during the time of the
training and before each individual ceremonial.

Have the novices any teachers? One would suppose that they must have, if
only to learn the difficult magical tricks, but it is hard to get any
detailed information on this point, because the natives ascribe all the
cleverness of the shaman to the 'spirits'.

'There are many liars in our calling', the shaman Scratching Woman said
to Bogoras.\[3\] 'One will lift up the skins of the sleeping-room with
his right toe and then assure you that it was done by "spirits"; another
will talk into the bosom of his shirt or through his sleeve, making the
voice issue from a quite unusual place.' Of course he himself was ready
to swear that he never did such tricks.

\[1. Ibid.

2\. Op. cit., p. 424.

3\. Bogoras, *The Chukchee*, p. 426.\]

Sometimes the old men teach the young shamans. 'The man who gives a part
of his power to another man loses correspondingly, and can hardly
recover the loss afterwards. To transfer his power, the older shaman
must blow on the eyes or into the mouth of the recipient, or he may stab
himself with a knife, with the blade of which, still reeking with his
"source of life" (*telkeyun*), he will immediately pierce the body of
the recipient.'

Bogoras did not hear of any transferring of shamanistic power while he
was among the Chukchee. He found it, however, among Eskimo women, who
were taught by their husbands, and whose children were taught by their
parents. In one family on St. Lawrence Island the shamanistic power has
been retained through a succession of generations, evidently having been
transferred from father to son.\[1\]

The Gilyak. Sternberg \[2\] says that although shamans do not play so
important a róle among the Gilyak as among some neighbouring tribes,
still their power among this folk is almost unlimited. Sternberg was
told by a Gilyak shaman that before he had entered on his vocation he
had been very ill for two months, during which time he was unconscious,
lying quite motionless. Sometimes, he said, he almost regained
consciousness, but sank again into a swoon before recovering his senses.
'I should have died', he explained, 'if I had not become a shaman.'
During these months of trial he became 'as dry', he said, 'as a dry
stick.' In the night he heard himself singing shaman's songs. Once there
appeared to him a bird-spirit, and, standing at some distance from it, a
man, who spoke to him in these words: 'Make yourself a drum and all that
pertains to a shaman. Beat the drum and sing songs. If you are an
ordinary man, nothing will come of it; but if you are to be a shaman,
you will be no ordinary one.' When he came to himself he found that he
was being held by head and feet close to the fire by his friends, who
told him that they had thought him already dead, carried off by the evil
spirits (*kekhn*). Forthwith he demanded a drum, and began to beat it
and sing. He felt half dead, half intoxicated. Then for the first time
he saw his spirit-protectors, *kekhn* and *kenchkh*. The former told
him, 'If you see any one ill, cure him. Do not trust *kenchkh*. He has a
man's face, but his body is a bird's. Trust us only.'

Sternberg himself was once witness of a first manifestation of
shamanistic power.

\[1. Op. cit., p. 420.

2\. Sternberg, *The Gilyak*, p. 72.\]

Koïnit was a little guest of Sternberg's, a boy of twelve. In spite of
his youth he had two souls, being the son of a great shaman, Chanikh,
who had as many as four souls (one from the mountains, another from the
sea, a third from the sky, and a fourth from the underworld). Once on
being suddenly awakened from sleep, Koïnit began to throw himself about,
and to shout aloud in different pitches or intonations of the voice, as
shamans are accustomed to do. When this was over, the boy's face looked
worn and tired, like that of an old man. He said afterwards that, during
the sleep which had preceded his outbreak, two *kekhns* had appeared to
him. He knew them for his father's *kekhns*; and they said to him: 'We
used to play with your father-let us play with you also."

#### II. Neo-Siberians.

Passing from the Palaeo- to the Neo-Siberians, we notice that the
shaman's protectors among the latter are highly developed beings.

Three kinds of 'spirits' are associated with a Yakut shaman, namely,
*änägyat*, *yekyua*, and *kaliany* (Sieroszewski). *Änägyat* is the
indispensable attribute of every shaman.

But *änägyat* is also the name of the iron breast-circle, the sign of
the shaman's dignity.

Even the weakest shamans possess *änägyat* \[2\] and *yekyua*-the latter
is 'sent from above, animal picture, bewitching spirit, devilish
devourer' (*Yekyua oïun abassyuah, simah abassyuah, üssüttan ongorudh*).

The *yekyua* is carefully hidden from the people. 'My *yekyua* will not
be found by any one; it lies hidden far away, there, in. the rocky
mountains of Edjigan.'\[3\]

Once a year, when the snow melts and the earth is black, the *yekyua*
arise from their hiding-places and begin to wander. They hold orgies of
fights and noises, and the shamans with whom they are associated feel
very ill. Especially harmful are the *yekyua* of female shamans.

\[1. Op. cit., pp. 73-4.

2\. Sieroszewski, in speaking about the division of the shamans into
three kinds, says that the last or third kind are not real shamans, as
they have not änägyat, but are sorcerers and other people in some way
peculiar (12 *Lat w Kraju Yakutów*, p. 628).

3\. Sieroszewski, op. cit., p. 626.\]

The weakest and most cowardly are the *yekyua* of dogs; the most
powerful are those of enormous bulls, stallions, elks, and black boars.
'Those shamans who have as their animal incarnation a wolf, bear, or
dog, are the must unfortunate; these animals are insatiable; they are
never satisfied, however much the shaman may provide for them.' The dog
especially gives no peace to his two-footed fellow; he 'gnaws with his
teeth the shaman's heart, tears into pieces his body'.\[1\] Then the
shaman feels sick and suffers pain. The crow is also a bad *yekyua*; the
eagle and hairy bull are called 'devilish fighters and warriors'
(*abassy keiktah*). This title is the most flattering one for a
shaman.\[2\] When a new shaman appears, the other shamans recognize him
at once by the presence of a new *yekyua*, whom they have not seen
before. Only wizards can see *yekyua*; to ordinary people they are
invisible.

Troshchanski \[3\] says of the *yekyua*: 'Among the protectors of the
shaman, the most important role is played by the *yekyua* (literally,
"mother-animal"). It is said that the shamans incarnate their *kut*\[4\]
in certain animals, e.g. in stallions, wolves, dogs, and that these
animals are thus the yekyua of shamans.

'If one of these animals kills another of its species, then the
corresponding shaman will die.' Troshshanski thinks that the shaman
incarnates his *kut* only during the time that he is actually
shamanizing.

Whereas this 'black' animal-protector seems to be of a totemic and
personal nature, to a certain extent 'of one blood and flesh' with his
protégé, on the other hand *ämägyat* strikes us as being a more
impersonal power.

Sieroszewski \[5\] explains that it is in most cases 'the spirit of a
deceased shaman', or, in some rare cases, one of the secondary heavenly
beings. But it seems that the term 'spirit' is used here quite vaguely;
e. g., we read further on: 'The human body cannot contain the power of
great gods, and so the spirit-protector remains always near the beloved
man (outside of him) and willingly comes at his call; in difficult
moments it helps him, defends him, and gives him advice.'\[6\] 'The
shaman sees and hears only through his *ämägyat*', says the shaman
Tiuspiut.

Ämägyat comes to a shaman through an accident, or as a

\[1. Ibid.

2\. Ibid.

3\. Troshchanski, *The Evolution of the Black Faith*, p. 138.

4 The part of the soul which, according to the Yakut, is common to
animals and men.

5\. Sieroszewski, op. cit., p. 626.

6\. Ibid.\]

heavenly destiny. 'When I was travelling in the north,' says Tiuspiut,
'I came upon a heap of wood (*saïba*) in the mountains, and as I just
wanted to cook some dinner, I set this on fire. Now under this heap was
buried a well-known Tungus shaman (Tiuspiut was a Yakut), and so his
*ämägyat* leapt into me." If the great shamans at death take their
(*ämägyat* to heaven, they are transformed into heavenly beings; but if
the *ämägyat* is not removed to heaven, then it will appear on the earth
sooner or later.\[2\]

Besides the two so-called spirits mentioned above, there comes to the
Yakut shaman, during shamanistic performances, still another kind of
spirit, a rather mischievous one, which forces the shaman to talk and to
imitate various, often indecent, gestures. These spirits are called
*kaliany*, and their representatives may be a Russian devil, a devil's
daughter with a devilish groom, who, being blind, is in the habit of
groping about in the dark, &c.

Thus Sieroszewski, on the mental training of the novice. Further light
is thrown on the question by Troshchanski.\[1\] Following out his main
idea of treating black and white shamans separately, he says: 'Not every
one can become a shaman, either white or black; only a person whose
*sür* has obtained a suitable education.

'The sür of a white shaman is educated under the care of one of the
*aïy*, and the *sür* of a black shaman studies with an *abassy*. How the
*sür* of a white shaman is educated among the Yakut is not known to us.
The sür of a black shaman lives with his tutor on the ninth floor
(underground-in their ideal division of the universe). If the *sür* is
educated on the ninth floor, then a most powerful shaman will arise from
it; if on the eighth floor, then the shaman will be of medium power; if
on the third floor, then the shaman will be only a sorcerer.'

The education consists in the *sür's* learning 'the habits, character,
and behaviour of *abassylar* and shamans.'

As to the education of a shaman himself, and his initiation, the Yakut
shaman is taught by an older shaman, who consecrates him by 'placing on
him the *ämägyat*'.\[4\] This sign is taken away by the shaman from a
person who does not wish to be a shaman any longer. There is in the
Yakut language a word *usüi*, which

\[1. Op. cit., p. 627.

2\. lbid.

3\. Troshchanski, op. cit., p. 146.

4\. Troshchanski, op. cit., p. 147.\]

means to teach the art of shamanizing and to consecrate a shaman.

Pripuzoff \[1\] describes the consecration of a shaman among the Yakut
as follows: 'The old shaman leads his pupil up a high mountain or into a
clearing in the forest. Here he dresses him in a shaman's garment, gives
him a rattle, and places on one side of him nine chaste youths, and on
the other nine chaste maidens. Then the shaman puts on his own garment,
and directs the youth to repeat after him certain words.' He demands of
the novice that he shall give up all that is most dear to him in the
world, and consecrate his life to the service of the spirits who shall
come -it his call. He tells his pupil where certain 'black' spirits
dwell, what diseases they cause, and how they may be propitiated.
Finally the young shaman must kill a sacrificial animal, and sprinkle
himself with its blood. The flesh is eaten by those who have been
present at the ceremony.

A child chosen to be a shaman is recognized among the Buryat by the
following signs\[2\]: 'He is often absorbed in meditation, likes to be
alone, has mysterious dreams, and sometimes has fits during which he is
unconscious.' According to the Buryat beliefs, the soul of a child is
then in process of being trained, among the 'West Tengeris' if he is to
be a 'white' shaman, among the 'East Tengeris' if he is to become a
'black' one. Living in the dwelling of the gods, his soul, under the
tutelage of deceased shamans, learns the various secrets of the shaman's
vocation; the soul must remember the names of the gods, the places where
they live, the means by which they may be propitiated, and the names of
the spirits which are subordinate to the high gods. After a period of
trial the soul of the child returns to the body, which for a time
resumes its normal life. But on his reaching adolescence, peculiar
symptoms show themselves in the person who has undergone these
experiences. He becomes moody, is easily excited into a state of
ecstasy, leads an irregular life, wandering from *ulus* to *ulus* to
watch the shamanistic ceremonies. He gives himself up with great
earnestness to exercises in the shamanistic arts, for which purpose he
segregates himself, going to some high mountain or into the forest,
where, before a great fire, he calls on the spirits,

\[1. Pripuzoff, *Materials for the Study of Shamanism among the Yakut*,
pp. 64-5.

2\. Agapitoff and Khangaloff, *Materials for the Study of Shamanism in
Siberia*, pp. 42-53.\]

and afterwards falls into a swoon. In the meanwhile, to prevent him from
doing himself an injury, his friends keep watch over him unobtrusively.

While the novice is preparing himself for his new life, his relations
call in a good shaman, who makes a sacrifice to propitiate the spirits
and induce them to help the young shaman-to-be. If the future shaman
belongs to a poor family, the whole community helps to procure the
sacrificial animals and other things which are indispensable for the
ceremonies.

The preparatory period lasts for several years, its length depending
largely on the capacity of the young man. He cannot, however, become a
shaman until he reaches the age of twenty. Finally he undergoes a
purification ceremony. One such ceremony does not confer all the rights
and powers of a shaman; there are, in fact, nine. But very few shamans
go through all these purifications; most only undergo two or three;
some, none at all, for they dread the responsibilities which devolve
upon consecrated shamans. To a fully consecrated shaman the gods are
very severe, and punish his faults or mistakes with death.

The first consecration ceremony is preceded by a purification of water.
For this an experienced old shaman, called the 'father-shaman', is
chosen, together with nine young men to be his assistants. These are
spoken of as his 'sons'. The water for the ablution must be drawn from a
spring-sometimes from three springs. They go in the morning of the day
of consecration to fetch the water, taking with them *tarasun* \[1\],
with which they make a libation to the master- and mistress-spirits of
the spring. As they return, they pluck up from the earth
birch-seedlings, of which they make a broom, and take it to the house of
the novice. Next the water is heated over a fire, and into it are thrown
certain herbs and pieces of bark. Then from the ears of a he-goat
prepared beforehand they cut pieces of hair, and some shavings from its
horns and hoofs, and throw these also into the pot. The he-goat is then
killed in such a manner that its blood drips into the pot. Then only is
the water ready for the consecration ceremony. The flesh of the goat is
given to the women present, who cook and eat it.

Now the father-shaman foretells the future from a sheep's
shoulder-blade. He summons the shamanist ancestors of the

\[1. A native Buryat drink, composed of milk and wine, called also wine
of milk'.\]

novice, and offers libations of wine and *tarasun*. Then he dips the
birch-broom into the water and beats the candidate on the naked back, as
do also the nine 'sons' of the 'father-shaman', saying at the same time:
'When thou art called to a poor man, ask little in return for your
trouble, and take what is given. Take care of the poor always, help
them, and pray to the gods to defend them against the power of evil
spirits. If thou art called by a rich man, go to him riding on a
bullock, and do not ask much for your trouble. If thou art called at the
same time by a poor and by a rich man, go first to the poor.' The
candidate repeats these precepts after the shaman, and promises to
observe them.

Then follows a libation of *tarasun* to the guardian spirits; this
closes the ceremony.  
The purification of a shaman by water is performed at least once a year,
but sometimes once a month, at the new moon; or else at any other time
when he considers himself to have been defiled, e. g. by touching some
unclean object. If the defilement is especially gross, then purification
is performed with blood. The shaman also purifies himself after a death
has occurred in the *ulus*.\[1\]

This ceremony is followed after some time by the first consecration,
called *kherege-khulkhe*, the expenses of which are shared by the
community. Again a 'father-shaman' and nine 'sons' are chosen, and they,
accompanied by the novice, ride on horseback from *yurta* to *yurta*,
collecting offerings. Before each *yurta* they stop and announce their
coming with a shout. They are hospitably entertained, and offerings of
different kinds-votive handkerchiefs, which are tied to 'a birch staff
carried by the novice, and sometimes money-are brought to them. They buy
wooden cups, little bells tied to horse-staves, wine, &c. The day before
the ceremony a certain number of stout birches are cut from the groves
by the 'sons' under the direction of the 'father-shaman '; from the
straightest of these they make horse-staves. The grove from which these
are taken is one in which the dead of the *ulas* are buried, and for the
propitiation of the spirits there they make offerings of mutton and
tarasan. At the same time they prepare the shaman's accessories, and
meanwhile other shamans of similar standing with the 'father-shaman '
summon the spirits.

\[1. ibid.\]

In the morning of the day of the consecration the birch-trees cut the
day before are planted. The stoutest birch, which has its roots still
attached to it, they plant in the south-west corner of the *yurta*,
where the ground is left bare for the fire; the top of the tree projects
through the smoke-bole above. This birch represents symbolically the
porter-god who allows the shaman ingress into heaven. It points the way
by which the shaman can reach the sky, and remains permanently in the
*yurta* as a sign that the dwelling is that of a shaman. The other
birches are planted in front of the *yurta* in the place where
sacrifices are usually offered, in the following order, from west to
east:

\(i\) A birch under which, on a carpet of felt, is placed some
*tarasun*. To the branches of this ribbons of black and yellow are tied
if the shaman is to be 'black', of white and blue if he is to be a
'white' shaman, and of all four colours if he is to serve both kinds of
spirits.

\(ii\) A birch to which are tied a big bell and the sacrificial horse.

\(iii\) A fairly stout birch which the novice has to climb.-These three
trees are planted with their roots, and are called serge (posts).

\(iv\) Nine saplings, in groups of three, the saplings in each group
being bound together with a rope made of white horsehair. To these are
tied ribbons of different colours in the following order-white, blue,
red, yellow, and so on again. On the saplings are hung skins of animals.

\(v\) Nine posts to which sacrificial animals are tied.

\(vi\) Some stout birches to which the bones of the sacrificial animals
are tied after being bound up in straw. These birches form a row.

From the principal birch in the *yurta* to all those which stand outside
are led two ribbons, red and blue. This is a symbolical representation
of the path of the shaman to the spirit-world. To the north of the row
of birches are placed nine pots for cooking the sacrificial meat.

When everything is ready, the novice and the others who take part in the
ceremony don their ceremonial dress. Then the shaman's accessories are
blessed, after which the horse-staves are said to turn into real horses.
All the morning the assembled shamans have been summoning the spirits
and sprinkling *tarasun*. The 'father-shaman' now calls upon the
guardian gods, and the novice repeats after him the words of his
invocation. The candidate climbs the birch inside the *yurta*, gets on
to the roof, and from there summons the spirits in a loud voice. When
the moment comes for leaving the *yurta*, four shamans take hold of a
certain felt carpet, each by a corner.\[1\] Just outside the entrance to
the *yurta* a fire is made, and various herbs are thrown into it:
everybody and everything which passes over the fire is purified by it.

The people leave the yurta in the following order: first the
'father-shaman', then the candidate, then the nine 'sons', and finally
the relatives and guests.

The ceremony ends with feasts and sacrifices.\[2\]

Among the *Samoyed* and *Ostyak* of the Turukhan country the future
shaman spends his youth in exercises which stimulate his nerves and
excite his imagination.\[3\] At the consecration of a novice, according
to Tretyakoff\[4\] he must stand with his face towards the west, while
the officiating shaman asks the Dark Spirit to help the candidate and to
give him a spirit to serve him. At the end of the ceremony the shaman
sings a hymn in praise of the Dark Spirit, and the novice repeats it
after him. The beginner is tested by the spirits, who require of him
certain sacrifices, as of his wife or son, and he has to promise them
various other sacrifices.

Both Castren \[5\] and Islavin \[6\] speak of the special training of
the novice by an old shaman. One of the Samoyed shamans told Castren of
how he was entrusted to the care of an old shaman for training, when he
was fifteen, as he (the candidate) came of an

\[1. According to Potanin, the felt carpet alluded to by Agapitoff and
Khangaloff provides the means of performing what is considered the most
essential part of the ceremony. The novice is carried on it, by the four
shamans mentioned, out of the *yurta* to the row of nine birches. Of the
moment of his elevation on the carpet, they say *bo begde*, 'the shaman
ascends'. On reaching the birches, the shaman must leap from the carpet
on to one of them, which he climbs. From the top of this birch he must
jump to that of the one next to it, and so on to the end of the row,
whence he must return in the same manner to his starting-point, and is
then again placed on the carpet. After this ceremony the new shaman
begins to shamanize, to foretell the future, and to heal the sick-but
all this without the use of the drum. This accessory he is not permitted
to acquire until after the third year from his consecration. (Potanin,
*Sketches of Northern Mongolia*, vol.iv,pp.58-9.) According to Appitoff
and Khangalolf (op. cit., p. 141), the custom thus described by Potanin
is peculiar to the Buryat of Balgansk.

2\. Ibid.

3 Bielayewski, op. cit., p. 113.

4\. Tretyakoff, *The Country of Turukhansk*, pp. 210-12.

5\. Castren, *Nordische Reisen und Forschungen*, p. 191.

6\. Islavin, The *Samoyed, their Home and Social Life*, p. 109.\]

old shamanist family. The means of education was as follows: Two
*tadibey* (shamans) blindfolded him with a handkerchief, and then beat
him, one on the back of the head and the other on the shoulders, till
his eyes were dazzled as with too much light, and he saw demons dancing
on his arms and feet. It must be remembered, of course, that he had been
taught beforehand about the Samoyed world of spirits.' In former times
Lapland was a school of shamanism, and all neighbouring tribes sent
youths thither to be trained as shamans.\[2\] At present only among
Russian Lapps are *noyda* (shamans) to be found, and they are but
degenerate copies of their predecessors.

\[1. Castren, op. cit., p. 191.

2\. Schefferus, *Lapponia*, p. 120. N. Kharuzin, *The Noyda among the
Ancient and the Modern Lapps*.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Types of Shamans](sis05.md)
