[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shamanism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sis04)  [Next](sis06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FL4VJ8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Shamanism in Siberia*, by M.A. Czaplicka, \[1914\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER IX

### TYPES OF SHAMANS

#### Palaeo-Siberians

IN this chapter, which deals with the different types of shamans, the
duties of a shaman will be enumerated. In nearly all the more advanced
tribes we shall see that certain shamans specialize in one sort of duty
or another, while among the more primitive peoples each performs many
different kinds of duties-a state of things made possible by the less
complex nature of those duties. The high conception of a shaman's duties
among certain tribes may be seen from Banzaroffs ideal picture of a
Buryat shaman. He is (a) priest, (b) medicine-man, and (c) prophet.

\(a\) 'As a priest, he knows the will of the gods, and so declares to
man what sacrifices and ceremonies shall be held; he is an expert in
ceremonials and prayers. Besides the communal ceremonies at which he
officiates, he conducts also various private cerenionials.'\[1\]

\(b\) As medicine-man, the shaman performs certain ceremonies to expel
the evil spirit from the patient.

\(c\) As a prophet, he foretells the future either by means of the
shoulder-blade of a sheep or by the flight of arrows.

This ideal type of shaman was probably rare even in Banzaroff's time,
for he himself says that the shaman was not present at all communal
sacrifices.\[2\] It is the same with some family sacrifices: the
*ongons* are fed by the master of the house; and certain other
sacrifices, as, for instance, those offered at child-birth, are made
without the assistance of the shaman.\[3\]

The fact that a communal or family ceremony is sometimes presided over
by the head of the commune or family, or that a private individual
occasionally performs divination, does not alter the fact that the
original type of Buryat shaman had the performance of all these rites in
his hands.\[4\] They had among the

\[1 Banzaroff, *Black Faith*, 1893, pp. 107-15.

2 ibid.

3\. Klenientz, *E.R.E.*, 'The Buriats', p. 13 ).

4\. Ibid.\]

Mongols in the time of Djingis Khan, when the shamans were at the height
of their power.\[1\] We cannot therefore agree with Mr. Mikhailowski,
who says, 'Of all the actions of the shaman, the most characteristic of
his calling is what is known as *kamlanie*,' i.e. invocations of
spirits.\[2\] Although it may be that in the decadence of his office a
shaman is sometimes nowadays no more than a medicine-man, even now in
certain places shamans are present, not only at communal, but also at
family rites, and even when not so present we find in the rites traces
of their original participation,

The Koryak. Among the Koryak, as among the Palaeo-Siberians and most
Neo-Siberian tribes, we may distinguish \[3\] (1) family shamans, and
(2) professional shamans.

Family shamanism is connected with the domestic hearth, whose welfare is
under its care. The family shaman has charge of the celebration of
family festivals, rites, and sacrificial ceremonies, and also of the use
of the family charms and amulets, and of their incantations.

Professional shamans are those who are not definitely attached to a
certain group of people. The more powerful they are, the wider is the
circle in which they can practise their art.

'There is no doubt that professional shamanism has developed from the
ceremonials of family shamanism', says Joebelson. \[4\] It seems,
however, necessary to add another category of (3) communal shamans,
forming a transitional class between family and professional shamans.
These shamans have to deal with a group of families taking part in
important ceremonials. The admission of this third category must not be
taken to mean that we agree unconditionally with the idea that the
professional shaman is a development from the family, or the communal,
shaman, though many practices, and the opinions of such serious
investigators as Jochelson and Bogoras, lend some weight to this notion.

It was among the Koryak that professional shamans were first affected by
Christianity.

The Chukchee. Among the Chukchee, the above division into family and
professional shamans needs to be supplemented, since we find \[5\] that
there exist three categories of professional shamans:

\[1. Mikhailowski, *Shamanism*, p. .58.

2 Op. cit., p. 55.

3\. Jochelson, *The Koryak*, p. 47.

4 Ibid.

Bogoras, *The Chukchee*, pp. 430-1.\]

\(A\) Ecstatic shamans, (B) Shaman-prophets, (C) Incantation shamans.

Of course, the duties of the shamans of all these categories merge into
each other; still, a certain specialization is to be observed.

A. The ecstatic shaman communicates with 'spirits' and is called
*kalatkourgin*.

This includes all kinds of intercourse with "spirits" which become
apparent to the listeners; that is, the voices of "spirits " talking
through the medium of the shaman, ventriloquistic performances, and
other tricks-generally speaking, the whole spectacular part of
shamanism, which forms ' the main content of the shamanistic *séances*.'
As observed above, 'all this is often considered merely as a kind of
jugglery. For performances of this sort, young people are said to be
better adapted than older ones. With increasing years some of the
shamans discontinue most of these tricks.'\[1\]

B. The shaman-prophet, i. e. one who is 'looking into', *hetolatirgin*.

'This branch of Chukchee shamanism is held in the highest veneration,
because the shaman possessing it has the faculty of seeing the danger
lying in wait for the people, or the good in store for them, and
accordingly he is able to advise them bow to avoid the first and to
secure the second. Most of the instructions given are of a ritualistic
kind, and refer to certain details of such and such a ceremonial, which
must be arranged after a certain manner in order to secure the desired
result., \[2\]

There are shamans who, though they have *kelet* at their disposal,
cannot give any advice; while others, on the other hand, cannot
communicate with 'spirits', but 'give magical advice as a kind of
internal subjective inspiration, after self-communion for a few moments.
These, notwithstanding the simplicity of their proceedings, usually
enjoy the highest consideration of their neighhours.'\[3\]

For instance, the shaman Galmuurgin was said by the Chukchee to be
'(with) only his (own) body' (*em-wikilin*), because no other beings
helped him with their inspiration.

'When giving a *séance*, he began by beating a drum and singing, but in
a few minutes he would leave off the exercise,

\[1. Bogoras, The *Chukchee*, p. 430.

2 Op. cit., p. 431.

3 Ibid.\]

and drawing a few long, almost hysterical breaths, would immediately
proceed to foretell the future. He talked to many people present, one by
one. When he was through with one case, he would stop for a while, as if
recollecting himself, and then, after several deep-drawn sighs, would
pass on to the next applicant.'\[1\]

C. Incantation shamans (*ewganva-tirgin*, 'producing of incantations'),
who carry on the more complicated practices of shamanism.

Incantations, together with spells, form the greater part of Chukchee
magic. The incantations may be of a benevolent or malevolent character.
Hence there are two types of shamans in this class:

1\. 'Well-minded' (*ten-cimnulin*), who ply their art in order to help
sufferers.  
2. 'Mischievous' (*kurg-enenilit*, or *kunich-enenilit*, literally
'mocking shamans'), who are bent on doing harm to people.

Good shamans have a red shamanistic coat and bad shamans a black one.
The same colours are used by the Yukaghir shamans.

The majority of shamans, however, combine in themselves the gifts of all
these categories and in the name of 'spirits' perform various tricks,
foretell the future, and pronounce incantations.

#### The Neo-Siberians.

The Yakut. Troshchanski\[2\] suggests that the division of shamans into
black and white is the most essential division among all Siberian
tribes, though many travellers speak of shamans in a general way as if
there were only one kind. It would seem, however, that Troshchanski
overlooks the distinction between the religious conceptions of the
Palaeo-Siberians and those of the Neo-Siberians. They live under
different environmental conditions; and, besides, the Neo-Siberians have
undoubtedly been to some extent influenced by contact with the higher
Asiatic religions.

It is among the Neo-Siberians that magico-religious dualism appears more
distinctly. Again, within the class of Neo-Siberians themselves
differences are found. Among the Yakut \[3\] the black shamans
predominate, the white hardly existing; while among

\[1. Op. cit., p. 431.

2 Troshchanski, *The Evolution of the Black Faith*, 1902, p. iii.

3\. Op. cit., P. 110.\]

the Votyak the white are almost the only shamans now to be found, as the
cult of the bright god has almost entirely displaced that of the black.

The Yakut white shamans are called *aïy-oïuna*. They take part in the
spring festivals, marriage ceremonies, fertilization rites, and the
curing of diseases, in cases where *kut* has not yet been taken away
from the patient.\[1\]

We read in a certain tale that at one wedding there were present nine
*aïy-oïuna* (white men-shamans) and eight *aïy-udangana* (white women-
shamans). \[2\] White shamans also ask, in cases of the sterility of
women, the *maghan sylgglakh* to descend to earth and make the woman
fertile. At the autumn fishing, in former times, they lighted torches
made of wood cut from a tree struck by lightning, purged the waters of
all uncleanness, and asked the *ichchi* (spirit-owner) of the lake for a
benefit. This, he considers, was certainly done by white. shamans, if
only for the reason that the ceremony was held in the daytime.\[3\] But,
on page 105 of the same work, Troshchanski writes: 'Only the spring
festivals were called *aïy-ysyakh*; the autumn festivals were known is
*abassy-ysyakh*.' Hence the ceremony of fertilization of the lake must
have been performed by black shamans, *abassy-oïuna*, in spite of the
fact that this ceremony was held in the daytime.

As to the characters of the two kinds of shamans, Gorokboff says that he
knew personally several *aïy-oïuna*, who were very good people indeed,
quiet, delicate, and really honest, while the *abassy-oïuna* were good
for nothing.\[4\] But Troshchanski says that the 'black shaman' among
the Yakut is only professionally 'black', that his attitude has no
specially evil character, and that he helps men no less than the white
shaman does. He is not necessarily bad, though he deals with evil
powers, and he occupies among the Yakut a higher position than among
other Neo-Siberians.

Black shamans offer sacrifices to *abassylar* and shamanize to maintain
their prestige. They foretell the future, call up spirits, wander into
spirit-land, and give accounts of their journeys thither.\[3\]

At the present day there are among the Yakut special storytellers and
also special sorcerers (*aptah-kisi*).

\[1. Op. cit., 1). 149.

2\. Khudiakoff, Verkhoyansk Anthology, p. 88.

3\. Troshchanski, ibid.

4\. Gorokhoff . *Yurung-Uolan*, E.S.S.I.R.G.S., 1887, p. 56.

Troshchanski, op. cit., p. 152.\]

According to the degree of esteem, in which they are held by the people,
Sieroszewski' classifies Yakut shamans as follows:

The Great Shaman-*ulahan-oïun*.

\(2\) The Middling Shaman-*orto-oïun*.

\(3\) The Little Shaman-*kenniki-oïun*.

A 'great shaman' has the *ämägyat* from *Ulu-Toïen* himself.

A shaman of middling power also possesses *ämägyat*, but not of so high
a quality or to so great an extent as the former.

A 'little shaman' does not possess *ämägyat*. He is not, in fact, really
a shaman, but a person in some way abnormal, neurotic, or original, who
can cure trifling illnesses, interpret dreams, and frighten away small
devils only.

With regard to the classification of shamans into 'white' and 'black',
Troshchanski puts forward the hypothesis that these two classes of
shamans originated and developed independently:

'One might imagine that the class of white shamans came into existence
first, and that it derived from the class of heads of families and
clans. The custom of the choice of one leader (shaman) for common
ceremonies or sacrifices may have helped in this evolution of the white
shaman from the heads of families. The wisest and most respected member
of the community would probably have the best chance of being chosen, as
he could please not only the people but also the spirits.' \[2\]

The same persons might then have been chosen repeatedly, and presently a
class of white shamans might arise for the communal cults and
sacrifices. In the meantime the head of the family could still keep his
priestly power in his own home, until the professional shaman took his
place, as we see at the present day among certain tribes, e.g. the
Yakut. \[3\]

Why should we regard the head of the family as the prototype of the
white shaman? We shall find in Troshchanski's book no more satisfactory
reply to this question than is contained in the following short passage:

'I think we are right in saying that the heads of the family, or the
chosen priests, in their practice and prayers do not address themselves
to the evil spirits, which in Yakut are called *abassylar*; hence it is
here that we find the origin of white shamans.' \[4\]

If we follow Troshchanski, we must draw the conclusion that

\[1. Sieroszewski, op. cit., p. 628.

2\. Troshchauski, op. cit., p. 120.

3\. Op. cit., p. 124.

4\. Op. cit., p. 113.\]

among the Neo-Siberians, e. g. the Buryat and the Yakut, the white
shamans form a quite distinct class, although we see that on certain
occasions the head of the family may take the place of the white shaman:

'Tailgan is a communal sacrifice in which the whole family or clan takes
part. This ceremony is designed to show humility: the Buryat call it the
"asking ceremony". The performer of *tailgan* may be the shaman, or the
whole group of family heads without the assistance of a shaman.'\[1\]

Among the Palaeo-Siberians there is no class of white shamans, and the
family cult is in the hands of the father, assisted by the mother, the
participation of professional shamans being often prohibited. Among the
Gilyak the assistance of shamans at sacrificial feasts, e.g. the
bear-ceremonial, is even forbidden. Is this because there is no white
shaman among these people? Or is it an indication that, after all,
family and professional shamanism have developed separately?

Among the Yakut, from. the observation of whom Troshchanski formed his
hypothesis, the white shaman may be a woman, in cases where the woman
stands as family head.\[2\]

Now as to the black shamans, they were originally women, says
Troshchanski, and he draws attention to the following linguistic and
sociological particulars which are made to act as evidence in support of
his hypothesis.

What is the essential meaning of the word shaman? In Sanskrit *sram*=to
be tired, to become weary; *sramana*=work, religious mendicant. In the
Pali language the word *samana* has the same meaning. These two latter
words have been adopted by the Buddhists as names for their
priests.\[3\] But, according to Banzaroff, the word *shaman* originated
in northern Asia: *saman* is a Manchu word, meaning 'one who is excited,
moved, raised'; *samman* (pronounced *shaman*) and *hamman* in Tungus,
have the

\[1. Agapitoff and Khangitloff, *Materials for the Study of Shamanism in
Siberia*, E.S.S.I.R.G.S., p. 36.

'How this may occur, in the patriarchal Yakut family, Troshchanski
explains as follows: 'Each wife of a polygynous Yakut lived separately
with her children and relations and cattle; during the frequent absences
of her husband she was actually the head of the family, and performed
family ceremonials. Several such *ye-usa* (matriarchal families) formed
one *aga-usa* (patriarchal family)' (p. 116).

3\. I am indebted for this information to Mr. M. de Z. Wickremasinghe,
Lecturer in Tamil and Telugu in the University of Oxford.\]

same meaning. *Samdambi* is Manchu: 'I shamanize', i.e. 'I call the
spirits dancing before the charm'\[1\]

From the above we see that the essential characteristic of a shaman is a
liability to nervous ecstasy and trances. Women are more prone to
emotional excitement than men: among the Yakut most of the women suffer
from *menerik* (a nervous disease, one type of the so-called 'Arctic
hysteria '). \[2\]

Thus Troshchanski. But the only conclusion-if any-that he could draw
from this would be that women are by nature more disposed to shamanizing
than men. And why should this make her the original black shaman? Only
one piece of evidence is adduced to connect women with 'black'
shamanizing, and that is taken from Kamchadal life,. not from that of
the Yakut, upon which chiefly he grounds his hypothesis. Among the most
primitive Kamchadal, where there were only women (or *koek-chuch*)
shamans, these practised only black shamanism, summoning evil
spirits.\[3\]

As to the linguistic evidence:

Among the Mongols, Buryat, Yakut, Altaians, Torgout, Kidan, Kirgis,
there is one general term for a woman-shaman, which has a slightly
different form in each tribe: *utagan, udagan, udaghan, ubakhan, utygan,
utiugun, iduan* (*duana*); whereas the word for man-shaman is different
in each of these tribes.

In Yakut he is called *oïun*; in Mongol, *buge*; Buryat, *buge* and
*bö*; Tungus, *samman* and *hamman*; Tartar, kam; Altaian, *kam* and
*gam*; Kirgis, *baksa* (*basky*); Samoyed, *tadibey*.  
From the above Troshchanski concludes that during the migration of the
Neo-Siberians they had only women-shamans, called by a similar general
name; and that the men-shamans appeared later, when these people
scattered, settling in lands distant from one mother, so that the term
for man-shaman originated independently in each tribe.\[4\]

Of course, this linguistic evidence concerns only the Neo- and not the
Palaeo-Siberians.  
Troshchanski gives us further the following religio-social evidence,
drawn exclusively from the Yakut, in support of his

\[1. Zakharoff, *Complete Manchu-Russian Dictionary*, 1875, p. 568.

2\. Troshchanski, op. cit., p. 119.

3\. Krasheninnikoff, *Description of the Conoitry of Kamchatka*, pp.
81-2.

4\. Troshchanski, op. cit., p. 118.\]

hypothesis of the evolution of the 'black' man-shaman from the 'black'
woman-shaman:

\(a\) On the Yakut shaman's apron there are sewn two iron circles,
representing breasts.\[1\]

\(b\) The man-shaman dresses his hair like a woman, on the two sides of
the head, and braids it; during a performance he lets the hair fall
down.\[2\]

\(c\) Both women and shamans are forbidden to lie on the right side of a
horse-skin in the *yurta*.\[3\]

\(d\) The man-shaman wears the shaman's costume only on very important
occasions; in ordinary circumstances he wears a girl's dress made of the
skin of a foal.\[4\]

\(e\) During the first three days after a confinement, when Ayisit, the
deity of fecundity, is supposed to be near the woman who is lying-in,
access to the house where she is confined is forbidden to men, but not
to shamans.\[5\]

How the female black shaman was displaced by the male black shaman
Troshchanski explains as follows, again using exclusively Yakut
evidence:

The smith who made the ornaments for the female shaman's garment
acquired some shamanistic power. He was in contact with iron, which was
of magical importance, and power came to him through this contact. (The
smiths were, like the shamans, 'black' and 'white', but among the Yakut
one hears more of 'black' smiths than of 'white'.) Thus the similarity
between the vocation of a shaman and that of a smith becomes close,
especially when the calling of smith descends through many generations
in the same family. Smiths come to be considered as the elder brothers
of shamans, and then the differences between them finally disappear, the
smith becoming a shaman.

The woman, then, since she could not be a smith, had eventually to give
up her place to the man.

In modern times, as there are no longer any 'inagical smiths', new
shamanistic garments cannot be made.'\[6\]

\[1. Krasheninnikoff, op. cit., pp. 81-2.

2 Ibid.

3\. Troshchanski, op. cit., p. 123.

4\. Ibid

5\. Ibid.

Troshchanski, op. cit.. p. 125. It will be interesting to quote here
what Sieroszewski says about the vocation of the smith: "Those who
approach most nearly to the shamans in their office, and are partially
related to them, are the smiths. "The smith and the shaman are of one
nest,", says a proverb of the Kolyma district. The smiths also can cure,
advise, and foretell the future, but their knowledge does not possess a
magical character; they are simply clever people, who know much, and who
possess "peculiar fingers". The profession of smith is generally
hereditary, especially in the north. It is in the ninth generation that
a \[hereditary\] smith first acquires certain supernatural qualities,
and the more ancient his ancestry, the more marked are these qualities.
The spirits are generally afraid of iron hoops and of the noise made by
the blowing of the smith's bellows. In the Kolyma district the shaman
would not shamanize until I \[Sieroszewski\] removed my case of
instruments; and even then his bad luck in shamanizing wits explained by
him as due to the fact that, as he said, "the spirits are afraid of
smiths \[in this case Sieroszewski\], and that is why they do not appear
at my call." Only a smith of the ninth generation can, without harm to
himself, hammer out the iron embellishment of the shamanistic dress, the
iron for the drum, or make *ämägyat*. If the smith who makes a
shamanistic ornament has not a sufficient number of ancestors, if the
noise of hammering and the glare of the fire does not surround him on
all sides, then birds with crooked claws and beaks will tear his heart
in pieces. Respectable hereditary smiths have tools possessed of
"spirits" (*ichchilah*) which can give out sounds by themselves.'
(Sieroszewski, op. cit., p. 632.)\]

This hypothesis of women being the first black shamans is, however, not
borne out by the evidence. Even if we allow that the above quotations,
especially that containing the linguistic evidence, tend to show that
women were shamans before men, it does not follow that they were the
first black shamans. There is not enough evidence in Troshchanski's book
to support his hypothesis of two separate origins and developments for
black and white shamans.

On the other hand, the evolution which Troshchanski ascribes to black
shamans might be ascribed to professional shamanism, if we reject
Jochelson's and Bogoras's view that professional developed out of family
shamanism.

The Altaians. Wierbicki \[1\] says that among the Altaians, besides the
shaman, called *kam*, there are also (i) *rynchi*, 'who, during attacks
accompanied by pain, can foretell the future'; (ii) *telgochi*, or
'guessers'; (iii) *yarinchi*, or those who can divine by means of the
blade-bone; (iv) *koll-kurechi*, who divine from the hand; (v) yadachi,
who control the weather by means of a stone, *yada-tash*, which is found
in narrow mountain defiles, where winds blow continually. To obtain
these stones a *yadachi* must swear away all his possessions. Hence he
is poor, lonely, and usually a widower.

The Buryat. Among the Buryat, according to Shashkoff,\[2\] shamans are
divided into (a) hereditary shamans and (b) shamans of the first
generation. Another division is into (a) real, (b) false

\[1. *The Natives of the Altai*, pp. 44-6.

2\. Shashkoff, *Shamanism in Siberia*, W.S.S.I.R.G.S., p. 82.\]

shamans. Again there are (a) white (*sagan-bö*) and (b) black
(*haranïn-bö*).

The white and black shamans, the Buryat say, fight with each other,
hurling axes at one another from distances of hundreds of miles. The
white shaman serves the West *tengeri* and West *khats*, and has charge
of the ceremonies held at birth, marriage, &c. He wears a white coat and
rides a white horse. A famous white shaman was Barlak of the Balagansk
district, at whose grave his descendants still go to worship.

The black shaman serves the *tengeri* and *khats* of the East. These
shamans are said to have power to bring illness and death upon men. They
are not liked, but much feared, by the people, who sometimes kill black
shamans, to such a point does this dislike develop.\[1\] The grave of a
black shaman is usually shaded by aspens, and the body is fastened to
the earth by a stake taken from this tree.

According to Agapitoff and Kangaloff, there are also a few shamans who
serve both good and bad spirits at the same time.

The Samoyed. Lepekhin \[2\] Says that the Samoyed shamans are not
divided into distinct classes, black and white, as among the Buryat, but
serve both for good and bad ends, as occasion arises. The Lapps likewise
make no strict distinction between good shamans and bad. Some of the
Lapp *noyda* (shamans) are known as 'Big', and others as 'Little',
*noyda*.

The Votyak. The whole Votyak hierarchy arose from the white shamans. The
chief of the shamans is the *tuno*. At the present day the *tuno* \[3\]
is the chief upholder of the old religion.

As the soul of a *tuno* is 'educated' by the Creator, he is without
doubt a white shaman. Besides the *tuno*, there are priests, chosen
either by himself or by the people under his advice. 'In most cases the
profession and knowledge of a *tuno* descend from father to son,
although any person who has the opportunity of acquiring the knowledge
necessary to a *tuno* can become one.' \[4\]

Among the Votyak there is a classification of shamans into (a) permanent
and (b) temporary. The latter are chosen to Perform some particular
sacrifice. Besides these there are

\[1. Agapitoff and Khanaaloff, op. cit., pp. 85-6.

2\. Lepekhin, *Diary of a Journey*, p. 262.

3\. Bogayewski, A Sketch of the Mode of Life of the Votyak of Sarapul,
p. 123.

4\. Op. cit., p. 126.\]

secondary priests appointed by the *tuno* and called *töre* and parchis.

In former times black shamans also were to be found among the Votyak,
but they have given way to the white, just as among the Yakut the white
shaman has been largely displaced by the black.

The Votyak black shaman of former times has been converted into an
ordinary sorcerer. He is called *pellaskis*, and 'he can aid the sick,
and find lost cattle through his incantations; but all this without any
connexion with the deities'.\[1\] Another kind of sorcerer is called
*vedin*. He is feared and hated by all. \[2\]  
When the *tuno* has finished his education under *Kylchin-Inmar* (the
Creator), the latter takes his pupil to a place where the candidates for
the position of sorcerer reside. He examines them, and to those who
answer satisfactorily he gives permission to enchant and destroy men.

\[1. Bogayewski, op. cit., p. 12).

2\. Op. cit., p. 126.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chaper X. The Accessories of the Shaman](sis06.md)
