[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seil11)  [Next](seil13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002B561B4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola*, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECOND EXERCISE

##### IT IS A MEDITATION ON THE SINS AND CONTAINS IN IT AFTER THE PREPARATORY PRAYER AND TWO PRELUDES, FIVE POINTS AND ONE COLLOQUY

**Prayer**. Let the Preparatory Prayer be the same.

**First Prelude**. The First Prelude will be the same composition.

**Second Prelude**. The second is to ask for what I want. It will be
here to beg a great and intense sorrow and tears for my sins.

**First Point**. The first Point is the statement of the sins; that is
to say, to bring to memory all the sins of life, looking from year to
year, or from period to period. For this three things are helpful:
first, to look at the place and the house where I have lived; second,
the relations I have had with others; third, the occupation in which I
have lived.

**Second Point**. The second, to weigh the sins, looking at the foulness
and the malice which any mortal sin committed has in it, even supposing
it were not forbidden.

**Third Point**. The third, to look at who I am, lessening myself by
examples:

First, how much I am in comparison to all men;

Second, what men are in comparison to all the Angels and Saints of
Paradise;

Third, what all Creation is in comparison to God: (--Then I alone, what
can I be?)

Fourth, to see all my bodily corruption and foulness;

Fifth, to look at myself as a sore and ulcer, from which have sprung so
many sins and so many iniquities and so very vile poison.

**Fourth Point**. The fourth, to consider what God is, against Whom I
have sinned, according to His attributes; comparing them with their
contraries in me -- His Wisdom with my ignorance; His Omnipotence with
my weakness; His Justice with my iniquity; His Goodness with my malice.

**Fifth Point**. The fifth, an exclamation of wonder with deep feeling,
going through all creatures, how they have left me in life and preserved
me in it; the Angels, how, though they are the sword of the Divine
Justice, they have endured me, and guarded me, and prayed for me; the
Saints, how they have been engaged in interceding and praying for me;
and the heavens, sun, moon, stars, and elements, fruits, birds, fishes
and animals -- and the earth, how it has not opened to swallow me up,
creating new Hells for me to suffer in them forever!

**Colloquy**. Let me finish with a Colloquy of mercy, pondering and
giving thanks to God our Lord that He has given me life up to now,
proposing amendment, with His grace, for the future.

OUR FATHER.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Third Exercise: First Repetition](seil13)
