[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seil35)  [Next](seil37) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002B561B4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola*, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THREE METHODS OF PRAYER

##### AND FIRST ON THE COMMANDMENTS

#### FIRST METHOD

The first Method of Prayer is on the Ten Commandments, and on the Seven
Deadly Sins, on the Three Powers of the Soul and on the Five Bodily
Senses. This method of prayer is meant more to give form, method and
exercises, how the soul may prepare itself and benefit in them, and that
the prayer may be acceptable, rather than to give any form or way of
praying.

##### I. The Ten Commandments

First let the equivalent of the second Addition of the SECOND WEEK be
made; that is, before entering on the prayer, let the spirit rest a
little, the person being seated or walking about, as may seem best to
him, considering where he is going and to what. And this same addition
will be made at the beginning of all Methods of Prayer.

**Prayer**. A Preparatory Prayer, as, for example, to ask grace of God
our Lord that I may be able to know in what I have failed as to the Ten
Commandments; and likewise to beg grace and help to amend in future,
asking for perfect understanding of them, to keep them better and for
the greater glory and praise of His Divine Majesty.

For the first Method of Prayer, it is well to consider and think on the
First Commandment, how I have kept it and in what I have failed, keeping
to the rule of spending the space of time one says the OUR FATHER and
the HAIL MARY three times; and if in this time I find faults of mine, to
ask pardon and forgiveness for them, and say an OUR FATHER. Let this
same method be followed on each one of the Ten Commandments.

**First Note**. It is to be noted that when one comes to think on a
Commandment on which he finds he has no habit of sinning, it is not
necessary for him to delay so much time, but according as one finds in
himself that he stumbles more or less on that Commandment so he ought to
keep himself more or less on the consideration and examination of it.
And the same is to be observed on the Deadly Sins.

**Second Note**. After having finished the discussion already mentioned
on all the Commandments, accusing myself on them and asking grace and
help to amend hereafter, I am to finish with a Colloquy to God our Lord,
according to the subject matter.

##### II. On Deadly Sins

About the Seven Deadly Sins, after the Addition, let the Preparatory
Prayer be made in the way already mentioned, only with the difference
that the matter here is of sins that have to be avoided, and before of
Commandments that have to be kept: and likewise let the order and rule
already mentioned be kept, and the Colloquy.

In order to know better the faults committed in the Deadly Sins, let
their contraries be looked at: and so, to avoid them better, let the
person purpose and with holy exercises see to acquiring and keeping the
seven virtues contrary to them.

##### III. On the Powers of the Soul

**Way**. On the three powers of the soul let the same order and rule be
kept as on the Commandments, making its Addition, Preparatory Prayer and
Colloquy.

##### IV. On the Bodily Senses

**Way**. About the five bodily senses the same order always will be
kept, but changing their matter.

**Note**. Whoever wants to imitate Christ our Lord in the use of his
senses, let him in the Preparatory Prayer recommend himself to His
Divine Majesty, and after considering on each sense, say a HAIL MARY or
an OUR FATHER.

And whoever wants to imitate Our Lady in the use of the senses, let him
in the Preparatory Prayer recommend himself to her, that she may get him
grace from Her Son and Lord for it; and after considering on each sense,
say a HAIL MARY.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Second Method of Prayer](seil37)
