[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ain03)  [Next](ain05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE STORY OF THE CREATION

In the beginning there was no earth, no water--nothing. There was only a
Person, *Juh-wert-a-Mah-kai* (The Doctor of the Earth).

He just floated, for there was no place for him to stand upon. There was
no sun, no light, and he just floated about in the darkness, which was
Darkness itself.

He wandered around in the nowhere till he thought he had wandered
enough. Then he rubbed on his breast and rubbed out *moah-haht-tack*,
that is perspiration, or greasy earth. This he rubbed out on the palm of
his hand and held out. It tipped over three times, but the fourth, time
it staid straight in the middle of the air and there it remains now as
the world.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

The first bush he created was the greasewood bush.

And he made ants, little tiny ants, to live on that bush, on its gum
which comes out of its stem.

But these little ants did not do any good, so be created white ants, and
these worked and enlarged the earth; and they kept on increasing it,
larger and larger, until at last it was big enough for himself to rest
on.

Then he created a Person. He made him out of his eye, out of the shadow
of his eyes, to assist him, to be like him, and to help him in creating
trees and human beings and everything that was to be on the earth.

The name of this being was *Noo-ee* (the Buzzard).

Nooee was given all power, but he did not do the work he was created
for. He did not care to help Juhwertamahkai, but let him go by himself.

And so the Doctor of the Earth himself created the mountains and
everything that has seed and is good to eat. For if he had created human
beings first they would have had nothing to live on.

But after making Nooee and before making the mountains and seed for
food, Juhwertamahkai made the sun.

In order to make the sun he first made water, and this he placed in a
hollow vessel, like an earthen dish (*hwas-hah-ah*) to harden into
something

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

like ice. And this hardened ball he placed in the sky. First he placed
it in the North, but it did not work; then he placed it in the West, but
it did not work; then he placed it in the South, but it did not work;
then he placed it in the East and there it worked as he wanted it to.

And the moon he made in the same way and tried in the same places, with
the same results.

But when he made the stars he took the water in his mouth and spurted it
up into the sky. But the first night his stars did not give light
enough. So he took the Doctor-stone (diamond), the *tone-dum-haw-teh*,
and smashed it up, and took the pieces and threw them into the sky to
mix with the water in the stars, and then there was light enough. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md)

And now Juhwertamahkai, rubbed again on his breast, and from the
substance he obtained there made two little dolls, and these he laid on
the earth. And they were human beings, man and woman.

And now for a time the people increased till they filled the earth. For
the first parents were perfect, and there was no sickness and no death.
But when the earth was full, then there was nothing to eat, so they
killed and ate each other.

But Juhwertamahkai did not like the way his

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

people acted, to kill and eat each other, and so he let the sky fail to
kill them. But when the sky dropped he, himself, took a staff and broke
a hole thru, thru which he and Nooee emerged and escaped, leaving behind
them all the people dead.

And Juhwertamahkai, being now on the top of this fallen sky, again made
a man and a woman, in the same way as before. But this man and woman
became grey when old, and their children became grey still younger, and
their children became grey younger still, and so on till the babies were
gray in their cradles.

And Juhwertamahkai, who had made a new earth and sky, just as there had
been before, did not like his people becoming grey in their cradles, so
he let the sky fall on them again, and again made a hole and escaped,
with Nooee, as before.

And Juhwertamahkai, on top of this second sky, again made a new heaven
and a new earth, just as he had done before, and new people.

But these new people made a vice of smoking. Before human beings had
never smoked till they were old, but now they smoked younger, and each
generation still younger, till the infants wanted to smoke in their
cradles.

And Juhwertamahkai did not like this, and let the sky fall again, and
created everything new again in the same way, and this time he created
the earth as it is now.

But at first the whole slope of the world was

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

westward, and tho there were peaks rising from this slope there were no
true valleys, and all the water that fell ran away and there was no
water for the people to drink. So Juhwertamahkai sent Nooee to fly
around among the mountains, and over the earth, to cut valleys with his
wings, so that the water could be caught and distributed and there might
be enough for the people to drink.

Now the sun was male and the moon was female and they met once a month.
And the moon became a mother and went to a mountain called
*Tahs-my-et-tahn Toe-ahk* (sun striking mountain) and there was born her
baby. But she had duties to attend to, to turn around and give light, so
she made a place for the child by tramping down the weedy bushes and
there left it. And the child, having no milk, was nourished on the
earth.

And this child was the coyote, and as he grew he went out to walk and in
his walk came to the house of Juhwertamahkai and Nooee, where they
lived.

And when he came there Juhwertamahkai knew him and called him
*Toe-hahvs*, because he was laid on the weedy bushes of that name.

But now out of the North came another powerful personage, who has two
names, *See-ur-huh* and *Ee-ee-toy*.

Now Seeurhuh means older brother, and when this personage came to
Juhwertamahkai, Nooee and Toehahvs he called them his younger brothers.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

\[paragraph continues\] But they claimed to have been here first, and to
be older than he, and there was a dispute between them. But finally,
because he insisted so strongly, and just to please him, they let him be
called older brother.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[29:1](ain04.htm#fr_0.md) Many doubt that the
Indians of North America knew anything about the diamond, but my
interpreter insisted that the Doctor-stone was the diamond, therefore I
have taken his word for it. Perhaps it was crystal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Juhwerta Mahkai's Song of Creation](ain05.md)
