[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ain06)  [Next](ain08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

# THE STORY OF THE FLOOD

NOW Seeurhuh was very powerful, like Juhwerta Mahkai, and as he took up
his residence with them, as one of them, he did many wonderful things
which pleased Juhwerta Mahkai, who liked to watch him.

And after doing many marvelous things he, too, made a man.

And to this man whom he had made, Seeurhuh (whose other name was
Ee-ee-toy) gave a bow & arrows, and guarded his arm against the bow
string by a piece of wild-cat skin, and pierced his ears & made
ear-rings for him, like turquoises to look at, from the leaves of the
weed called *quah-wool*. And this man was the most beautiful man yet
made.

And Ee-ee-toy told this young man, who was just of marriageable age, to
look around and see if he could find any young girl in the villages that
would suit him and, if he found her, to see her relatives and see if
they were willing he should marry her.

And the beautiful young man did this, and found a girl that pleased him,
and told her family of his wish, and they accepted him, and he married
her.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

And the names of both these are now forgotten and unknown.

And when they were married Ee-ee-toy, foreseeing what would happen, went
& gathered the gum of the greasewood tree.

Here the narrative states, with far too much plainness of circumstantial
detail for popular reading, that this young man married a great many
wives in rapid succession, abandoning the last one with each new one
wedded, and had children with abnormal, even uncanny swiftness, for
which the wives were blamed and for which suspicion they were thus
heartlessly divorced. Because of this, Juhwerta Mahkai and Ee-ee-toy
foresaw that nature would be convulsed and a great flood would come to
cover the world. And then the narrative goes on to say:

Now there was a doctor who lived down toward the sunset whose name was
Vahk-lohv Mahkai, or South Doctor, who had a beautiful daughter. And
when his daughter heard of this young man and what had happened to his
wives she was afraid and cried every day. And when her fattier saw her
crying he asked her what was the matter? was she sick? And when she had
told him what she was afraid of, for every one knew and was talking of
this thing, he said yes, he knew it was true, but she ought not to be
afraid, for there was happiness for a woman in marriage and the
mothering of children.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

And it took many years for the young man to marry all these wives, and
have all these children, and all this time Ee-ee-toy was busy making a
great vessel of the gum he had gathered from the grease bushes, a sort
of olla which could be closed up, which would keep back water. And while
he was making this he talked over the reasons for it with Juhwerta
Mahkai, Nooee, and Toehahvs, that it was because there was a great flood
coming.

And several birds heard them talking thus--the woodpecker,
*Hick-o-vick*; the humming-bird, *Vee-pis-mahl*; a little bird named
*Gee-ee-sop*, and another called *Quota-veech*.

Eeeetoy said he would escape the flood by getting into the vessel he was
making from the gum of the grease bushes or *ser-quoy*.

And Juhwerta Mahkai said he would get into his staff, or walking stick,
and float about.

And Toehahvs said he would get into a cane-tube.

And the little birds said the water would not reach the sky, so they
would fly up there and hang on by their bills till it was over.

And Nooee, the buzzard, the powerful, said he did not care if the flood
did reach the sky, for he could find a way to break thru.

Now Ee-ee-toy was envious, and anxious to get ahead of Juhwerta Mahkai
and get more fame for his wonderful deeds, but Juhwerta Mahkai, though
really the strongest, was generous and from

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

kindness and for relationship sake let Ee-ee-toy have the best of it.

And the young girl, the doctor's daughter, kept on crying, fearing the
young man, feeling him ever coming nearer, and her father kept on
reassuring her, telling her it would be all right, but at last, out of
pity for her fears & tears, he told her to go and get him the little
tuft of the finest thorns on the top of the white cactus, the
*haht-sahn-kahm*, <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) and bring to him.

And her father took the cactus-tuft which she had brought him, and took
hair from her head and wound about one end of it, and told her if she
would wear this it would protect her. And she consented and wore the
cactus-tuft.

And he told her to treat the young man right, when he came, & make him
broth of corn. And if the young man should eat all the broth, then their
plan would fail, but if he left any broth she was to eat that up and
then their plan would succeed.

And he told her to be sure and have a bow and arrows above the door of
the *kee*, so that he could take care of the young man.

And after her father had told her this, on that

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

very evening the young man came, and the girl received him kindly, and
took his bows & arrows, and put them over the door of the kee, as her
father had told her, and made the young man broth of corn and gave it to
him to eat.

And he ate only part of it and what was left she ate herself.

And before this her father had told her: "if the young man is wounded by
the thorns you wear, in that moment he will become a woman and a mother
and you will become a young man."

And in the night all this came to be, even so, and by day-break the
child was crying.

And the old woman ran in and said: "*Mossay*!" which means an old
woman's grandchild from a daughter.

And the daughter, that had been, said: "It is not your *moss*, it is
your *cah-um-maht*," that is an old woman's grandchild from a son.

And then the old man ran in and said: "*Bah-ahm-ah-dah*!" that is an old
man's grandchild from a daughter, but his daughter said: "It is not your
*bah-ahm-maht*, but it is your *voss-ahm-maht*," which is an old man's
grandchild from a son.

And early in the morning this young man (that had been, but who was now
a woman & a mother) made a *wawl-kote*, a carrier, or cradle, for the
baby and took the trail back home.

And Juhwerta Mahkai told his neighbors of what was coming, this young
man who had changed

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

into a woman and a mother and was bringing a baby born from himself, and
that when he arrived wonderful things would happen & springs would gush
forth from under every tree and on every mountain.

And the young man-woman came back and by the time of his return
Ee-ee-toy had finished his vessel and had placed therein seeds &
everything that is in the world.

And the young man-woman, when he came to his old home, placed his baby
in the bushes and left it, going in without it, but Ee-ee-toy turned
around and looked at him and knew him, for he did not wear a woman's
dress, and said to him: "Where is my Bahahmmaht? Bring it to me. I want
to see it. It is a joy for an old man to see his grandchild.

I have sat here in my house and watched your going, and all that has
happened you, and foreseen some one would send you back in shame,
although I did not like to think there was anyone more powerful than I.
But never mind, he who has beaten us will see what will happen."

And when the young man-woman went to get his baby, Ee-ee-toy got into
his vessel, and built a fire on the hearth he had placed therein, and
sealed it up.

And the young man-woman found his baby crying, and the tears from it
were all over the ground, around. And when he stooped over to pick up
his child he turned into a sand-snipe,

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

and the baby turned into a little teeter-snipe. And then that came true
which Juhwerta Mahkai had said, that water would gush out from under
every tree & on every mountain; and the people when they saw it, and
knew that a flood was coming, ram to Juhwerta Mahkai; and he took his
staff and made a hole in the earth and let all those thru who had come
to him, but the rest were drowned.

Then Juhwerta Mahkai got into his walking stick & floated, and Toehahvs
got into his tube of cane and floated, but Ee-ee-toy's vessel was heavy
& big and remained until the flood was much deeper before it could
float.

And the people who were left out fled to the mountains; to the mountains
called *Gah-kote-ki*h (Superstition Mts.) for they were living in the
plains between Gahkotekih and Cheoffskawmack (Tall Gray Mountain.)

And there was a powerful man among these people, a doctor (mahkai), who
set a mark on the mountain side and said the water would not rise above
it.

And the people believed him and camped just beyond the mark; but the
water came on and they had to go higher. And this happened four times.

And the mahkai did this to help his people, and also used power to raise
the mountain, but at last he saw all was to be a failure. And he called
the people and asked them all to come

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

close together, and he took his doctor-stone (*mahkai-haw-teh*) which is
called Tonedumhawteh or Stone-of-Light, and held it in the palm of his
hand and struck it hard with his other hand, and it thundered so loud
that all the people were frightened and they were all turned into stone.

And the little birds, the woodpecker, Hickovick; the humming-bird,
Veepismahl; the little bird named Ge-ee-sop, and the other called
Quotaveech, all flew up to the sky and hung on by their bills, but Nooee
still floated in the air and intended to keep on the wing unless the
floods reached the heavens.

But Juhwerta Mahkai, Ee-ee-toy and Toehahvs floated around on the water
and drifted to the west and did not know where they were.

And the flood rose higher until it reached the woodpecker's tail, and
you can see the marks to this day.

And Quotaveech was cold and cried so loud that the other birds pulled
off their feathers and built him a nest up there so he could keep warm.
And when Quotaveech was warm he quit crying.

And then the little birds sang, for they had power to make the water go
down by singing, and as they sang the waters gradually
[receded](errata.htm#5).

But the others still floated around.

When the land began to appear Juhwerta Mahkai and Toehahvs got out, but
Ee-ee-toy had to wait for his house to warm up, for he had built a fire
to warm his vessel enough for him to unseal it.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

When it was warm enough he unsealed it, but when he looked out he saw
the water still running & he got back and sealed himself in again.

And after waiting a while he unsealed his vessel again, and seeing dry
land enough he got out.

And Juhwerta Mahkai went south and Toehahvs went west, and Ee-ee-toy
went northward. And as they did not know where they were they missed
each other, and passed each other unseen, but afterward saw each other's
tracks, and then turned back and shouted, but wandered from the track,
and again passed unseen. And this happened four times.

And the fourth time Juhwerta Mahkai and Ee-ee-toy met, but Toehahvs had
passed already.

And when they met, Ee-ee-toy said to Juhwerta Mahkai "My younger
brother!" but Juhwerta Mahkai greeted him as younger brother & claimed
to have come out first. Then Ee-ee-toy said again: "I came out first and
you can see the water marks on my body." But Juhwerta Mahkai replied: "I
came out first and also have the water marks on my person to prove it."

But Ee-ee-toy so insisted that he was the eldest that Juhwerta Mahkai,
just to please him, gave him his way and let him be considered the
elder.

And then they turned westward and yelled to find Toehahvs, for they
remembered to have seen his tracks, and they kept on yelling till he
heard them. And when Toehahvs saw them he called them his younger
brothers, and they called

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

him younger brother. And this dispute continued till Ee-ee-toy again got
the best of it, and although really the younger brother was admitted by
[the](errata.htm#6) others to be Seeurhuh, or the elder.

And the birds came down from the sky and again there was a dispute about
the relationship, but Ee-ee-toy again got the best of them all.

But Quotaveech staid up in the sky because he had a comfortable nest
there, and they called him *Vee-ick-koss-kum Mahkai*, the Feather-Nest
Doctor.

And they wanted to find the middle, the navel of the earth, and they
sent Veeppismahl, the humming bird, to the west, and Hickovick, the
woodpecker, to the east, and all the others stood and waited for them at
the starting place. And Veepismahl & Hickovick were to go as far as they
could, to the edge of the world, and then return to find the middle of
the earth by their meeting. But Hickovick flew a little faster and got
there first, and so when they met they found it was not the middle, and
they parted & started again, but this time they changed places and
Hickovick went westward and Veepismahl went east.

And this time Veepismahl was the faster, and Hickovick was late, and the
judges thought their place of meeting was a little east of the center so
they all went a little way west. Ee-ee-toy, Juhwerta Mahkai and Toehahvs
stood there and sent the birds out once more, and this time Hickovick
went eastward again, and Veepismahl went west.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

\[paragraph continues\] And Hickovick flew faster and arrived there
first. And they said : "This is not the middle. It is a little way west
yet."

And so they moved a little way, and again the birds were sent forth, and
this time Hickovick went west and Veepismahl went east. And when the
birds returned they met where the others stood and all cried "This is
the *Hick*, the Navel of the World!"

And they stood there because there was no dry place yet for them to sit
down upon; and Ee-eetoy rubbed upon his breast and took from his bosom
the smallest ants, the *O-auf-taw-ton*, and threw them upon the ground,
and they worked there and threw up little hills; and this earth was dry.
And so they sat down.

But the: water was still running in the valleys, and Ee-ee-toy took a
hair from his head & made it into a snake--*Vuck-vahmuht*. And with this
snake he pushed the waters south, but the head of the snake was left
lying to the west and his tail to the east.

But there was more water, and Ee-ee-toy took another hair from his head
and made another snake, and with this snake pushed the rest of the water
north. And the head of this snake was left to the east and his tail to
the west. So the head of each snake was left lying with the tail of the
other.

And the snake that has his tail to the east, in the morning will shake
up his tail to start the

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

morning wind to wake the people and tell them to think of their dreams.

And the snake that has his tail to the west, in the evening will shake
up his tail to start the cool wind to tell the people it is time to go
in and make the fires & be comfortable.

And they said: "We will make dolls, but we will not let each other see
them until they are finished."

And Ee-ee-toy sat facing the west, and Toehahvs facing the south, and
Juhwerta Mahkai facing the east.

And the earth was still damp and they took clay and began to make dolls.
And Ee-ee-toy made the best. But Juhwerta Mahkai did not make good ones,
because he remembered some of his people had escaped the flood thru a
hole in the earth, and he intended to visit them and he did not want to
make anything better than they were to take the place of them. And
Toehahvs made the poorest of all.

Then Ee-ee-toy asked them if they were ready, and they all said yes, and
then they turned about and showed each other the dolls they had made.

And Ee-ee-toy asked Juhwerta Mahkai why he had made such queer dolls.
"This one," he said, "is not right, for you have made him without any
sitting-down parts, and how can he get rid of the waste of what he
eats?"

But Juhwerta Mahkai said: "He will not need to eat, he can just smell
the smell of what is cooked."

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

Then Ee-ee-toy asked again: "Why did you make this doll with only one
leg--how can he run?" But Juhwerta Mahkai replied: "He will not need to
run; he can just hop around."

Then Ee-ee-toy asked Toehahvs why he had made a doll with webs between
his fingers and toes--"How can he point directions?" But Toehahvs said
he had made these dolls so for good purpose, for if anybody gave them
small seeds they would not slip between their fingers, and they could
use the webs for dippers to drink with.

And Ee-ee-toy held up his dolls and said: "These are the best of all,
and I want you to make more like them." And he took Toehahv's dolls and
threw them into the water and they became ducks & beavers. And he took
Juhwerta Mahkai's dolls and threw them away and they all broke to pieces
and were nothing.

And Juhwerta Mahkai was angry at this and began to sink into the ground;
and took his stick and hooked it into the sky and pulled the sky down
while he was sinking. But Ee-ee-toy spread his hand over his dolls, and
held up the sky, and seeing that Juhwerta Mahkai was sinking into the
earth he sprang and tried to hold him & cried, "Man, what are you doing?
Are you going to leave me and my people here alone?"

But Juhwerta Mahkai slipped through his hands, leaving in them only the
waste & excretion of his skin. And that is how there is sickness & death
among us.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

And Ee-ee-toy, when Juhwerta Mahkai escaped him, went around swinging
his hands & saying: "I never thought all this impurity would come upon
my people!" and the swinging of his hands scattered disease over all the
earth. And he washed himself in a pool or pond and the impurities
remaining in the water are the source of the malarias and all the
diseases of dampness.

And Ee-ee-toy and Toehahvs built a house for their dolls a little way
off, and Ee-ee-toy sent Toehahvs to listen if they were yet talking. And
the *Aw-up*, (the Apaches) were the first ones that talked. And
Ee-ee-toy said: "I never meant to have those Apaches talk first, I would
rather have had the *Aw-aw-tam*, the Good People, speak first. "

But he said: "It is all right. I will give them strength, that they
stand the cold & all hardships." And all the different people that they
had made talked, one after the other, but the Awawtam talked last.

And they all took to playing together, and in their play they kicked
each other as the Maricopas do in sport to this day; but the Apaches got
angry and said: "We will leave you and go into the mountains and eat
what we can get, but we will dream good dreams and be just as happy as
you with all your good things to eat."

And some of the people took up their residence on the Gila, and some
went west to the Rio Colorado. And those who builded vahahkkees,

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

or houses out of adobe and stones, lived in the valley of the Gila,
between the mountains which are there now.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[39:1](ain07.htm#fr_1) What the Pimas call the
*haht-sahn-kahm* is the wickedest cactus in Arizona. The tops of the
branches fall off, and lie on the ground, and if stepped on the thorns
will go thru ordinary shoe leather and seem to hold with the tenacity of
fish-hooks, so that it is almost impossible to draw them out.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Songs](ain08)
