[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ain13)  [Next](ain15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

# STORIES OF THE SECOND NIGHT

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

### THE STORY OF THE TURQUOISES AND THE RED BIRD

AND at the vahahkkee which the white men now call the Casa Grande ruins
was the home of *Seeollstchewadack Seeven*, or the Morning green Chief.

And one morning the young women at that place were playing and having a
good time with the game of the knotted rope or balls, which is called
*toe-coll*.

And in this game the young girls are placed at each end, near the goals,
and at this time, at the west end, one of the young girls gradually sank
into the earth; and as she sank the earth around her became very green
with grass.

And Seeollstchewadack Seeven told the people not to disturb the green
spot until the next morning; and the next morning the green spot was a
green rock, and he told the people to dig around it, and as they dug
they chipped off small pieces, and the people came and got what they
wanted of these pieces of green stone. And they made ear-rings and
ornaments from these green stones, which were *tchew-dack-na-ha-gay-awh*
or turquoises.

And after the turquoises were distributed, and the fame of this had
spread, the chief of another people, who lived to the east, whose name
was Dthas Seeven (Sun-Chief) thought he would do something wonderful,
too, being envious, and he opened one of his veins and from the blood
made

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

a large, beautiful bird, colored red.

And Dthas Steven told his bird to go to the city of Seeollstchewadack
Seeven and hang around there till that chief saw him and took him in.
And when they offered him corn he was not to eat that nor anything else
they gave him, but when he saw his chance he was to pick up a bit of the
green stone and swallow it, for when it should be seen that he would
swallow the green stones then he would be fed on turquoises.

So the bird was sent, and when it arrived at the city of the turquoises
the daughter of Seeollstchewadack Seeven, whose name was *Nawitch*, saw
it and went and told her father. And he asked, "What is the color of the
bird?" and she answered, "Red;" and he said, "I know that bird: It is a
very rare bird, and its being here is a sign something good is going to
happen. I want you to get the bird and bring it here, but do not take
hold of it. Offer it a stick, and it will take hold of it, with its
bill, and you can lead it here."

And Nawitch offered the bird a stick, and it caught hold of the end by
its bill, which was like a parrot's bill, and she led it to her father.

And Seeollstchewadack Seeven said: "Feed him on pumpkin seed, for that
is what this kind of bird eats."

And Nawitch gave the bird pumpkin seed, but it would not eat. And then
she tried melon seed, but it would not eat. And then she tried
devil-claw

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

seed, but it would not eat. And her father said, then: "Make him broth
of corn, for this kind of bird eats only new dishes!" And she did so,
but it would not eat the broth of corn.

And the old man told her to try pumpkin seed again; and she tried the
pumpkin seed again, and the melon seed again, and the devil-claw seed,
and the broth of corn, but the bird would not touch any of these.

But just then the bird saw a little piece of turquoise lying on the
ground and it sprang and swallowed it. And the daughter saw this and
told her father that the bird would eat turquoises. And her father said:
"This kind of bird will not eat turquoises, but you may try him." And
she gave it some turquoises and it ate them greedily. And then-her
father said: "Go and get some nice, clean ones, a basket full." And she
did so, and the bird ate them all, and she kept on feeding it until it
had swallowed four basketful.

And then the bird began to run around, and the girl said: "I fear our
pet will leave us and fly away" but the old man said: "He will not fly
away. He likes us too well for that," but after a short time the bird
got to a little distance and took to its wings, and flew back to the
city of Dthas Seeven.

And Dthas Seeven gave it water twice, and each time it vomited, and thus
it threw up all the turquoises.

And so Dthas Seeven also had turquoises.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes on the Story of the Turquoises](ain15.md)
