[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ain09)  [Next](ain11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

### THE STORY OF AH-AHN-HE-EAT-TOE-PAHK MAHKAI

AND there was an orphan named *Ah-ahn-he-eat-toe-pahk Mahkai* (which
means Braided-Feather Doctor) who lived at a place called Two Reservoirs
(*Go-awk-Vahp-itchee-kee*) north of Cheoff-Skawmack, or Tall Gray
Mountain.

And his only relative was an old grandmother. And she used to go and get
water in earthern vessels, a number of them in her carrying basket. And
when she neared home she would call to her grandson, saying: "Come, help
me wrestle with it!" meaning to help her down with her load. And he
would jump and run, and wrestle so roughly he would break all the
vessels in her basket.

And thus was he mean and mischievous, a bad boy in many ways. And one
day his grandmother sent him to get some of the vegetable called
"owl's-feathers," which the Awawtam cook by making it into a sort of
tortilla, baked on the hot ground where a fire has just been. And he
went and found an owl and pulled its feathers out & brought them to the
old woman, and she said: "This is not what I want! It is a vegetable
that I mean!"

And so he went off again and got the vegetable owl's-feathers for her.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

After that she sent him for the vegetables named "crow's-feet" and
"black bird's-eyes," saying to him that they were very good cooked
together. And the mischievous orphan went & got the feet of some real
crows and the eyes of real blackbirds and brought them to her. And she
said: "This is not what I mean! I want the vegetables named after these
things!"

And the boy, who was then about twelve years old, went and got what she
wanted and she cooked them.

And this orphan boy had a dream which he liked and wished to have come
true, and went to a dance that was being danced in the neighborhood, a
ceremonial dance such as is celebrated when a young girl arrives at
womanhood, and he went to see it, hoping it would in some way be like
his dream, but when he saw it he was disgusted.

And he went to hear the song of a singing doctor, a mahkai or
medicine-man, but when he heard his singing he was disgusted with that
too.

And he left his home and on his way found a little house, or kee, made
of rough bushes. And the one who lived therein invited him to stay
awhile and see all the different people who would arrive there.

And he did so, and in the early evening they came--all the fiercest
animals, cougars, bears, eagles, and they were bewitching each other,
but nobody bewitched him, and in the morning he went on.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

And he went along until he came to another kee, and the owner invited
him to stay over night and see all the people who came there. And he did
so, and in the early evening came the same creatures and did the same as
before, but he was not bewitched.

And he went on again till he came to a desert place, utterly barren,
without trees or bushes and there a wind came to meet him, a whirlwind,
*Seev-a-lick*, and it caught him up and carried him to the East & then
back again, and to the North and back again; and to the West & back
again; and then South & back again. And so it got possession of his soul
and carried it off to its own place.

And Seevalick, the whirlwind, said to him: "You shall be like me."

And there his dream. came true and he said: "This is what I was looking
for; this it is for which I was travelling."

And he wished to go back, and the wind took his soul back again into his
body, and so he returned to his home.

And after his return he was the best young man in the country, kind to
everybody, and everybody liked him. But he did not care to be with boys
of his own age, but liked better to be with the wise old men, and went
where they came together at nights. And he would sit and listen to them,
but did not attempt to make any speeches himself. His reasons were that
the young were often vicious, thieves, beggars, murderers, and he would

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

rather be with the old who followed what was better.

And in the evening he would often hear [the](errata.htm#8.md) old people
say: "We will go rabbit-hunting in such a place," but he stayed at home
and did not go with them.

But one night, after a while, when they said: "Tomorrow we will go
jack-rabbit hunting," he went home as they did, but the next morning,
when they went hunting, he went and made himself a bow & arrows, as
Seevalick had told him and placed them where he could find them.

And the next evening they were talking again of hunting, and appointed a
place to meet, and the following morning, when they were getting ready,
he got his bows & arrows, but he did not come quite up to the meeting
place, but sat a little way off.

And as he sat there the people came up to him and made fun of him and
asked him if he expected to kill anything with his weapons, for he had
made a big bow & arrows as the Whirlwind had done. And the people handed
these about among themselves, laughing, and when they were thru
ridiculing them they brought back the bow and arrows and laid them down
before him. But he said nothing, and when the people were thru he left
the bow & arrows there, and went home and went again to look for a
suitable stick to make a bow from.

And he made a new bow & arrows and left them where he could find them,
and went home.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

And again he went in the evening to the old people's gathering and heard
them appoint a place for the hunting, and went home when they did. And
in the morning, when he heard the signal cry for hunting, he went and
got his bow & arrows and followed after them again, but again stayed
some distance off. And again the people came about him and handled his
bow & [arrows](errata.htm#9.md) and laughed at them. And again he left them
lying there on the ground and went home to make a new bow & arrows.

And the fourth time this happened he was late at the place of meeting,
and before he came the one at whose house the meeting was said to the
others: "There is a young man who has been several times with us to the
place where we come together for the hunting, and I suppose he has made
a new bow & arrows today, for he has to do that whenever you handle his
weapons. Now I want you not to handle his weapons any more, but to let
him be till we see what he will do, for it appears to me that he is some
kind of a powerful personage (mahkai).

And Toehahvs, who was listening, said: "You yourself, were the very
first to handle his weapons."

And the next morning when Ahahnheeattoepahk Mahkai heard the signal
yells for the hunting, he went to the meeting place, with his bow and
arrows, and sat away off, as before, but this time nobody came to him.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

And then the hunting began, and in it some one called to him: "There is
a jack-rabbit (*choo-uff*) coming your way!" and he shot the rabbit with
his arrow; but when he came to it he did not pick it up, but grasped the
arrow and with a swinging motion threw the rabbit from it to the man
nearest him.

And thus he went on all day, killing rabbits and giving them to others,
keeping none for himself.

And again he was late at the place of meeting, and the man who had
spoken the night before said: "Now you see what he has done! This is the
fourth bow that he has made. If you people had left him alone before, he
would, before. this, have been killing game for you. And now if you do
not disturb him I am sure he will go on, and you will have jack-rabbits
to eat all the time."

And so he killed rabbits at every hunt, and gave them away, especially
to the old. Whenever he killed one he would pick it up and give it to an
old man, and keep on that way.

And one night at the place of meeting the spokesman said: "Tomorrow we
will surround the mountain and hunt deer, and we will put him at the
place where the deer will run, and we will see how many he will kill!"

And in the morning, at the mountain, they placed him at the deer-run,
and told him to "shut the valley," meaning for him to head-off and kill
any deer which might run toward him. But the young man began to get big
rocks and try to make

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

a wall to close the valley up, and paid no attention to the deer running
past him, and when the people came, and asked him about his shooting he
said: "You did not tell me to kill the deer, you told me to 'shut the
valley.'"

(Not but what he understood them, but he was acting again as he had once
done with his grandmother.)

And the next day they tried another mountain and said: "We will see if
the young man will kill us any deer there." So when they came to this
mountain they told him to go to a certain valley, on the other side, and
hang himself there. This is a form of speech which means to hang around
or remain at a place; but the young hunter went there and left his bow &
arrows on the ground, and hung himself up by his two hands clasped
around the limb of a tree.

And after they had chased many deer in his direction they said: "Let us
go now & butcher-up the deer the young man has killed, for he must have
killed a good many by this time."

But when they came to where the young man was, there he hung by his
hands, and when they asked him how many he had killed, he said: "I have
not killed any. You did not tell me to kill any, only to hang myself
here, which I did, and I have hung here and watched the deer running
past.

And they tried him again, on another morning, at another valley, and
this time they told him if

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

he saw a doe big with fawn, "*snon-ham*," which is also the word used
for a woman soon to become a mother, he should kill her. And he went to
his place, and there came by such a woman and he shot her down and
killed her.

And the next day they took him to another mountain and told him to kill
the "*kurly*," which means the old, but they meant him to understand old
deer. And when they came to him later to butcher-up the deer he had
killed, and asked him where they were, he replied: "I have not killed
any deer, you did not tell me to kill deer, but to kill the kurly, and
there is the kurly I have killed!"

And it was the old man who goes ahead whom he had shot with his arrow.

And after they had buried the old man they returned to the village, and
that night the man who owned the meeting place said: "Tomorrow we must
give him another trial, and this time I want you to tell him straight
just what you want. Tell him to kill the deer, either young or old, and
he will do it. If you had done this before he would have killed us many
deer. You should have understood him better by this time, but you did
not tell him straight, and now he has killed two of us."

And the next morning they took him to another mountain, and placed him
in a low place, and told him to kill all the deer which came his way.
And, when they went after a while, after chasing many deer toward him,
they asked him where the deer

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

were which he had killed, and he replied: "Down in the low place you
will find plenty deer." And they went there and found many dead deer of
all kinds, and butchered them up.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes on the Story of Ah-ahn-he-eat-toe-pahk Mahkai](ain11.md)
