[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ain17)  [Next](ain19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

### THE STORY OF HAWAWK

AND when Dthas Seeven had gotten better he meditated on what had
happened to him, and studied out that Seeollstchewadack-Seeven was the
cause of his trouble, and planned how to get the better of him.

Now the Indians have a game of football in which the ball is not kicked
but lifted and thrown a good ways by the foot, and Dthas Seeven made
such a ball, and sent a young man to play it in the direction of the
city of Seeollstchewadack Seeven. And the young man did so, and as he
kept the ball going on it came to the feet of a young girl, who, when
she saw the ball, picked it up and hid it under the square of cloth
which Indian girls wear.

And the young man came up and asked her if she had seen the ball, and
she answered no, she had not seen it, and she kept on denying it, so at
last he turned back and said he might as well go home as he no longer
had a ball to play with. But he had not gone far before the girl called
to him: "Are you not coming back to get your ball?" And he went back to
her, and she tried to find the ball, but could not.

But the ball was not lost, but it had bewitched her.

And after a time this girl had a baby, a tall baby, with claws on its
hands and feet like a wild animal.

And the people did not know what this meant,

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

and they asked Toehahvs, and Toehahvs knew because this had been
prophesied of old time. And Toehahvs said: "She is *Haw-awk*."

And Hawawk grew and became able to crawl, but people were afraid of
handling her because of the scratching of her claws. Only her relatives
could safely handle her. And as she grew older, still, she would
sometimes see other children and wish to play with them, but in a short
time they would get scratched by her in her gambols and would run home
crying and leave her alone. And it got so that when the children saw her
coming they would tell each other and run home and she could get none of
them to play with her.

She claimed Ee-ee-toy as her uncle, and when he had been rabbit-hunting
and came in with game she would run and call him "uncle!" and try and
get the rabbits away from him; and when he cleaned the rabbits and threw
away the entrails she would run and devour them, and the bones of the
rabbits the people threw away after the feasts she would eat, too.

And when Hawawk grew older she would sometimes complain to Ee-ee-toy if
he came in without game. "Why is it you sometimes come in without
rabbits?" she would say, "And why do you not kill a great many?" And he
would reply: "It is not possible to kill a great many, for they run very
fast and are very hard to shoot with a bow and arrow." "Let me go with
you," she would say, "and I will kill a great many."

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

\[paragraph continues\] But he would tell her: "You are a girl, and it
is not your place to go hunting. If you were a boy it would be, but as
it is you cannot go."

And she kept on begging in this way, and he kept on refusing, she saying
that she could kill a great many, and he saying that only a man or a boy
could shoot many rabbits, because they ran so fast.

But as she grew older still she began to follow the hunters, and when
the hunting began she would be in the crowd, but she tried to keep out
of her uncle's way so that he would not see her. And sometimes when she
would thus be following the hunt a rabbit would run in her direction,
and she would run fast and jump on it and kill it, and eat it right
there; and after a while she could do this oftener and caught a good
many; and she would eat all she wanted as she caught them, and the
others she gave to her uncle, Ee-ee-toy, to carry home. And Ee-ee-toy
came to like to have her with him because of the game she could get. But
after a time she did not come home anymore, but staid out in the bushes,
living on the game she could get. But when the hunters came out, she
would still join them and after killing and eating all she wanted she
would give the rest of her kill to her uncle, as before.

And so she contrived to live in the wild places, like a wild-cat, and in
time became able to kill deer, antelopes, and all big game, and yet
being part human she would tan buckskin like a woman

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

and do all that a woman needs to do.

And she found a cave in the mountain which is called *Taht-kum*, where
she lived, and that cave can be seen now and is still called Hawawk's
Cave.

But she had been born near where the ruins of Casa Grande now are and
claimed that vahahkkee for her own. And when she knew a baby had been
born there she would go to the mother and say, "I want to see my
grandchild," But if the mother let her take the baby she would put it
over her shoulder, into her gyih-haw, and run to her cave, and put the
baby into a mortar, and pound it up and eat it. And she got all the
babies she could in this way; and later on she grew bolder and would
find the larger children, where thy were at play, and would carry them
off to eat them. And now she let all the rabbits and such game go, and
lived only on the children she caught, for a long time.

And Ee-ee-toy told the people what to do in this great trouble. He told
them to roast a big lot of pumpkin seeds and to go into their houses and
keep still. And when the people had roasted the pumpkin seeds and gone
into their houses, Ee-ee-toy came around and stopped up the door of
every house with bushes, and plastered clay over the bushes as the
Awawtam still do when they go away from home.

After a time Hawawk came around, and stood near the houses, and
listened, and heard the people cracking the pumpkin seeds inside.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

And she said:. "Where are all my grandchildren? They must have been gone
for a long time, for I do not see any tracks, nor hear any voices, and I
hear only the rats eating the seeds in the empty houses."

And she came several times, and saw no one, and really believed the
people had gone entirely away. And for a while she did not come any
more, but after a time she was one day running by the village and she
saw some children playing. And she caught two and ran with them to her
cave, And from that day she went on stealing children as before.

And Ee-ee-toy made him a rattle, out of a wild gourd, and went and lay
on the trail on which Hawawk usually came, and changed himself into the
little animal called "*Kaw-awts*." And when Hawawk came along she poked
him with a stick of her gyih-haw and said. "Here is a little kawawts. He
must be my pet." And then Ee-eetoy jumped up and shook his rattle at
her, and frightened her so that she ran home. And then Ee-ee-toy made
rattles for all the children in that place and when they saw Hawawk
coming they would shake their rattles at her and scare her back again.

But after a while Hawawk became used to the rattles and ceased to fear
them, and even while they were shaking she would run and carry some of
the children off.

And one day two little boys were hunting doves

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

after the manner of the country. They had a little kee of willows, and a
hole inside in the sand where they sat, and outside a stick stuck up for
the doves to light on. And when the doves came they would shoot them
with their bows and arrows. And while they were doing this they saw
Hawawk coming. And they said "What shall we do! Hawawk is coming and
will eat us up."

And they lay down in the hole in the sand and covered themselves with
the dove's feathers. And Hawawk came and said: "Where are my
grandchildren! Some of them have been here very lately." And she went
all around and looked for their tracks, but could find none leading away
from the place. And she came back again to the kee, and while she was
looking in a wind came and swept away all the dove-feathers, and she
sprang in and caught up the two boys and put them in her gyih-haw and
started off.

And as she went along the boys said: "Grandmother, we like flat stones
to play with. [Won't](errata.htm#13) you give us all the flat stones you
can find?" And Hawawk picked up all the flat stones she came to and put
them one by one over her [shoulder](errata.htm#14) into the basket.

And the boys said, again, after the basket [began](errata.htm#15) to get
heavy, "Grandmother, we like to go under limbs of trees. Go under all
the low limbs of trees you can to please us." And Hawawk went under a
low tree, and one of the boys caught hold of the limb and hung there
till

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

she had gone on. And Hawawk went under another tree, and the other boy
[caught](errata.htm#16) hold of a limb and staid there. But because of
the flat stones she kept putting into her gyih-haw Hawawk did not notice
this. And when she got to her cave and emptied her basket there were no
boys there.

And when Hawawk saw this she turned back and found the tracks of the
boys, and ran, following after them, and caught up with them just before
they got to their village. And she would have caught them there, and
carried them off again, but the boys had gathered some of the fine
thorns of a cactus, and when Hawawk came near they held them up and let
them blow with the wind into her face.

And they stuck in her eyes, and hurt them, and she began to rub her
eyes, Which made them hurt worse so that she could not see them, and
then the boys ran home and thus saved their lives.

After that she went to another place called *Vahf-kee-wohlt-kih*, or the
Notched Cliffs, and staid around there and ate the children, and then
she moved to another place, the old name of which is now forgotten, but
it is called, now, *Stchew-a-dack Vah-veeuh*, or the Green Well. And
there, too, she killed the children.

And the people called on Ee-ee-toy to help them, and Ee-ee-toy said, "I
will kill her at once!"

And Ee-ee-toy, being her relative, went to her home and said: "Your
grandchildren want some

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

amusement and are going to have dances now every night and would like
you to come."

And she replied: "You know very well I do not care for such things. I do
not care to come."

And Ee-ee-toy returned and told the people she did not care to come to
their dances, tho he had invited her, but he would think of some other
way to get her to come where they were, that they might kill her.

And he went a second time, and told her the people were going to sing
the *Hwah-guff-san-nuh-kotch Nyuee*, or Basket Drumming Song, and wanted
her to come. But she said: "I have heard of that song, but I do not care
to hear it. I care nothing for such things, and I will not come."

So Ee-ee-toy returned and told of his second failure, but promised he
would try again. And in the morning he went to her and said: "Your
grand-children are going to sing the song *Haw-hawf-kuh Nyuee* or Dance
of the Bone-trimmed Dresses Song and they want you to come. "But she
said: "I do not care for this song, either, and I will not come."

And Ee-ee-toy told of his third failure, but promised the people he
would try once more. and when the morning came he went to Hawawk and
said: "Your grandchildren are going to dance tonight to the song which
is called *See-coll-cod-dha-kotch Nyuee*," (which is a sort of ring
dance with the dancers in a circle with joined

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

hands) "and they want you to come."

And she said: "That is what I like. I will come to that. When is it
going to be?"

And he said: "It will be this very night."

And he went and told the people she was coming and they must be ready
for her.

Hawawk got ready in the early evening and dressed herself in a skirt of
soft buckskin. And over this she placed an overskirt of deerskin,
fringed with long cut fringes with deer-hoofs at the ends to rattle. And
then she ran to the dancing place; and the people could hear her a long
way off, rattling, as she came. And they were already dancing when she
arrived there, and she went and joined hands with Ee-ee-toy.

And Hawawk was a great smoker, and Ee-ee-toy made cigarettes for her
that had something in them that would make folks sleep. And he smoked
these himself, a little, to assure her, but cautiously and moderately,
not inhaling the smoke, but she inhaled the smoke, and before the four
nights were up she was so sleepy that the people were dragging her
around as they danced, and then she got so fast asleep that Ee-ee-toy
carried her on his shoulder.

And all the time they were dancing they were moving across country, and
getting nearer the cave where she lived, and other people at the same
time were ahead of them carrying lots of wood to her cave, And when they
arrived at her cave in the mountain of Tahtkum they laid her

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

sleeping body down inside, and placed the wood in the cave between her
and the door, filling it all to the entrance, which they closed with
four hurdles, such as the people fasten their doors with, so that she
could not run out.

And then they set the wood on fire, and it burned fiercely, and when the
fire reached Hawawk she waked and cried out. "My grandchildren, what
have I done that you should treat me this way!"

And the fire hurt her so that she jumped up and down with pain, and her
head struck the ceiling of the cave and split the rock. And when the
people saw it they called to Ee-ee-toy, and he went and put his foot
over the crack, and sealed it up, and you may see the track of his foot
there to this day.

But Ee-ee-toy was not quick enough, and her soul escaped through the
crack.

And then for a while the people had peace, but in time her soul turned
into a green hawk, and this hawk killed the people, but did not eat
them.

And this made the people great trouble, but one day a woman was making
pottery and she had just taken one pot out of the fire and left another
one in the furnace, on its side, when this hawk saw her and came
swooping down from high in the air to kill her, but missed her, and went
into the hot pot in the fire, and so was burned up and destroyed.

And one day they boiled greens in that pot,

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

the greens called *choo-hook-yuh*, and the greens boiled so hard that
they boiled over, and splashed around and killed people. And they boiled
all day and stopped at night, and at daybreak began again to boil, and
this they did for a long time; boiling by day and stopping at night.

And the people sent for Toehahvs who lived in the east, and *Gee-ah-duk
Seeven*, or Strong Bow Chief, who lived where is now the ruin of
*Aw-awt-kum Vah-ahk-kee*, to kill the pot for them.

And when they arrived Geeahduk Seeven enquired if the pot slept. And the
people said. "Yes, it sleeps all night." Then said Geeahduk Seeven, "We
will get up very early, before the pot wakes, and then we will kill it."

But Toehahvs said; "That is not right, to go and kill it at night. I am
not like a jealous woman who goes and fights her rival in the darkness.
I am not a woman, I am a man!"

And Toehahvs said to Geeahduk Seeven: "I will go in the morning to
attack the pot and I want you to go on the other side, and if the pot
throws its fluid at me, so that I cannot conquer it, then do you run up
on the other side and smash it."

Then Toehahvs took his shield and his club, in the morning, and went to
attack the pot. But the pot saw him, and, altho he held up his shield,
it boiled over, and threw the boiling choohookyuh so high and far that
some of it fell on Toehahvs' back and scalded it. And Toehahvs had to
give back a little. But at that moment

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Geeahduk Seeven ran in on the other side and
smashed the pot.

And there was an old man with an orphan grandson, living near there, and
when the pot was smashed these came to the spot and ate up the
choohookyuh. And at once they were turned into bears, the old man into a
black bear, the boy into a brown bear.

And these bears also killed people, and tho the people tried to kill
them, for a long time they could not do so. When they shot arrows at the
bears, the bears would catch them and break them up. And so the people
had to study out other ways to get the better of them. There is a kind
of palm-tree, called *o-nook*, which has balls where the branches come
out, and the people burned the trees to get these balls, and threw them
at the bears. And the bears caught the balls, and fought and wrestled
with them, and while their attention was taken by these balls the people
shot arrows at them and killed them.

And thus ended forever the evil power of Hawawk.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes on the Story of Hawawk](ain19)
