[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ain15)  [Next](ain17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

### THE STORY OF WAYHOHM, TOEHAHVS AND TOTTAI

AND Seeollstchewadack Seeven wondered what this action of the bird
meant, and he studied about it till he found out who it was that had
sent the bird and for what purpose.

And he sent a cold rain upon the home of Dthas; Seeven. And it rained a
heavy rain for three days and three nights, so hard that it put out all
the fires in the city of Dthas Seeven, and Dthas Seeven was dying with
cold.

And the people came about him to witness his dying, and they said: "Let
us send some one to get the fire!" And they sent Toehahvs.

And Toehahvs went, and at last came to a house where he heard the fire
roaring within. And he looked in, and there was a big fire. And he sat
in the doorway holding out his paws toward the heat.

And the owner of the house, whose name was *Way-hohm*, or the Lightning,
sat working within with his face to the fire and his back to Toehahvs.
And Toehahvs wanted to dash in and steal some fire, but he did not dare,
and he went back and told the people he had seen the fire but he could
not get it.

On the fourth day it was still raining, and they sent another person.
And this time they sent Tot-tai, or the Road Runner, for they said he
could run almost as fast as Toehahvs.

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

And Tottai came to the same house, and heard the fire, and peeped in the
door to warm himself. And there sat the owner of the fire, Wayhohm,
working with his face to the fire and his back to Tottai. And Tottai
dashed in and caught hold of a stick with fire at one end and ran out
with it.

And Wayhohm caught up his bow, the Bow-of-the-Lightning,
*Way-hohm-a-Gaht*, and fired at Road Runner, and struck him on the side
of his head, and that is why the side of Tottai's head is still bare;
and Tottai ran on, and Wayhohm shot at him again and struck the other
side of his head.

And Tottai whirled around then so that the sparks flew every way, and
got into all kinds of wood, and that is why there is fire in all kinds
of sticks even now, and the Indian can get it out by rubbing them
together to this day.

But Tottai kept on, and got to the house of Dthas Seeven all right, and
they made a fire, and Dthas Seeven got better again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes on the Story of Wayhohm](ain17.md)
