[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ain19)  [Next](ain21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

### THE STORY OF TAWQUAHDAHMAWKS AND HER CANAL

AND after this the people had long peace, increased in numbers,. and
were scattered all around. Some lived where the old vahahkkees now are
in the Gila country, and some lived in the Papago country, and some in
the Salt River country. And those who lived where the mound now is
between Phoenix and Tempe were the first to use a canal to irrigate
their land. And these raised all kinds of vegetables and had fine crops.
And the people of the Gila country and the people of the Salt River
country at first did not raise many vegetables, because they did not
irrigate, and they used to visit the people who did irrigate and eat
with them; but after a while the people who, lived on the south side of
the Salt River also made a canal, and you can see it to this day.

But when these people tried their canal it did not work. When they
dammed the river the water did not run, because the canal was uphill.
And they could not seem to make it deeper, because it was all in a lime
rock.

And they-sent for Ee-ee-toy to help them. And Ee-ee-toy had them get
stakes of ironwood, and sharpen them, and all stand in a row with their
stakes in their hands at the bottom of the canal.

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

And then Ee-ee-toy sang a song, and at the end of the song the people
were all to strike their stakes into the bottom of the canal to make it
deeper. But it would not work, it was too hard, and Ee-ee-toy gave it
up.

And Ee-ee-toy said: "I can do no more, but there is an old woman named
*Taw-quah-dahm-awks* (which means The Wampum Eater) and she, tho only a
woman, is very wise, and likely can help you better than I. I advise you
to send for her."

And the people sent for her, and she said: "I will come at once."

And she came, as she had promised, but she did not go to where the
people were assembled, but went right to the canal. And she had brought
a fog with her, and she left the fog at the river, near the mouth of the
canal. And she went up the course of the canal, looking this way and
that, to see how much up-hill it ran.

And when she reached where the canal ran uphill she blew thru it the
breath which is called *seev-hur-whirl*, which means a bitter wind. And
this wind tore up the bed of the canal, as deep as was necessary,
throwing the dirt and rocks out on each side.

And then the fog dammed up the river and the water ran thru the canal.

Then the old woman did not go near the people, but went home, and in the
morning, when one of the people went to see why the old woman did

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

not come, he saw the canal full of water and he yelled to everybody to
come and see it.

And in this way these people got water for their crops and were as
prosperous as the others below them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes on the Story of Tawquahdahmawks](ain21.md)
