[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ain21)  [Next](ain23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

### HOW NOOEE KILLED EE-EE-TOY

E-EE-TOY lived in the Salt River Mountain, which is called by the
Awawtam Moehahdheck, or the Brown Mountain, and whenever the girls had
ceremonial dances because of their arrival at womanhood he would come
and sing the appropriate songs. And it often happened that he would
tempt these young girls away to his mountain, to be his wives, but after
keeping them awhile he would grow tired of them and send them back.

And the people disliked Ee-ee-toy because of this. And when they had
crops, too, Ee-ee-toy would often shoot his hot arrows thru the fields,
and wither up the growing things; and tho the people did not see him do
this, they knew he was guilty, and they wanted to kill him, but they did
not know how to do it.

And the people talked together about how they could kill Et-ee-toy. And
two young boys, there were, who were always together. And as they lay at
the door of their kee they heard the people talking of sending bunches
of people here and there to kill Ee-ee-toy, and one said: "He is only
one, we could kill him ourselves." And the other one said: "Let us go
and kill him, then."

So the two boys went to Moehahdheck, and found Ee-ee-toy lying asleep,
and beat him with their clubs, and killed him, and then came back and
told the people of what they had done. But

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

none of the people went to see the truth of this and in the morning
Ee-ee-toy came again, just as he used to do, and walked around among the
people, who said among themselves: "I thought the boys said they had
killed him."

And that same night all the people went to Moehahdheck, and found
Ee-ee-toy asleep, and fell upon him and killed him. And there was a pile
of wood outside, and they laid him on this and set fire to the wood and
burned his flesh. And feeling sure that he was now dead, they went home,
but in the morning there he was, walking around, alive again.

And so the people assembled again, and that night, once more, they
killed him, and they cut his flesh up into little bits, and put it into
a pot, and boiled it, and when it was cooked they threw it all away in
different directions. But in the morning he was alive again and the
people gave it up for that time.

But after awhile they were planning again how to kill him; and one of
them proposed that they all go and tie him with ropes and take him to a
high cliff, and push him off, and let him fall. And so they went and did
this, but Ee-ee-toy was not hurt at all. He just walked off, when he
reached the bottom, and looked up at the people above him.

The next scheme was to drown him. They caught him and led him to a
whirlpool, and tied his hands and feet and threw him in. But he

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

came up in a few minutes, without any ropes on, and looked at the
people, and then dived, and so kept on coming up and diving down. And
the people, seeing they could not drown him, went home once more.

Then Nooee called the people together and said: "It is of no use for you
to try to kill Ee-ee-toy, for you cannot kill him. He is too powerful,
for men to kill. He has power over the winds, and all the animals. and
he knows all that is going on in the mountains, and in the sky. And I
have power something like him."

So Nooee told the people to come in, that evening, to his house. He
said: "I will show you part of my power, and I want everyone to see it."

And Nooee lived not far from where Ee-eetoy did, south of the
Moehahdheck mountain, at a place called *Nooee Vahahkkee*, and that was
where he invited the people to come.

And so, when the people assembled at Nooee Vahahkkee, Nooee made earth
in his habitation, and mountains on it, and all things on it, in little
as we say, so that the people could see his power; for Juhwerta Mahki
had made him to have power, tho he had not cared to use it. And he made
a little world in his house for them to look at, with sun, moon and
stars working just as our sun and stars work; and everything exactly
like our world.

And when night came, Nooee pushed the darkness back with his hands, and
spread it on the walls, so that the people could see his little world

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

and how it worked. And he was there four days and four nights, showing
this wonder to the people.

And after this Nooee flew up thru the openings in the roof of his house,
and sat there, and saw the sun rise. And as soon as the sun rose Nooee
flew towards it, and flew up and up, higher and higher, until he could
see Ee-ee-toy's heart. And he wore a nose ring, as all the brave people
did, a nose ring of turquoise. But from his high view he saw that
everything looked green and so he knew he could not kill Eee-ee-toy that
day.

And the next day he did the same thing, only he wore a new nose-ring,
made of a sparkling shell. And when he got up high enuf to see
Ee-ee-toy's heart he saw that the ground looked dry, and he was very
much pleased, for he knew that now he would, someday, kill Ee-ee-toy.
And he went home.

And the third morning Nooee again put on his nose ring of glittering
shell, and flew up to meet the Sun, and he flew up and up until be came
to the sun himself. And Nooee said to the Sun: "You know there is a
Person, on earth, called Ee-ee-toy, who is very bad, and I want to kill
him, and I want your help, and this is the reason I come to you."

And Nooee said to the Sun: "Now you go back, and let me shine in your
place, and I will give just as much light as you do, but let me

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

have your *vi-no-me-gaht*, your gun, to shoot with, when I get around to
your home." And the Sun said: "*Moe-vah Sop-hwah*, that is all right.
But I always go down over yonder mountain, and when you get to that
mountain just stop and look back, and see how the world looks."

And Nooee took the Sun's place, and went down, that evening, over the
mountain, stopping, as he was told, to see how wonderful the world
looked; and when he came to the Sun's home, the sun gave him the weapon
he shot with.

And the next morning Nooee rose in place of the Sun, and after rising a
little he shot at the earth, and it became very hot. And before noon he
shot again, and it was still hotter. And Ee-ee-toy knew, now that he was
going to be killed, but he tried to use all his power to save himself.
He ran around, and came to a pond where there had always been ice, and
he jumped in to cool himself, but it was all boiling water.

And when it was nearly noon Nooee shot again, and it became terribly
hot, and Ee-ee-toy ran for a rock which had always been cold, but just
before he got there the heat made the rock burst.

And he ran to a tree, whose cool shade he often enjoyed, but as he came
near it the tree began to burst into flame, and he had to turn back. And
now it was noon, and Nooee shot again.

And Ee-ee-toy ran to a great post, all striped

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

around with black and white, which had been made by his power, and which
had a hollow that was always cool inside, and was about to put his arms
around it when he fell down and died.

So Ee-ee-toy was dead, and Nooee went down to his setting, and returned
the weapon to the Sun, and then went home to his vahahkkee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Songs](ain23.md)
