[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ain20)  [Next](ain22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

### NOTES ON THE STORY OF TAWQUAHDAHMAWKS

In this story we find proof that the oldest digging utensil was a
sharpened stake.

Before these people became agricultural they must have subsisted mainly
on the game and wild fruits of the desert. They showed me several
seed-bearing bushes and weeds which in old time had helped to eke out
for them an existence.

Starvation must have often stared them in the face, and the references
to hunger, and the prophecies of plenty, and of visits to relatives
whose crops were good, are scattered pathetically all thru these
legends.

And indeed, until very recently, mezquite beans and the fruit of various
cactus plants were staple articles of food.

Mezquite beans grow in a pod on the thorny mezquite trees. The gathering
of them was quite a tribal event, large parties going out. The beans
when brought home were pounded in the *chee-o-pah*, or mortar, which was
made by burning a hollow in the end of a short mezquite log, set in the
ground like a low post. A long round stone pestle, or *vee-it-kote*, was
used to beat with, and sometimes the cheeopah itself was of stone. But
stone mortars were usually ancient and dug from out the vahahkkee ruins.

The beans, crushed very fine and separated from the indigestible seeds,
packed into a sweet cake that would keep a year.

Various cactus fruits were eaten. They warned me that for a novice to
eat freely of prickly pears produced a lame, sore feeling, as if one had
taken cold or a fever. I noticed no symptoms however. The fruit of the
giant cactus is gathered from the top, around which it grows like a

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

crown, by a long light pole, made from the rib of the same cactus, with
a little hook at its end made by tying another short piece, slant-wise,
across. They called the constellation of Ursa Major, *Quee-ay-put*, or
The Cactus-Puller, from a fancied resemblance to this familiar
implement.

The giant cactus, or *har-san*, was eaten ripe, or dried in the sun, or
boiled to a jam and sealed away in earthern jars. They also fermented it
by mixing with water, and made their famous *tis-win* or whiskey from
it. They had "big drunks" at this time, in which all the tribe joined in
a general spree.

A sort of large worm (larva) was also gathered in large quantities,
boiled and eaten with salt.

The confusion in the Pima [thought](errata.htm#17) on religious matters
is well revealed in this tale, in which Ee-ee-toy, who may be regarded
as a god, frankly admits that in some matters an old woman may be wiser
and more powerful than he. Nothing appears to have been very clearly
defined in their faith except that a mahkai might be or do almost
anything.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Nooee Killed Ee-Ee-Toy](ain22)
