[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ain30)  [Next](ain32.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

### NOTES ON THE STORY OF EE-EE-TOY'S ARMY AND THAT OF THE DESTRUCTION OF THE VAHAKKEES

In the Story of Ee-ee-toy's Army we come to an amusing superstition of
the Pimas. There is a funny little creature in Arizona, related to the
tarantula, perhaps, which the Pimas say is very poisonous, and which is
certainly very quick in motion and the hardest thing to kill I ever saw.
it is covered with a sort of fuzzy hair, which blows in the wind, and is
sometimes red and sometimes yellow or white. Now there seems to be a
connection in the Indian mind between this *way-heem-mahl*, as they name
him, and this story of Ee-ee-toy's Army. The bands, it is related, were
distinguished by certain colors--some took red, and some yellow and
white, for their badge-color. And the Pimas of today suppose themselves
descended from these bands, and some clans claim that the bands of the
red were their forbears, and some trace back to the bands of yellow and
white. And not many years back there was a rivalry between these, and
the wayheemmahls, having the same colors, were identified with the
bands, and the Pimas descended from a band of a certain color would not
kill a wayheemmahl of that color, or willingly permit others to do so,
but would eagerly kill wayheemmahls of the opposite color. If, then, a
Pima of the red faction saw a yellow wayheemmahl, running over the
ground, he was quick to jump on it; but if a Pima of the yellow stood
near he would resent this attack on his relation, and a hair-pulling
fight would result. This custom is probably altogether obsolete now.

It will be noticed that the fantastic explanations of why gyihhaws are
now carried by the women, is contradicted by the carrying of gyihhaws by
various women in previous stories.

The closing of the earth cuts down the six bands to four and a fraction.

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

Wardances, and extravagant and boastful speeches prophesying success,
seem to have preceded all the military movements of the Awawtam.

The creation of deer in this story, by Ee-ee-toy, is contrary to their
presence in earlier tales, as in that of Ahahnheeattoepahk Mahkai.

The careful mention of the sickness and death of an apparently
unimportant woman is curious, and hard to explain. Perhaps this was the
inauguration of the pestilence.

The Story of the Destruction of the Vahahkkees has the most historic
interest of any.

The uniting of the bands by the "Light" is very curious. My Indians
could not tell me what this was, only something occult and mysterious by
which they had clairvoyant ken of each other's needs. Its use appears in
the fight at Cheof Seevick.

The resemblance to the Israelites crossing the Red Sea is remarkable in
the exploit of the Bow Doctor, and the crossing of the Rio Colorado.

The Choochawf Awawtam appear to have been cave-dwellers, and my Indians
were confused in memory as to whether they were encountered on the
hither or far side of the Colorado.

The statement that the closing of the waters left the Yumas and
Maricopas on the far bank of the Colorado is likely only a mahkai's
fanciful attempt to explain their presence there. As the Indians of the
Yuman stock speak an entirely different language from the Indians of the
Piman stock, it is unlikely they were united in the original invading
army. There is no other evidence that there ever was any alliance
between them till the Maricopas, fearing extermination from the Yumas,
joined the Pimas sometime in the first half of the nineteenth century.

Comalk Hawkkih gave me this account of the coming in of the Maricopas:
The Yumas and the Maricopas were once all one people, but there was a
jealousy between two

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

sons of a chief, one of whom was a favorite of his father, and one
killed the other, and this grew to a civil war. The defeated party, the
Maricopas, went first to Hot Springs, where they staid awhile, and then
to Gila Bend, but each time the Yumas followed and attacked them and
drove them on. Fearing extermination they came to the Pimas for
protection. The Pimas adopted them. Now began war between Yumas and
Mohaves on one side, and Pimas, Papagoes and Maricopas on the other.
There were only two battles after the Maricopas came in, but in the
second battle all the Yuma warriors engaged were killed, and the Mohaves
had to flee over the mountain, and only a part [of](errata.htm#22.md) these
escaped. This battle was fought at what is now called Maricopa Mountain.

So terrible was the defeat, that to this day the Yumas hold an annual
"Cry," or lamentation, in memory of it. Their old foes are invited, and
if any Pima or Maricopa attends he is given a horse. This war reduced
both Yumas and Maricopas to a mere remnant.

Since then the Maricopas have lived with the Pimas, and in customs are
almost exactly similar, except that they burn their dead, and still
speak their distinctive language.

They are a taller, larger race than the Pimas, more restless, said to be
quicker witted, but more inclined to vice, and to be rapidly dying out;
while the Pimas yet hold their own in numbers, despite recent inroads of
tuberculosis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story of Sohahnee Mahkai and Kawkoinpuh](ain32.md)
