[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ain31)  [Next](ain33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

### THE STORY OF SOHAHNEE MAHKAI AND KAWKOINPUH

NOW when the bands were going thru this country they had selected the
places for their homes, expecting to return, and each band, as it
selected its place, drove down short sticks so as to know it again.

And after returning across the Rio Colorado the bands went again to
these places which they had selected and settled there.

Only the Toehawnawh Awawtam (the Papagoes) did not at first go to their
selected place, but went on beyond *Awn-kee Ack-kee-mull*, the Salt
River, to where is now Lehi.

And there was one doctor among them named So-hah-nee Mahkai, and he had
no child, but he had found one of the children belonging to the country,
which had been left alive, and he had adopted it for his own. And he
went on and lived by himself at the place then called *Vah-kah-kum*, but
now named *Stcheu-a-dack-a-Vahf*, or Green Cliff.

And the *Aw-up*, or Apaches, were a part of the original people of this
country, and this child which Sohahnee Makai had adopted was an Apache.

And when he had grown up to be quite a large boy the Apaches planned to
capture Sohahnee Mahkai; but Sohahnee Mahkai knew of this and told the
boy to go to a place where he had been clearing up a farm and to find
the stick there with

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

which he had been cutting down bushes, and to dig a hole there under the
bushes, and then to come back home and eat his supper. And after he had
eaten h is supper he was to return to the place where the stick was, and
hide in the hole under the bushes which were there.

And the boy's name was *Kaw-koin-puh*, and he dug the hole under the
bushes, as he was directed, and returned for his supper.

And then Sohahnee Mahkai said to him: "Now to-night the Apaches will
come to kill me, but here is a basket-box which I want you to have after
I am dead. And when you are safe in your hole you will hear when they
come to kill me. But don't you come out till they are far enuf away.
Then come and find my body, no matter whether it is here or dragged
away. And when you find it, do not mind how stained and bloody it is,
but fall upon it, and put your mouth to mine, and inhale, and thus you
will inherit my power. And when you leave my body, do not attempt to
follow after the Apaches, for they would surely [kill](errata.htm#23)
you, for tho you are one of them they would not know that, because you
do not speak their language. But I want you to return to where we left
some people at the place called *Vik-kuh-svan-kee*."

So the boy took the little basket-box, and went to his hole, and early
in the evening the Apaches came and surrounded the house, and staid
there till near morning, and then began the attack. And

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

the boy could hear the fighting, and could hear Sohahnee Mahkai yell
every time his arrow killed anyone; and he could hear the old woman, his
wife, shout out in her exultation, too. And it was after the sun was up
that the old woman was killed; and then Sohahnee Makai ran out and the
Apaches chased him and killed him, and said: "Now let us cut him open
and find what it is that made him so brave, and enabled him to kill so
many of us." And they cut him open and found under his heart a feather
of the chicken hawk.

And the Apaches took that feather, and that is how they are so brave and
even if there are only two of them will often attack their enemies and
kill some of them.

And after the Apaches were far away the boy came out of his hole and
found the old woman, and from there tracked till he found the old man;
and he fell over, him, as he had been told, and inhaled four times; and
then he went to Vikkuhsvankee, but he got there at night, and did not
attempt to go into any house. but staid outside all night in the bushes.

And in the morning a girl came and found the boy, and went back and told
the people there was some one outside who was a stranger there, some one
with short hair. And they came and stood [around](errata.htm#24) him,
and teased him, and threw dirt at him, until finally he cried out:
"Don't you remember me, who I am? My name is Kawkoinpuh and I was

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

here once, but went away with the doctor, Sohahnee Makai. And now the
Apaches have killed him and the old woman, his wife, and I am left
alone."

And when he said this the people remembered him, and took him by the
hand, and led him to a doctor named *Gawk-siss Seev-a-lick*, who adopted
him, and he was treated nicely because he was a good hunter and used to
keep the doctor in plenty of game.

And the doctor had a daughter, and when she was old enuf he gave her to
Kawkoinpuh for his wife. And Kawkoinpuh staid with his wife's people;
and his wife expected a child, and wanted different things to eat. So
Kawkoinpuh left home and went to the mountain called Vahpkee, and there
got her a lot of the greens called choohookyuh. And after a while he
wonted to go again, but she said: "Do not go now, for the weather is
bad. Wait till it is more pleasant." But he said, "I am going now," and
he went.

And this time he was hunting wood rats instead of greens, and he had
killed three and was trying to scare out the fourth one, where he could
shoot it, when the Apaches came and surrounded him a good ways off.

He saw them and ran for home, but there were many Apaches in front of
him, and they headed him off.

But he jumped up and down and sideways, as Sohahnee Mahkai had done,
shooting and

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

killing so many that finally he broke thru their ring, and started for
home. But he kept turning back and shooting at them as he ran. And one
of them came near and was about to kill him, but he shot first and
killed the Apache. And then another came near and this time the Apache
shot first, and so Kawkoinpuh was killed.

And when evening came, Gawksiss Seevalick came out, and called aloud,
and invited the people to his house, and asked them if any had seen his
son, Kawkoinpuh; who had seen him last; for he knew something had
happened him, as he always came home after his hunt, because he loved
his home. But nobody had seen anything of Kawkoinpuh, because no one had
been out, the weather being bad.

But Gawksis Seevalick knew the boy was killed, because he was a doctor,
and there is a being above, called *Vee-ips-chool*, who is always sad
and who makes people sad when anything had has happened.

So they went out the next morning, and tracked the boy, and came to
where he had killed the wood-rats, and then they found the tracks of the
Apaches, and then found a great many Apaches whom he had killed, and
finally they found his body.

The Apaches had cut him open, and taken out his bowels and wound them
around bushes, and cut off his arms and legs and hung them on trees. And
one of the men, there, told them to get wood

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

and to gather up these parts of Kawkoinpuh's body and burn them. And
some of the people remained behind and did this, and then all went home.

And in the evening Gawksiss Seevalick again called the people together
and sang them a song to express his grief.

And the next morning he went with his daughter to where Kawkoinpuh had
been burned, and there they found some blood still remaining and buried
it. And that evening again he called the people together, and said: "You
see what has happened; we have lost one of our number. We ought not to
stay here, but to return to the place we first selected." And the people
took his advice and got their things ready and started.

And they went slow because they were on foot, and it took them four
nights to get to the place where they wanted to go. And the first night
there was no singing, but the second night there was a doctor named
*Geo-goot-a-nom-kum* who sang a song for them; and the third night there
was a doctor named *Geo-deck-why-nom-kum* who sang a song for them; and
on the fourth night there was a doctor named *Mahn-a-vanch-kih* who sang
for them a song.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes on the Story of Sohahnee Mahkai](ain33)
