[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ain33)  [Next](ain35.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

### THE STORY OF PAHTAHNKUM

AND when they came to their journey's end the wife of Kaw-koin-puh had a
baby, which grew up to be a fine boy, but the mother cried all the time,
[wherever](errata.htm#25.md) she went, on account of her husband's death.

And the people, after they had settled down, used to go rabbit-hunting,
and the children too, and this boy, *Paht-ahn-kum*, used to watch them
wistfully, and his mother said: "I know what you are thinking of, but
there is nothing for you to kill rabbits with. But I will send you to
your uncle, my brother, whom I am expecting will make a bow and arrows
for you."

And the next morning, early, the boy went to his uncle, who said: "Why
do you come so early? It is an unusual thing for you to come to see me
so early instead of playing with boys and girls of your own age."

And the boy replied: "My mother said she was expecting you to make me a
bow-and arrows."

And his uncle said; "That is an easy thing to do. Let us go out and get
one." And they went out and found an *o-a-pot*, or cat-claw tree, and
cut a piece of its wood to make a bow, and they made a fire and roasted
the stick over this, turning it, and they made a string from its bark to
try it with; and then they found arrow-weeds, and made

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

arrows, four of them, roasting these, too, and strengthening them; and
then they went home and made a good string for the bow from sinew.

And then the boy went home and showed his mother his bow and arrows.

And the next morning the children went hunting and little Pahtahnkum
went with them to the place of meeting.

And they found a quotaveech's nest near them, with young ones in it, and
one of the men shot into it and killed one of the young ones, and then
the children ran up to join in the killing. And when Pahtahnkum came up,
one of the men threw him one of the young birds, and said: "Here, take
it, even if your mother does not wish to marry me."

And the little boy ran home and gave his game to his mother, and when
she saw it she turned her back on it and cried. And he wondered why she
cried when he had brought her game and was wishing she would cook it for
his dinner.

And his mother said: "I never thought my relatives would treat you this
way. There is an animal, the *caw-sawn*, the wood rat, and a bird, the
*kah-kai-cheu*, the quail, and these are good to eat, and these are what
they ought to give you, and when they give you those, bring them home
and I will cook them for you." She said, further; "This bird is not fit
to eat; and I was thinking, while I was crying, that if your father were
living now you would have plenty of game,

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

and he would make you a fine bow, and teach you to be as good a hunter
as there is. And I will tell you now how your father died. We did not
use to live here. But beyond this mountain there is a river, and beyond
that another river still, and that is where we lived and where your
father was killed by the people called Apaches, and that is why we are
here, and why we are so poor now.

I am only telling you this so you may know how you came to be
fatherless, for I know very well you can never pay it back, For the
Apaches are very fierce, and very brave, and those who go to their
country have to be very careful; for even at night the Apaches may be
near them, and even the sunshine in their country feels
[different](errata.htm#26.md) from what it does here."

And the little boy, that night, went to his uncle, who asked: "Why do
you come to me in the night?"

And the little boy said: "I come to you because today I was hunting with
the bow and arrows you made me, and someone gave me a little bird, and I
was bashful, and brought it right home for my mother to cook for me, and
she cried, and then told me about my father and how he died. And I do
not see why you kept this a secret from me. And I wish you would tell me
what these Apaches look like, that they are so fierce and brave."

And his uncle said: "That is so. I have not

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

told you of these things because you are just a baby yet, and I did not
intend to tell you until you were a man, but now I know you have sense
enuf to wish to learn. There is nothing so very different or dangerous
about these Apaches; only their bows, and their arrows of cane, are
dangerous."

And the little boy went on to another doctor, who said: "Why do you come
to me?: are you lost? If so, we will take you home." But the little boy
said to him: "No, I am not lost, but I want you to tell me one
thing--Why the Apaches are so dangerous--are they like the *har-sen*,
the giant cactus, with so many thorns?" And the doctor answered: "No,
they are men like we are, and have thoughts as we have, and eat as we
do, and there is only one thing that makes them dangerous and that is
their bows and their arrows of cane."

So the little boy went to the next doctor, and this doctor also asked
him if he were lost, and he said: "No, but I want you to tell me just
one thing--why the Apaches are so dangerous. Are they like the
*mirl-hawk*, the cane-cactus, with so many branches all covered with
thorns?" And the doctor replied: "No, they are human beings just as we
are, and think just as we do, and eat as we do, and the only things that
make them dangerous are their bows and their arrows of cane." And the
little boy said: "I am satisfied."

But he went yet to another doctor and asked

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

him also why the Apaches were so dangerous, were they like the
*hah-nem*, the *cholla* cactus? but the doctor said no, and gave the
same answer as the others had done, and the little boy said: "I am
satisfied then," and went back to his uncle again and began to question
him about how people did when they got ready for war, and what they did
to purify themselves afterward, and his uncle said: "It is now late at
night, and I want you to go home, and tomorrow come to me, and I will
tell you about these things."

So the little boy went home, but very early in the morning, before
sunrise, he was again at his uncle's house, and came in to him before he
was yet up. And his uncle said: "I will now tell you, but we must go
outside and not talk in here before other people."

And he took the little boy outside. and they stood there facing the
east, waiting for the sun to rise, with the little boy on the right of
his uncle. And when the sun began to rise the doctor stretched out his
left hand and caught a sunbeam, and closed his hand on it, but when he
opened his hand there was nothing there; and then he used his right hand
and caught a sunbeam but when he opened his hand there was nothing
there; and he tried again with his left hand, and there was nothing, but
when he tried the second time with his right hand, when he opened it,
there was a lock of Apache's hair in his hand.

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

And he took this and put it in the little boy's breast, and rubbed it in
there till it all disappeared, having entered into the little boy's
body.

And then he told the little boy to get him a small piece of oapot or
cat-claw tree, but no, he said, I will go myself; and he went and got a
little piece of the oapot, and tied a strip of cloth around the boy's
head, and stuck the little piece of wood in it, and then told him to go
home to his mother and tell her to give him a new dish to eat from.

And this stick which the doctor had put into the boy's hair represented
the *kuess-kote* or scratching stick which the Pimas and Papagoes used
after killing Apaches, during the purification time; and the doctor had
made it from cat-claw wood because the cat-claw catches everybody that
comes near, and he wanted the boy to have great power to capture his
enemies.

And his uncle told the boy to stay at home in the day time, lying still
and not going anywhere, but at night to come to him again. "And before
you come again," he said, "I will make you something and have it ready
for you."

And the little boy kept still all that day, but at night he went to his
uncle again, and his uncle had four pipes ready for him, made from
pieces of cane, and he said, "Now tonight when the people gather here
(for it was the custom for many people to come to the doctor's house in
the evening) they will talk and have a good time, but

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

after they are thru I will roll a coal from the fire toward you, and
then you light one of the pipes and smoke four whiffs, and after that
slide the *watch-kee*, the pipe, along the ground toward me, as is the
custom, and I will smoke it four times and pass it to my next neighbor,
and he will do the same, and so the pipe will go all around and come
back to you. And even when it is out, when it comes back to you, you are
to take it and stick the end that was lighted in the ground.

So that evening the people all assembled as usual, and told all the news
of the day, and about the hunting as was their custom. And when they
were thru, and had quieted down, the uncle moved to the fire and rolled
a coal toward Pahtahnkum, who took it and lit one of the pipes, and
smoked it four times, and then slid it slowly (the pipe must be slid
slowly because if it were slid rapidly the enemy would be too quick and
escape, but if it is done slowly the enemy will be slow and can be
captured) along the ground to his uncle. And his uncle took the
watchkee, the pipe-tube, and smoked it also four whiffs, and passed it
on, but saying: "Of course you are all aware that if any man among you
has a wife expecting to have a baby soon, he should not smoke it, but
pass it on without smoking to his neighbor, for if you smoke in such
case the child will not be likely to live very long."

And so the pipe passed around, and the boy, when the pipe came to him
again, buried it as

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

he had been told, and then he began to make this speech:--

"I am nothing but a child, and I go around where the people are cooking
and when they give me something to eat I generally suffer because it is
so hot. And there was a hunt, and you gave me nothing but a little
quotaveech, and stuck it under my belt as if it were something good to
eat: and when I took it home to my mother, and dropped it down by her,
she turned her back upon it and began to cry. And when she had done
crying she told me of all that had happened before, about my father's
death, and the story entered my heart; and I went for help to a
respectable person, a doctor, one to whom a child would not be likely to
go, and he kindly assisted me, and told me what I asked of him.

And I wanted to be revenged on the slayers of my father, and in
imagination a day was appointed for the war, and I went; and the first
night I feared nothing and felt good, and the second night, too, I
feared nothing and felt good, but the third night I knew I was in the
land of the Apaches, an enemy with shield and club, and I did not feel
good, and it seemed to me the world was shaking, and I thought of what
my mother had said, that the land of the Apaches was different from
ours.

And the fourth day I went on and came to the mountain of the Apaches,
and I found there the broken arrows of my father's fight; and I sat

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

down, for it seemed to me the mountains and the earth were shaking, and
shook my knees, and I thought of what my mother had said that the land
of the Apaches felt entirely different.

And the next day I went on and came to the water of the Apaches. And my
hair lay over the water like moss. And I looked and found my skull, and
I used it for a dipper, and parted the hair with it, and dipped up the
water and drank it. And when I drank from the skull I felt as if I were
crazy, and clutched around with my hands at things that were not there.

And from there I went on to another water, and that was covered with the
white war-paint of my hair, which lay like ashes on the water, and I
looked around and found my skull, and drank from that water, and it
smelled strong to me like the smell of human flesh and of black
war-paint.

And all this was caused in my imagination by the thought of my dead
father, and of how the Apaches had gone along rejoicing because they had
killed him.

And the next place was a great rock, and I sat down under it, and it was
wet with my tears; and the winds of the power of my sadness blew around
the rock four times, and shook me.

In the far east there is a gray cousin, the Coyote, and he knows where
to find the Apaches, and he was the first I selected to help me and be
my comrade, and he took my word, and joined me; and stood up and looked,
and saw the Apaches

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

for me and told me; and I had my band ready, and my boys captured the
Apaches, who had no weapons ready to injure them.

And after killing then, I took their property, and I seemed to get all
their strength, all their power. And I came home, bringing all the
things I had captured, and enriched my home, strengthening myself four
times, and the fame of my deed was all over the country.

And I went to the home of the doctor, taking the child I had captured,
and when we were there the blue tears fell from the eyes of the child
onto my boys and girls.

And all of you, my relatives, should think of this, and be in favor of
the war, remembering the things we have captured, and the enemies we
have killed, and should make your singing all joy because of our past
successes."

And after the speech was done, feeling it the speech of a child, the
people were silent, but at length Toehahvs said: "I like the way of the
child, because I am sure he is to be a powerful person, perhaps stronger
than any of us, and I respect him, and that is why I am kind to him, and
I want that we should all take a smoke, and after that you will get over
your feeling of his insignificance."

And then they all smoked again, and began to talk about the war, and of
the things they lacked, but the boy wanted them to get ready in four
days, telling them that was plenty of time. And

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

so they all began to get ready for the war, making and getting ready
shields, clubs, bows, arrows, shoes, and whatever was needed.

And so the people departed for the war, and the very day they left, the
mother of Pahtahnkum went and got clay to make the new dishes for the
men who should kill Apaches, for she foreknew that many would he killed,
and so she sang at her work. And a few of the people were left at home,
and one of these was an old man, and he passed near where the mother
(whose name was *Koel-hah-ah*) was making her pottery, and heard her
singing her song, and he said to the people: "It is very strange that
this woman who used to cry all the time is singing now her boy has gone
to the war. Perhaps she is like some wives, who when their time of
mourning is over are looking out for another man."

And the war-party went by near where *Tawtsitka* (Sacaton) now is,
around the mountain *Chirt-kee*, and west of the *Sah-kote-kee*,
(Superstition) mountains, and there they found tracks of the Apaches,
and paused, and the boy, Pahtahnkum, told them to wait there while he
went forward and found where the Apaches were.

And Toehahvs said: "I will go with you, so we can help each, other and
be company, and you will feel that you have some strength, and I will
feel the same."

So Pahtahnkum and Toehahvs went out on their scout, and went up an
*arroyo*, or washout

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

valley, in the mountains, and in making a turn came suddenly upon some
Apache children playing in the sand, and the children saw them and ran
up the valley to where the Apache houses were. And the two scouts stood
and looked at each other and said: "What shall we do now! for if we go
back the people will blame us for letting the Apaches see us first."

And Pahtahnkum said: "You go back and step in my tracks, and I will turn
into a crow and fly up on this rock." And this was done, and when the
Apaches came they could see only the coyote tracks, and they said:
"There are no human tracks here. It must have been a coyote the children
saw," and they went back home. And then Pahtahnkum flew to where
Toehahvs was, and came down and took his human shape again.

And the band had been anxious about them, because they were gone so
long, and had followed their tracks, and now came near, and when
Pahtahnkum saw them, instead of going back to them, he and Toehahvs
turned and ran toward the Apaches, and all the band rushed after them,
and they took the Apache village by surprise, and conquered and killed
all the men, and then killed all the women, and scalped them all.

And because Pahtahnkum had been so brave, and had killed many, the
people brought all the scalps to him, and all the baskets, and bows and
arrows, and other things they had taken, and laid them around him; and
then they all stood around

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

him in circles, the oldest in the middle next the boy, and the others,
in the order of their age, in circles outside. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6.md) And then Pahtahnkum began to yell, he was so
rejoiced, and he threw the scalps of the Apaches up into the air, and
then, after them, the other things, the bows and arrows, and all things
captured, because he wanted to make a cloud; for when an Apache is
killed it will rain.

And while this was happening, his mother was rejoicing at home, knowing
all that was happening her boy.

So the people took everything the Apaches had, and a good many children
as captives, and they returned by the same road, and before they got
home they sent a messenger ahead.

And when they got home they presented all the property taken, and all
the weapons and all the captives to the mother of Pahtahnkum.

Now when the neighbors of those Apaches heard of this they formed a big
war-party, and followed [Pahtahnkum's](errata.htm#27.md) trail, but when
they came to the place called *Taht-a-mumee-lay-kote* they stopped,
because they did not know where to find water, and so they turned back,
tho from there they could see the mountains where Pahtahnkum lived.

And after Pahtahnkum had gone thru the prescribed purifications, and the
war-dances and

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

rejoicing proper to the occasion, he again formed a war-party, and again
took the trail after the Apaches, only this time he went to the other
end of the Superstition Mts. And there they saw the lights at night on a
peak, where the Apaches lived, and went up there and killed them, except
the children, whom they took for captives.

And then they went down into an open place in the desert, and there
placing Pahtahnkum and Toehahvs in the center, they again formed the
circles, with the older ones nearest the middle, and again brought all
their trophies to Pahtahnkum and Toehahvs, who threw them up with
rejoicing, as before.

And again the Apaches formed a war-party, and pursued them; and again
they, when they came to the low mountains south west of where Tawtsitka
now is, were frightened, as they looked over the desert, and said: "This
country is unknown to us, and we do not want to die of thirst," and
again they abandoned the pursuit, and returned home. And because the
place where they made fires was found, these mountains are called *Aw-up
Chert-taw* to this day.

And again everything was given to Koelhahah, as before.

And once more, after the purification, Pahtahnkum formed a war-party;
and this time they went to the east, and there again found Apaches at
the place called *Oy-yee-duck*, or The Field, because there the Apaches
had cultivated fields,

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

and here they fought the Apaches, and defeated them; but they had hard
work to kill one Apache, who was very brave, and who kept his wife
before him and his child behind him, and as the Papagoes did not want to
kill these they could not get at the man. But finally Pahtahnkum killed
a man near him, and some one else killed the woman, and then Pahtahnkum
killed this man and took the little boy captive.

And again they went out to an open place, and formed the circles, and
rejoiced as before.

And a party of Apaches pursued them again and again were discouraged,
and turned back at the red bluff to the eastward, where they dug a well,
which place is still called *Taw-toe-sum Vah-vee-uh*, or the Apache's
Well.

And again, in due time, a war-party was formed, and this time it went
far east, and there was found a single hunter of the Apaches, and this
man they killed and cut up and mutilated as had been done with
Pahtahnkum's father, putting his flesh out as if to jerk it. And they
went south-east from there and again found a single hunter; and him they
scalped and placed his scalp like a hat on a giant-cactus, for which
reason the place is still called *Waw-num*, which means a hat.

And Pahtahnkum walked behind, for he was very sad, thinking of his
father.

And then Pahtahnkum returned home, having revenged his father, and this
was the last of his wars.

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

And once more the Apaches followed him, but stopped at a place near the
Superstition Mts. where, as there had been rain and the ground was wet,
they stopped to clean a field, *See-qua-usk*, or the Clearing, but they
gave it up and returned, not even planting the crop.

And his mother made a large *olla*, and a small flat piece of pottery,
like the plates *tortillas* are baked on. And she put all the Apache
hair in the olla, and placed the flat plate on top to cover it with
grease-wood-gum to seal it up tight. And then she went and found a cave,
and by her power called a wind and a cloud that circled it round.

And then she returned to her people, and, placing the olla on her head,
led them to the cave, and said. "I will leave this olla here, and then
when I have need of wind, or of rain, I can form them by throwing these
up, and so I shall be independent."

And after this Pahtahnkum was taken ill, and the people said it was
because he had not properly purified himself.

And he went to the tall mountain east of Tucson, and from there to other
mountains, seeking the cool air, but he got no better, and at last he
came to the Maricopa Mts., and died there, and his grave is there yet.

And his mother died at her home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[185:1](ain34.htm#fr_6.md) The reason why the older
people went inside the circle was to protect the younger ones from the
*impurity* of anything Apache, and they went inside as more hardened to
this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Song of Koelhahah About Her Son](ain35.md)
