[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ain43)  [Next](ain45) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

### NOTES ON THE STORY OF CLOUD

In Emory's report, before alluded to, also in Captain Johnston's, we
find variants of The Story of the Children of Cloud.
[Thirsty](errata.htm#38) Hawk, the Maricopa, told Emory "that in bygone
days a woman of surpassing beauty resided in a green spot in the
mountains, near where we were encamped. All-the men admired and paid
court to her. She received the tributes of their devotion, grain, skins,
etc., but gave no love or other favor in return. Her virtue and her
determination to remain unmarried were equally firm. There came a
drought which threatened the world with famine. In their distress,
people applied to her, and she gave corn from her stock, and the supply
seemed endless. . . . One day as she was lying asleep with her body
exposed, a drop of rain fell on her stomach, which produced conception.
A son was the issue, who was the founder of a new race which built all
these houses" (ruins, vahahkkees).

Johnston has it: "The general asked a Pima who made the house I had
seen. 'It is the Caza de Montezuma', said he, 'it was built by the son
of the most beautiful woman, who once dwelt in yon mountain; she was
fair, and all the handsome men came to court her, but in vain; when they
came, they paid tribute, and out of this small store she fed all the
people in time of distress, and it did not diminish; at last, as she lay
asleep, a drop of rain fell upon her navel, and she became pregnant, and
brought forth a boy, who was the builder of all these houses."

The seeneeyawkum gives her twins but knew nothing of any story of their
children or of these buildings, the vahahkkees.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story of Tcheunassat Seeven](ain45)
