[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Taoism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](ycgp02) [Next](ycgp04)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER III <span class="small">THE BREVITY OF CONSCIOUS LIFE</span>

Y<span class="small">ANG</span> C<span class="small">HU</span> said:

   "One hundred years is the limit of a long life. <span id="page_39">p.
39</span> Not one in a thousand ever attains to it. Yet if they do,
still unconscious infancy and old age take up about half this time.

   "The time he passes unconsciously while asleep at night, and that
which is wasted though awake during the day, also amounts to another
half of the rest. Again pain and sickness, sorrow and fear, fill up
about a half, so that he really gets only ten years or so for his
enjoyment. And even then there is not one hour free from some anxiety.

   "What then is the object of human life? What makes it pleasant?
Comfort and elegance, music and beauty. Yet one cannot always gratify
the desire for comfort and elegance nor incessantly enjoy beauty and
music.

   "Besides, being warned and exhorted by punishments and rewards, urged
forward and repelled by fame and laws, men are constantly rendered
anxious. Striving for one vain hour of glory and providing for the
splendour which is to survive their death, they go their own solitary
ways, analysing what they hear with their ears and see with their eyes,
and carefully considering what is good for body and mind; so they lose
the happiest moments of the present, and cannot really give way to these
feelings for one hour.

   "How do they really differ from chained criminals?

   "The Ancients knew that all creatures enter <span id="page_40">p.
40</span> but for a short while into life, and must suddenly depart in
death. Therefore they gave way to their impulses and did not check their
natural propensities.

   "They denied themselves nothing that could give pleasure to their
bodies; consequently, as they were not seeking fame. but were following
their own nature, they went smoothly on, never at variance with their
inclinations. They did not seek for posthumous fame. They neither did
anything criminal, and of glory and fame, rank and position, as well as
of the span of their life they took no heed."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](ycgp04)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
