[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Taoism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](ycgp001) [Next](ycgp01.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

# YANG CHU'S GARDEN OF PLEASURE

## INTRODUCTION

T<span class="small">HE</span> period of the Warring States of the
Western Chinese Empire, 480 to 230 <span class="small">B.C.</span>,
embraces practically (almost) all of the philosophies of China, and is
curiously coincident with the rise of philosophy in Greece under
somewhat similar conditions.

   To the capital of Liang, in the State of Wei, came all the
philosophers, just as they came to Athens. Here came Mencius, perhaps
one of the greatest of the exponents of Confucianism, a veritable St.
Paul of the Confucian movement, and the chief opponent of Yang Chu. Here
came Chuang-Tzŭ, most subtle among the Taoist sophists, Li Kuei the
great statesman and law-giver, Hsün-tzŭ the philosopher of the doctrine
of original evil, Wênt-zu the able follower of Lao-tzŭ, and Mo-Ti the
apostle of brotherly love, whose name is frequently bracketed with Yang
Chu in condemnation by Mencius. Seldom had any capital in the world
attracted so many profound original and subtle thinkers as the capital
of the State of Wei, in the third and second centuries before Christ.
The spread of Christianity in Eastern Europe, and Confucianism in China,
ultimately <span id="page_8">p. 8</span> destroyed or diverted the
philosophic spirit, substituting religious dogma and rites for
philosophic inquiry and reason, and for centuries the the philosophies
lay buried or perished altogether in the great burning of the books in
213 <span class="small">B.C.</span>, or passed, like Taoism, into the
realms of rites and worship, or were preserved only in fragmentary form,
like the single chapter of the philosophy of Yang Chu, that remains
imbedded in the Taoist teachings of Lieh Tzu. But in the third and
fourth centuries <span class="small">B.C.</span>, the golden period of
Chinese philosophy, the minds of men were turned to the critical
examination of life. Philosophers rose, exploring boldly the motives and
mysteries of existence, gathered around them disciples, and went from
court to court, gaining fresh adherents and disputing with rival
teachers on the most diverse and subtle of subjects.

   At the Court of Liang at the period of Yang Chu, about 300 <span
class="small">B.C.</span>, the philosophers were treated as guests of
the reigning king, who reserved for them lodging and maintenance, and
encouraged all who had any pretence to the pursuit of truth and wisdom.
Whether or not Yang Chu was actually a native of the Wei State, or
whether he came there drawn by the attraction of a critical and
unrivalled audience, it is at least certain that he settled there as
small proprietor, probably in the reign of King Hwei, and continued
there till his death, about 250 <span class="small">B.C.</span> One
<span id="page_9">p. 9</span> may imagine a condition of life in many
respects somewhat analogous to the life of Epicurus in his famous
Athenian Garden. To the philosopher of pleasure and contentment came
pupils and disciples, discourses were held in much the same way as at an
identical period discourses were held in the garden at Athens, and it is
to these discourses, memorised and recorded by his favourite pupil
Meng-sun-Yang, that we most probably owe the single fragment of the
teaching of Yang Chu that remains, a fragment complete and explicit
enough to enable us to form a clear estimate of his teaching and
philosophy.

   Of his personal life, a little is to be gathered from Chapter XIV.,
where in an amusing interview with the King of Liang, the philosopher
states the simple truth that what is possible and easy to some men is
difficult and impossible of attainment to others, and that there is no
more real merit in ruling a kingdom well than in guiding a flock of
sheep. From this chapter we learn that he lived the customary life of
the Chinese gentleman of his day. A wife, a concubine and a garden are
mentioned, and in surroundings quite simple and unpretentious he found,
one may imagine, something of the pleasure and contentment of his
philosophic ideal.

   From the few authentic anecdotes contained partly in the book of
Chuang Tzu and Lieh Tzu, one may gain but little more: that he had a
<span id="page_10">p. 10</span> brother called Yang Pu, the hero of the
delightful story of the dog who failed to recognise his master; and
that, like other philosophers of the period, he travelled frequently
through other States, taking with him a few chosen disciples, putting up
at wayside inns, expounding his philosophy in strange courts, or
commenting wittily on the passing adventures of the journey. These few
facts present to us a life in no way differing from the lives of the
majority of philosophers of his time, both in Greece and China. They
tell us little, but they tell us sufficient. They disclose a personality
at once profound, even cynical, witty and singularly clear sighted.

   That his philosophy failed to find permanent foothold is hardly to be
wondered at. His ideas were too daring, too subversive of the accepted
order of things, to attract the mass of people, who came, no doubt, to
listen to the suave and witty philosopher of happiness and the cult of
the senses, but returned, one may imagine, with a satisfied readiness to
their rites of ancestor worship or the cultivation of their Taoist
superstitions. His philosophy had no place for rites. It denied a ruling
spirit, it was anti-deistic. It could disclose no signs and marvels. To
the seekers after the Taoist secret of passing invisibly through the air
he offered nothing but the most material and mundane of views. To the
seekers for guidance he offered happiness in its most simple form, <span
id="page_11">p. 11</span> and that at the expense of vulgar
self-assertion and self-glorification. His adherents could never have
numbered more than a few.

   Dr. Forke, in his extremely interesting introducion to the seventh
chapter of *Lieh Tzu*, which contains all that remains of the teaching
of Yang Chu, compares his philosophy to a study in scarlet on black, the
scarlet symbolic of the joy of life, the black of his unyielding
pessimism, and at first sight the comparison is so apt that one is
inclined to accept it.

   One feels the curious, almost mephitic profundity of the sage that
stirred the wrath of his Christian commentators almost to the bounds of
unseemliness. His bland indifference to virtue, civic and personal, his
insistence on life only as a means of separate and individual
expression, his negation of self-sacrifice, and his contempt of the
good, the excellent and the successful, produce at first in the Western
mind the sense of a moral atmosphere dark and sinister as the cloud from
which emerges the evil genii of the East. "His teaching is quite
detestable." says Dr. Legge, and elsewhere he refers to him as the
"least-erected spirit who ever professed to reason concerning the duties
of life and man." Balfour in his *Oriental Studies* speaks of "the
irreproachable Kuan Chung, who is made to utter the most atrocious
doctrines," and it is doubtful if anybody who has a preconceived or
inherited basis of morality or <span id="page_12">p. 12</span> dogma
will cease to agree with the two opinions quoted above. For them the
tower of philosophy from whence through many windows strangely tinted,
opaque or clear, the philosophers view the world as a small thing viewed
with interest and careful detachment, must ever seem something a little
aloof, a little repellent. About all philosophy there lingers the
haunting sense of the coldness, the dispassion of the philosopher.
Marcus Aurelius will always, to most men, seem a little less than
perfectly human, Socrates a little more than the perfect doctrinaire.
The world will always turn for guidance to the idealists like Christ and
Buddha rather than to the philosophers like Epictetus and Kanada. The
garden of Epicurus has faded from the minds of men. The garden of
Gethsemane will for ever remain like a picture engraved deeply in their
hearts.

   Unlike the poet, the philosopher has no country. And seldom is this
so clearly to be seen as in the fragment of Yang Chu, that contains the
essence of his philosophy. Elaborated and subtilised, it forms the basis
for the Epicurean philosophy in Greece; in the calm summit of its
indifference it attains the ultimate perfection of the ego realised many
centuries later by Max Stirner, and is akin in some respects. to the
Charvaka philosophy in India, while lacking the harsh note of combative
scepticism which leaves the Indian doctrine less a philosophy than a
rebellion in thought.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

   Both philosophies press upon men the importance of happiness during
life, but while to Yang Chu the study and cultivation of the senses are
all, Bhrihaspati is content to leave the expression of pleasure in a
formula at once singularly empty, and tinged with the indifference and
cynicism of one to whom the subject is really of little moment.

<span class="small"></span>

   While life remains let a man live happily. Let him feed on ghee,
though he runs in debt.

   When once the body becomes ashes, how can it ever return again?

   The larger view of the Chinese philosopher in reality transcends the
philosophy of Brihaspati by that quality of attention to and intense
feeling for life, which in some respects brings him closer to Epicurus,
his truer Western prototype, though he accepts no basis of semi-moral
self-interest for life, postulates no far-living philosophic deities,
and gives to man the solitary satisfaction of his senses, and that only
for the brief space of his lifetime.

   It is here that Dr. Forke traces the underlying pessimism of the
sage, the blackness against which are silhouetted the scarlet pleasures
of life. But this black pessimism is not real. It appears only in
illustration of the folly of the desire for fame, or of the various
means whereby man closes for himself the gateways of happiness. It is no
part of his philosophy—rather it is the antithesis. That he dwells upon
the shortness of life, <span id="page_14">p. 14</span> that he upholds
no promise of an after-life, that he deprecates the retarding influence
of virtues, where by their practice the full sense of life is dulled and
warped, does not establish or even condone any pessimistic outlook on
life; on the contrary, a full judgment of life, a clear sense of the
futility of much that has been accepted as praiseworthy, would preclude
any philosopher who has once accepted the individual standpoint as the
primary and important standpoint from developing a pessimism which would
absolutely nullify his philosophy. The keynote of this philosophy is
disregard of life, disregard of death. Those things exist and are to be
accepted. From them are to be taken what to each one is good. Only
strife, insatiability, greed, anxiety, false striving for virtue or
fame, are to be avoided as unnecessary and disturbing. The primary and
the only gift of man is his individuality. That is all that he inherits,
and with him it perishes. It is for him to preserve this single gift to
the ultimate moment, neither striving to exceed nor to renounce. All
those things that have ministered to this development of individuality
are good, all those things that have warped or retarded it are bad,
whether they be virtue, the desire for fame, for power, for regulating
the affairs of others, or the regulation of one's own conduct in
conformity with the views of others. By these things the lives of men
are dominated and rendered unhappy. Their life <span id="page_15">p.
15</span> is passed in a state of fever. Their personalities are warped
or destroyed or rendered miserable. They pursue chimeras, neglecting the
happiness that lies at their very feet. Fainting, they fall and perish
and are forgotten. The clear light of many days brings to them no
pleasure. The very word pleasure has lost its meaning for them. They
take nothing from life but disquiet of spirit, anxiety and discontent.
Within each one are certain desires, certain appetites, certain wishes.
These things are normal and natural. They are in themselves the ultimate
means whereby personality is fostered and preserved. The philosopher,
viewing life clearly, neglecting nothing, fearing nothing, regarding
nothing, pursues his way. True to himself, disquiet does not touch him.
For him the simplest pleasures will suffice, for contentment is an axiom
of his philosophy. Relying absolutely upon his senses, he comes to
understand them, and when in the end they begin to fail he renounces the
life which has become useless to him, and with the sage of Wei passes
into final oblivion.

   This philosophy of the senses, enunciated by the philosopher with a
calm, smiling carelessness, has no real affinity with pessimism.
Naturalism and sensism may find in him certain affinities, but
pessimism, which is primarily at the base of all religions which regard
the natural desires and appetites of man as a primary legacy of a nature
<span id="page_16">p. 16</span> naturally and originally evil, has no
exponent in the sage of Liang, who, believing in nature and taking men
as he finds them, urges them faithfully to follow their natures
whithersoever they may lead them.

   It is here that one may find perhaps the real answer to the riddle
that has puzzled all the students of the great exponent of Taoism, Lieh
Tzu, in whose work the solitary fragment of Yang Chu is imbedded.

   The Taoist philosophy is the philosophy of naturalism. It teaches the
following of nature. Obedience to the laws of nature is the primary
axiom of the Taoist philosophy. Both Yang Chu and Lieh Tzu start from
the same point—the close and acute study and observation of nature. They
postulate existence as a natural thing, neither good nor bad in itself.
To both thinkers an accepted morality is a hindrance.

   "He who regards as common property a body appertaining to the
universe and the things of the universe is a perfect man," says Yang
Chu. And this sense of the oneness and freedom of nature is so
distinctly true to Taoist teaching that one hesitates to accept the
apparent complete antagonism between the two teachings. The doctrine of
universal theft from nature is a purely Taoist doctrine, where all
things in nature are common property and all things are stolen.

   We steal our very existence from nature, says <span id="page_17">p.
17</span> Lieh Tzu. Such thefts are unconscious thefts. The doctrine of
disregard is also largely Taoist in thought. The ideal Taoist minimises
desires and cravings:

<span class="small"></span>

   "They followed their natural instincts, feeling neither joy in life,
nor abhorrence of death. Thus they came to no untimely ends."<span
id="page_17_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_17_note_1.md)

   One may compare this with the saying of Yang Chu:

<span class="small"></span>

   "Having once come into life, disregard it and let it pass, mark its
desires and wishes and be drifted away to annihilation."

   One may best compare the two teachings by saying that Yang Chu is the
naturalist philosopher in youth; Lieh Tzu the naturalist philosopher in
old age. It is at least possible that in the lost works of Yang Chu the
link that binds him more closely with the Taoist doctrine existed, a
link that would account for the inclusion of this frament of his work in
the book of *Lieh Tzu*.

   It is only in actual theory of conduct as apart from metaphysical
speculation that the divergence between the two is most marked. In that
single sentence dealing with the oneness and freedom of nature we have
the solitary expression of metaphysical speculation in the whole of the
philosophy of Yang Chu, but that line of philosophic thought, one may
conjecture, is either a solitary exception or a clue to the puzzle that
has perplexed all students of Taoist philosophy.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

   But theory of conduct takes up practically the whole of the solitary
work of Yang Chu that remains, and it is this theory of conduct that
marks the real divergence between the teaching of Yang Chu and that of
Lieh Tzu. Both viewed all life and nature as it really exists as a
natural phenomenon, governed by certain natural and unavoidable laws,
and both drew from the same premises deductions of a different
character. In the world of Yang Chu life is dominated and bounded by the
senses. His philosophy is a sense philosophy. To live in accord with the
senses man must renounce nothing, strive for nothing. All his conduct
must be guided by his senses. Nature is not perverse, only man where he
deflects from nature is perverse, where he builds systems of
anti-natural morality, where he piles up useless riches, where he limits
or destroys the full expression of individuality to the senses.

   So he evolves a philosophy of life quite logical and quite unmoral,
in which all life and all expression of life are centred in the senses,
where the cultivation of the senses is the primary law and the
gratification of them by the simplest means the ultimate object. Here at
any rate, whatever we may dimly suspect, is no metaphysical subtlety.
The theory is set before us so plainly, so uncompromisingly, that there
is no loophole for escape. Even Epicurus is weak-kneed beside the calmly
smiling sage of Liang. Here is no <span id="page_19">p. 19</span>
philosophic minister to the senses, no subtle qualification. Pleasure is
an actual thing, no mere negative phantom. All forms of pleasures are
swept into his net. Nothing is bad, nothing is evil.

<span class="small"></span>

   "Allow the ear to hear what it likes, the eye to see what it likes,
the nose to smell what what likes, the mouth to say what it likes, the
body to enjoy the comforts it likes to have, and the mind to do what it
likes."

   The careful study and cultivation of the senses is the true basis of
egoistical philosophy, and it is logically unassailable. It is the
basis, if not of much modern thought, at least of a great deal of modern
action, and gathers impetus from its reiterated demand from all classes
for a fuller, more complete individual expression.

   Starting from the same premises, the Taoist philosopher, who is
essentially a metaphysician, turns aside and plunges into the
unknowable. To him life is a force, strange, inert, passive, and fecund,
impermeable, intangible and mysterious. It is to the comprehension of
this force that lies at the back of all natural phenomena, that the
Taoist urges his diciples. Learn to know Tao which is the way, the way
of nature; allow yourself to drift, to merge into nature. Desires and
their satisfaction have no part in this philosophy.

<span class="small"></span>

   "Those who excel in beauty become vain, says Lieh Tzu. Those who
excel in strength become violent. To such it is useless to speak of Tao.
Hence he who is not yet turning grey will surely err if he but speak of
Tao. How much less can he put it into practice!"

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

   Here is the clear dividing line between the two. To Yang Chu the
senses are all, their satisfaction everything. Youth and youth alone can
obtain the full satisfaction that the senses demand. With age comes
restraint and final renunciation.

   To the Taoist, without this restraint and renunciation nothing can be
done. The way of Tao is closed. Youth may not enter save by doing
violence to his natural instincts.

   Passivity, old age, introspection belong to Lieh Tzu; joyousness and
contentment to Yang Chu.

   The whole of his philosophy is sustained by this sense of happiness
easily obtained, close at hand, a happiness that is independent of
enforced and uncongenial labour, deadening the senses and turning men
into unwilling beasts, and independent of the burden of riches, which in
themselves are a direct means of limiting personality.

<span class="small"></span>

   "Yuan Hsien lived in mean circumstances in Lu, while Tse Kung amassed
wealth in Wei.

   "Poverty galled the one and riches caused uneasiness to the other.

   "So poverty will not do, nor wealth either.

   "Enjoy life and take one's ease, for those who know how to enjoy life
are not poor, and he that lives at ease requires no riches."

   The philosopher does not say how this happy condition of life is to
be brought about. To him it was possibly a corollary to the discovery of
the uselessness of wealth for the purpose of happiness. There is no
taint or suspicion of socialism <span id="page_21">p. 21</span> or any
tyranny limiting or defining the action of individuals; on the contrary
his philosophy is purely individualist and non-authoritarian. He
visualises quite clearly a kind of golden age, a fabulous pre-existing
period in the history of the world, where strife for useless power and
useless domination and useless fame did not exist, where a full
knowledge of the importance of living so brief a life as happily as
possible alone guided the actions of men. In speaking of this period and
contrasting it with the later period in which strife and domination and
wealth had reduced men to the unhappy condition of manacled slaves, he
says:

<span class="small"></span>

   "The Ancients knew that all creatures enter but for a short while
into life and must suddenly depart in death. Therefore they gave way to
their impulses and did not check their natural propensities.

   "They denied themselves nothing that could give pleasure to their
bodies; consequently, as they were not seeking fame but were following
their own nature, they went smoothly on, never at variance with their
own inclinations.

   "They did not seek for posthumous fame. They never did anything
criminal, and of glory and fame, rank and position, as well as of the
span of their life, they took no heed."

   He was essentially the philosopher of true egoism as opposed to the
false egoism under which at his time the world laboured and suffered—the
egoism that oversteps the limits of the true care and cultivation of
self and persists, for quite selfish and vain and frequently petty
motives, in assuming the care and control of others, and imposing upon
them terms of slavery and hardship, <span id="page_22">p. 22</span>
terms that limit and ultimately destroy all individuality, and reduce
men to the level of driven and unwilling slaves.

   A recent writer who lent for a brief space a certain dignity to
British letters has pointed out, quite truly, that "Selfishness is not
living as one wishes to live, it is asking others to live as one wishes
to live. And unselfishness is letting other people's lives alone, not
interfering with them."

   With this selfishness, which is simply the product of a stupid and
unreasonable vanity, true egoism has nothing whatever in common. True
egoism is essentially unselfish. It suffices for the true egoist to live
his own life. Others he will help and assist when help or assistance is
required.

   So, in the words of Yang Chu:

<span class="small"></span>

   "We may give the feverish rest, satiety to the hungry, warmth to the
cold and assistance to the miserable,"

but for ourselves we must be content to live our own lives, to discover
for ourselves the ultimate method of expression for which our lives and
natures are suited.

   That this final expression of individuality may be what is called
moral, or what is called unmoral, is to the sage a matter of complete
indifference. A certain evenness of temperament, a certain sense of
contentment and harmony easily attained, is suggested by the calm and
restrained style of the philosopher. Alexandra David, in her interesting
pamphlet *Les Théories Individualistes Chinoises*, <span id="page_23">p.
23</span> speaks of the influence of this curious simplicity of
style—"La singulière simplicité d'expression de ce 'négateur du
sacre'"—and the whole effect of his teaching is essentially quietistic,
profound and indifferent. But the philosopher urges no definite course
of conduct or life. What to one is happiness and pleasure, to another
will be folly. So long as expression, whether it be what is called the
moral or what is called unmoral, is true expression, it is of importance
only to the individual concerned what intimate form it shall take. All
forms of pleasure and all forms of happiness are purely relative. The
warmth of the spring sun rejoices the heart of the old farmer of Sung;
within their palaces, in the province of Cheng, the profligate brothers
of Tse Chan, gladdening their senses with delicate wines and women of
rare and perfect beauty. Among the wonderful pavilions at Wei lingers
Tuan-Mu-Shu, counting the days that are left of his youth, when songs
and gaiety shall no longer endure for him; and with a coarse fare of
hemp stalks, cress and duckweed, the heart of the peasant of Sung is
made glad. We may communicate our pleasures to others, we can never
enforce them.

   Riches may increase and multiply our desires; they cannot add to our
happiness—they may even take away from it. It is only the things, few in
number, that are absolutely necessary and essential to life that are of
any real importance. <span id="page_24">p. 24</span> And it is just
those things for the lack of which most lives are rendered worthless.

<span class="small"></span>

   "If men could do without food and clothes there would be no more
kings and princes."

   It is the struggle, in itself so often futile and wasteful, for a
bare and meagre existence that limits and thwarts the development of
personality, or hardens it to an extent where it no longer becomes worth
developing.

   One may condemn or despise the voluptuary. That is purely a question
of æsthetics. At least, however crude, however perverse he may seem,
still he has in his lifetime attempted to express an individuality,
attempted to achieve some ideal which to him appeared worthy of
attainment; but the man whose personality is dead, who can find no means
of expression, who from hardship or from success hardly won has lost all
that makes life of any value whatsoever, is beyond redemption.
Consideration is wasted upon him. Already he is dead, and whether he be
rich or poor his existence is no longer of use to himself and may only
be a hindrance to others.

   Such as these, says the philosopher with grim irony, are the
fugitives of life. Whether they are killed or live, their lives have
been regulated by externals.

<span class="small"></span>

   "Urged and repelled by fame and laws, they are constantly rendered
anxious; so they lose the happiest moments of the present, and cannot
give way to their feelings for one hour."

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

   On the question of self-sacrifice the philosopher is quite clear.
Life of itself is of no importance, save to the liver, and that only for
the brief space of his existence. By self-sacrifice there is nothing to
be gained, save perhaps a little fame, and if this be at the expense and
to the detriment of personality, it is a wrong thing to do. From
kindness of heart and a real desire to relieve suffering a man may
dispose of and give away those things which are not absolutely essential
to his existence. But to himself his life must be sacred. To spoil one's
life for the sake of fame, or because is is considered a splendid thing
to do, is to commit a wrong against one's self. And it is equally wrong
that one should be expected to do so. If the world requires this
ultimate self-sacrifice, then the world is wrong and the condition of
things that calls for this self-sacrifice is wrong. In a chapter devoted
to quite clear exposition of this view, a chapter which for its
dispassionate contempt of obvious and accepted views has been most
singled out for especial condemnation, Yang Chu takes the extreme case
of the sage against the universe, and the greater part of the chapter is
taken up with a justification of this extreme point of view.

<span class="small"></span>

   "If the ancients," says the philosopher, referring to the golden age
of his ideal, "by injuring a single hair could have rendered a service
to the world they would not have done it, and had the universe been
offered to a single person he would not have accepted it.

   "As nobody would damage a single hair and nobody would do a favour to
the world, the world was in a perfect state."

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

   To the philosopher self-sacrifice is simply the corollary of a wrong
and unbalanced condition of life. In a community where neither fame nor
self-glorification at the expense of others is desired, self-sacrifice
would not exist. It would be unnecessary.

   Where all are happy and all are contented, there would be no need of
either self-sacrifice or self-aggrandisement. That is a simple truth,
and if, by the adoption of a false and selfish egoism and a false and
equally selfish racial egoism, humanity has reached a point where
self-sacrifice has become a good or desirable thing, the fault really
lies with the vanity and ignorance that have led humanity to this point,
and have ultimately justified a code of morals philosophically
unreasonable and unnecessary.

   It is important to state this quite clearly, because a superficial
and misleading view of the philosophic meaning of this much-abused
chapter has provoked a number of commentators to a righteous but quite
undue sense of anger, which, while possibly justified by the curious
makeshift view of modern morals, has no real bearing upon the
philosophic position of the philosoper.

   In the view of the philosopher the care of self, for the preservation
and expression of personality, is the primary and natural duty of all
mankind, and where this natural care is interfered with, warped or
thwarted, a condition of affairs arises in which injustice, greed and
vanity, in <span id="page_27">p. 27</span> themselves quite unnecessary
things, call for antidotes which in themselves are equally unnecessary.
And so the virtues are born as antidotes to vices that are in themselves
the children of ignorance.

   The rest of the chapter is taken up with a disquisition on the
relative degrees of self-sacrifice which, while interesting from a
logical point of view, is not of any particular importance. As in the
chapter dealing with the justification of the two happy voluptuaries,
Yang Chu here states the extreme case, and leaves the qualification to
his disciples.

   A certain number of chapters, notably Chapters III., IV., VIII., XI.,
XIII. and XV., deal fully or in part with an exposition of the conduct
of life by a philosophic materialism, a materialism which is simply a
statement of fact. Life is a natural and unavoidable phenomenon. There
is no mystery about life, says the philosopher. We live and we cease to
live; no matter whether we are virtuous or libertine, moral or immoral,
we share the same fate and speedily are forgotten. In tears or silence
our personalities perish with us, be they bad or be they good, and the
body of a saint is no better than the body of a thief. This is simply a
statement, and may be accepted or denied. It can only be pointed out
that neither the earlier Taoists, nor the Confucians, nor the Buddhists,
believe in a conscious after-life, and that, assuming as he does the
ultimate end of life <span id="page_28">p. 28</span> to be a final and
unavoidable thing, the philosopher is controverting no current belief of
his period. All deductive philosophy must invariably concern itself with
facts, and to those facts and by them all philosophy is limited. Whether
man be a single expression of Tao, the highest form as yet evolved, his
destiny is bounded by his life. Beyond, we know nothing. If we did, if
we were certain, all philosophy, all speculation, possibly all religion,
would cease. A thousand guesses at the life motive may be made; all are
uncertain, all are speculative. Alone the philosopher, satisfied with
the knowable, strives to present existence as at least something that
may with care be rendered a little happy, a little less uncertain, or a
little more worthy of the desire to live, which is the primary instinct
of animals and men. If he pursues happiness, if he pursues
self-sacrifice, if he pursues tears, or if he pursues power and the vast
aggrandisement of the super-man, or remains, like the Taoist quiescent,
submerged in life and content, at least he surveys, from one among the
many windows in the tower of philosophy, a land where something better,
something finer or at least something less miserable is being done;
where the harshness and striving of life come to him like a distant echo
of some old drama ill-played and no longer worth recording, or a mist
that has suddenly lifted and taken with it the vanities and unhappiness
of men.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

   Philosophy can bring no further knowledge of life. It can but alter
the terms by which life is known. In whatever terms we regard it, life
remains the same; and so it is that the materialist philosopher,
disregardful of all purely speculative things, realising that the
unknowable will for all time remain, is concerned solely with the
guidance of mankind to his Utopia, where in happiness in their lives
and, having achieved this, prepare uncomplaining to depart.

   This is the real strength of the materialist position that, having
once proclaimed life as a final and unenduring thing, the philosopher
must turn to the consideration of what makes most for happiness in men's
lives, and if in his opinion happiness is only to be gained by the
senses, it follows that all life will lead to the cultivation and
perfecting of these senses as a means whereby this happiness may be most
easily and perfectly obtained. A sense of beauty will ultimately take
the place now occupied by vanity and aggression, because man, through
the guidance of his senses, must ultimately desire what is beautiful;
that is, he will begin by desiring what is actually necessary, then what
is comfortable, and finally what is beautiful. A true cultivation of the
senses can never degrade mankind. It is only by not cultivating or even
by thwarting and limiting the senses that man becomes degraded. It is
quite <span id="page_30">p. 30</span> true that coarse natures will
require coarse pleasures. These are always obtainable—too easily
obtainable.

   In dealing with the question of coarse pleasures Yang Chu does not
say that drink is in itself a good or desirable thing, or that love of
women carried to excess is a laudable and commendable thing. What he
says is that all inclinations, however gross, however indefensible, are
preferable to the perverse inclination for interference with others, for
rule, for power and authority. It is possible for a man to ruin his
health by overindulgence. By lust for power and command he may ruin the
life of a whole nation. But a civilisation that pursues and cultivates
happiness will ultimately raise the ideal of pleasure. Riches, useless
display, orgies, self-aggrandisement at the expense of others, personal
or racial aggresiveness, greed, vanity and insatiability—all the things
that make life a thing of torment, a curtain of black which the faint
light of a few virtues can only faintly illumine—will ultimately be
assessed at their true value. It will be discovered that happiness can
be obtained by the most simple of means. Men will begin to use their
senes or at least to try and understand them a little, and so, each in
his separate way, will aim at the happiness that lies most surely and
easily at his hand.

   That is the materialist Utopia. It is the final word of materialist
philosophy.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

   Beyond the solitary chapter in the book of Lieh-Tzu, which contains
all that remains of the teaching of Yang Chu, there are, scattered
through the book of Lieh-Tzu and the book of Chuang-Tzu, a few possibly
authentic tales and anecdotes attributed to the philosopher of Liang and
illustrative of his teaching. These with one exception have already been
included in two recently published works on the Taoist
Philosophers,<span id="page_31_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_31_note_1.md) and may
be omitted from the present work.

   The single anecdote referred to may be given here, as it illustrates
in a singularly happy fashion the smiling scepticism of the sage to whom
in life the one final and certain thing is death.

<span class="small"></span>

   The neighbour of Yang Chu once lost a sheep.

   He began to search for it with all his kinsfolk, and asked assistance
also from the servants of Yang Chu, who in astonishment said:

   "Oh, oh! why do you require such a large number of persons to seek
for a single lost sheep?"

   The neighbour replied:

   "There are many crossways to pursue and search out."

   On his return he was asked if he had found his sheep, and replied
that he had given up the search.

   Yang Chu asked him why he had given up the search.

   The neighbour answered:

   "Among the crossways there were a great many small diverging tracts.
Not knowing which to follow I gave up the search and returned."

   Yang Chu became pensive and wrapped in thought. For a whole day he
neither smiled nor spoke.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

   His disciples, astonished at his attitude, asked him the reason,
saying:

   "A sheep is an animal of little value; furthermore this one did not
belong to you, Master. Why does its loss disturb your usual amiable
humour and gaiety?"

   Yang Chu made no answer.

   His disciples were unable to understand the significance of his
silence, and Meng-Sun-Yang went out and asked Hsin-tu-tse on the
subject.

   Another day Hsin-tu-tse accompanied by Meng-Sun-Yang came to Yang Chu
and asked him saying:

   "Once three brothers travelled through the Provinces of Chi and Lu.

   "They were instructed under the same master and had studied the
doctrine of humanity and justice.

   "When they came to their father's house their father asked them what
was the final conclusion they had arrived at in regard to the doctrine
of humanity and justice.

   "The one answered:

   "'The study of humanity and justice teaches me to love and respect my
body, and to consider of less importance what makes for fame and glory.'

   "The second said:

   "'The study of humanity and justice teaches me to sacrifice my body
in order to obtain fame and glory.'

   "The third said:

   "'The study of humanity and justice teaches me to discover a method
of conciliating the desire of my body and the desire for fame.'

   "These three contradictory theories arise from the teaching of the
same master. Which of them is true? which is false?"

   Yang Chu said:

   "There was once a man who lived on the banks of the river. He had a
perfect knowledge of river lore, and was an expert swimmer. He was
boatman of his state and gained his living managing his boat.

   "His gains were considerable and would provide for the maintenance of
a hundred persons.

   "Those who desired instruction under his direction came to him
bringing a sack of grain and became his pupils.

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

   "Quite half among them drowned themselves.

   "In coming to him they had the intention of learning to swim, and not
of drowning themselves. In the end the succcesses and failures were
equal (since half learnt to swim and half were drowned).

   "Which among them do you think were right, and which were wrong?"

   Hsin-tu-tse kept silence. But Meng-Sun-Yang took him up saying:

   "Well, is this not right? It is because your question was put in so
vague a fashion that the answer of the Master is so evasive. Meanwhile I
am in a greater darkness than before."

   Hsin-tu-tse replied:

   "Because the large roads divide into innumerable small pathways and
tracks the sheep was lost.

   "The aspects of wisdom being multiplied, many students lose
themselves. It does not matter if at the beginning all start from the
same aspect of wisdom, there are always divergencies at the end.

   "The single thing that re-establishes equality is death and the
annihilation of personality at death.

   "It is indeed pitiable that you, an ancient disciple of the Master
and a student of the Master's doctrine, should not comprehend the
meaning of his parables."

   Here, with all the grace and charm of a humour that is quite peculiar
to the materialist sage of Liang, Yang Chu points out that with one
basis to all philosophies the rest is entirely a question of
personality—that from the solid premises of life, thought, and all the
phenomena of existence, innumerable deductions may be drawn, all
diverging, all opposed, all false and all true. What remains when the
din and the shouting have died away is the solitary fact that we live
and we die, and whether we live comfortably or uncomfortably, whether we
do good or ill, whether we <span id="page_34">p. 34</span> achieve
happiness or unhappiness, whether pursue wisdom or achieve the pleasure
of moment, is a matter of absolute unimportance; the end comes and
forgetfulness swallows us up. At the most we may look back regretfully
upon a few quite happy days, and memory may bring us a transient and
ephemeral sense of happiness. These are the things we have gained from
life, the things that are hidden away in the secret drawer of the
treasure-chest of our life, the single true and perfect expression of
personality that the fates and human selfishness have allowed us.

   The sheep of the neighbour of Yang Chu are still lost amid the
thousand branching pathways of thought and the wisdom of conflicting
philosophies. Life still remains the simple thing that man has made so
complex, and the ideal of life is still the ideal of happiness, and to
each one happiness must come with different features and in a different
guise. Alone we are sure of this, that it was happiness that touched us,
and to that moment of happiness all our lives have led up; and here the
philosopher draws down the heavy curtain of death. Life should be happy,
says he, if men made happiness their business. If it is unhappy it is
because men search for other things and so their lives are unhappy.

   If men desired happiness for themselves they would be content with
the happiness that the senses afforded them. That they struggle, that
<span id="page_35">p. 35</span> they rob and slay and maim, may be a
survival of the old tradition of aboriginal times, the tradition of
bloodshed, rapine and self-aggrandisement, when expression found its
only vent in slaughter and violence; but the pursuit of happiness
solitary and profound and yet strangely simple, is, to the philosopher,
the ultimate and final end that men should pursue when they have shaken
off the old fetters of pride and arrogance of race or personality, and
the scales have fallen from their eyes. For life at best can afford but
happiness, and to all death comes alike, and no philosophy, however
transcendent, however fine, can alter this solitary and immutable law of
life.

   Happiness from simple means in life and death to end it all is the
basis of the philosophy of Yang Chu. You cannot avoid life, and the
pursuit of wisdom avails not to close the final doorway. All wisdom,
like all happiness, is relative. In life you must achieve your own
happiness. Neither wisdom, nor virtue, nor wrong-doing, nor gain at the
expense of others can help you. Alone and unaided you must pursue the
way of your own happiness, a happiness that can be rarely communicated
and still more rarely shared. The final solution of happiness must come
through you. Let it suffice for you.

H. C.-B. 

   <span class="small">*Note*.—The author is indebted to Professor Anton
Forke for his permission to use his translation of Yang Chu which
appeared in the *Journal* of the Peking Oriental Society.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](ycgp01.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_17">p. 17</span>

<span id="page_17_note_1"></span>[1](#page_17_fr_1.md) [*Taoist Teachings*,
p. 38](../tt/tt05.md), translated by L. Giles.

<span id="footnotes_page_31">p. 31</span>

<span id="page_31_note_1"></span>[1](#page_31_fr_1.md) *Musings of a
Chinese Mystic*, by Lionel Giles, M.A. [*Taoist
Teachings*](../tt/index.md), by Lionel Giles, M.A. John Murray, "Wisdom of
the East Series."

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
