[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lo00)  [Next](lo02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P889G/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lo!*, by Charles Fort, \[1931\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# LO!

### PART I

### 1

<span class="smallcaps">A naked</span> man in a city street—the track of
a horse in volcanic mud—the mystery of reindeer's ears—a huge, black
form, like a whale, in the sky, and it drips red drops as if attacked by
celestial swordfishes—an appalling cherub appears in the sea—

*Confusions*.

Showers of frogs and blizzards of snails—gushes of periwinkles down from
the sky—

The preposterous, the grotesque, the incredible—and why, if I am going
to tell of hundreds of these, is the quite ordinary so regarded?

An unclothed man shocks a crowd—a moment later, if nobody is generous
with an overcoat, somebody is collecting handkerchiefs to knot around
him.

A naked fact startles a meeting of a scientific society—and whatever it
has for loins is soon diapered with conventional explanations.

Chaos and muck and filth—the indeterminable and the unrecordable and the
unknowable—and all men are liars—and yet—

Wigwams on an island—sparks in their columns of smoke.

Centuries later—the uncertain columns are towers. What once were
fluttering sparks are the motionless lights of windows. According to
critics of Tammany Hall, there has been monstrous corruption upon this
island: nevertheless, in the midst of it, this regularization has
occurred. A woodland sprawl has sprung to stony attention.

The Princess Caraboo tells, of herself, a story, in an unknown language,
and persons who were themselves liars have said that she lied, though
nobody has ever known what she told. The story

<span id="page_542">p. 542</span>

of Dorothy Arnold has been told thousands of times, but the story of
Dorothy Arnold and the swan has not been told before. A city turns to a
crater, and casts out eruptions, as lurid as fire, of living things—and
where Cagliostro came from, and where he went, are so mysterious that
only historians say they know—venomous snakes crawl on the sidewalks of
London—and a star twinkles—

*But the underlying oneness in all confusions*.

An onion and a lump of ice—and what have they in common?

Traceries of ice, millions of years ago, forming on the surface of a
pond—later, with different materials, these same forms will express
botanically. If something had examined primordial frost, it could have
predicted jungles. Times when there was not a living thing on the face
of this earth—and, upon pyrolusite, there were etchings of forms that,
after the appearance of cellulose, would be trees. Dendritic sketches,
in silver and copper, prefigured ferns and vines.

Mineral specimens now in museums—calcites that are piles of petals—or
that long ago were the rough notes of a rose. Scales, horns, quills,
thorns, teeth, arrows, spears, bayonets—long before they were the
implements and weapons of living things they were mineral forms. I know
of an ancient sketch that is today a specimen in a museum—a colorful,
little massacre that was composed of calcites ages before religion was
dramatized—pink forms impaled upon mauve spears, sprinkled with drops of
magenta. I know of a composition of barytes that appeared ages before
the Israelites made what is said to be history—blue waves heaped high on
each side of a drab streak of forms like the horns of cattle, heads of
asses, humps of camels, turbans, and upheld hands.

*Underlying oneness*—

A new star appears—and just how remote is it from drops of water, of
unknown origin, falling on a cottonwood tree, in Oklahoma? Just what
have the tree and the star to do with the girl of Swanton Novers, upon
whom gushed streams of oils? And why was a clergyman equally greasy?
Earthquakes and droughts and the sky turns black with spiders, and, near
Trenton, N. J., something pegged stones at farmers. If lights that have
been seen in the sky were upon the vessels of explorers from other
worlds—

<span id="page_543">p. 543</span>

then living in New York City, perhaps, or in Washington, D. C., perhaps,
there are inhabitants of Mars, who are secretly sending reports upon the
ways of this world to their governments?

A theory feels its way through surrounding ignorance—the tendrils of a
vine feel their way along a trellis—a wagon train feels its way across a
prairie—

*Underlying oneness*—

Projections of limonite, in a suffusion of smoky quartz—it will be ages
before this little mineral sketch can develop into the chimneys and the
smoke of Pittsburgh. But it reproduces when a volcano blasts the
vegetation on a mountain, and smoke-forms hang around the stumps of
trees. Broken shafts of an ancient city in a desert—they are projections
in the tattered gusts of a sandstorm. It's Napoleon Bonaparte's retreat
from Moscow—ragged bands, in the grimy snow, stumbling amidst abandoned
cannon.

Maybe it was only coincidence—or what may there be to Napoleon's own
belief that something was supervising him? Suppose it is that, in
November, 1812, Napoleon's work, as a factor in European readjustments,
was done. There was no military power upon this earth that could remove
this one, whose work was done. There came coldness so intense that it
destroyed the Grand Army.

Human knowledge—and its fakes and freaks. An astronomer, insulated by
his vanity, seemingly remote from the flops and frailties of everybody
else, may not be so far away as he thinks he is. He calculates where an
undiscovered planet will be seen. "Lo!"—as the astronomers like to
say—it is seen. But, for some very distressing, if not delightful,
particulars, see, later, an account of Lowell's planet. Stars are said
to be trillions of miles away, but there are many alleged remotenesses
that are not so far away as they are said to be.

The Johnstown flood, and the smash of Peru, and the little nigger that
was dragged to a police station—

<div align="center">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

Terrified horses, up on their hind legs, hoofing a storm of frogs.

Frenzied springboks, capering their exasperations against frogs that
were tickling them.

<span id="page_544">p. 544</span>

Storekeepers, in London, gaping at frogs that were tapping on their
window panes.

We shall pick up an existence by its frogs.

Wise men have tried other ways. They have tried to understand our state
of being, by grasping at its stars, or its arts, or its economics. But,
if there is an underlying oneness of all things, it does not matter
where we begin, whether with stars, or laws of supply and demand, or
frogs, or Napoleon Bonaparte. One measures a circle, beginning anywhere.

I have collected 294 records of showers of living things.

Have I?

Well, there's no accounting for the freaks of industry.

It is the profound conviction of most of us that there never has been a
shower of living things. But some of us have, at least in an elementary
way, been educated by surprises out of much that we were "absolutely
sure" of, and are suspicious of a thought, simply because it is a
profound conviction.

I got the story of the terrified horses in the storm of frogs from Mr.
George C. Stoker, of Lovelock, Nev. Mr. John Reid, of Lovelock, who is
known to me as a writer upon geological subjects, vouches for Mr.
Stoker, and I vouch for Mr. Reid. Mr. Stoker vouches for me. I have
never heard of anything—any pronouncement, dogma, enunciation, or
pontification—that was better substantiated.

What is a straight line? A straight line is the shortest distance
between two points. Well, then, what is a shortest distance between two
points? That is a straight line. According to the test of ages, the
definition that a straight line is a straight line cannot be improved
upon. I start with a logic as exacting as Euclid's.

Mr. Stoker was driving along the Newark Valley, one of the most
extensive of the desert regions of Nevada. Thunderstorm. Down came
frogs. Up on their hind legs went the horses.

The exasperated springboks. They were told of, in the *Northern News*
(Vryburg, Transvaal) March 21, 1925, by Mr. C. J. Grewar, of Uitenhage.
Also I have a letter from Mr. Grewar.

The Flats—about 50 miles from Uitenhage—springboks leaping and shaking
themselves unaccountably. At a distance, Mr. Grewar

<span id="page_545">p. 545</span>

could conceive of no explanation of such eccentricities. He
investigated, and saw that a rain of little frogs and fishes had pelted
the springboks. Mr. Grewar heard that some time before, at the same
place, there had been a similar shower.

Coffins have come down from the sky: also, as everybody knows, silk hats
and horse collars and pajamas. But these things have come down at the
time of a whirlwind. The two statements that I start with are that no
shower exclusively of coffins, nor of marriage certificates, nor of
alarm clocks has been recorded: but that showers exclusively of living
things are common. And yet the explanation by orthodox scientists who
accept that showers of living things have occurred is that the creatures
were the products of whirlwinds. The explanation is that little frogs,
for instance, fall from the sky, unmixed with anything else, because, in
a whirlwind, the creatures were segregated, by differences in specific
gravity. But when a whirlwind strikes a town, away go detachables in a
monstrous mixture, and there's no findable record of washtubs coming
down in one place, all the town's cats in one falling battle that lumps
its infelicities in one place, and all the kittens coming down together
somewhere else, in a distant bunch that miaows for its lump of mothers.

See London newspapers, Aug. 18 and 19, 1921—innumerable little frogs
that appeared, during a thunderstorm, upon the 17th, in streets of the
northern part of London.

I have searched in almost all London newspapers, and in many provincial
newspapers, and in scientific publications. There is, find-able by .me,
no mention of a whirlwind upon the 17th of August, and no mention of a
fall from the sky of anything else that might be considered another
segregated discharge from a whirlwind, if there had been a whirlwind.

A whirlwind runs amok, and is filled with confusions: and yet to the
incoherences of such a thing have been attributed the neatest of
classifications. I do not say that no wind ever scientifically
classifies objects. I have seen orderly, or logical, segregations by
wind-action. I ask for records of whirlwinds that do this. There is no
perceptible science by a whirlwind, in the delivery of its images. It
rants trees, doors, frogs, and parts of cows. But living

<span id="page_546">p. 546</span>

things have fallen from the sky, or in some unknown way have appeared,
and have arrived homogeneously. If they have not been segregated by
winds, something has selected them.

There have been repetitions of these arrivals. The phenomenon of
repetition, too, is irreconcilable with the known ways of whirlwinds.
There is an account, in the London *Daily News*, Sept. 5, 1922, of
little toads, which for two days had been dropping from the sky, at
Chalon-sur-Saône, France.

Lies, yarns, hoaxes, mistakes—what's the specific gravity of a lie, and
how am I to segregate?

That could be done only relatively to a standard, and I have never heard
of any standard, in any religion, philosophy, science, or complication
of household affairs that could not be made to fit any requirement. We
fit standards to judgments, or break any law that it pleases us to
break, and fit to the fracture some other alleged law that we say is
higher and nobler. We have conclusions, which are the products of
senility or incompetence or credulity, and then argue from them to
premises. We forget this process, and then argue from the premises,
thinking we began there.

There are accounts of showering things that came from so far away that
they were unknown in places where they arrived.

If only horses and springboks express emotions in these matters, we'll
be calm thinking that even living things may have been transported to
this earth from other worlds.

*Philadelphia Public Ledger*, Aug. 8, 1891—a great shower of fishes, at
Seymour, Ind. They were unknown fishes. *Public Ledger*, Feb. 6, 1890—a
shower of fishes, in Montgomery County, California. "The fishes belong
to a species altogether unknown here." *New York Sun*, May 29, 1892—a
shower, at Coalburg, Alabama, of an enormous number of eels that were
unknown in Alabama. Somebody said that he knew of such eels, in the
Pacific Ocean. Piles of them in the streets—people alarmed—farmers
coming with carts, and taking them away for fertilizing material.

Our subject has been treated scientifically, or too scientifically.
There have been experiments. I have no more of an ill opinion of
experimental science than I have of everything else, but I have been an
experimenter, myself, and have impressions of the servile politeness

<span id="page_547">p. 547</span>

of experiments. They have such an obliging, or ingratiating, way that
there's no trusting the flatterers. In the *Redruth* (Cornwall, England)
*Independent*, Aug. 13, and following issues, 1886, correspondents tell
of a shower of snails near Redruth. There were experiments. One
correspondent, who believed that the creatures were sea snails, put some
in salt water. They lived. Another correspondent, who believed that they
were not sea snails, put some in salt water. They died.

I do not know how to find out anything new without being offensive. To
the ignorant, all things are pure: all knowledge is, or implies, the
degradation of something. One who learns of metabolism, looks at a
Venus, and realizes she's partly rotten. However, she smiles at him, and
he renews his ignorance. All things in the sky are pure to those who
have no telescopes. But spots on the sun, and lumps on the planets—and,
being a person of learning, or, rather, erudition, myself, I've got to
besmirch something, or nobody will believe I am—and I replace the pure,
blue sky with the wormy heavens

London *Evening Standard*, Jan. 3, 1924—red objects falling with snow at
Halmstead, Sweden.

They were red worms, from one to four inches in length. Thousands of
them streaking down with the snowflakes—red ribbons in a shower of
confetti—a carnival scene that boosts my discovery that meteorology is a
more picturesque science than most persons, including meteorologists,
have suspected—and I fear me that my attempt to besmirch has not been
successful, because the worms of heaven seem to be a jolly lot. However,
I cheer up at thought of chances to come, because largely I shall treat
of human nature.

But how am I to know whether these things fell from the sky in Sweden,
or were imagined in Sweden?

I shall be scientific about it. Said Sir Isaac Newton—or virtually said
he—"If there is no change in the direction of a moving body, the
direction of a moving body is not changed." "But," continued he, "if
something be changed, it is changed as much as it is changed." So red
worms fell from the sky, in Sweden, because from the sky, in Sweden, red
worms fell. How do geologists determine the age of rocks? By the fossils
in them. And how do they deter

<span id="page_548">p. 548</span>

mine the age of the fossils? By the rocks they're in. Having started
with the logic of Euclid, I go on with the wisdom of a Newton.

*New Orleans Daily Picayune*, Feb. 4, 1892—enormous numbers of unknown
brown worms that had fallen from the sky, near Clifton, Indiana. *San
Francisco Chronicle*, Feb. 14, 1892—myriads of unknown scarlet
worms—somewhere in Massachusetts—not seen to fall from the sky, but
found, covering several acres, after a snowstorm.

It is as if with intelligence, or with the equivalence of intelligence,
something has specialized upon transporting, or distributing, immature
and larval forms of life. If the gods send worms, that would be kind if
we were robins.

In *Insect Life*, 1892, p. 335, the Editor, Prof. C. V. Riley, tells of
four other mysterious appearances of worms, early in the year 1892. Some
of the specimens he could not definitely identify. It is said that at
Lancaster, Pa., people in a snowstorm caught falling worms on their
umbrellas.

The wise men of our tribes have tried to find God in a poem, or in
whatever they think they mean by a moral sense in people, or in
inscriptions in a book of stone, which by one of the strangest freaks of
omission is not now upon exhibition in from fifteen to twenty synagogues
in Asia Minor, and all up and down Italy—

Crabs and periwinkles—

Ordinary theologians have overlooked crabs and periwinkles—

Or mystery versus the fishmonger.

Upon May 28, 1881, near the city of Worcester, England, a fishmonger,
with a procession of carts, loaded with several kinds of crabs and
periwinkles, and with a dozen energetic assistants, appeared at a time
when nobody on a busy road was looking. The fishmonger and his
assistants grabbed sacks of periwinkles, and ran in a frenzy, slinging
the things into fields on both sides of the road. They raced to gardens,
and some assistants, standing on the shoulders of other assistants, had
sacks lifted to them, and dumped sacks over the high walls. Meanwhile
other assistants, in a dozen carts, were furiously shoveling out
periwinkles, about a mile along the road. Also, meanwhile, several boys
were busily mixing in crabs. They were not advertising anything. Above
all there was secrecy.

<span id="page_549">p. 549</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The cost must have
been hundreds of dollars. They appeared without having been seen on the
way, and they melted away equally mysteriously. There were houses all
around, but nobody saw them.

Would I be so kind as to tell what, in the name of some slight
approximation to sanity, I mean by telling such a story?

But it is not my story. The details are mine, but I have put them in,
strictly in accordance with the circumstances. There was, upon May 28,
1881, an occurrence near Worcester, and the conventional explanation was
that a fishmonger did it. Inasmuch as he did it unobserved, if he did
it, and inasmuch as he did it with tons upon acres, if he did it, he did
it as I have described, if he did it.

In *Land and Water*, June 4, 1881, a correspondent writes that, in a
violent thunderstorm, near Worcester, tons of periwinkles had come down
from the sky, covering fields and a road, for about a mile. In the issue
of June 11th, the Editor of *Land and Water* writes that specimens had
been sent to him. He notes the mysterious circumstance, or the
indication of a selection of living things, that appears in virtually
all the accounts. He comments upon an enormous fall of sea creatures,
unaccompanied by sand, pebbles, other shells, and seaweed.

In the *Worcester Daily Times*, May 30, it is said that, upon the 28th,
news had reached Worcester of a wonderful fall from the sky of
periwinkles on Cromer Gardens Road, and spread far around in fields and
gardens. Mostly, people of Worcester were incredulous, but some had gone
to the place. Those who had faith returned with periwinkles.

Two correspondents then wrote that they had seen the periwinkles upon
the road before the storm, where probably a fishmonger had got rid of
them. So the occurrence conventionalized, and out of these surmises
arose the story of the fishmonger, though it has never been told before,
as I have told it.

Mr. J. Lloyd Bozward, a writer whose notes on meteorological subjects
are familiar to readers of scientific periodicals of this time, was
investigating, and his findings were published in the *Worcester Evening
Post*, June 9th. As to the story of the fishmonger, note his statement
that the value of periwinkles was 16 shillings a bushel. He says that a
wide area on both sides of the road was strewn with

<span id="page_550">p. 550</span>

periwinkles, hermit crabs, and small crabs of an unascertained species.
Worcester is about 30 miles from the mouth of the River Severn, or, say,
about 50 miles from the sea. Probably no fishmonger in the world ever
had, at one time, so many periwinkles, but as to anybody having got rid
of a stock, because of a glutted market, for instance, Mr. Bozward says:
"Neither upon Saturday, the 28th, nor Friday, the 27th, was there such a
thing procurable in Worcester as a live periwinkle." Gardens as well as
fields were strewn. There were high walls around these gardens. Mr.
Bozward tells of about 10 sacks of periwinkles, of a value of about £20,
in the markets of Worcester, that, to his knowledge, had been picked up.
Crowds had filled pots and pans and bags and trunks before he got to the
place. "In Mr. Maund's garden, two sacks were filled with them." It is
his conclusion that the things fell from the sky during the
thunderstorm. So his is the whirlwind-explanation.

There are extraordinary occurrences, and conventionalization cloaks
them, and the more commonplace the cloakery, the more satisfactory.
Periwinkles appear upon a tract of land, through which there is a road.
A fishmonger did it.

But the crabs and the fishmonger—and if the fishmonger did the
periwinkles, did he do the crabs, if he did it?

Or the crabs and the whirlwind—and, if the periwinkles were segregated
from pebbles and seaweed, why not from the crabs, if segregation did it?

The strongest point for the segregationists is in their own mental
processes, which illustrate that segregations, whether by wind action,
or not, do occur. If they have periwinkles and crabs to explain, and,
say, that with a story of a fishmonger, or of a whirlwind, they can
explain the periwinkles, though so they cannot explain the crabs, a
separation of data occurs in their mentalities They forget the crabs and
tell of the periwinkles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2](lo02.md)
