[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lo05)  [Next](lo07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P889G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lo!*, by Charles Fort, \[1931\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 6

<span class="smallcaps">Flows</span> of blood from "holy images"—I take
for a proposition that, though nothing can be proved—because, if all
phenomenal things are continuous, there is, in a final sense, nothing
phenomenal—anything can be said to be proved—because, if all phenomenal
things are continuous, the most preposterous nonsense must somewhere be
linked with well-established beliefs. If I had the time for an extra
job, I'd ask readers to think up loony theories, and send them to me,
and I'd pick out the looniest of all, and engage to find abundant data
to make it reasonable to anybody who wanted to think it reasonable.

Once upon a time I thought that stories of flows of blood from "holy
images" were as ridiculous as anything that I had ever read in any
astronomical, or geological textbook, or in any treatise upon economics
or mechanics.

<span id="page_582">p. 582</span>

Well, then, what happened?

It occurred to me that stories of flows of blood from "holy images" are
assimilable with our general expressions upon teleportations. Whereupon,
automatically, the formerly despised became the somewhat reasonable.
Though now and then I am ill-natured with scientific methods, it is no
pose of mine that I am other than scientific, myself, in our
expressions. I am tied down like any college professor or Zulu wise man.

As a start-off, I suggest that if we accept that flows of water ever
have appeared at points in objects, called "houses," a jolt is softened,
and we pass easily into thinking that other fluids may have appeared at
points in other objects, called "holy images." The jolt is softened
still more, if we argue that other fluids did appear at points in the
object, called a "house," at Swanton-Novers.

There may be Teleportation, and maybe for ages the secret of it has been
known by esoteric ones. It may be that priests, especially in the past,
when, sociologically, they were of some possible use, have known how to
teleport a red fluid, or blood, to points upon images. They may have
been "agents," able to do this, without knowing how they got their
effects. If I can accept that our whole existence is an organism, I can
accept that, if by so-called miracles, its masses of social growths can
best be organized and kept coordinated, then appear so-called miracles.
The only flaw that I note in this argument is that it overlooks that
there is no need for miracles. If there is a need for belief in
miracles, miracles can be said to have occurred.

We shall have an expression in terms of some of the other of our
expressions. If we arrange the ideas of it neatly, if not nattily, no
more will be required to impress anybody who would like to be impressed.

Out in open fields there have been mysterious, or miraculous, showers of
water. Then has appeared the seeming "agency" of human beings, and
similar showers have occurred in houses

Out in open places, there are electrical manifestations, and they are
known as "lightning." The general specializes, and human beings use
electricity, in their houses, or in images that are called

<span id="page_583">p. 583</span>

"machines." Or we'd say that electricians are trained "agents" in the
uses of lightning.

Out in open places there have been flows of a red liquid.

In *La Nature*, Sept. 25, 1880, Prof. J. Brun, of the University of
Geneva, writes that, near Djebel-Sekra, Morocco, he had heard rumors of
a fall of blood from the sky. He visited the place of the reported
phenomenon. He says that, to his stupefaction, he found rocks and
vegetation covered with scales of a red, shining material. Examining
specimens under a microscope, he found them composed of minute
organisms, which he tells us were *Protococcus fluvialis*.

The identification may be doubted. I don't like it. The ease with which
any writer can pick to pieces any statement made by anybody who is not
present to bandy delusions with him is becoming tiresome, but if I will
write a book, I will write it triumphantly.

So this identification may be doubted. First we note that Prof. Brun
says that, instead of having the features of the Algae that he had
named, these organisms were simple, or undifferentiated. To explain this
appearance, the Professor, who had perhaps recovered from his
stupefaction, says that the things were young ones. But an aggregation
exclusively of young *Protococci* is as extraordinary as would be a vast
assemblage, say filling Central Park, New York, of human infants,
without a sign of a parent.

The explanation sublimates segregationism. It attributes to a grab, an
exquisite discrimination. Somewhere in a swamp, said Prof. Brun, there
were hosts of *Protococci*—venerable ones, middle-aged ones, and their
brats—or "all sizes," as he worded it. Along came a whirlwind. Carrying
away all the minute organisms, this big, rough disturbance removed, with
microscopic fastidiousness, old *Protococci* from young *Protococci*,
according to differences in specific gravity. It cast down at one place
all the bereft parents, and precipitated, at Djebel-Sekra, a rain of
little, red orphans.

When we recover from the sadness into which this tragedy cast us, we
reflect that of all organisms, red blood-cells are of the simplest, or
least differentiated. Anyway, here is an orthodox scientist who accepted
that a red fluid did fall from the sky. I have about a dozen other
records of showers of red fluids that were

<span id="page_584">p. 584</span>

not rains colored by dusts. Upon several of these occasions the
substance was identified as blood.

Or that once upon a time, or once upon an archaic time, there came to
this earth, along arterial paths in space, red flows of a primitive
plasm that deluged continents, and out of which, by the plan, purpose,
guidance, or design that governs developments in all organisms, higher
forms of life developed—

And that maybe this mechanism has not altogether ceased, so that to this
day, but in a vestigial sense, or in a very much dwindled
representation, such flows are continuing—

And that, if human beings ever have had "agency" in directing such
flows, that is only a specialization of the general.

Once upon a time, it was the fashion with those of us who say that they
are of the enlightened, to reject all stories of the "Miracles at
Lourdes." The doctors had much to do with this rejection. Somewhere
behind everything that everybody believes, or disbelieves, is somebody's
pocket. But now, as to those "miracles," the explanation of
auto-suggestion is popular. Some of us who were not interested are
beginning to think. The tendency that I point out is that of so often
rejecting both data and an explanation, simply because one rejects an
explanation. Many of our data are in this position of phenomena at
Lourdes. Explanations have been taken over by theologians, or by
spiritualists, and scientists, instead of opposing this usurpation, have
denied the data. Whether it is only because I now want so to accept, or
not, I now accept that the phenomenon of the stigmata, or flows of blood
from points upon living images, has occurred.

Most likely those who deny the phenomenon of the stigmata are those who
have not read, or have not recently read, the story of Louise Lateau,
for instance. One would have to be of a very old-fashioned resistfulness
not to accept this story, half an hour after reading it. For the latest
instance, that of Theresa Neumann, of the village of Konnersreuth, near
Munich, Germany, see the *New York Times*, April 18, 1928. In recent
years, several cases have been reported, in the United States. Flows of
blood from points in living images lead us to flows of blood from points
in graven images. If one accepts the phenomenon of the stigmata, I don't
know that

<span id="page_585">p. 585</span>

acceptance is monstrously stretched by transferring the idea from bodies
to statues.

"On Saturday (Aug. 21, 1920) all statues and holy pictures, in the home
of Thomas Dwan, of Templemore, Tipperary, Ireland, began to bleed." See
newspapers of August 24th.

A boy, James Walsh, a devout youngster, aged sixteen, was the center of
the reported phenomena, at Templemore. Perhaps the bleeding statues and
pictures were trickeries of his.

All boys and girls are little rascals. This is a generalization that one
can feel somewhat nearly sure of, until it is examined. Then, because of
continuity, we find that we cannot define boys and girls, because no
definite line can be drawn between youngsters and adults. Also rascality
and virtue merge. Well, without arguing, I say that if all the boys and
girls who appear in our records were rascals, they were most expert
little rascals.

"Towns in ruins—terrible bloodshed—bombs and burnings—shocking series of
murders—hellish vandalism—brutality and terrorism—hangings, ambushes,
raids."

Whatever the association may be, I note conditions in Ireland, at this
time.

Here is one newspaper heading, telling of occurrences of one day—"Reign
of terror in Ireland—terrible massacre—appalling loss of
life—holocaust—bloodshed and horror."

Five days before the phenomena at Templemore were first reported, this
town was raided. The Town Hall was burned down, and other buildings were
destroyed. Templemore was terrorized. All shops were closed. Few persons
dared to be seen in the streets. On the road to Templemore there was not
a cart. The town was partly in ruins. It was god-forsaken and
shilling-and-pence-deserted.

I take from the *Tipperary Star:*

"In Dwan's house, and in the house of his sister-in-law, Mrs. Maher,
where lived and worked the young man, James Walsh, statues started to
bleed simultaneously."

This news sneaked up and down the roads. Its carriers were stealths
amidst desolation and ruin. Then they scurried from farm to farm, and
people were coming out from their homes. They went

<span id="page_586">p. 586</span>

to Templemore to see. Then they went in droves. The roads began to hum.
Sounds of tramping and the creaking of wheels—men and horses and
primitive old carts and slickest of new cars from cities—it was
medievalism honked with horns—or one of the crusades, with chariots
slinging out beer bottles—and anachronism is just one more of the
preposterous errors of Life, Nature, or an Organism, or whomever, or
whatever may be the artist that does these things. The roads began to
roar. Strings of people became ropes of marching thousands. Hope and
curiosity, piety, and hilarity, and the incentive to make it a holiday:
out for the fun of it, out to write letters to the newspapers, exposing
the fakery of it, out to confirm religious teachings—but maybe all this
cannot be explained in terms only of known human feelings: it was as
enormous as some of the other movements of living things that I shall
tell of. Then the news that was exciting Ireland was going out to the
world.

The terror that chanting processions were threading may have had
relation with these rhythms of marchers. They were singing their song of
the long, long way, and then arriving shiploads took up the song.
Messrs. Cook, the tourist agents, sent inquiries as to whether the inns
of Templemore could provide for 2,000 pilgrims from England. Scotchmen
and Englishmen and Frenchmen—tourist agencies in the United States,
European countries, and Japan sent inquiries. Waves that billowed from
this excitement beat upon Table Mountain, South Africa, and in the surf
that fell upon Cape Town, people bobbed into a Committee that was sent
to investigate. Drops of blood from a statue in Ireland—and a trickle of
turbans down a gangway at Bombay—a band of pilgrims set out from Bombay.
I am far from making a religion of it, but whatever was directing all
this would make hats come off at Hollywood. Also, whether somebody was
monkeying with red ink, or not, is getting lost in this story. Because
of a town that the world had never before heard of, Paris and London
were losing Americans.

Other phenomena, which may have been teleportations, were reported. In
the earthen floor of the Walsh boy's room, a hollow, about the size of a
teacup, filled with water. No matter how it was drained—and thousands of
persons took away quantities—water, from an unknown source, always
returned to this appearing-point.

<span id="page_587">p. 587</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The subject of
"holy wells" occurs to me, as a field of neglected data. Everything that
I can think of occurs to me as a field of disregard and neglect. Statues
in Walsh's room bled—that's the story—and, as in poltergeist doings—or
as in *other* poltergeist doings—objects moved about in an invisible
force.

I take notice of these stories of objects that moved in the presence of
a boy, because scarcely can it be said that they were of value to
priestcraft, and it can be said that they are common in accounts of
occult phenomena of adolescence. I now offer as satisfactory an
expression upon phenomena at Templemore, as has ever been conceived of
by human mind. A Darwin writes a book about species. By what constitutes
a species? He does not know. A Newton explains all things in terms of
gravitation. But what is gravitation? But he has stopped. I explain the
occurrences at Templemore in terms of poltergeist phenomena. Any
questions? But I claim scientific license for myself, too.

Marvelous cures were reported at Templemore. What teleportations have to
do with cures, I don't see: but I do see that if people believe that any
marvel, such as a new arrival at a Zoo, has curative powers, there will
be a pile of .crutches outside the cage of that thing.

Walkers, bicyclists, motor cars, donkey carts, lorries, charabancs,
wheelbarrows with cripples in them: jaunting cars, special trains
rushing from Dublin. Some of the quietest old towns were in uproars.
Towns all around and towns far away were reporting streets resounding
with tramping thousands. There were not rooms enough in the towns. From
storms of people, drifts slept on door steps. Templemore, partly in
ruins, stood black in the center of a wide growth of tents. This new
city, mostly of tents, was named Pilgrimsville.

I have not taken up definite accounts of the bleeding statues. See
statements published in various issues of the *Tipperary Star*. They are
positively convincing, or they are fairy stories for grown-up brats. I
could fill pages, if I wanted to, but that would imply that I think
there is any meaning in solemn assertions, or in sworn testimony, with
hands on Bibles. For instance, I have notes upon an account by Daniel
Egan, a harness-maker of Templemore, of blood

<span id="page_588">p. 588</span>

that he had seen oozing from a statue—but this statement may be
attributed to a sense of civic responsibility. He would be a bad citizen
who would testify otherwise, considering the profit that was flowing
into Templemore. The town's druggist, a man of what is said to be
education, stated that he had seen the phenomena. He was piling up a
fortune from people who had caught bad colds sleeping in the fields. I
suppose that some of them had come devoutly from far away, but had begun
to sneeze, and had back-slid from piety to pills. However, something
that I cannot find a hint of is that either Dwan or the Mahers charged
admission. At first, people were admitted in batches of fifty, somebody,
holding a watch, saying, every five minutes: "Time, please!" Soon Dwan
and the Mahers placed the statues in windows, for all to see. There were
crowds all day, and torchlight processions moved past these windows all
night.

The blood that was shed in Ireland continued to pour from human beings:
but the bleeding statues stopped, or statements that statues were
bleeding stopped. However, wherever the water was coming from, it
continued to flow from the appearing-point in the Walsh boy's room. In
the *Tipperary Star*, September 25, the estimate is that, in about one
month, one million persons had visited Pilgrimsville. To some degree the
excitement kept up the rest of the year.

They were threading terror with their peaceful processions. They marched
through "a terrible toll of bloodshed—wild scenes at Nenagh—the Banshaw
Horror." Past burned and blackened fields in which corpses were lying,
streamed these hundreds of thousands: chanting their song of the long,
long way; damning the farmers, who were charging them two shillings
apiece for hard-boiled eggs; praying, raiding chicken houses, telling
their beads, stealing bicycles. "Mr. John McDonnell gave a pilgrim a
lift, and was robbed of £250."

But one of these detachments enters a town. In another street, a man
runs from a house—"My God! I'm shot!" Not far away—the steady sound of
tramping pilgrims. These flows of beings are as mysterious as the
teleportations of substances. They may mean an

<span id="page_589">p. 589</span>

organic control, or maintenance of balance, even in a part that is
diseased with bombs and ambuscades and arson.

But it is impossible, except to the hopelessly pious, to consider, with
anything like veneration, any such maintenance of a balance, because, if
a god of order be conceived of, also is he, or it, a god of murder.

But, regarded aesthetically, sometimes there are effects that are
magnificent.

"Bloody Sunday in the County Cork!" But, upon this day, somewhere upon
every road in Ireland is maintained a rhythm.

Somewhere, a lorry of soldiers is moving down a road. Out of bushes come
bullets, and the sides of the car are draped with a droop of dead men.
Not far away, men and women and children are marching. Along the roads
of distracted Ireland—steady pulsations of people and people and people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7](lo07)
