[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lo09)  [Next](lo11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P889G/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lo!*, by Charles Fort, \[1931\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 10

<span class="smallcaps">Unknown</span>, luminous things, or beings, have
often been seen, sometimes close to this earth, and sometimes high in
the sky. It may be that some of them were living things that
occasionally come from somewhere else in our existence, but that others
were lights on the vessels of explorers, or voyagers, from somewhere
else.

From time to time, luminous objects, or beings, have been reported from
Brown Mountain, North Carolina. They appear, and then for a long time
are not seen, and then they appear again. See the *Literary Digest*,
Nov. 7, 1925. I have other records. The luminosities travel, as if with
motions of their own. They are brilliant, globular forms, and move in
the sky, with a leisureliness and duration that exclude any explanation
in meteoric terms. For many years, there had been talk upon this
subject, and then, in the year 1922, people of North Carolina, asking
for a scientific investigation, were referred to the United States
Geological Survey. A geologist was sent from Washington to investigate
these things in the sky.

One imagines, but most likely only faintly, the superiority of this
geologist from Washington. He heard stories from the natives. He
contrasted his own sound principles with the irresponsible gab of
denizens, and went right to the investigation, scientifically. He went
out on a road, and saw lights, and made his report. 47% of the lights
that he saw were automobile headlights; 33% of them were locomotive
headlights; 10% were lights in houses, and 10% were bush fires. Tot that
up, and see that efficiency can't go further. The geologist from
Washington, having investigated nothing that he had been sent to
investigate, returned to Washington, which also,

<span id="page_625">p. 625</span>

by the way, is a place where there's plenty to investigate, and I
suppose that the people of North Carolina will be no wiser, as to these
things in the sky, if some other time they appeal to a United States
Fish Commission, or the Department of Labor.

I don't know to just what degree my accusation, in these matters, is of
the laziness and feeble-mindedness of scientists. Or, instead of
accusing, I am simply pointing out everybody's inability seriously to
spend time upon something, which, according to his preconceptions, is
nonsense. Scientists, in matters of our data, have been like somebody in
Europe, before the year 1492, hearing stories of lands to the west,
going out on the ocean for an hour or so, in a row-boat, and then
saying, whether exactly in these words, or not: "Oh, hell! there ain't
no America."

In *Knowledge*, September, 1913, Count de Sibour enjoyed his laziness,
or incompetence, which a merciful providence, bent upon keeping us human
beings reconciled to being human beings, made him think was his own
superiority. He told a story of foolish, credulous people, in North
Norfolk, England, who, in the winter of 1907-8, believed that a pair of
shining things, moving about the fields, could not be explained as he
explained them. We are told of a commonplace ending of this alleged
mystery: that finally a gamekeeper shot one of these objects, and found
that it was a common barn owl, phosphorescent with decayed wood from its
nesting place, or with a fungous disease of its feathers. According to
other accounts, these things were as brilliant as electric lights. But a
phosphorescent owl could not shine with a light like an electric light.
So De Sibour described the light as "a pale, yellow glow," such as a
phosphorescent owl could shine with.

Science concerns itself with adaptations, and science itself is
adaptation. We are reminded of the Rev. Hugh Guy. He could not explain
downpours: so he turned downpours into "a small quantity," which he
could explain.

De Sibour knew nothing about this subject, from his own experiences. We
go to the same records to which he went. Like him, we find just about
what we want to find. In the London *Times*, Dec. 10, 1907, and in
following issues, are accounts of these luminous objects, which were
flying about the fields of North Norfolk,

<span id="page_626">p. 626</span>

having been reported by Mr. R. W. Purdy, a well-known writer upon
biologic subjects.

Among other attempts to assimilate with the known, or among other
expressions of a world-wide antipathy to the finding out of anything
new, was the idea that owls are sometimes luminous. The idea came first,
or the solution of the problem was published first, and then the problem
was fitted to the solution. This is said to be a favorite method of
ratiocination with inmates of a home for the mentally deficient, but I
should think that one of these inmates should feel at home anywhere. De
Sibour and others fitted in a story that a luminous owl had been shot. I
think that at times there may be faintly luminous owls, because I accept
that, under some circumstances, almost anything may be luminous.
*English Mechanic*, 10-15—case of a man with a luminous toe.

Shining things, flying like birds, in the fields of North Norfolk
continued to be reported. The brilliant things looked electric. When
they rested on trees, everything around them was illuminated. Purdy's
descriptions are very different from "a pale, yellow glow." Upon the
night of December 1st, he saw something that he thought was the lamp of
a motor cycle, moving rapidly toward him, in a field, stopping, then
rising several yards, moving higher, and then retreating. It moved in
various directions. See the *Field*, Jan. 11, 1908.

De Sibour was uncareful, in his mystery-squelching story, his bobbed
story, a story that forced a mystery to a commonplace ending. No
gamekeeper shot a luminous owl, at this time, in North Norfolk.

But somebody did say that he had conventionally solved the mystery.
*Eastern Daily Press* (Norwich), Feb. 7, 1908—that, early in the morning
of the 5th, Mr. E. S. Cannell, of Lower Hellesdon, saw something shining
on a grass bank. According to him, it fluttered up to him, and he found
that it was the explanation of a mystery. It was a luminous owl, he
said; and, as told by him, he carried it to his home, where it died,
"still luminous."

But see the *Press* of the 8th—that Mr. Cannell's dead owl had been
taken to a taxidermist, who had been interviewed. Of course a
phosphorescence of a bird, whether from decayed wood, or

<span id="page_627">p. 627</span>

feather fungi, would be independent of life or death of the bird.
Questioned as to whether the body of the owl was luminous or not, the
taxidermist said: "I have seen nothing luminous about it."

In zoological journals, one frequently comes upon allusions to these
things, or beings, of North Norfolk. No gamekeeper killed one of them,
but the story of the gamekeeper who had killed a luminous owl is told in
these records that are said to be scientific. It is not necessary that a
gamekeeper should kill a luminous owl, and so put an end to a mystery. A
story that he did will serve just as well.

The finding, or the procuring in some way or another, of the body of an
owl, did not put an end to the mystery, except in most of the records,
that are said to be scientific. There were at first two lights, and
there continued to be two lights. The brilliant things continued to be
seen in the fields, flitting about, appearing and disappearing. The last
observation findable by me (May 3, 1908) is recorded in the *Trans.
Norfolk and Norwich Naturalists’ Society*, 8-550. Purdy records an
observation upon the two lights, seen together, more than a month after
the date upon which Mr. Cannell said that his owl had fluttered right up
to him.

Something else was reported, in this region. In the *Eastern Daily
Press*, Jan. 28, 1908, it is said that, at night—moon bright—"a dark,
globular object, with a structure of some kind upon the side of it,
traveling at a great pace," had been seen in the sky, by employees of
the Norwich Transportation Company, at Mousehead. "It seemed too large
for a kite, and, besides, its movements seemed under control, for it was
traveling against the wind."

I am here noting only a few of the many records of unknown, seemingly
living, luminous things that used to be called *will-o’-the-wisps*. They
come and they go, and their reappearances in a small region make me
think of other localized repetitions that we have noted.

London *Daily Express*, February 15, and following issues,
1923—brilliant, luminous things moving across fields, sometimes high in
the air, at Fenny Compton, Warwickshire. They were "intense lights,"
like automobile headlights. Sometimes these luminous things, or beings,
hovered over a farmhouse. It was a deserted

<span id="page_628">p. 628</span>

farmhouse, according to the London *Daily News*, February 13. About a
year later, one of these objects, or whatever they were, returned, and
was reported as "a swiftly moving light," by several persons, one of
them Miss Olive Knight, a school teacher, of Fenny Compton (London
*Sunday News*, Jan. 27, 1924).

The Earl of Erne tells, in the London *Daily Mail*, Dec. 24, 1912, of
brilliant luminosities that, from time to time, in a period of seven or
eight years, had been appearing near Lough Erne, Londonderry, Ireland,
"in size and shape very much like a motor car lamp." In later issues of
the *Daily Mail*, the Countess of Erne tells of these things, or
creatures, "like motor car lamps, large and round."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11](lo11.md)
