[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lo12)  [Next](lo14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P889G/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lo!*, by Charles Fort, \[1931\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 13

<span class="smallcaps">As</span> to data that we shall now take up, I
say to myself: "You are a benign ghoul, digging up dead, old legends and
superstitions, trying to breathe life into them. Well, then, why have
you neglected Santa Claus?"

But I am particular in the matter of data, or alleged data. And I have
come upon no record, or alleged record, of mysterious footprints in
snow, on roofs of houses, leading to chimneys, Christmas Eves.

There is a great deal, in the most acceptable of the science of today,
that represents a rehabilitation of supposed legends, superstitions, and
folk lore. Recall Voltaire's incredulity as to fossils, which according
to him only a peasant would believe in. And note that his antagonism to
fossils was probably because they had been taken over by theologians, in
their way of explaining. Here was one of the keenest of minds: but it
could not accept data, because it rejected explanations of the data. And
so one thinks of, say, the transmutation of metals, which is now
rehabilitated. And so on. There are some backward ones, today, who do
not believe in witches: but every married man knows better.

In the month of May, 1810, something appeared at Ennerdale, near the
border of England and Scotland, and killed sheep, not devouring them,
sometimes seven or eight of them in a night, but biting into the jugular
vein and sucking the blood. That's the story. The only mammal that I
know of that does something like this is the vampire bat. It has to be
accepted that stories of the vampire bat are not myths. Something was
ravaging near Ennerdale, and the losses by sheep farmers were so serious
that the whole region

<span id="page_644">p. 644</span>

was aroused. It became a religious duty to hunt this marauder. Once,
when hunters rode past a church, out rushed the whole congregation to
join them, the vicar throwing off his surplice, on his way to a horse.
Milking, cutting of hay, feeding of stock were neglected. For more
details, see *Chambers’ Journal*, 81-470. Upon the 12th of September,
someone saw a dog in a cornfield, and shot it. It is said that this dog
was the marauder, and that with its death the killing of sheep stopped.

For about four months, in the year 1874, beginning upon January 8th, a
killer was abroad, in Ireland. In *Land and Water*, March 7, 1874, a
correspondent writes that he had heard of depredations by a wolf, in
Ireland, where the last native wolf had been killed in the year 1712.
According to him, a killer was running wild, in Cavan, slaying as many
as 30 sheep in one night. There is another account, in *Land and Water*,
March 28. Here, a correspondent writes that, in Cavan, sheep had been
killed in a way that led to the belief that the marauder was not a dog.
This correspondent knew of 42 instances, in three townlands, in which
sheep had been similarly killed—throats cut and blood sucked, but no
flesh eaten. The footprints were like a dog's, but were long and narrow,
and showed traces of strong claws. Then, in the issue of April 11th, of
*Land and Water*, came the news that we have been expecting. The killer
had been shot. It had been shot by Archdeacon Magenniss, at
Lismoreville, and was only a large dog.

This announcement ends the subject, in *Land and Water*. Almost anybody,
anyway in the past, before suspiciousness against conventions had the
development that it has today, reading these accounts down to the final
one, would say—"Why, of course! It's the way these stories always end
up. Nothing to them." But it is just the way these stories always end up
that has kept me busy. Because of our experience with pseudo-endings of
mysteries, or the mysterious shearing and bobbing and clipping of
mysteries, I went more into this story that was said to be no longer
mysterious. The large dog that was shot by the Archdeacon was sacrificed
not in vain, if its story shut up the minds of readers of *Land and
Water*, and if it be desirable somewhere to shut. up minds upon this
earth.

<span id="page_645">p. 645</span>

See the *Clare Journal*, issues up to April 27th—the shooting of the
large dog, and no effect upon the depredations—another dog shot, and the
relief of the farmers, who believed that this one was the killer—still
another dog shot, and supposed to be the killer—the killing of sheep
continuing. The depredations were so great as to be described as
"terrible losses for poor people." It is not definitely said that
something was killing sheep vampirishly, but that "only a piece was
bitten off, and no flesh sufficient for a dog ever eaten."

The scene of the killings shifted.

*Cavan Weekly News*, April 17—that, near Limerick, more than 100 miles
from Cavan, "a wolf or something like it" was killing sheep. The writer
says that several persons, alleged to have been bitten by this animal,
had been taken to the Ennis Insane Asylum, "laboring under strange
symptoms of insanity."

It seems that some of the killings were simultaneous near Cavan and near
Limerick. At both places, it was not said that finally any animal, known
to be the killer, was shot or identified. If these things that may not
be dogs be, their disappearances are as mysterious as their appearances.

There was a marauding animal in England, toward the end of the year
1905. London *Daily Mail*, Nov. 1, 1905—"the sheep-slaying mystery of
Badminton." It is said that, in the neighborhood of Badminton, on the
border between Gloucestershire and Wiltshire, sheep had been killed.
Sergeant Carter, of the Gloucestershire Police, is quoted—"I have seen
two of the carcasses, myself, and can say definitely that it is
impossible for it to be the work of a dog. Dogs are not vampires, and do
not suck the blood of a sheep, and leave the flesh almost untouched."

And, going over the newspapers, just as we're wondering what's delaying
it, here it is—

London *Daily Mail*, December 19—"Marauder shot near Hinton." It was a
large, black dog.

So then, if in London any interest had been aroused, this announcement
stopped it.

We go to newspapers published nearer the scene of the
sheep-slaughtering. *Bristol Mercury*, November 25—that the killer was a
jackal, which had escaped from a menagerie in Gloucester. And

<span id="page_646">p. 646</span>

that stopped mystification and inquiry, in the minds of readers of the
*Bristol Mercury*.

Suspecting that there had been no such escape of a jackal, we go to
Gloucester newspapers. In the *Gloucester Journal*, November 4, in a
long account of the depredations, there is no mention of the escape of
any animal in Gloucester, nor anywhere else. In following issues,
nothing is said of the escape of a jackal, nor of any other animal. So
many reports were sent to the editor of this newspaper that he doubted
that only one slaughtering thing was abroad. "Some even go so far as to
call up the traditions of the werewolf, and superstitious people are
inclined to this theory."

We learn that the large, black dog had been shot upon December 16th, but
that in its region there had been no reported killing of sheep, from
about November 25th. The look of data is of another scene-shifting. Near
Gravesend, an unknown animal had, up to December 16th, killed about 30
sheep (London *Daily Mail*, December 19). "Small armies" of men went
hunting, but the killing stopped, and the unknown animal remained
unknown.

I go on with my yarns. I no more believe them than I believe that twice
two are four.

If there is continuity, only fictitiously can anything be picked out of
the nexus of all phenomena; or, if there is only oneness, we cannot,
except arbitrarily, find any two units with which even to start the
sequence that twice two are four. And, if there is also discontinuity,
all things are so individualized that, except arbitrarily and
fictitiously, nothing can be classed with, or added to, anything else.

London *Daily Express*, Oct. 14, 1925—the district of Edale, Derbyshire,
terrorized, quite as, centuries ago, were regions by stories of
werewolves. Something, "black in color and of enormous size," was
slaughtering sheep, at night, "leaving the carcasses strewn about, with
legs, shoulders, and heads torn off; broken backs, and pieces of flesh
ripped off." Many hunting parties had gone out, but had been unable to
track the animal. "People in many places are so frightened that they
refuse to leave their homes after dark, and keep their children in the
house." If something had mysteriously appeared, it then quite as
mysteriously disappeared.

<span id="page_647">p. 647</span>

There are stories of wanton killings, or of bodies that were not fed
upon. London *Daily Express*, Aug. 12, 1919—something that, at Llanelly,
Wales, was killing rabbits, for the sake of killing—entering hutches at
night, never taking rabbits, killing them by breaking their backbones.

Early in the morning of March 3, 1906, the sentry at Windsor Castle saw
something, and fired a shot at it (London *Daily Mail*, March 6). The
man's account of what he thought he saw was not published. It was said
that he had shot at one of the ornamental, stone elephants, which had
looked ghostly in moonlight. He was sentenced to three days’ confinement
in barracks, for firing without proper cause. It would be interesting to
know what he thought he saw, with such conviction that he fired and
risked punishment—and whether it had anything to do with

*Daily Mail*, March 22—that about a dozen of the King's sheep, in a
field near Windsor Castle, had been bitten by something, presumably a
dog, so severely that they had to be killed. In the *Daily Mail*, March
19, is an account of extraordinary killing of sheep, "by dogs," near
Guildford, about 17 miles from Windsor. 51 sheep were killed in one
night.

A woman in a field—something grabbed her. At first the story was of a
marauding panther that must have escaped from a menagerie. See the
*Field*, Aug. 12, 19, 1893—an animal, supposed to be an escaped panther,
that was preying upon human beings, in Russia. Look up records of
werewolves, or supposed werewolves, and note instances of attacks almost
exclusively upon women. For a more particularized account, by General R.
G. Burton, who was in Russia, at the time, see the *Field*, Dec. 9,
1893. General Burton had no opportunity to visit the place "haunted by
this mysterious animal," but he tells the story, as he got it from
Prince Sherincki, who was active in the hunt. An unknown beast was
terrorizing a small district in the Orel Government, south of Moscow.
The first attack was upon the evening of July 6th. Three days later,
another woman was grabbed by an undescribed animal, which she beat off,
until help arrived. That day, a boy, aged 10, was killed and devoured.
July 11th—a woman killed, near Trosna. "At four o'clock, on the 14th,
the beast severely wounded another woman and at

<span id="page_648">p. 648</span>

five o'clock, made another attack upon a peasant girl, but was beaten
off by a companion, who pulled the animal off by the tail. These details
are taken from the official accounts of the events."

There was a panic, and the military authorities were appealed to. 3
officers and 40 men were sent from Moscow. They organized beats that
were composed of from 500 to 1,000 peasants, but all hunts were
unsuccessful. On the 24th of July, four women were attacked, and one of
them was killed.

Something was outwitting 3 officers and 40 men, and armies of 1,000
peasants. War was declared. Prince Sherincki, with 10 officers and 130
men, arrived from St. Petersburg. We notice that in uncanny occurrences,
when there is wide publicity, or intense excitement, phenomena stop—or
are stopped. War was declared upon something, but it disappeared.
"According to general descriptions, the animal was long, with a blunt
muzzle, and round, standing-up ears, with a long, smooth, hanging tail."

We know what to expect.

In the *Field*, Dec. 23, 1893, it is said that, after a study of
sketches of the spoor of the animal, the naturalist Alferachi gave his
opinion that the animal was a large dog. He so concluded because of the
marks of protruding nails in the sketches.

But also it is said that plaster casts of the footprints showed no such
marks. It is said that the nail marks had been added to the sketches,
because of assertions by hunters that nail marks had been seen. Writing
30 years later (*Chambers’ Journal*, ser. 7, vol. 14, p. 308) General
Burton tells of the animal as something that had never been identified.

This is fringing upon an enormous subject that leads away from the
slaughtering of sheep to attacks, some of them mischievous, some
ordinarily deadly, and some of the *Jack the Ripper* kind, upon human
beings. Though I have hundreds of notes upon mysterious attacks upon
human beings, I cannot develop an occult criminology now.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 14](lo14.md)
