[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lo18)  [Next](lo20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P889G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lo!*, by Charles Fort, \[1931\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 19

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> the *Encyclopædia Britannica*, the
story of Kaspar Hauser is said to be one of the most baffling mysteries
in history. This is an unusual statement. Mostly we meet denials that
there are mysteries. In everything that I have read upon this case, it
is treated as if it were unique. A writer like Andrew Lang, who has a
liking for mysteries, takes up such a case, with not an indication of a
thought in his mind that it should not be studied as a thing in itself,
but should be correlated with similars. That, inductively, anything of
an ultimate nature could be found out, is no delusion of mine: I think
not of a widening of truth, but of a lessening of error.

<span id="page_701">p. 701</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I am naïve enough
in my own ways, but I have not the youthful hopes of John Stuart Mill
and Francis Bacon.

As to one of the most mysterious of the circumstances in the story of
Kaspar Hauser, I have many records of attacks upon human beings, by
means of an unknown, missile-less weapons. See the newspapers for
several dozen accounts of somebody, or something, that was terrorizing
people in New Jersey, in and around Camden, in the winter of 1927-28.
People were fired upon, and in automobiles there were bullet holes, but
bullets were unfindable. I know of two other instances, in the State of
New Jersey. In France, about the year 1910, there was a long series of
such attacks, attributed to "phantom bandits."

It may be that, telepathically, human beings have been induced to commit
suicide. Look up the drowning of Frank Podmore. It may be that the
mystery of Kaspar Hauser was attracting too much attention. There is a
strange similarity in the taking off of Frank Podmore, Houdini,
Washington Irving Bishop, and perhaps Dr. Crawford. The list is long, of
the deaths that followed the opening of the tomb of Tut-Ankh-Amen.

Psychologically and physiologically the case of the Rev. Thomas Hanna is
so much like the case of Kaspar Hauser that the suggestion is that if
Hanna were not an impostor, Hauser was not. For particulars of the Hanna
case, see Sidis, *Multiple Personality*. In both cases there was said to
be obliteration of memory, or reduction to the mental state of the
newborn, with, however, uncommon, or marvelous, ability to learn.
Phenomena common to both cases were no idea of time; no idea of sex;
appearance of all things, as if at the same distance, or no idea of
distance; and inability, or difficulty, in walking. Kaspar Hauser was no
impostor, who played a stunt of his own invention, as tellers of his
story have thought. If he were an impostor, somewhere, back in times
when little was known of amnesia, he had gotten ahold of detailed
knowledge of profoundest amnesia. And he was about seventeen years old.
Perhaps he was in a state of profound hypnosis. If the boy of Nepal,
India, had wandered from the priest—who may have kidnaped him
ordinarily, and may not have kidnaped him ordinarily—and had appeared in
an

<span id="page_702">p. 702</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> English community,
he would have been unable to account for himself, and there would have
been a mystery similar to Hauser's.

If a "wolf child," when found, was "almost devoid of human
intelligence," and when grown up became a policeman, ours is not quite
the cynicism of a scenario-writer, or a writer of detective stories. If
we do not think that this child had been the associate of wolves from an
age of a few months, we think of an obliterative process that rendered
it "a speechless, little animal," but that did not so impair its
mentality that the child could not start anew. Our expression upon
Kaspar Hauser will be that he was a "wolf child," and that, if he had
appeared somewhere in India, he would, according to local conventions,
probably be called a "wolf child," and that if he had found any place of
refuge, it would be called a "wolf's den": but, in our expression, the
lupine explanation is not accepted in his case and the cases of all
so-called "wolf children." "Wolf children" have appeared, and the
conventional story of their origin is not satisfactory. If "wolf
children" have had something the matter with their legs, or have crawled
on all fours, it is not satisfactory to say that this was because they
had been brought up with wolves, any more than it would be to say that a
young bird, even if not taught by its parents, would not be able to fly,
if brought up with mammals.

If we accept that the Pansini boys ever were teleported, we note the
mental effects of the experience, in that they were in a state of
profound hypnosis.

Little frogs bombard horses—and, though there have been many attempts to
explain Kaspar Hauser, it has never before occurred to anybody to bring
little frogs into an explanation

Or seals in a pond in a park—and the branded reindeer of Spitzbergen—see
back to everything else in this book. Later, especially see back to
lights in the sky, and the disappearance of them, when a story was told,
and, so long as the story was not examined, seemed to account for them.
The luminous owl—the *malmoot*—and if anybody can't be explained
conventionally, he's an impostor—or, if we're all, to some degree,
impostors, he's an exceptional impostor.

<span id="page_703">p. 703</span>

Upon Whit Monday afternoon, May, 1828, a youth, aged sixteen or
seventeen, staggered, with a jaunty stride, into the town of Nuremberg,
Germany. Or, while painfully dragging himself along the ground, he
capered into the town. The story has been told by theorists. The tellers
have fitted descriptions around their theories. The young man was unable
fully to govern the motions of his legs, according to Andrew Lang, for
instance. He walked with firm, quick steps, according to the Duchess of
Cleveland. The Duchess’ theory required that nothing should be the
matter with his legs. By way of the New Gate, he entered the town, and
there was something the matter with his legs, according to all writers,
except the one who preferred that there should be nothing the matter
with his legs.

To Nurembergers who gathered around, the boy held out two letters, one
of which was addressed to a cavalry captain. He was taken to the
captain's house, but, because the captain was not at home, and because
he could give no account of himself, he was then taken to a police
station. Here it was recorded that he could speak only two sentences in
the German language, and that when given paper and pencil he wrote the
name Kaspar Hauser. But he was not put away and forgotten. He had
astonished and mystified Nurembergers, in the captain's house, and these
townsmen had told others, so that a crowd had gone with him to the
station house, remaining outside, discussing the strange arrival. It was
told in the crowd, as recorded by von Feuerbach, that near the New Gate
of the town had appeared a boy who seemed unacquainted with the
commonest objects and experiences of everyday affairs of human beings.
The astonishment with which he had looked at the captain's saber had
attracted attention. He had been given a pot of beer. The luster of the
pot and the color of the beer affected him, as if he had never seen
anything of the kind before. Later, seeing a burning candle, he cried
out in delight with it, and before anybody could stop him, tried to pick
up the flame. Here his education began.

This is the story that has been considered imposture by everybody who
wanted to consider it imposture. I cannot say whether all alleged cases
of amnesia are fakes, or not. I say that, if there be

<span id="page_704">p. 704</span>

amnesia, the phenomena of Kaspar Hauser are aligned with phenomena of
many cases that are said to be well-known. The safest and easiest and
laziest of explanations is that of imposture.

Of the two letters, one purported to be from the boy's mother, dated
sixteen years before, telling that she was abandoning her infant, asking
the finder to send him to Nuremberg, when he became seventeen years old,
to enlist in the Sixth Cavalry Regiment, of which his father had been a
member. The other letter purported to be from the finder of the infant,
telling that he had ten children of his own, and could no longer support
the boy.

Someone soon found that these letters had not been written by different
persons, sixteen years apart. One of them was in Latin characters, but
both were written with the same ink, upon the same kind of paper. In the
"later" letter, it was said: "I have taught him to read and write, and
he writes my handwriting exactly as I do." Whereupon the name that
Kaspar had written, in the police station, was examined, and it was said
that the writings were similar. Largely with this circumstance for a
basis, it has been said that Kaspar Hauser was an impostor—or that he
had written the letters himself. With what expectation of profit to
himself is not made clear. If I must argue, I argue that an impostor,
aware that handwritings might be compared, would, if he were a good
impostor, pretend to be unable to write, as well as unable to speak. And
those who consider Kaspar Hauser an impostor, say that he was a very
good impostor. The explanation in the letter, of the similarity of
handwritings, seems to be acceptable enough.

People living along the road leading to the New Gate were questioned.
Not an observation upon the boy, before he appeared near the Gate, could
be heard of. But we see, if we accept that someone else wrote his
letters, that this Gate could not have been his "appearing-point," in
the sense we're thinking of. He must have been with, or in the custody
of, someone else, at least for a while. Streets near the jail, where for
a time he was lodged, were filled with crowds, clamoring for more
information. Excitement and investigation spread far around Nuremberg. A
reward was offered, and, throughout Germany, the likeness of Kaspar
Hauser was posted in

<span id="page_705">p. 705</span>

public places. People in Hungary took up the investigation. Writers in
France made much of the mystery, and the story was published in England.
People from all parts of Europe went to see the boy. The mystery was so
stimulated by pamphleteers that, though "feverish" seems an extreme
word, writers described the excitement over this boy, "who had appeared
as if from the clouds," as a "fever." Because of this international
interest, Kaspar Hauser was known as "The Child of Europe."

The city of Nuremberg adopted Kaspar. He was sent to live with Prof.
Daumer, a well-known scientist, and the Mayor of Nuremberg notified the
public to "keep away from his present residence, and thereby avoid
collision with the police." The seeming paralysis of his legs wore off.
He quickly learned the German language, but spoke always with a foreign
accent. I have been unable to learn anything of the peculiarities of
this accent. Except to students of revivals of obliterated memories, his
quickness in learning would seem incredible. Writers have said that so
marvelous was his supposed ability to learn that he must have been an
impostor, having a fair education, to start with. Though the
impostor-theory is safest and easiest, some writers have held that the
boy was an idiot, who had been turned adrift. This explanation can be
held simply and honestly by anybody who refuses to believe all records
after the first week or so of observations. Whether impostor or idiot,
the outstanding mystery is the origin of this continentally advertised
boy.

The look of all the circumstances to me is that somebody got rid of
Kaspar, considering him an imbecile, having been able to teach him only
two German sentences. Then the look is that he had not for years known
Kaspar, but had known him only a few weeks, while his disabilities were
new to him. Where this custodian found the boy is the mystery.

Kaspar Hauser, in the year 1829, wrote his own story, telling that,
until the age of sixteen or seventeen, he had lived upon bread and
water, in a small, dark cell. He had known only one person, alluded to
by him, as "the man," who, toward the end of his confinement had taught
him two sentences, one of them signifying that he wished to join a
cavalry regiment, and the other, "I don't know."

<span id="page_706">p. 706</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He had been
treated kindly, except once, when he had been struck for being noisy.

Almost anybody, reading this account, will, perhaps regretfully, perhaps
not, say farewell to our idea of a teleported boy. "That settles it."
But nothing ever has settled anything, except relatively to a desire for
settlement, and if ours is a desire for unsettlement, we have assurance
that we, or any other theorist, can find in the uncertainties of any
human document, whether supposed to have been dictated from on high, or
written by a boy, material for thinking as our theories require.

We note in Kaspar's story a statement that he had no idea of time. That
is refreshing to our wilting theory. We may think that he had lived in a
small, dark room all his life of which he had remembrance, and that that
may have been a period of only a few weeks. We pick upon his statement
that once he had been struck for being noisy. To us that means that he
had been confined, not in a cell, or a dungeon, but in a room in a
house, with neighbors around, and that there was somebody's fear that
sounds from him would attract attention—or that there were neighbors so
close to this place that the imprisonment of a boy could not have been
kept a secret more than a few weeks.

We're not satisfied. We hunt for direct data for thinking that, if
Kaspar Hauser had been confined in a dark room, it had not been for more
than a few weeks.

"He had a healthy color" (Hiltel). "He had a very healthy color: he did
not appear pale or delicate, like one who had been some time in
confinement" (Policeman Wüst).

According to all that can be learned of another case, a man, naked,
almost helpless, perhaps in a state of hypnosis so profound that also it
was physical, so that he could scarcely walk, and in whom memory was
obliterated so that he did not know enough to make his way along a road,
which he crossed, appeared near Petersfield, Hampshire, Feb. 21, 1920.
If we can think that a peasant, near Nuremberg, found on his farm a boy
in a similar condition, and took him in, then considering him an
imbecile, and wanting to get rid of him, keeping him in confinement,
fearing he might be held responsible for him, then writing two letters
that would explain an

<span id="page_707">p. 707</span>

abandonment in commonplace terms that would not excite inquiry, but not
being skillful in such matters, that looks as if we're explaining
somewhat.

Because of the continuation of Kaspar's story, we think that this place
was near Nuremberg. Whit Monday was a holiday, and the farmers, or the
neighbors, were probably not laboring in the fields: so this was the day
for the shifting of the supposed imbecile. Upon this day, as told by
Kaspar, "the man" carried the boy from the dark room, and carried, or
led, him, compelling him to keep his eyes downward, toward Nuremberg.
Kaspar's clothes were changed for the abandonment.

Perhaps he had been found naked, and had been given makeshift garments.
Perhaps he had been found in clothes, of cut and texture that were
remarkable and that would have caused inquiry. The clothes that were
given to him were a peasant's. It was noted in Nuremberg that they
seemed not to belong to him, because Kaspar was not a peasant boy,
judging by the softness of his hands (von Feuerbach).

The story has resemblances to the story of the English boy of Nepal. In
each case somebody got rid of a boy, and in each case it is probable
that a false story was told. If "the man" in Kaspar's case had the ten
children that, to excuse an abandonment, he told of, there'd have been
small chance for him to keep his secret. There are differences in these
two stories. It will be my expression that they came about because of
the wide difference in attention that was attracted.

Oct. 17, 1829—Kaspar was found in the cellar of Prof. Daumer's house,
bleeding from a cut in the forehead. He said that a man in a black mask
had appeared suddenly, and had stabbed him.

It has been explained that this was attempted suicide. But stabbing
oneself in the forehead is a queer way to attempt suicide, and in
Nuremberg arose a belief that Kaspar's life was in danger from unknown
enemies, and two policemen were assigned to guard him.

Upon an afternoon in May, 1831, one of these policemen, while in one
room, heard a pistol shot, in another room. He ran there, and found
Kaspar again wounded in the forehead. Kaspar said that it was an
accident: that he had climbed upon the back of a chair,

<span id="page_708">p. 708</span>

and, reaching for a book, had slipped, and, catching out wildly, had
grasped a pistol that was hanging on the wall, discharging it.

Dec. 14, 1833—Kaspar Hauser ran from a park, crying that he had been
stabbed. Deeply wounded in his side, he was taken to his home. The park,
which was covered with new-fallen snow, was searched, but no weapon was
found, and only Kaspar's footprints were seen in the snow. Two of the
attending physicians gave their opinion that Kaspar could not so have
injured himself. The opinion of the third physician was an indirect
accusation of suicide: that the blow had been struck by a left-handed
person. Kaspar was not left-handed, but was ambidextrous.

Kaspar lay on his bed, with his usual publicity. He was surrounded by
tormentors, who urged him to gasp plugs in his story. He was the only
human being who had been in the park, according to the testimony of the
snow tracks. It was not only Kaspar who was wounded. There was a wound
in circumstances. Tormentors urged him to confess, so that in terms of
the known they could fill out his story. Faith in confessions and the
desire to end a mystery with a confession are so intense that some
writers have said that Kaspar did confess. As a confession, they have
interpreted his protest against his accusers—"My God! that I should so
die in shame and disgrace!"

Kaspar Hauser died. The point of his heart had been pierced by something
that had cut through the diaphragm, penetrating stomach and liver. In
the opinion of two of the doctors and of many of the people of
Nuremberg, this wound could not have been self-inflicted. Rewards for
the capture of an assassin were offered. Again, throughout Germany,
posters appeared in public places, and in Germany and other countries
there were renewed outbursts of pamphlets. The boy appeared "as if from
the clouds," and nothing more was learned.

It was Kaspar's story that a man in the park had stabbed him. If anybody
prefers to think that it cannot be maintained that there was only one
track of footprints in the snow, let him look up various accounts, and
he will find assurances any way he wants to find them. For almost every
statement that I have made, just as good authority

<span id="page_709">p. 709</span>

for denying it, as for stating it, can be found, provided any two
conflicting theories depend upon it. One can read that Kaspar Hauser was
highly intelligent or brilliant. One can read that the autopsy showed
that his brain was atrophied to the size of a small animal's, accounting
for his idiocy. One comes upon just about what one comes upon in looking
up any other matter of history. It is said that history is a science. I
think that it must be.

A great deal, such as Kaspar's alleged ability to see in the dark, and
his aversion to eating meat, and his inability to walk would be
understandable, if could be accepted the popular theory that Kaspar
Hauser was the rightful Crown Prince of Bavaria, who for political
reasons had been kept for sixteen or seventeen years in a dungeon. There
would be an explanation for two alleged attacks upon him. But see back
to his own story of confinement in a house, or a peasant's hut, near
Nuremberg, where probably his imprisonment could not have been kept
secret more than a few weeks. See testimony by Hiltel and Wüst.

See back to a great deal more in this book—

The wolf of Shotley Bridge, and the wolf of Cumwinton—or that something
removed one wolf and procured another wolf to end a mystery that was
attracting too much attention.

It was said that Kaspar Hauser was murdered to suppress political
disclosures. If it be thinkable that Kaspar was murdered to suppress a
mystery, whether political, or not so easily defined, there are
statements that support the idea that also some of the inhabitants of
Nuremberg, who were prominent in Kaspar's affairs, were murdered. One
can read that von Feuerbach was murdered, or one can read that von
Feuerbach died of a paralytic stroke. See Evans (*Kaspar Hauser*, p.
150)—that, soon after the death of Kaspar Hauser, several persons, who
had shown much interest in his case, died, and that it was told in
Nuremberg that they had been poisoned. They were Mayor Binder, Dr.
Osterhauser, Dr. Preu, and Dr. Albert.

"Kaspar Hauser showed such an utter deficiency of words and ideas, such
perfect ignorance of the commonest things and appearances of Nature, and
such horror of all customs, conveniences, and

<span id="page_710">p. 710</span>

necessities of civilized life, and, withal, such extraordinary
peculiarities in his social, mental, and physical disposition, that one
might feel oneself driven to the alternative of believing him to be a
citizen of another planet, transferred by some miracle to our own" (von
Feuerbach).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 20](lo20)
