[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lo19)  [Next](lo21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P889G/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lo!*, by Charles Fort, \[1931\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_711">p. 711</span>

# PART II

### 20

<span class="smallcaps">According</span> to appearances, this earth is a
central body, within a revolving, starry globe.

But am I going to judge by appearances?

But everything of the opposing doctrine is judgment by other
appearances. Everybody who argues against judging by appearances bases
his argument upon other appearances. Monistically, it can be shown that
everybody who argues against anything bases his argument upon some
degree or aspect of whatever he opposes. Everybody who is attacking
something is sailing on a windmill, while denouncing merry-go-rounds.

"You can't judge by appearances," say the astronomers. "Sun and stars
seem to go around this earth, but they are like a field that seems to go
past a train, whereas it is the train that is passing the field."
Judging by this appearance, they say that we cannot judge by
appearances.

Our judgments must depend upon evidence, the scientists tell us.

Let somebody smell, hear, taste, see, and feel something that is unknown
to me, and then tell me about it. Like everybody else, I listen
politely, if he's not too long about it, and then instinctively consult
my preconceptions, before deciding whether all this is evidence. An
opinion is a matter of evidence, but evidence is a matter of opinion.

We can depend upon intuition, says Bergson.

I could give some woebegone accounts of what has befallen me, by
depending upon intuitions, whether called "hunches," or "transcendental
consciousness"; but similar experiences have befallen everybody else.
There would have been what I call good sport, if Bergson had appeared
upon the floor of the Stock Exchange, and preached his doctrine, in
October, 1929.

<span id="page_712">p. 712</span>

We have only faith to guide us, say the theologians.

Which faith?

It is my acceptance that what we call evidence, and whatever we think we
mean by intuition and faith are the phenomena of eras, and that the best
of minds, or minds best in rapport with the dominant motif of an era,
have intuition and faith and belief that depend upon what is called
evidence, relatively to pagan gods, then to the god of the Christians,
and then to godlessness—and then to whatever is coming next.

We shall have data for thinking that our existence, as a whole, is an
organism. First we shall argue that it is a thinkable-sized formation,
whether organic, or not. If now, affairs upon this earth be fluttering
upon the edge of a new era, and I give expression to coming thoughts of
that era, thousands of other minds are changing, and all of us will take
on new thoughts concordantly, and see, as important evidence, piffle of
the past.

Even in orthodox speculations there are more or less satisfactory
grounds for thinking that ours is an existence, perhaps one of countless
other existences, that is an egg-like formation, shelled away from the
rest of the cosmos. Many astronomers have noted that the Milky Way is a
broad band in the sky, with the look of a streak around a globular
object. For conventional reasons for thinking that the "solar system" is
central in "a mighty cluster of stars," see Dolmage, *Astronomy*, p.
327. Dolmage even speculates upon a limiting demarcation which is akin
to the notion of a shell, shutting off this existence from everything
else.

Back in the pessimistic times of Sir Isaac Newton was formulated the
explanation of existence in general that is our opposition. It was the
melancholy doctrine of universal fall. It was in agreement with the
theology of the time: fallen angels, the fall of mankind: so falling
planets, falling moons, everything falling. The germ of this despair was
the supposed fall of the moon, not to, but around, this earth. But if
the moon is falling away from observers upon one part of this earth's
surface, it is rising in the sky, relatively to other observers. If
something is quite as truly rising as it is falling, only minds that
belong away back in times when everything was supposed to be falling,
can be satisfied with this yarn of the rising moon

<span id="page_713">p. 713</span>

that is falling. Sir Isaac Newton looked at the falling moon, and
explained all things in terms of attraction. It would be just as logical
to look at the rising moon, and explain all things in terms of
repulsion. It would be more widely logical to cancel falls with rises,
and explain that there is nothing.

I think of this earth as central, and as almost stationary, and with the
stars in a shell, revolving around. By so thinking, I have the concept
of an object, and the visualization of an existence as a whole. But the
trouble with this idea is that it is reasonable. Not absolutely can it
be said that human minds reason according to reasonableness. There is
the love of the paradox to consider. We are in agreement with
observations, but peasants, or clodhoppers, think as we think. We offer
no paradox to make one feel superior to somebody who hops from clod to
clod.

What is the test? Of course, if there are no standards, all tests must
be fakes. But if we have an appearance of reasonableness, and if the
other side says that it is reasonable, how choose?

We read over and over that prediction is the test of science.

The astronomers can predict the movements of some of the parts of what
they call the solar system.

But so far are they from a comprehensive grasp upon the system as a
whole that, if, for a basis of their calculations, be taken that this
earth is stationary, and that the sun and the planets, and the stars in
a shell, move around this earth, the same motions of heavenly bodies can
be foretold. Take for a base that the earth moves around the sun, or
take that the sun moves around the earth: upon either base the
astronomers can predict an eclipse, and enjoy renown and prestige, as if
they knew what they were telling about. Either way there are
inaccuracies.

Our opposition is ancient and at least uppish.

Prof. Todd, in his book, *Stars and Telescopes*, says: "Astronomy may be
styled a very aristocrat among the sciences."

For similar descriptions, by implication, of themselves, by themselves,
see all other books by astronomers.

There are aristocratic human beings. I'll not contend otherwise. There
are aristocratic dogs, and all cats, except for relapses, are
aristocrats. There are aristocratic goldfish. In whatever is bred, is
the

<span id="page_714">p. 714</span>

tendency to aristocraticize. Porcupines, as the untouchable and the
stupid, are *verier* aristocrats than the merely *very*. The
aristocratic state is supposed to be the serene, the safe, and the
established. It is unintelligent, because intelligence is only a means
of making adaptations, and the aristocratic is the made. If this state
of the relatively established and stupid were the really, or finally,
established and stupid, we'd see good reason for the strivings and
admirations and imitations of strugglers, climbers, or newcomers to
stabilize themselves into stupors. But, in phenomenal being, the
aristocratic, or the academic, is, though thought of as the arrived,
only a poise between the arriving and the departing. When far-advanced
it is the dying. Wherein it is a goal, our existence is, though only
locally, suicidal. The literature of the academic ends with the
obituary. Prof. Todd's self-congratulation is my accusation.

But there is only relative aristocracy. If I can show that, relatively
to a viewpoint, other than the astronomers’ own way of adoring
themselves, the supposed science of astronomy is only a composition of
yarns, evasions, myths, errors, disagreements, boasts, superstitions,
guesses, and bamboozlements, I am spreading the good cheer that it is
still very faulty and intellectual and still alive, and may be able to
adjust, and keep on exciting its exponents with admiration for
themselves.

We shall see what mathematical astronomy is said to start with. If we
can't accept that it ever fairly started, we'll not delay much with any
notion that it could get anywhere.

The early mathematical astronomers, in their calculations upon moving
bodies, could not treat of weights, because these inconstancies are
relative; nor of sizes, because sizes are relative and variable. But
they were able to say that they had solved their problem of how to
begin, because nobody else interfered and asked whether they had or not.
They gave up weight and size and said that their treatment was of
*mass*.

If there were ultimate particles of matter, one could think of *mass* as
meaning a certain number of those things. When atoms were believed in,
as finals, an astronomer could pretend that he knew what he meant by a
quantity of matter, or *mass*. Then, with electrons, he could more or
less seriously keep on pretending. But

<span id="page_715">p. 715</span>

now the sub-electron is talked of. And, in turn, what is that composed
of? Perhaps the pretensions can stretch, but there is too much strain to
the seriousness. If nobody knows what constitutes a quantity of matter,
the astronomer has no idea of what he means by *mass*. His is a science
of *masses*.

But it may be said that, even though he has not the remotest idea of
what he is calculating about, the astronomers’ calculations work out,
just the same.

There was the *mass* of Mars, once upon a time, for instance: or the
"known" unknowables constituting the planet. Once upon a time, the
*mass* of Mars was said to be known. Why shouldn't it be said to be
known? The equations were said to work out, as they should work out.

In the year 1877, two satellites of the planet Mars were discovered. But
their distances and their periods were not what they should be,
theoretically. So then everything that had worked out so satisfactorily
as it should work out, turned out to have worked out as it shouldn't
have worked out. A new *mass* had to be assigned to the planet Mars.

Now that works out as it should work out.

But I think that it is cannier not to have things so marvelously work
out, as they should work out, and to have an eye for something that may
come along and show that they had worked out as they shouldn't have
worked out. For data upon these work-outs, see Todd, *Astronomy*, p. 78.

It would seem that the mistake by the astronomers is in thinking that,
in a relative existence, there could be more than relative *mass*, if
the idea of *mass* could be considered as meaning anything. But it is
more of a dodge than a mistake. It is just relativity that the
astronomers have tried to dodge, with a pseudo-concept of a constant, or
a final. Instead of science, this is metaphysics. It is the childish
attempt to find the absolutely dependable in a flux, or an
intellectually not very far-advanced attempt to find the absolute in the
relative. The concept of *mass* is a borrowing from the theologians, who
are in no position to lend anything. The theologians could not
confidently treat of human characters, personalities, dispositions,
temperaments, nor intellects, all of which are shifts: so

<span id="page_716">p. 716</span>

they said that they conceived of finals, or unchangeables, which they
called "souls." If economists and psychologists and sociologists should
disregard all that is of hopes and fears and wants and other changes of
human nature, and take "souls" for their units, they would have sciences
as aristocratic and sterile as the science of astronomy, which is
concerned with *souls*, under the name of *masses*. A final, or
unchangeable, must be thought of as a state of unrelatedness. Anything
that is reacting with something else must be thought of as being in a
state of change. So when an astronomer formulates, or says he
formulates, the effects of one *mass*, or one planet, as a *mass*, upon
another, his meaningless statement might as well be that the subject of
his equations is the relations of unrelatedness.

Starting with nothing thinkable to think about, if constants, or finals,
are unknown in human experience, and are unrepresentable in human
thought, the first and the simplest of the astronomers’ triumphs, as
they tell it, is the Problem of the Two Masses.

This simplest of the problems of celestial mechanics is simply a
fiction. When Biela's comet split, the two *masses* did not revolve
around a common center of gravity. Other comets have broken into parts
that did not so revolve. They have been no more subject to other
attractions than have been this earth and its moon. The theorem is
Sunday School Science. It is a mathematician's story of what bodies in
space ought to do. In the textbooks, it is said that the star Sirius and
a companion star exemplify the theorem, but this is another yarn. If
this star has moved, it has not moved as it was calculated to move. It
exemplifies nothing but the inaccuracies of the textbooks. It is by
means of their inaccuracies that they have worked up a reputation for
exactness.

Often in his book, an astronomer will sketchily take up a subject, and
then drop it, saying that it is too complex, but that it can be
mathematically demonstrated. The reader, who is a good deal of a dodger,
himself, relieved at not having to go into complexities, takes this
lazily and faithfully. It is bamboozlement. There are many of us,
nowadays, who have impressions of what mathematicians can do to, or
with, statistics. To say that something can be mathematically
demonstrated has no more meaning than to say

<span id="page_717">p. 717</span>

of something else that it can be politically demonstrated. During any
campaign, read newspapers on both sides, and see that anything can be
politically demonstrated. Just so it can be mathematically shown that
twice two are four, and it can be mathematically shown that two can
never become four. Let somebody have two of arithmetic's favorite fruit,
or two apples, and undertake to add two more to them. Although he will
have no trouble in doing this, it can be mathematically shown to be
impossible. Or that, according to Zeno's paradoxes, nothing can be
carried over intervening space and added to something else. Instead of
ending up skeptically about mathematics, here am I upholding that it can
prove anything.

We are told in the textbooks, or the tracts, as I regard these
propagandist writings of Sunday School Science, that by parallax, or
annual displacement of stars, relatively to other stars, the motion of
this earth around the sun has been instrumentally determined. Mostly,
these displacements are about the apparent size of a fifty cent piece,
held up by someone in New York City, as seen by somebody in Saratoga.
This is much refinement. We ask these ethereal ones—where is their
excuse, if they get an eclipse wrong by a millionth of an inch, or a
millionth of a second?

We look up this boast.

We find that the disagreements are so great that some astronomers have
reported what is called *negative parallax*, or supposed displacement of
stars, the wrong way, according to theory. See Newcomb, *The Stars*, p.
152. See the *English Mechanic*, 114-100, 112. We are out to show that
astronomers themselves do not believe parallactic determinations, but
believe those that they want to believe. Newcomb says that he does not
believe these determinations that are against what he wants to believe.

Spectroscopic determinations are determined by whatever the
spectroscopists want to determine. If one thinks not, let one look up
the "determinations" by astronomers who were for and against Einstein.
Grebe and Bachem, at Bonn, found shifts of spectral lines in Einstein's
favor. They were for Einstein. St. John, at the Mt. Wilson Observatory,
found the testimony of the spectroscope not in Einstein's favor. He was
against Einstein. The spectroscope is

<span id="page_718">p. 718</span>

said to be against us. But, if we had a spectroscope of our own, it
would be for us.

In *The Earth and the Stars*, Abbot says that the spectroscope "seems to
indicate" that variable stars, known as the *Cepheid Variables*, are
double stars. But he says: "The distance between the supposed pairs
turns out to be impossibly small." When a spectroscopic determination is
not what it should be, it only "seems to indicate."

The camera is another of the images in astronomical idolatry. I note
that bamboozlements that have played out everywhere else, still hold
good in astronomy. Spirit photographs fall flat. At the movies, if we
see somebody capering seemingly near an edge of a roof, we do not think
that he had been photographed anywhere near an edge of a roof.
Nevertheless, even in such a religious matter as photography in
astronomy, a camera tells what it should tell, or the astronomers will
not believe it.

If the astronomers would fight more among themselves, more would come
out. How can I be a pacifist, just so long as .I am trying to educate
myself? Much comes out, war times. Considerable came out, in
astronomical matters, during the Mars controversy. Everything that was
determined by Lowell, with his spectroscope, and his camera, and his
telescope, as an indication of the existence of life upon the planet
Mars, was determined by Campbell, with his spectroscope, and his camera,
and his telescope, to be not so. The question is not what an instrument
determines. The question is—whose instrument? All the astronomers in the
world may be against our notions, but most of their superiority is in
their more expensive ways of deceiving themselves.

Foucault's experiment, or the supposed demonstration with the pendulum,
is supposed to show that this earth rotates daily. If a pendulum does—at
least for a while—swing somewhat nearly in a constant line, though
changing relatively to environment, and if we think that neither
religiously, nor accidentally, has it received some helpful little
pushes, we accept that here there may be indication of an annual, and
not daily, rotation of this earth. That would account for the annual
shift, and not the daily shift, of the stars. I don't know that I accept
this, but I have no opposing prejudice.

<span id="page_719">p. 719</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When I write of
this earth as "almost stationary," as I have to regard it, if I think of
it as surrounded by a starry shell that is not vastly far away, I mean
that relatively to the tremendous velocities of conventionality. But
this alleged experiment has never been more than part of an experiment.
I quote from one of the latest textbooks, *Astronomy*, by Prof. John C.
Duncan, published in 1926. We are told that a pendulum, if undisturbed,
swings for "several hours," in "very nearly" the same plane. Farther
along we read that, in the latitude of Paris, where Foucault made his
experiment, the time for a complete demonstration is 32 hours. Prof.
Duncan makes no comment, but it is the reader's own fault if he reads in
these statements that the swing of a pendulum, through more than part of
an experiment, and in more than "very nearly" the same plane, ever has
demonstrated the daily rotation of this earth..

In the textbooks, which are pretty good reading for contrary persons
like ourselves, it is said that the circumstance that this earth is
approximately an oblate spheroid indicates the rapid rotation of this
earth. But our negative principle is that nothing exclusively indicates
anything. It does not matter what an astronomer, or anybody else says to
support any statement, the support must be a myth. Even if I could
accept that the astronomers are right, I could not accept that they can
demonstrate that they're right. So we hunt around for opposing data,
knowing that they must be findable somewhere. We come upon the shape of
the sun. The sun rotates rapidly, but the sun is not an oblate spheroid:
if there be any departure from sphericity, the sun is a prolate
spheroid. Or we argue that oblateness may be an indication that in
early, formative times this earth rotated rapidly, but that now this
earth could be oblate and almost stationary. It may be another instance
of my many credulities, but here I am accepting that this roundish, or
perhaps pear-shaped, earth is flattened at the poles, as it is said to
be.

Astronomers cite relative numerousness of meteors, as indication of this
earth's motion in an orbit. Prof. Duncan (*Astronomy*, p. 262) says that
meteors seen after midnight are about twice as numerous as are those
that are seen before midnight. "This is because, in the latter half of
the night, we are riding on the front side of the Earth, as it moves
along its orbit, and receives meteors from all

<span id="page_720">p. 720</span>

directions, whereas in the earlier half we see none of those which the
Earth meets 'head on.'"

There is no use comparing little sparks of meteors, seen at different
times of night, because of course soon after midnight more of these
little things are likely to be seen than earlier in the evening, in
lingering twilight. Here, Prof. Duncan's statement is that when meteors
can be seen morely, more meteors can be seen. That is wisdom that we
shall not defile.

In the records of great meteors that were seen in England, in the year
1926—see *Nature*, *Observatory*, *English Mechanic*—eighteen were seen
before midnight, and not one was seen after midnight. All other records
that I know of are against this alleged indication that this earth moves
in an orbit. For instance, see the catalogue of meteors and meteorites
published in the *Rept. Brit. Assoc. Ad. Sci.*, 1860. See page 18. 51
after midnight (from midnight to noon); 146 before midnight (noon to
midnight). I have records of my own, for 125 years, in which the
preponderance of early meteors is so great that, if there were any sense
to this alleged indication, it would mean that this earth is running
backward, or going around the way it shouldn't. Of course I note that
great meteors are more likely to be reported before midnight, because,
though many persons are out after midnight, mostly they're not out
reporting meteors. But Prof. Duncan has made a statement, which depends
upon records, and I am checking it up, according to records. Year 1925,
for instance—meteors of France and England—14 before midnight: 3 after
midnight. This record, as I have it, is not complete, but I will hold
out for the proportionality. Most of the great meteors of 1930 were seen
before midnight.

Whatever becomes of Prof. Duncan's statement, I'll make one, myself, and
that is that, if nobody looks up, or checks up, what the astronomers
tell us, they are free to tell us anything that they want to tell us.
Their system is a slippery imposition of evasions that cannot be checked
up, or that, for various reasons, mostly are not checked up. But at
least once there was a big check up.

The 24th of January, 1925—excitement in New York City.

It was such as, in all foreign countries, is supposed to arise in

<span id="page_721">p. 721</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> America only when
somebody finds out a new way of making dollars.

It was the morning of the eclipse of the sun, total over a part of New
York City.

Open spaces in Central Park were crowded down to a line, as exactly as
possible at 83rd Street. Up in the air were planes full of observers.
Coogan's Bluff was lively with scientific gab. Hospitals were arranging
that patients should see the eclipse. There was scarcely a dollar in it,
and this account will be believed, in England and France, no more than
will most of our other accounts. At the Fifth Avenue Police Court,
Magistrate Dale adjourned court, and went, with lawyers and cops and
persons out on bail to the roof. In Brooklyn, the Chamber of Commerce
dropped all matters of exports and imports and went to the roof. I don't
suppose everybody was looking. I can't accept homogeneity. There were
probably some contrary ones who went down into cellars, simply because
most of their neighbors were up on roofs. But the New York Telephone
Company reported that when the eclipse came, not one call came into one
of its offices, for ten minutes. When there are uproars in New York,
they are such uproars as have never been heard anywhere else: but I
think that most striking in the records of silences is this hush that
came for ten minutes upon New York City.

Along the line of 83rd Street, which had been exactly predicted by the
astronomers, as the southern limit of the path of totality, and in
places north and south, were stationed 149 observers, sent by the New
York lighting companies, to report upon light effects. With them were
photographers.

At Petropaulovsk, Kamchatka, and at Cachapoyas, Peru, an eclipse is all
that it should be, and books by astronomers tell of the minute exactness
of the astronomers. But this was in New York City. Coogan's Bluff got
into this. There were cops and judges and gunmen on roofs, and the
telephones were silent. There were 149 expert observers, who were not
astronomers. They had photographers with them.

In time, the astronomers did pretty well. But, hereafter when they tell
of their refinements, as with discs several hundred miles

<span id="page_722">p. 722</span>

away, I shall think, not of fifty cent pieces, but of Ferris Wheels.
Their prediction was wrong by four seconds.

The 149 observers for the lighting companies reported that the
astronomers were wrong, in space, by three quarters of a mile.

It was the day of the big check up.

If the sun and the planets compose a system that is enormously remote
from everything else in existence, what is it that regularizes the
motions, and why does not the mechanism run down? The astronomers say
that the planets keep moving, and that a whole system does not run down,
because space is empty, and there is "absolutely" nothing to tend to
stop the moving bodies. See Abbot, *The Earth and the Stars*, p. 71.
Astronomers say this early in their books. Later, they forget. Later,
when something else requires explanation, they tell a different story.
They explain the zodiacal light in terms of enormous quantities of
matter in space. In their chapters upon meteors, they tell of millions
of tons of meteoric dusts that fall from space to this earth, every
year. Abbot says that space is "absolutely" empty. Ball, for instance,
explains the shortening of the orbit of Encke's comet as a result of
friction with enormous quantities of matter in space. I don't know how
satisfactory, except to ourselves, our own expression will be, but
compare it with a story of an absolute vacancy that is enormously
occupied.

There is a tendency to regularize. Crystals, flowers, and butterflies’
wings. Proportionately as they become civilized, people regularize, or
move in orbits. People regularize in eating and sleeping. There are
clockwork Romeos and Juliets. Everywhere, where the tendency is not
toward irregularization, the tendency is toward regularization. Here's a
good specimen of my own wisdom. Something is so, except when it isn't
so.

Not in terms of gravitation, but in terms of this tendency to
regularize, celestial periodicities may be explained.

Why does not the mechanism of what the astronomers think is a solar
system run down?

The astronomers say that this is because it is unresisted by a resisting
medium.

Why does not a heart run down? Anyway for a long time?

<span id="page_723">p. 723</span>

It is only a part, and, as a part, is sustained by what may be
considered a whole. If we think of the so-called solar system, not as a
virtually isolated, independent thing, with stars trillions of miles
away, but as part of what may be considered an organic whole, within a
starry shell, our expression is that it is kept going organically, as
the heart of a lesser organism is kept going.

Why does not the astronomers’ own system, or systematized doctrine, run
down, or why so slow about it? It is only a part of wider organization,
from which it is receiving maintenance in the form of bequests,
donations, and funds of various kinds.

Our opposition is a system of antiquated thought, concerned primarily
with the unthinkable. It is supported by instruments that are believed
when they tell what they should tell. The germ of the system is the fall
of the rising moon. Its simplest problem is a fairy-theorem, fit for
top-heavy infants, but too fanciful for grownup realists. Its prestige
is built upon its predictions. We have noted one of them that was
three-quarters of a mile wrong.

Newtonism is no longer satisfactory. There is too much that it cannot
explain.

Einsteinism has arisen.

If Einsteinism is not satisfactory, there is room for other notions.

For records of eclipses during which the stars were not displaced, as,
according to Einstein, they should be, see indexes of *Nature*. See
vols. 104 and 105. Displacement of spectral lines—see records of
astronomers who have disagreed. Perihelion-motion of Mercury's
orbit—Einstein calculated without knowing what he was calculating about.
Nobody knows what this eccentricity is. See records of the transits of
Mercury. Neither Newtonians nor Einsteinites have predicted them right.
See the London *Times*, April 17 and 24, 1923. Here Sir J. Larmor shows
that, if Einstein's predictions of light-effects during eclipses were
verified, they disproved his theory—that, though Prof. Einstein would be
a great mathematician, if in our existence anything could really be
anything, relativity is so against him that he is only a relatively
great mathematician, and made a bad error in his calculations, having
mistakenly doubled certain effects.

Defeat has been unconsciously the quest of all religions, all

<span id="page_724">p. 724</span>

philosophies, and all sciences. If they were consciously trying to lose,
they would be successes. Their search has been for the Absolute, in
terms of which to explain the phenomenal, or for the Absolute to relate
to. Supposed to have been found, it has been named Jehovah, or
Gravitation, or the Persistence of Force. Prof. Einstein has taken the
Velocity of Light, as the Absolute to relate to.

We cannot divorce the idea of reciprocity from the idea of relations,
and relating something to the Absolute would be relating the Absolute to
something. This is defeating an alleged concept of the Absolute, with
the pseudo-idea of the Relative Absolute. The doctrine of Prof.
Einstein's is based not upon an absolute finding, but upon a question:

Which is the more graspable interpretation of the Michelson-Morley
experiments:

That no motion of this earth in an orbit is indicated, because the
velocity of light is absolute;

Or that no motion of this earth in an orbit is indicated, because this
earth is stationary?

Unfortunately for my own expressions, I have to ask a third question:

Who, except someone who was out to boost a theory ever has demonstrated
that light has any velocity?

Prof. Einstein is a Girondist of the Scientific Revolution. His revolt
is against classical mechanics, but his methods and his delusions are as
antiquated as what he attacks. But it is my expression that he has
functioned. Though his strokes were wobbles, he has shown with his
palsies the insecurities of that in Science which has been worshipfully
regarded as the Most High.

It is my expression that the dissolution of phenomenal things is as much
a matter of internal disorders as the effect of any external force, and
that the slump of so many astronomers in favor of Einstein, who has made
good in nothing, indicates a state of dissatisfaction that may precede a
revolution—or that, if a revolt starts in the Observatories, hosts of
irreconcilable observations will be published by the astronomers
themselves, cutting down distances of planets and stars enormously. I
shall note an observation by an astronomer, such as probably no
astronomer, in the past, would

<span id="page_725">p. 725</span>

have published. It seems to have been recorded reluctantly, and a
conventional explanation was attempted—but it was published.

I take from a clipping, from the *Los Angeles Evening Herald*, April 28,
1930, which was sent to me by Mr. L. E. Stein, of Los Angeles. In an
account of the eclipse of the sun, April 28, 1930, Dr. H. M. Jeffers,
staff astronomer of Lick Observatory, says: "We expected the shadow to
be but half a mile in width. Instead of that, I think that it was nearer
five miles broad." He says: "It may be suggested by others that the
broad shadow was cast by astronomical errors due to the moon being
closer to the earth than we have placed it in theory. But I don't
believe that this broad belt was caused by anything but refraction."

The difference between half a mile and five miles is great. If the
prophets of Lick Observatory did not take refraction into consideration,
all the rest of their supposed knowledge may be attributable to
incompetence. This difference may mean that the moon is not more than a
day's journey away from this earth.

In *The Earth and the Stars*, p. 211, Abbot tells of the spectroscopic
determinations, by which the new star in Perseus (Feb. 22, 1901) was
"found" to be at a distance of 300 light years from this earth. The news
was published in the newspapers. A new star had appeared, about the year
1600, and its light was not seen upon this earth, until Feb. 22, 1901.
And the astronomers were able to tell this—that away back, at a moment
when Queen Elizabeth—well, whatever she was doing—maybe it wouldn't be
any too discreet to inquire into just what she was doing—but the
astronomers told that just when Queen Elizabeth was doing whatever she
was doing, the heavens were doing a new star. And where am I,
comparatively? Where are my poor, little yarns of flows of methylated
spirits from ceilings, and "mysterious strangers," and bodies on
railroad lines, compared with a yarn of the new star and Queen
Elizabeth?

But the good, little star restores my conceit. In the face of all
spectroscopes in all Observatories, it shot out nebulous rings that
moved at a rate of 2 or 3 seconds of arc a day. If they were 300 light
years away, this was a velocity far greater than that of light is said
to be. If they were 300 light years away, it was motion at the rate of
220,000 miles a second. There were dogmas that could not

<span id="page_726">p. 726</span>

stand this, and the spectroscopic determinations, which were in
agreement, were another case of agreements working out, as they
shouldn't have worked out. The astronomers had to cut down one of their
beloved immensities. Whether as a matter of gallantry, or not, they
spread a denial for Queen Elizabeth's reputation to tread upon, saving
that from the mud of an inquiry into just what Her Majesty was doing,
and substituting unromantic speculations upon what, say, Andrew Jackson
was up to.

Abbot's way of explaining the mistake is by attributing the first
"pronouncements" to "the roughness of the observations."

All over this earth, astronomers were agreeing in these
"determinations." They were refinements until something else appeared
and roughened them.

It would seem that, after this fiasco of the readjusted interest in what
historical personages were doing, astronomers should have learned
something. But, if Prof. Todd is right, in his characterization of them,
that is impossible. About twenty years later, this situation,
essentially the same in all particulars, repeated. Upon May 27, 1925, a
new star was discovered in the southern constellation Pictor. By
spectroscopic determination, its distance was "determined" to be 540
light years. See this stated in a bulletin of the Harvard Observatory,
November, 1927.

March 27, 1928—the new star split.

When the split was seen, astronomers of the South African Observatory
repudiated the gospel of their spectroscopes of three years before.
There must have been much roughness, even though there had been three
years in which to plane down the splinters. They cut the distance from
540 to 40 light years. If there should be any more reductions like this,
there may start a slump of immensities down toward a conception of a
thinkable-sized formation of stars. A distance cut down 60 × 60 × 24 ×
365 × 500 × 186,000 miles is a pretty good start.

Prof. Einstein, having no means of doing anything of the kind, predicts
a displacement of the stars.

Astronomers go out upon an expedition to observe an eclipse, and, not
knowing that Einstein has no special means of predicting

<span id="page_727">p. 727</span>

anything, they report, presumably because they want so to report, that
he is right.

Then eclipse after eclipse—and Einstein is wrong.

But he has cast an ancient system into internal dissensions, and has
cast doubts upon antiquities of thought almost as if his pedantic
guesses had had better luck.

Whether the time has come, or not, here is something that looks as if it
is coming:

An editorial in the *New York Sun*, Sept. 3, 1930: views of somebody
else quoted:

"The public is being played upon and utterly misled by the dreamery of
the rival mathematical astronomers and physicists—not to mention the
clerics—who are raising the game of notoriety to a fine art; in rivalry
to religious mysticism, a scientific pornography is being developed, and
attracts the more because it is mysterious."

These are the views of Professor Henry E. Armstrong, emeritus head of
the department of chemistry, at City and Guilds College, South
Kensington, London.

This is revolt inside. That is what develops into revolution.

Prof. Armstrong's accusation of pornography may seem unduly stimulating:
but, judging by their lecheries in other respects, one sees that all
that the astronomers have to do is to discover that stars have sex, and
they'll have us sneaking to bookstores, for salacious "pronouncements"
and "determinations" upon the latest celestial scandals. This would
popularize them. And after anything becomes popular—then what?

That the time has come—or is coming—or more of the revolt within—

Or that, if they cannot continue upon their present pretenses of
progress, the astronomers must return from their motionless excursions.
A generation ago, they told of inconceivable distances of stars. Then
they said that they had, a thousand times, multiplied some of these
distances: but, if the inconceivable be multiplied any number of times,
it is still the same old inconceivability. If, at the unthinkable,
thought stops, but if thought must move somewhere, the astronomers, who
cannot go on expansively, will, if they do

<span id="page_728">p. 728</span>

think, have to think in reductions. If the time has come, there will be
a crash in the Observatories, with astronomers in a panic selling short
on inconceivabilities.

Upon Sept. 2, 1930, began a meeting of the American Astronomical
Society, in Chicago. A paper that was read by Dr. P. Van de Kamp may be
a signal for a panic. Said he: "Some of the stars may actually be
thousands of light years nearer than astronomy believes them to be."

That—with some extensions—is about what I am saying.

Says the astronomer Leverrier—back in times when an astronomical system
is growing up, and is of use in combating an older and decaying
orthodoxy, and needs support and prestige—says he—"Look in the sky, and
at the point of my calculations, you will find the planet that is
perturbing Uranus."

"Lo!" as some of the astronomers say in their books. At a point in the
sky that can be said—to anybody who does not inquire into the
statements—to be almost exactly the point of Leverrier's calculations,
is found the planet Uranus, to which—for all the public knows—can be
attributed the perturbations of Uranus.

Up goes the useful renown of the astronomers. Supported by this triumph,
they function.

But, if they're only the figments of one of the dream-like developments
of our pseudo-existence, they, too, must pass away, and they must go by
way of slaughter, or by way of laughter. Considering all their doings, I
think that through hilarity would be the fitter exit.

Later:

"Look at the sky," we are told that the astronomer Lowell said, "and at
the point of my calculations, you will find the planet that is
perturbing Neptune."

But this is in the year 1930.

Nevertheless we are told that a planet is found almost exactly at the
point of the calculations. The exultations of the astronomers are
spreadheaded.

But this is later. The damned thing takes a tack that shows that it
could no more have been perturbing Neptune than I, anyway

<span id="page_729">p. 729</span>

just at present, could cast a meeting of the National Academy of
Sciences into disorder by walking past it.

They must be murdered, or we shall laugh them away. There is always
something that can be said in favor of murder, but in the case of the
astronomers that would be willful waste of the stuff for laughter.
Orthodox astronomers have said that Leverrier used no mathematical
method by which he could have determined the position of Neptune. See
Lowell's *The Evolution of Worlds*, p. 124. By way of stuff for the
laugh, I mention that one of these disbelieving astronomers was Lowell.

One time, in a mood of depression, I went to the New York Public
Library, and feeling a want for a little, light reading, I put in a slip
for Lowell's *Memoir on a Trans-Neptunian Planet*. I got even more
amusement than I had expected.

Just where was this point, determined by Lowell, almost exactly in which
his planet was found? The spreadheads—the special articles—over and over
in the newspapers of the world—"almost exactly."

Says Lowell, page 105: "Precise determination of its place does not seem
possible. A general direction alone is predicable."

The stuff for a laugh that is as satisfactory as murder is in the solemn
announcements, by the astronomers, about April Fool's Day, 1930, that
they had found Lowell's planet almost exactly in the place, precise
determination of which does not seem possible

Their chatter over Lowell's magnificent accuracy in pointing in a
general direction—

Then the tack of a thing that showed that it could not have been all
this indefiniteness, anyway—

265 years, instead of 3,000 years—

And instead of going the thing was coming.

If they can't tell whether something is coming or going, their solemn
announcements upon nearness or farness may be equally laughable.

If by mathematical means Adams and Leverrier did not determine the
position of the planet Neptune, or if it was, in an opinion that Lowell
quotes, "a happy accident," how account for such

<span id="page_730">p. 730</span>

happiness, or for this timely and sensational boost to a prestige, if we
suspect that it was not altogether an accident?

My expression is that herein I'd typify my idea of organic control
which, concealed under human vanity, makes us think that we are doing
all things ourselves, gives support to human institutions, when they are
timely and are functioning, and then casts its favorites into rout and
fiasco, when they have outlived their functioning-period.

If Leverrier really had had powers by which he could have pointed to an
unseen planet, that would have been a finality of knowledge that would
be support to a prestige that could never be overthrown. Suppose a
church had ever been established upon foundations not composed of the
stuff of lies and frauds and latent laughter. Let the churchman stand
upon other than gibberish and mummery, and there'd be nothing by which
to laugh away his despotisms.

Say that, whether it be a notion of organic control, or not, we accept
any theory of Growth, or Development, or Evolution—

Then we accept that the solemnest of our existence's phenomena are of a
wobbling tissue—rocks of ages that are only hardened muds—or that a lie
is the heart of everything sacred—

Because otherwise there could not be Growth, or Development, or
Evolution.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 21](lo21.md)
