[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lo28)  [Next](lo30.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P889G/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lo!*, by Charles Fort, \[1931\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 29

<span class="smallcaps">Why</span> don't they see, when sometimes
magnificently there is something to see?

The answer is the same as the answer to another question:

Why, sometimes, do they see when there is nothing to see?

In the year 1899, Campbell, the astronomer, "announced" that the star
Capella is a spectroscopic binary, or has a companion-star, as
determined by the spectroscope. Astronomers of Greenwich Observatory
investigated. One of them looked through the telescope,

<span id="page_814">p. 814</span>

and he said, or rather, announced, that he saw it. Another of the
astronomers looked for the companion. He announced that he saw it. Eight
other astronomers followed. Each announced that he saw it. But now the
astronomers say that this alleged companion cannot be seen in any
telescope. See Duncan, *Astronomy*, p. 335.

The Andromeda nebula is said to be so far away that, though a
description of a nearby view of its parts would read like divorce
statistics in the United States, no dissolving motion can be seen by
observers on this earth. In astronomical books, published in the past,
appeared reproductions of photographs of this nebula, which were as
artfully touched up, I should say, as any life of a saint ever was by
any theologian. It was given a most definitely spiral appearance, to
convey an impression of whirlpool-motion. But the nebula-theory of
existence has passed away. In astronomical books of recent date we see
no such definite look of a whirlpool in pictures of the Andromeda
nebula, but more of a stratified appearance. The astronomers see
whatever they want to see—when they do see—and then see to it that we
see as they see. So, though according to our records, one would think
otherwise, there is considerable seeing by astronomers.

If I look at a distant house, and see faces appearing at windows,
something seems to tell me that the stoop of the house is not flying in
one direction, the roof of it scooting some other way, and every brick
upon a jamboree of its own. Of course, minutely, there are motions. But,
if the house is not so far away as to prevent the seeing of new faces
looking out, I argue that other changes, such as the roof in a frenzy to
get away from the stoop, would, if there were such incompatibilities, be
visible. Of course this is only argument. If we can have neat little
expressions, that's mentality's profoundest.

The Andromeda nebula is said to be so far away that tremendous motions
of its parts cannot be seen.

But more than fifty new stars in it have been seen, looking out.

So we are realizing how numerous new stars are, if in one little
celestial formation more than fifty have been seen. If amateur

<span id="page_815">p. 815</span>

astronomers were as numerous as amateur golf players, for instance, we'd
realize much more.

Pronounced changes, such as appearances and disappearances of stars,
have been watched, but no change in relative positions of stars has ever
been watched occurring. There are parts of the sky that are dusty with
little stars. If they were not such good-looking little things, the
heavens would be filthy with them. But no grain of these shining sands
has ever been watched changing its position relatively to other grains.
All recorded changes of positions are so slight that some of them may be
attributed to inaccuracies in charting, in earlier times, and some to
various stresses that have nothing to do with independent motions. Just
here we are not discussing the alleged phenomena of "companion stars."
But our own expressions require that there be small changes in positions
of stars, just as terrestrial volcanoes change slightly. Not a star has
ever been seen to cross another star, but observations upon other
changes in the stars are frequent.

For records of five new stars in five months, see *Popular Astronomy*,
March, 1920.

Many of the so-called new stars have been sudden flares of faint old
stars. Upon this earth there have been sudden flares in volcanic craters
that were dormant, or that were supposed to be extinct. And it was not
by collision. Nothing came along and knocked against them.

Apart from our expressions upon organic suppressions, it is easy enough
to understand one aspect of the origin of the present astronomical
doctrine. It was in a time of mathematicians, to whom astronomical
observations were secondary. The only one of these earlier ones who was
an industrious observer (Tycho Brahé) gave his opinion that this earth
is stationary. The rest of them did little observing, and spent their
time calculating. Nowadays new stars are seen often, but, for 178 years,
the calculators saw not one of them. In their time it was considered
crude, or vulgar, to see. Mentality always has been bullied by snobbery.
In the times of the founders of astronomical dogmas, observations were
sneered at, and were called *empiricism*. Any way that is not the
easiest way always is held in contempt, until competition forces harder
methods. The

<span id="page_816">p. 816</span>

easiest of all affectations is the aristocratic pose, if by aristocracy
we mean minimization of doing anything. There's a coarseness to anybody
who works. Give this a thought—he might sweat. Amateurs, out in their
back yards, see, with their little spyglasses, much that the
professionals miss, but they catch colds. When a back yard amateur, like
W. F. Denning, reports something, that represents patience and
snuffling. Denning blew his nose, and kept his eyes open. The inmates of
Observatories, when not asleep, are calculating. It's easier on brains,
and it's easier on noses. Back in times when little boys were playing
hop-scotch and marbles, and had not yet taken up the new sport of giving
astronomers astronomical information, or in those times when only
astronomers were attending somewhat to astronomical matters, and when
therefore changes in stars were unheard of, arose the explanation of
vast distances, to account for unobserved changes.

The look is that stars do not change positions relatively to one another
for the same reason that Vesuvius and Etna do not. Or there are very
slight changes of position, just as relatively to each other Vesuvius
and Etna change: but no star has ever been seen to pass over any other
star, any more than has Vesuvius ever been seen sailing in the sky over
Etna.

Other changes of stars that are said to be so far away that changes of
position cannot be seen, have been noted. For a discussion of stars that
have disappeared, see *Nature*, 99-159. For a list of about 40 missing
stars, see *Monthly Notices, R. A. S.*, 77-56. This list is only
supplementary to other lists.

Upon March 14, 1912, the newspapers told that the discovery of a new
star had been "announced" by the Kiel Observatory, Germany. No reader of
newspapers, of that time, would suppose otherwise than that vigilant
astronomers, at least worth their keep, knew when a new star appeared.

Early in the morning of March 11th, earthquakes of unusual intensity
were recorded at many places in the United States. At Harvard
University, the calculators announced that the center of the quake was
in the West Indies, or Mexico. Newspaper readers, if they paid any
attention, were properly impressed with this ability of intellectuals in
Massachusetts to know what was going on in the

<span id="page_817">p. 817</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> West Indies, or
Mexico. But newspapers the next day told of a quake, upon the 11th, of
Triangle Island, off Vancouver, B. C., and of nothing in either the West
Indies or Mexico. At Victoria, B. C., it was calculated that the center
of the quake was in the Pacific Ocean, 400 miles westward. The same
readers, forgetting just where the calculators of Harvard had placed the
quake, thought it marvelous how the scientists can know these things.

Sometimes distant skies turn black with the shadows of disasters. Had
this quake centered in a densely populated region, we'd have another
datum of a distant fall of probably volcanic material, about the time of
a catastrophe. Upon the day of the quake, black water fell from the sky,
near Colmer, about 30 miles from London (*Jour. Roy. Met. Soc.*,
38-275). The rain was not muddy, but was like diluted ink. Somebody
thought that it was soot from London. Somebody else thought not,
pointing out that, if this were so, ink, not much diluted, would often
fall in London.

The night of the 12th, the astronomers of this earth's Observatories
were calculating. Wherever the town of Dombass, Norway, is, the
astronomers of Kiel, Germany, were disturbed by a telegram. It was from
an amateur, named Enebo, telling that there was a new star in the
constellation Gemini, and that it was visible without a telescope.
Astronomers in other parts of this earth were notified. They looked up
from what they considered astronomical matters, and saw what the amateur
had discovered.

In November, 1913, an astronomer photographed a part of the
constellation Sagittarius. I don't know what his idea was. Perhaps
simply and somnambulically he photographed, and had no ideas. Six years
later, somebody found out that he had photographed a new star. Then
other photographs were examined. Astronomers are pretty keen at
detecting something that has been pointed out to them, and they learned
that they had photographed this star, rising from 10th to 7th magnitude,
between the 21st and the 22nd of November.

Wanted—something by way of data for us.

Like every other theorist, we find just that—

*Nature*, 94-372—that, seven days after the maximum of this new star, an
afterglow, which can be attributed to no known volcanic

<span id="page_818">p. 818</span>

eruption upon this earth, was seen in the sky, in Italy, France,
Belgium, and England.

April 25, 1917—a professional astronomer photographed a new star
(magnitude 6.5) in the constellation Hercules. The next day there was a
disastrous earthquake in Italy. Upon May 1st, a great quake—perhaps in
the constellation Hercules—whereabouts unknown to this earth's
scientists—was registered by this earth's seismographs (*Nature*,
99-472).

Domes of Observatories look like big snail shells. Architectural
symbolism. It took the astronomers about three years to learn that they
had photographed the new star in Hercules (*Pop. Astro.*, March, 1920).
If newspaper editors were like astronomers, they'd send out
photographers, rather busily, and, perhaps years later, if they could
condescend from journalism into doing some newspaper work, they'd
examine plates. They'd tell of a fire that had occurred long before.
They'd write up some fashion notes upon the modes in their readers'
childhood. Like dealers in stale stars, they'd wonder at a lack of
public interest.

Upon March 6, 1918, black rain fell from the sky, in Ireland (*Symons’
Met. Mag.*, 53-29). If our preconceptions so direct, we relate this
occurrence with smoky discharges from factory chimneys of South Wales,
or somewhere else in Great Britain—and it is better that we do not ask
why black rains are not common near Pittsburgh. Or we note that the next
night there was in the sky a crimson appearance that worried many
communities in Europe and North America. For a week there were, in the
newspapers of New York and London, descriptions of this glare, and
comments upon it. People thought that there was a great fire somewhere.
I give data for thinking that there may have been a volcanic eruption
somewhere.

March 6th—the fall of black rain. March 7th—the glare in the sky. March
9th—down upon this earth fell dusts in volumes that were proportional to
the glare. See *Amer. Jour. Sci.*, *Monthly Weather Review*, and *Sci.
Amer.*, of this period. There was a fall of dust in Wisconsin, and in
Michigan; and there was a fall of dust in Vermont. These falls, so far
apart—in Ireland, in Western States, and in Vermont—look like what is
called indication of an

<span id="page_819">p. 819</span>

origin somewhere beyond this earth. There is no findable record of any
disturbance upon this earth, by which to explain. No new star was
reported, but there may have been a stellar eruption in a part of the
daytime sky, reflecting in a glare, at night. There may have been
relation with an occurrence in June. In the meantime, there were several
remarkable glares in the sky.

Early in the evening of June 8th, of this year 1918, two men, one of
them in Madras, India, and the other in South Africa, looked up at the
sky, and saw a brilliant new star in the constellation Aquila. Each of
them notified an Observatory, which had not been observing. Evening of
the 8th—Harvard University Observatory notified by an amateur. The
astronomers of Harvard had seen nothing new, but telegram after telegram
came to them from other amateurs. Whatever else the astronomers of Lick
Observatory were doing, I don't know. They were probably calculating.
But they, too, were receiving telegrams, and when told, by amateurs, to
look up at the sky, and see a new star, they looked up at the sky, and
saw the new star. See *Pubs. Astro. Soc. Pacific*, August, 1918. Besides
the amateur in Madras, an amateur in Northern India notified the
Observatories (*Nature*, 102-105). *English Mechanic*, August
9—professionals of New Zealand notified by an amateur. In *Nature*,
101-285, is published a list of amateurs, who, in England, had reported
this new star to official centers of unobservation. There is only one
record of a professional astronomer, who, without information from
amateurs, saw this new star. One of the astronomers of Greenwich
Observatory had looked up at the sky, and had seen this new star.
*Nature*, 101-285—that he had seen it, but had not recognized that it
was a new star. One of the amateurs who saw it, and recognized it, was a
schoolboy named Wragge (London *Times*, June 21). The Lisbon Observatory
was notified by a boy, aged 14 (*Observatory*, 41-292).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 30](lo30.md)
