[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fsar02)  [Next](fsar04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9IO12/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Flying Saucers Are Real*, by Donald Keyhoe, \[1950\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER II

IT HAS BEEN over two years since the puzzling death of Captain Thomas
Mantell.

Mantell died mysteriously in the skies south of Fort Knox. But before
his radio went silent, he sent a strange message to Godman Air Force
Base. The men who heard it will never forget it.

It was January 7, 1948.

Crowded into the Godman Field Tower, a group of Air Force officers
stared up at the afternoon sky. For just an instant, something gleamed
through the broken clouds south of the base.

High above the field, three P-51 fighters climbed with swift urgency.
Heading south, they quickly vanished.

The clock in the tower read 2:45.

Colonel Guy Hix, the C.O., slowly put down his binoculars. If the thing
was still there, the clouds now hid it. All they could do was wait.

The first alarm had come from Fort Knox, when Army M.P.'s had relayed a
state police warning. A huge gleaming object had been seen in the sky,
moving toward Godman Field. Hundreds of startled people had seen it at
Madisonville, ninety miles away.

Thirty minutes later, it had zoomed up over the base.

Colonel Hix glanced around at the rest of the men in the tower. They all
had a dazed look. Every man there had seen the thing, as it barreled
south of the field. Even through the thin clouds, its intermittent red
glow had hinted at some mysterious source of power. Something outside
their understanding.

It was Woods, the exec, who had estimated its size. Hix shook his head.
*That* was unbelievable. But something had hung over Godman Field for
almost an hour. The C.O. turned quickly as the loud-speaker, tuned to
the P-51's, suddenly came to life.

"Captain Mantell to Godman . . . Tower Mantell to Godman Tower . . ."

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

The flight leader's voice had a strained tone.

"I've sighted the thing!" he said. "It looks metallic--and it's
tremendous in size!"

The C.O. and Woods stared at each other. No one spoke.

"The thing's starting to climb," Mantell said swiftly. "It's at twelve
o'clock high, making half my speed. I'll try to close in."

In five minutes, Mantell reported again. The strange metallic object had
speeded up, was now making 360 or more.

At 3:08, Mantell's wingman called in. Both he and the other pilot had
seen the weird object. But Mantell had outclimbed them and was lost in
the clouds.

Seven minutes dragged by. The men in the tower sweated out the silence.
Then, at 3:15, Mantell made a hasty contact.

"It's still above me, making my speed or better. I'm going up to twenty
thousand feet. If I'm no closer, I'll abandon chase."

It was his last report.

Minutes later, his fighter disintegrated with terrific force. The
falling wreckage was scattered for thousands of feet.

When Mantell failed to answer the tower, one of his pilots began a
search. Climbing to 33,000 feet, he flew a hundred miles to the south.

But the thing that lured Mantell to his death had vanished from the sky.

Ten days after Mantell was killed, I learned of a curious sequel to the
Godman affair.

An A.P. account in the New York Times had caught my attention. The
story, released at Fort Knox, admitted Mantell had died while chasing a
flying saucer. Colonel Hix was quoted as having watched the object,
which was still unidentified. But there was no mention of Mantell's
radio messages--no hint of the thing's tremendous size.

Though I knew the lid was probably on, I went to the Pentagon. When the
scare had first broken, in the summer of '47, I had talked with Captain
Tom Brown, who was handling saucer inquiries. But by now Brown had been

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

shifted, and no one in the Press Branch would admit knowing the details
of the Mantell saucer chase.

"We just don't know the answer," a security officer told me.

"There's a rumor," I said, "it's a secret Air Force missile that
sometimes goes out of control."

"Good God, man!" he exploded. "If it was, do you think we'd be ordering
pilots to chase the damned things?"

"No--and I didn't say I believed it." I waited until he cooled down.
"This order you mentioned--is it for all Air Force pilots, or special
fighter units?"

"I didn't say it was a special order," he answered quickly. "All pilots
have routine instructions to report unusual items."

"They had fighters alerted on the Coast, when the scare first broke," I
reminded him. "Are those orders still in force?"

He shook his head. "No, not that I know of." After a moment he added,
"All I can tell you is that the Air Force is still investigating. We
honestly don't know the answer."

As I went out the Mall entrance, I ran into Jack Daly, one of
Washington's veteran newsmen. Before the war, Jack and I had done
magazine pieces together, usually on Axis espionage and communist
activity. I told him I was trying to find the answer to Mantell's death.

"You heard anything?" I asked him.

"Only what was in the A.P. story," said Jack. "But an I.N.S. man told me
they had a saucer story from Columbus, Ohio--and it might have been the
same one they saw at Fort Knox."

"I missed that. What was it?"

"They sighted the thing at the Air Force field outside of Columbus. It
was around sundown, about two hours after that pilot was killed in
Kentucky."

"Anybody chase it?" I asked.

"No. They didn't have time to take off, I guess. This I.N.S. guy said it
was going like hell. Fast as a jet, anyway."

"Did he say what it looked like?"

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

"The Air Force boys said it was as big as a C-47," said Jack. "Maybe
bigger. It had a reddish-orange exhaust streaming out behind. They could
see it for miles."

"If you hear any more, let me know," I said. Jack promised he would.

"What do you think they are?" he asked me.

"It's got me stumped. Russia wouldn't be testing missiles over here.
Anyway, I can't believe they've got anything like that. And I can't see
the Air Force letting pilots get killed to hide something we've got."

One week later, I heard that a top-secret unit had been set up at Wright
Field to investigate all saucer reports. When I called the Pentagon,
they admitted this much, and that was all.

In the next few months, other flying-disk stories hit the front pages.
Two Eastern Airline pilots reported a double-decked mystery ship sighted
near Montgomery, Alabama. I learned of two other sightings, one over the
Pacific Ocean and one in California. The second one, seen through field
glasses, was described as rocket-shaped, as large as a B-29. There were
also rumors of disks being tracked by radar, but it was almost a year
before I confirmed these reports.

When Purdy wired me, early in May of '49, I had half forgotten the
disks. It had been months since any important sightings had been
reported. But his message quickly revived my curiosity. If he thought
the subject was hot, I knew he must have reasons. When I walked into his
office at 67 West 44th, Purdy stubbed out his cigarette and shook hands.
He looked at me through his glasses for a moment. Then he said abruptly:

"You know anything about the disks?"

"If you mean what they are--no."

He motioned for me to sit down. Then he swiveled his chair around, his
shoulders hunched forward, and frowned out the window.

"Have you seen the Post this week?"

I told him no.

"There's something damned queer going on. For fifteen months, Project
'Saucer' is buttoned up tight. Top secret. Then suddenly, Forrestal gets
the *Saturday Evening Post*

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

to run two articles, brushing the whole thing off. The first piece hits
the stands--and then what happens?"

Purdy swung around, jabbed his finger at a document on. his desk.

"That same day, the Air Force rushes out this Project 'Saucer' report.
It admits they haven't identified the disks in any important cases. They
say it's still serious enough--wait a minute--"he thumbed through the
stapled papers--" 'to require constant vigilance by Project "Saucer"
personnel and the civilian population.'"

"You'd think the *Post* would make a public kick," I said.

"I don't mean it's an out-and-out denial," said Purdy. "It doesn't
mention the Post--just contradicts it. In fact, the report contradicts
itself. It looks as if they're trying to warn people and yet they're
scared to say too much."

I looked at the title on the report: "A Digest of Preliminary Studies by
the Air Materiel Command, Wright Field, Dayton, Ohio, on 'Flying
Saucers.'"

"Have the papers caught it yet?" I asked Purdy.

"You mean its contradicting the *Post*?" He shook his head. "No, the
Pentagon press release didn't get much space. How many editors would
wade through a six-thousand-word government report? Even if they did,
they'd have to compare it, item for item, with the Post piece."

"Who wrote the *Post* story?"

Purdy lit a cigarette and frowned out again at the skyscrapers.

"Sidney Shallett--and he's careful. He had Forrestal's backing. The Air
Force flew him around, arranged interviews, supposedly gave him inside
stuff. He spent two months on it. They O.K.'d his script, which
practically says the saucers are bunk. Then they reneged on it."

"Maybe some top brass suddenly decided it was the wrong policy to brush
it off," I suggested.

"Why the quick change?" demanded Purdy. "Let's say they sold the *Post*
on covering up the truth, in the interests of security. It's possible,
though I don't believe it. Or they could simply have fed them a fake
story. Either

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

Way, why did they rush this contradiction the minute the *Post* hit the
stands?"

"Something serious happened," I said, "after the *Post* went to press."

"Yes, but what?" Purdy said impatiently. "That's what we've got to find
out."

"Does Shallett's first piece mention Mantell's death?"

"Explains it perfectly. You know what Mantell was chasing? The planet
Venus!"

"That's the Post's answer?" I said, incredulously.

"It's what the Air Force contract astronomer told Shallett. I've checked
with two astronomers here. They say that even when Venus is at full
magnitude you can barely see it in the daytime even when you're looking
for it. It was only half magnitude that day, so it was practically
invisible."

"How'd the Air Force expect anybody to believe that answer?" I said.

Purdy shrugged. "They deny it was Venus in this report. But that's what
they told Shallett--that all those Air Force officers, the pilots, the
Kentucky state police, and several hundred people at Madisonville
mistook Venus for a metallic disk several hundred feet in diameter."

"It's a wonder Shallett believed it."

"I don't think he did. He says if it wasn't Venus, it must have been a
balloon."

"What's the Air Force answer?" I asked Purdy.

"Look in the report. They say whatever Mantell chased--they call it a
'mysterious object'--is still unidentified."

I glanced through the case report, on page five. It quoted Mantell's
radio report that the thing was metallic and tremendous in size. Linked
with the death of Mantell was the Lockbourne, Ohio, report, which tied
in with what Jack Daly had told me, over a year before. I read the
report:

"On the same day, about two hours later, a sky phenomenon was observed
by several watchers over Lockbourne Air Force Base, Columbus, Ohio. It
was described as 'round or oval, larger than a C-47, and traveling in
level

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

flight faster than 500 miles per hour.' The object was followed from the
Lockbourne observation tower for more than 20 minutes. Observers said it
glowed from white to amber, leaving an amber exhaust trail five times
its own length. It made motions like an elevator and at one time
appeared to touch the ground. No sound was heard. Finally, the object
faded and lowered toward the horizon."

Purdy buzzed for his secretary, and she brought me a copy of the first
*Post* article.

"You can get a copy of this Air Force report in Washington," Purdy told
me. "This is the only one I have. But you'll find the same answer for
most of the important cases--the sightings at Muroc Air Base, the
airline pilots' reports, the disks Kenneth Arnold saw--they're all
unidentified."

"I remember the Arnold case. That was the first sighting."

"You've got contacts in Washington," Purdy went on. "Start at the
Pentagon first. They know we're working on it. Sam Boal, the first man
on this job, was down there for a day or two."

"What did he find out?"

"Symington told him the saucers were bunk. Secretary Johnson admitted
they had some pictures--we'd heard about a secret photograph taken at
Harmon Field, Newfoundland. The tip said this saucer scared hell out of
some pilots and Air Force men up there.

"A major took Boal to some Air Force colonel and Boal asked to see the
pictures. The colonel said they didn't have any. He turned red when the
major said Symington had told Boal about the pictures."

"Did Boal get to see them?" I said.

"No," grunted Purdy, "and I'll bet twenty bucks you won't, either. But
try, anyway. And check on a rumor that they've tracked some disks with
radar. One case was supposed to be at an Air Force base in Japan."

As I was leaving, Purdy gave me a summary of sighting reports.

"Some of these were published, some we dug up ourselves," he said. "We
got some confidential stuff from

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

airline pilots. It's pretty obvious the Air Force has tried to keep them
quiet."

"All right," I said. "I'll get started. Maybe things aren't sewed up so
tightly, now this report is out."

"We've found out some things about Project 'Saucer,' said Purdy.
"Whether it's a cover-up or a real investigation, there's a lot of
hush-hush business to it. They've got astronomers and astrophysicists
working for them, also rocket expects, technical analysts, and Air Force
Special Intelligence. We've been told they can call on any government
agency for help--and I know they're using the F.B.I."

It was building up bigger than I had thought.

"If national security is involved," I told Purdy, "they can shut us up
in a hurry."

"If they tell me so, O.K.," said Purdy. He added grimly, "But I think
they're making a bad mistake. They probably think they're doing what's
right. But the truth might come out the wrong way."

"It is possible," I thought, "that the saucers belong to Russia."

"If it turns out to be a Soviet missile, count me out," I said. "We'd
have the Pentagon and the F.B.I. on our necks."

"All right, if that's the answer." He chuckled. "But you may be in for a
jolt."

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](fsar04.md)
