[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](thp03) 
[Next](thp05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766100413/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Hidden Power, by Thomas Troward \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

### THE PERVERSION OF TRUTH

THERE is a very general recognition, which is growing day by day more
and more widespread, that there is a sort of hidden power somewhere
which it is within our ability, somehow or other, to use. The ideas on
this subject are exceedingly vague with the generality of people, but
still they are assuming a more and more definite form, and that which
they appear to be taking with the generality of the public is the
recognition of the power of suggestion. I suppose none of us doubts that
there is such a thing as the power of suggestion and that it can produce
very great results indeed, and that it is par excellence a hidden power;
it works behind the scenes, it works through what we know as the
subconscious mind, and consequently its activity is not immediately
recognisable, or the source from which it comes. Now there is in some
aspects, its usefulness, its benefit, but in other aspects there is a
source of danger, because a power of this kind is obviously one which
can be used either well or ill; in itself it is perfectly neutral, it
all depends on the purpose "for which it is used, and the character of
the agent who employs it.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

This recognition of the power of suggestion is in many instances taking
a most undesirable form, and I commend to your notice, in support of
this observation, numerous advertisements in certain classes of
magazines--many of you must have seen many specimens of that
kind--offering for a certain sum of money to put you in the way of
getting personal influence, mental power, power of suggestion, as the
advertisements very unblushingly put it, for any purpose that you may
desire. Some of them even go into further particulars, telling you the
particular sort of purposes for which you can employ this, all of them
certainly being such uses as no one should ever attempt to make of it.

Therefore, this recognition of the power of suggestion, say even as a
mere money-making power, to leave alone other misapplications of it, is
a feature which is taking hold, so to say, of certain sections of the
public who do not realise a higher platform in these things. It is
deplorable that it should be so, but it is in the nature of things
unavoidable. You have a power which can be used affirmatively, and which
can be used negatively, which can be used for higher purposes, and can
be used for lower purposes, and consequently you will find numbers of
people who, as soon as they get hold of it, will at once think only of
the lower purposes, not of the higher.

In support of what I say--although this is by no means, I suppose,
intended as a low application, probably it is intended as a high
application, but I cannot

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

say I agree with it--but to show you that I am talking from actual facts
I will read you a note which I have made from the *Daily Mail*, of the
10th January, that I daresay some of you may have seen. It is an article
headed "Killing by Prayer," and the article goes on to say that a
certain circular has been sent round to the different hospitals and
other places where the study of vivisection goes forward to this effect.
In this circular, signed with the letters "M. C.," the writer says that
he accidentally heard of a person who was in the habit of praying from
time to time for the death of one of our leading vivisectors and that
always the man indicated died. That is what M. C. heard by chance during
conversation at a hotel dinner. Then thinking over this, M. C. goes on
to say that he (or she) tried praying that the man most likely to cause
suffering to innocent subjects by his experiments might be removed, and
the consequence was that about a fortnight later one of our most
distinguished medical scientists died.

I do not know who the scientist in question was; I daresay some of you
may be aware of the name. However, that is what the *Daily Mail* tells
us, and it also states that the Anti-Vivisection Societies were
unanimous in condemning this circular, and very properly so. Now you see
the sender of that circular, whoever he was, obviously thought he was
doing a very good piece of work. I myself am by no means any friend of
vivisection. I do not think any one can

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

have a real knowledge of the truth and remain in touch with it, but I
certainly agreed with the Anti-Vivisection Societies in condemning such
a circular as that. You see there is the assumption that prayer, or
mental power, can be used to remove a person from the stage of life, and
M. C. claims that he did it in the case of this particular scientist.

That brings back another parallel, almost, I might say, an historical
parallel, to our mind; that of Dr. Anna Kingsford, taking place perhaps
some forty years ago, who claimed--of course she was a very strong
anti-vivisectionist--that by thought-power she caused the death of
Claude Bernard, the great vivisection scientist of France. Certainly at
the time that she put out her forces he did die, but on the other hand,
it has been remarked that it was from that very date that her own
break-up commenced, and never ceased till she herself passed into the
other world. So you see these actions are likely to revert to the
sender, even if they are successful.

Now in these two cases the ultimate object was not a low one, it was one
which was supposed to be for the benefit of humanity and of the dumb
creation. But that does not justify the means. The maxim, "The end
justifies the means," is the greatest perversion of truth, and still
more so if this hidden power, the power of suggestion, is used to injure
any one for a more personal motive than in these cases which I have
cited. The lower the motive, the lower the

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

action becomes, and to suppose that because mental means are employed
they make any difference in the nature of the act is a very great
mistake.

It has been sometimes my painful duty to sentence people to death for
murder, and therefore I claim that I have a very fair knowledge of what
differentiates murder from those cases in which life is taken which do
not amount to murder; and speaking from the judicial experience of a
great many years, and the trial of a large number of cases which have
involved the question whether the death penalty should be passed or not,
I have no hesitation in saying that to kill by mental means is just as
much murder as to kill by poison or the dagger. Speaking judicially, I
should have not the least hesitation in hanging any one who committed
murder by means of mental suggestion. Psychological crime, remember, is
crime just the same; possibly it is more deeply dyed crime, because of
the greater knowledge which must go along with it. I say that the
psychological criminal is worse than the ordinary criminal.

One of the teachings of the Master is on this very point. I refer you to
the miracle of the fig tree. You know that he exhibited his power of
killing not a person, not even an animal, but a tree. And when the
disciples said to him, see how this tree which you cursed has withered
away, he replied, Well, you can do exactly the same thing, and goes on
to say, nothing shall be impossible to you. Therefore if you can kill

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

fig trees, you can kill people, but, "forgive, if you have aught against
any," that your heavenly Father may forgive you.

He says in effect: now you have seen that this hidden power can be used
to the destruction of life, at your peril use it otherwise than as a
Divine power. Use it with prayer to God and with forgiveness of all
against whom you have any sort of grudge or ill-feeling, and if its use
is always prefaced in this way, according to the Master's directions,
then nobody can use it to injure another either in mind, body or estate.

Perhaps some of you may be inclined to smile if I use the word
"sorcery," but at the present day, under one name or another, scientific
or semi-scientific, it is nothing but the old-world sorcery which is
trying to find its way among us as the hidden power. Sorcery is the
inverted use of spiritual power. That is the definition of it, and I
speak upon authority. I refer you to the Bible where you will find
sorcery takes a prominent place among the list of those things which
exclude from the heavenly Jerusalem; the heavenly Jerusalem not being a
town or a city in this place or that place, but the perfected state of
man. Therefore, use sorcery, and you cannot reach that heavenly state.

It is on this account that we find in Revelations that wonderful
description of two symbolical women; they represent two modes of the
individual soul. Of course they go further, they indicate national
things, race evolution and so on. Why? Because all national

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

movements, all race evolutions, have their root in the development of
the individual. A nation or a race is only a collection of individuals,
and therefore if a principle once spreads from one individual to
another, it spreads to the nation, it spreads to the race. So,
therefore, these two symbolical women represent primarily two modes of
soul, two modes of thought. You know perfectly well the description of
the two women. One, the woman clothed with the sun, standing with the
moon under her feet, and with a diadem of stars about her head; the
other seated upon an earthly throne, holding a golden cup, and the cup
is full of abominations. Those are the two women, and we know that one
of them is called in the Scripture, Babylon, and we know which one that
is. One of the marks of this woman--mind you that means the class of
individuality--is the mark of sorcery, the mark of the inverted use of
spiritual and mental powers.

But what is the end of it? The end is that this Babylon becomes the
habitation of devils, the hold--or, as the original Greek has it, the
prison of evil, an unclean, spirit, the cage of every unclean bird. That
is the development which takes place in each individual who sets out to
misuse this mental power. The misuse may have a very small beginning, it
may be such as is taught in a certain school, which I am told exists in
London, where shop assistants are trained in the use of magnetic power,
in order to decoy or

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

compel unknowing purchasers into buying what they do not want. I am told
there is such a school; I cannot quote you my authority. That is a
trifling matter. I go into a shop and spend two or three shillings in
buying something which, when I get home, I find absolutely useless, and
I say, "How in the name of fortune did I come to buy this rubbish?"
Well, I must have been hypnotised into it. It does not make much
difference to me, but it makes a great deal of difference to the young
man or young woman who has hypnotised me, because it is the first step
on the downward path. It may be only a matter of sixpence, but it leads
on step by step, and unless that path is retraced, the final end is that
of Babylon. Therefore it is that St. John says, "I heard a voice from
Heaven saying, 'Come forth, my people, out of her'"--and that is out of
Babylon--"come forth, my people, out of her"--that is out of this
inverted mode of using spiritual power--"come forth, my people, out of
her, that ye have no fellowship with her sins and that ye shall receive
not of her plague." Therefore, against this inverted use of the hidden
power I warn every one from the first day when he begins to realise that
there is such a thing as mental or spiritual power which can be
exercised upon other persons.

Are we then on this account to go continually in terror of suffering
from malicious magnetism, fearing that some enemy here, or some enemy
there, is turning on this hidden power against us? If so, we should go

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

in trepidation continually. No, I do not think there is the least reason
for us to go in fear in this way. To begin with there are comparatively
few who know the law of suggestion sufficiently well to use it either
affirmatively or negatively, and of those who do know it sufficiently to
make use of it, I am convinced that the majority would wish only to use
it in all kindness, and for the benefit of the person concerned. That, I
am confident, is the attitude of nine-tenths, or I might perhaps say
ninety-nine hundredths, of the students of this subject. They wish to do
well, and look upon their use of mental power as an additional means of
doing good. But after all, human nature is human nature, and there
remains a small minority who are both able and willing to use this
hidden power injuriously for their own purposes.

Now how are we to deal with this minority? The answer is simple. Just
see them in their true light, see them for what they really are, that is
to say, persons who are ignorant of the real spiritual power. They think
they have it, and they have not. That is what it is. See them in their
true light and their power will fall away from them. The real and
ultimate power is that of the affirmative; the negative is destructive,
the affirmative is constructive. So this negative use of the hidden
power is to be destroyed by the use of the affirmative, the constructive
power. The affirmative destroys the negative always in one way, and that
is not by attacking it, not by running at it

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

like a bull in a china shop; but by building up life. It is always a
building power--it is building, building, building life and more life,
and when that life comes in, the negative of necessity goes out.

The ultimate affirmative position is that of conscious union with the
source of life. Realise this, and you need not trouble yourself about
any action of the negative whatever. Seek conscious union with the
ultimate, the first cause, that which is the starting point of all
things, whether in the universe or in yourself as the individual. That
starting point is always present; it is the same yesterday, to-day and
forever, and you are the world and the universe in miniature, and it is
always there working in you if you will recognise it. Remember the
reciprocity between yourself and this truly hidden power. The power of
suggestion is a hidden power, but the power which creates all things is
the hidden power which is at the back of all things. Now realise that it
is in yourselves and you need trouble about the negative no longer. This
is the Bible teaching regarding Christ; and that teaching is to bring
about this conscious personal union with the Divine All-creating Spirit
as a present living power to be used day by day.

The Bible tells us there is such a thing as the mystery of iniquity,
that is to say, the mystery of the spiritual power used invertedly, used
from the diabolical standpoint; and when the Bible speaks of the mystery
of iniquity, it means what it says. It tells us there are

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

powers and principalities in the invisible world which are using
precisely these same methods on an enormous scale; because, remember one
thing, there is never any departure in any part of the Universe from the
universal rule of law; what is law upon earth is law in Heaven, law in
Hell, law in the invisible and law in the visible; that never alters.
What is done by any spiritual power, whether it is a spiritual power of
evil or of good, is done through the mental constitution which you have.
No power alters the law of your own mind, but a power which knows the
law of your mind can use it.

Therefore, it is so essential that you should know the law of your own
mind and realise its continual amenability to suggestion. That being so,
the great thing is to get a standard for fundamental, unchangeable, and
sufficient suggestion to which you can always turn, and which is
automatically impressed upon your subconscious mind so deeply that no
counter-suggestion can ever take its place; and that is the mystery of
Christ, the Son of God. That is why we are told of the mystery of
Christ, the mystery of godliness in opposition to the mystery of
iniquity; it is because both the mystery of the Divine and the mystery
of the diabolical are seeking to work through you, and they can only
work through you by the law of your own mental constitution, that is to
say, by the law of subconscious mind acting and re-acting upon your

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

conscious mind and upon your body, and so upon your circumstances.

The mystery of Christ is no mere ecclesiastical fiction. People have
distorted it, and made it not clear, by trying to explain what at that
time and in those days was not properly known, by trying to explain what
they did not know; because what is commonly now known regarding the laws
of mind was unknown then. But now this light has come we begin to see
that the Bible teaching regarding Christ has a great and a deep meaning,
and it is for these reasons St. Paul said to the Corinthians: "Little
children of whom I travail again in birth, until Christ be formed in
you." That is why he speaks of "Christ in you the hope of glory," that
is to say, the Christ conception, the realisation of the Christ
principle as exhibited in the Christ person, brings you in touch with
the personal element in the Universal Spirit, the divine creative, first
moving Spirit of the Universe.

Then you see that realising this as your fundamental fact, it is
continually impressed upon your subconscious mind, even when you are not
thinking of it, because that is the action of the subconscious mind to
take in and reason and argue in its own deductive way upon things of
which you are not at the moment consciously thinking. Therefore it is
that the realisation of that great promise of redemption, which is the
backbone of the Bible from the first chapter of Genesis to

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

the last chapter of Revelations, is according to a scientific law. It is
not a hocus-pocus business, it is not a thing which has been arranged
this way and might just as well have been arranged in some other; it is
not so because some arbitrary Authority has commanded it, and the
Authority might just as well have commanded it some other way.

No, it is so because the more you examine it, the more you will find
that it is absolutely scientific; it is based upon the natural
constitution of the human mind. And it is therefore that "Christ," as
set forth in the Bible--whether in the Old Testament symbology, or in
the New Testament personality--"is the fulfilling of the law," in the
sense of specialising in the highest degree that which is common to all
humanity. As we realise this more and more, and specialise it more and
more, so we shall rise to higher and higher intercourse and more and
more consciousness of reciprocal identity, reciprocal life with the
Universal Power, which will raise us above any possibility of being
touched by any sort of malicious suggestion.

If anybody should be, then, so ill-willed towards us and so lamentably
ignorant of spiritual truth himself as to seek to exercise the power of
malicious suggestion against us, I pity the person who tries to do it.
He will get nothing out of it, because he is firing peas out of a
pea-shooter against an iron-clad war vessel. That is what it amounts to;
but for himself it amounts to something more. It is a true saying that
"Curses

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

return home to roost." I think if we study these things, and consider
that there is a reason for them, we need not be in the least alarmed
about negative suggestion, or malicious magnetism, of being brought
under the power of other minds, of being got over in some way, of being
done out of our property, of being injured in our health, or being hurt
in our circumstances, and so on.

Of course if you lay yourself open to that kind of thing, you will get
it. "Knock, and it shall be opened unto you." That is why the Scripture
says, "He that breaketh through a hedge, a serpent shall bite him." That
is the serpent that some of us know something about, that is our old
enemy Nahash. Some of you, at any rate, are sufficiently trained in the
inner sciences to know the serpent Nahash. Break down the hedge, that is
to say, the conscious control of your own mind, and above all the hedge
of the Divine love and wisdom with which God himself will surround you
in the personality of His Son, break down this hedge and of course
Nahash comes in. But if you keep your hedge--and remember the old Hebrew
tradition always spoke of the Divine Law as "the hedge"--if you keep
your hedge unbroken, nothing can come in except by the door. Christ
said, "I am the door, by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved."

I have spoken of the two great mysteries, the mystery of godliness and
the mystery of iniquity, the mystery of Christ and the mystery of
anti-Christ.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Now, it is not
necessary, mind you, that you should understand these mysteries in full
in order to get into your right position. If it were necessary that we
should fully understand these mysteries, either to get away from the one
or to get into the other, I think all of us would have an uncommonly bad
chance. I certainly should. I can touch only the fringe of these things,
but we can realise the principle of the affirmative and the principle of
the negative which underlies them both; one is the mystery of light, the
other is the mystery of darkness.

I do not say do not study these mysteries; they are exactly what we
ought to study, but do not think that you remain in a state of danger
until you have completely fathomed the mystery. Not a bit of it. You can
quite get on the right side without understanding the whole thing,
exactly as you travel on a railway without understanding the mechanism
of the engine which takes you along.

So then we have these two mysteries, that of light and that of darkness,
and therefore what we have to do is to exercise our will to receive the
mystery of light, and then that will make for itself a centre in our own
hearts and beings, and you will become conscious of that centre. Whether
you understand it or not, you will become conscious of it--and then from
that centre, that centre of light in yourself, you can start everything
in your life, whether spiritual or temporal. You do not have to go
further back; you do not have

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

to analyse the why and the wherefore of these things in order to get
your starting point. It may interest you afterwards, it may strengthen
you afterwards to do so, but for a practical starting point you must
realise the Divine presence in yourself, which is the son of God
manifested in you, that is the Divine principle of personality speaking
within yourself.

So then, having realised this as your centre, you carry the
all-originating affirmative power with you, all through everything that
you do and everything that you are; day and night it will be there, it
will protect you, it will guide you, it will help you. And when you want
to do so you can consciously apply to it and it will give you
assistance, and because you take this as your starting point, it will
manifest itself in all your conditions; because, remember, it is a very
simple law of logic that whatever you start with will manifest itself
all down the sequence which comes from it. If you start with the colour
red you can make all sorts of modifications and bring out orange, purple
and brown, but the red basis will show itself all down the scale of
colour, and so if you start with a basis of blue, blue will show itself
all down the scale of various colours.

Therefore, if you start with the affirmative basis, the one starting
point of the Divine spirit, not taking it lower down the stream, but
going to the fountain head, that affirmative principle of life will flow
all through, showing its own quality to the very tips of your fingers
and beyond that out into all your circumstances.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> So that the divine
presence will be continuously with you, not as a consequence of your
joining this Church or that, following this idea, or that teacher, but
because you know the truth for yourselves, and you have realised it as
an actual living experience in your own mind and in your own heart; and
therefore it is that this personal recognition of the Divine love and
wisdom and power is what St. Paul calls "Christ in you, the hope of
glory."

Each one who recognises this, is one who answers the Biblical
description of a true Israelite indeed. That word "Israelite" in the
Bible is a very deeply symbolical word, and carries an immense amount of
meaning with it. So get this recognition as the real working fact that
each one of you is an Israelite indeed, and if so, then make yourselves
perfectly happy with the everlasting statement, which is as true now as
it was on the day on which it was uttered: "There is no divination or
enchantment against Israel."

1909\.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The ''I Am''](thp05)
