[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](thp04) 
[Next](thp06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766100413/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Hidden Power, by Thomas Troward \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

### III

### THE "I AM"

WE often do not sufficiently recognise the truth of Walt Whitman's pithy
saying, "I am not all contained between my hat and my boots," and forget
the two-fold nature of the "I AM," that it is at once both the
manifested and the unmanifested, the universal and the individual. By
losing sight of this truth we surround ourselves with limitations; we
see only part of the self, and then we are surprised that the part fails
to do the work of the whole. Factors crop up on which we had not
reckoned, and we wonder where they come from, and do not understand that
they necessarily arise from that great unity in which we are all
included.

It is the grand intelligence and livingness of Universal Spirit
continually pressing forward to manifestation of itself in a glorious
humanity.

This must be effected by each individual's recognition of his power to
co-operate with the Supreme Principle through an intelligent conception
of its purpose and of the natural laws by which that purpose is
accomplished--a recognition which can proceed only from the realisation
that he himself is none other than the same Universal Principle in
particular manifestation.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

When he sees this he sees that Walt Whitman's saying is true, and that
his source of intelligence, power, and purpose is in that Universal
Self, which is his as well as another's just because it is universal,
and which is therefore as completely and entirely identified with
himself as. though there were no other expression of it in the world.

The understanding which alone gives value to knowledge is the
understanding that, when we employ the formula "I am, therefore I can,
therefore I will," the "I AM" with which the series starts is a being
who, so to speak, has his head in heaven and his feet upon the earth, a
perfect unity, and with a range of ideas far transcending the little
ideas which are limited by the requirements of a day or an hour. On the
other hand, the requirements of the day and the hour are real while they
last, and since the manifested life can be lived only in the moment that
now is, whether it be to-day or ten thousand years hence, our need is to
harmonise the life of expression with the life of purpose, and by
realising in ourselves the source of the highest purposes to realise
also the life of the fullest expression.

This is the meaning of prayer. Prayer is not a foolish seeking to change
the mind of Supreme Wisdom, but it is an intelligent seeking to embody
that wisdom in our thoughts so as more and more perfectly to express
*it* in expressing *ourselves*. Thus, as we gradually grow into the
habit of finding this inspiring

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Presence *within
ourselves*, and of realising its forward movement as the ultimate
determining factor in all true healthful mental action, it will become
second nature to us to have all our plans, down to the apparently most
trivial, so floating upon the undercurrent of this Universal
Intelligence that a great harmony will come into our lives, every
discordant manifestation will disappear, and we shall find ourselves
more and more controlling all things into the forms that we desire.

Why? Because we have attained to *commanding* the Spirit and making it
obey us? Certainly not, for "if the blind lead the blind both shall fall
into the ditch"; but because we are *companions* of the Spirit, and by a
continuous and growing intimacy have changed, not "the mind of the
Spirit," but our own, and have learned to think from a higher
standpoint, where we see that the old-world saying "know thyself"
includes the knowledge of all that we mean when we speak of God.

I AM IS ONE

This may seem a very elementary proposition, but it is one of which we
are too apt to lose sight. What does it mean? It means everything; but
we are most concerned with what it means in regard to ourselves, and to
each of us personally it means this. It means that there are not two
Spirits, one which is myself and one which is another. It means that
there is not some

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

great unknown power external to myself which may be actuated by
perfectly different motives to my own, and which will, therefore, oppose
me with its irresistible force and pass over me, leaving me crushed and
broken like the devotee over whom the car of Jaggarnath has rolled. It
means that there is only one mind, one motive, one power--not two
opposing each other--and that my conscious mind in all its movements is
only the one mind expressing itself as (not merely through) my own
particular individuality.

There are not two I AMS, but one I am. Whatever, therefore, I can
conceive the Great Universal Life Principle to be, that I am. Let us try
fully to realise what this means. Can you conceive the Great Originating
and Sustaining Life Principle of the whole universe as poor, weak,
sordid, miserable, jealous, angry, anxious, uncertain, or in any other
way limited? We know that this is impossible. Then because the I AM is
one it is equally untrue of ourselves. Learn first to distinguish the
true self that you are from the mental and physical processes which it
throws forth as the instruments of its expression, and then learn that
this self controls these instruments, and not vice versa. As we advance
in this knowledge we know ourselves to be unlimited, and that, in the
miniature world, whose centre we are, we ourselves are the very same
overflowing of joyous livingness that the Great Life Spirit is in the
Great All. The I AM is One.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. Affirmative Power](thp06)
