[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](thp12.md) 
[Next](thp14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766100413/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Hidden Power, by Thomas Troward \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

### XI

### YOURSELF

I WANT to talk to you about the livingness there is in being yourself.
It has at least the merit of simplicity, for it must surely be easier to
be oneself than to be something or somebody else. Yet that is what so
many are constantly trying to do; the self that is their own is not good
enough for them, and so they are always trying to go one better than
what God has made them, with endless strain and struggle as the
consequence. Of course, they are right to put before them an ideal
infinitely grander than anything they have yet attained--the only
possible way of progress is by following an ideal that is always a stage
ahead of us--but the mistake is in not seeing that its attainment is a
matter of growth, and that growth must be the expansion of something
that already exists in us, and therefore implies our being what we are
and where we are as its starting point. This growth is a continuous
process, and we cannot do next month's growth without first doing this
month's; but we are always wanting to jump into some ideal of the
future, not seeing that we can reach it only by steadily going on from
where we are now.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

These considerations should make us more confident and more comfortable.
We are employing a force which is much greater than we believe ourselves
to be, yet it is not separate from us and needing to be persuaded or
compelled, or inveigled into doing what we want; it is the substratum of
our own being which is continually passing up into manifestation on the
visible plane and becoming that personal self to which we often limit
our attention without considering whence it proceeds. But in truth the
outer self is the surface growth of that individuality which lies
concealed far down in the deeps below, and which is none other than the
Spirit-of-Life which underlies all forms of manifestation.

Endeavour to realise what this Spirit must be in itself--that is to say,
apart from any of the conditions that arise from the various relations
which necessarily establish themselves between its various forms of
individualisation. In its homogeneous self what else can it be but pure
life--Essence-of-Life, if you like so to call it? Then realise that as
Essence-of-Life it exists in the innermost of *every one* of its forms
of manifestation in as perfect simplicity as any we can attribute to it
in our most abstract conceptions. In this light we see it to be the
eternally self-generating power which, to express itself, flows into
form.

This universal Essence-of-Life is a continual becoming (into form), and
since we are a part of Nature we do not need to go further than
ourselves to find

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

the life-giving energy at work with all its powers. Hence all we have to
do is to allow it to rise to the surface. We do not have to *make* it
rise any more than the engineer who sinks the bore-pipe for an artesian
well has to make the water rise in it; the water does that by its own
energy, springing as a fountain a hundred feet into the air. Just so we
shall find a fountain of Essence-of-Life ready to spring up in
ourselves, inexhaustible and continually increasing in its flow, as One
taught long ago to a woman at a wayside well.

This up-springing of Life-Essence is not another's--it is our own. It
does not require deep studies, hard labours, weary journeyings to attain
it; it is not the monopoly of this teacher or that writer, whose
lectures we must attend or whose books we must read to get it. It is the
innermost of *ourselves*, and a little common-sense thought as to how
anything comes to be anything will soon convince us that the great
inexhaustible life must be the very root and substance of us, permeating
every fibre of our being.

Surely to be this vast infinitude of living power must be enough to
satisfy all our desires, and yet this wonderful ideal is nothing else
but what we already are *in principio*--it is all there in ourselves
now, only awaiting our recognition for its manifestation. It is not the
Essence-of-Life which has to grow, for that is eternally perfect in
itself; but it is our recognition of it that has to grow, and this
growth cannot be

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

forced. It must come by a natural process, the first necessity of which
is to abstain from all straining after being something which at the
present time we cannot naturally be. The Law of our Evolution has put us
in possession of certain powers and opportunities, and our further
development depends on our doing just what these powers and
opportunities make it possible for us to do, here and now.

If we do what we are able to do to-day, it will open the way for us to
do something better to-morrow, and in this manner the growing process
will proceed healthily and happily in a rapidly increasing ratio. This
is so much easier than striving to compel things to be what they are
not, and it is also so much more fruitful in good results. It is not
sitting still doing nothing, and there is plenty of room for the
exercise of all our mental faculties, but these faculties are themselves
the outcome of the Essence-of-Life, and are not the creating power, but
only that which gives direction to it. Now it is this moving power at
the back of the various faculties that is the true innermost self; and
if we realise the identity between the innermost and the outermost, we
shall see that we therefore have at our present disposal all that is
necessary for our unlimited development in the future.

Thus our livingness consists simply in being ourselves, only more so;
and in recognising this we get rid of a great burden of unnecessary
straining and striving, and the place of the old *strum and drang* will

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

be taken, not by inertia, but by a joyous activity which knows that it
always has the requisite power to manifest itself in forms of good and
beauty. What matters it whither this leads us? If we are following the
line of the beautiful and good, then we shall produce the beautiful and
good, and thus bring increasing joy into the world, whatever particular
form it may assume.

We limit ourselves when we try to fix accurately beforehand the
particular form of good that we shall produce. We should aim not so much
at having or making some particular thing as at expressing all that we
are. The expressing will grow out of realising the treasures that are
ours already, and contemplating the beauty, the affirmative side, of all
that we are *now*, apart from the negative conceptions and detractions
which veil this positive good from us. When we do this we shall be
astonished to see what possibilities reside in ourselves as we are and
with our present surroundings, all unlovely as we may deem them: and
commencing to work at once upon whatever we find of affirmative in
these, and withdrawing our thought from what we have hitherto seen of
negative in them, the right road will open up before us, leading us in
wonderful ways to the development of powers that we never suspected, and
the enjoyment of happiness that we never anticipated.

We have never been out of our right path, only we have been walking in
it backwards instead of forwards,

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

and now that we have begun to follow the path in the right direction, we
find that it is none other than the way of peace, the path of joy, and
the road to eternal life. These things we may attain by simply living
naturally with ourselves. It is because we are trying to be or do
something which is not natural to us that we experience weariness and
labour, where we should find all our activities joyously concentrated on
objects which lead to their own accomplishment by the force of the love
that we have for them. But when we make the grand discovery of how to
live naturally, we shall find it to be all, and more than all, that we
had ever desired, and our daily life will become a perpetual joy to
ourselves, and we shall radiate light and life wherever we go.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. Religious Opinions](thp14.md)
