[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](thp14.md) 
[Next](thp16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766100413/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Hidden Power, by Thomas Troward \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

### XIII

### A LESSON FROM BROWNING

PERHAPS you know a little poem of Browning's called "An Epistle
Containing the Strange Medical Experiences of Karshish, the Arab
Physician." The somewhat weird conception is that the Arab physician,
travelling in Palestine soon after the date when the Gospel narrative
closes, meets with Lazarus whom Jesus raised from the dead, and in this
letter to a medical friend describes the strange effect which his vision
of the other life has produced upon the resuscitated man. The poem
should be studied as a whole; but for the present a few lines selected
here and there must do duty to indicate the character of the change
which has passed upon Lazarus. After comparing him to a beggar who,
having suddenly received boundless wealth, is unable to regulate its use
to his requirements, Karshish continues:

"So here--we call the treasure knowledge, say,  
Increased beyond the fleshly faculty--  
Heaven opened to a soul while yet on earth,  
Earth forced on a soul's use while seeing heaven:  
The man is witless of the size, the sum,

The value in proportion of all things."

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

In fact he has become almost exclusively conscious of

"The spiritual life around the earthly life:  
The law of that is known to him as this,  
His heart and brain move there, his feet stay here,"

and the result is a loss of mental balance entirely unfitting him for
the affairs of ordinary life.

Now there can be no doubt that Browning had a far more serious intention
in writing this poem than just to record a fantastic notion that flitted
through his brain. If we read between the lines, it must be clear from
the general tenor of his writings that, however he may have acquired it,
Browning had a very deep acquaintance with the inner region of spiritual
causes which give rise to all that we see of outward phenomenal
manifestation. There are continual allusions in his works to the life
behind the veil, and it is to this suggestion of some mystery underlying
his words that we owe the many attempts to fathom his meaning expressed
through Browning Societies and the like--attempts which fail or succeed
according as they are made from "the without" or from "the within." No
one was better qualified than the poet to realise the immense benefits
of the inner knowledge, and for the same reason he is also qualified to
warn us of the dangers on the way to its acquisition; for nowhere is it
more true that

"A little knowledge is a dangerous thing,"

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

and it is one of the greatest of these dangers that he points out in
this poem.

Under the figure of Lazarus he describes the man who has practically
grasped the reality of the inner side of things, for whom the veil has
been removed, and who knows that the external and visible takes its rise
from the internal and spiritual. But the description is that of one
whose eyes have been so dazzled by the light that he has lost the power
of accommodating his vision to the world of sense. He now commits the
same error from the side of "the within" that he formerly committed from
the side of "the without," the error of supposing that there is no vital
reality in the aspect of things on which his thoughts are not
immediately centered. This is want of mental balance, whether it shows
itself by refusing reality to the inward or the outward. To be so
absorbed in speculative ideas as to be unable to give them practical
application in daily life, is to allow our highest thoughts to evaporate
in dreams.

There is a world of philosophy in the simple statement that there can be
no inside without an outside, and no outside without an inside; and the
great secret in life is in learning to see things in their wholeness,
and to realise the inside and the outside simultaneously. Each of them
without the other is a mere abstraction, having no real existence, which
we contemplate separately only for the purpose of reviewing the logical

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

steps by which they are connected together as cause and effect. Nature
does not separate them, for they are inseparable; and the law of nature
is the law of life. It is related of Pythagoras that, after he had led
his scholars to the dizziest heights of the inner knowledge, he never
failed to impress upon them the converse lesson of tracing out the steps
by which these inner principles translate themselves into the familiar
conditions of the outward things by which we are surrounded. The process
of analysis is merely an expedient for discovering what springs in the
realm of causes we are to touch in order to produce certain effects in
the realm of manifestation. But this is not sufficient. We must also
learn to calculate how those particular effects, when produced, will
stand related to the world of already existing effects among which we
propose to launch them, how they will modify these and be modified by
these in turn; and this calculation of effects is as necessary as the
knowledge of causes.

We cannot impress upon ourselves too strongly that reality consists of
both an inside and an outside, a generating principle and a generated
condition, and that anything short of the reality of wholeness is
illusion on one side or the other. Nothing could have been further from
Browning's intention than to deter seekers after truth from studying the
principles of Being, for without the knowledge of them truth must always
remain wrapped in mystery; but the lesson he would impress on us is that
of guarding vigilantly the mental

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

equilibrium which alone will enable us to develop those boundless powers
whose infinite unfolding is the fulness of Life. And we must remember
above all that the soul of life is Love, and that Love shows itself by
service, and service proceeds from sympathy, which is the capacity for
seeing things from the point of view of those whom we would help, while
at the same time seeing them also in their true relations; and
therefore, if we would realise that Love which is the inmost vitalising
principle even of the most interior powers, it must be kept alive by
maintaining our hold upon the exterior life as being equally real with
the inward principles of which it is the manifestation.

1902\.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV. The Spirit of Opulence](thp16.md)
