[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](thp09) 
[Next](thp11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766100413/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Hidden Power, by Thomas Troward \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

### VIII

### DESIRE AS THE MOTIVE POWER

THERE are certain Oriental schools of thought, together with various
Western offshoots from them, which are entirely founded on the principle
of annihilating all desire. Reach that point at which you have no wish
for anything and you will find yourself free, is the sum and substance
of their teaching; and in support of this they put forward a great deal
of very specious argument, which is all the more likely to entangle the
unwary, because it contains a recognition of many of the profoundest
truths of Nature. But we must bear in mind that it is possible to have a
very deep knowledge of psychological facts, and at the same time vitiate
the results of our knowledge by an entirely wrong assumption in regard
to the law which binds these facts together in the universal system; and
the injurious results of misapprehension upon such a vital question are
so radical and far-reaching that we cannot too forcibly urge the
necessity of clearly understanding the true nature of the point at
issue. Stripped of all accessories and embellishments, the question
resolves itself into this: Which shall we

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

choose for our portion, Life or Death? There can be no accommodation
between the two; and whichever we select as our guiding principle must
produce results of a kind proper to itself.

The whole of this momentous question turns on the place that we assign
to desire in our system of thought. Is it the Tree of Life in the midst
of the Garden of the Soul? or is it the Upas Tree creating a wilderness
of death all around? This is the issue on which we have to form a
judgment, and this judgment must colour all our conception of life and
determine the entire range of our possibilities. Let us, then, try to
picture to ourselves the ideal proposed by the systems to which I have
alluded--a man who has succeeded in entirely annihilating all desire. To
him all things must be alike. The good and the evil must be as one, for
nothing has any longer the power to raise any desire in him; he has no
longer any feeling which shall prompt him to say, "This is good,
therefore I choose it; that is evil, therefore I reject it"; for all
choice implies the perception of something more desirable in what is
chosen than in what is rejected, and consequently the existence of that
feeling of desire which has been entirely eliminated from the ideal we
are contemplating.

Then, if the perception of all that makes one thing preferable to
another has been obliterated, there can be no motive for any sort of
action whatever. Endue a being who has thus extinguished his faculty of
desire

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

with the power to create a universe, and he has no motive for employing
it. Endue him with all knowledge, and it will be useless to him; for,
since desire has no place in him, he is without any purpose for which to
turn his knowledge to account. And with Love we cannot endue him, for
that is desire in its supreme degree. But if all this be excluded, what
is left of the man? Nothing, except the mere outward form. If he has
actually obtained this ideal, he has practically ceased to be. Nothing
can by any means interest him, for there is nothing to attract or repel
in one thing more than in another. He must be dead alike to all feeling
and to all motive of action, for both feeling and action imply the
preference for one condition rather than another; and where desire is
utterly extinguished, no such preference can exist.

No doubt some one may object that it is only evil desires which are thus
to be suppressed; but a perusal of the writings of the schools of
thought in question will show that this is not the case. The foundation
of the whole system is that *all* desire must be obliterated, the desire
for the good just as much as the desire for the evil. The good is as
much "illusion" as the evil, and until we have reached absolute
indifference to both we have not attained freedom. When we have utterly
crushed out *all* desire we are free. And the practical results of such
a philosophy are shown in the case of Indian devotees, who, in pursuance
of their resolve to crush out *all* desire, both for good and evil

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

alike, become nothing more than outward images of men, from which all
power of perception and of action have long since fled.

The mergence in the universal, at which they thus aim, becomes nothing
more than a self-induced hypnotism, which, if maintained for a
sufficient length of time, saps away every power of mental and bodily
activity, leaving nothing but the outside husk of an attenuated human
form--the hopeless wreck of what was once a living man. This is the
logical result of a system which assumes for its starting-point that
desire is evil in itself, that every desire is *per se* a form of
bondage, independently of the nature of its object. The majority of the
followers of this philosophy may lack sufficient resolution to carry it
out rigorously to its practical conclusions; but whether their ideal is
to be realised in this world or in some other, the utter extinction of
desire means nothing else than absolute apathy, without feeling and
without action.

How entirely false such an idea is--not only from the standpoint of our
daily life, but also from that of the most transcendental conception of
the Universal Principle--is evidenced by the mere fact that anything
exists at all. If the highest ideal is that of utter apathy, then the
Creative Power of the universe must be extremely low-minded; and all
that we have hitherto been accustomed to look upon as the marvellous
order and beauty of creation, is nothing but a display of vulgarity and
ignorance of sound philosophy.

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

But the fact that creation exists proves that the Universal Mind thinks
differently, and we have only to look around to see that the true ideal
is the exercise of creative power. Hence, so far from desire being a
thing to be annihilated, it is the very root of every conceivable mode
of Life. Without it Life could not be. Every form of expression implies
the selection of all that goes to make up that form, and the passing-by
of whatever is not required for that purpose; hence a desire for that
which is selected in preference to what is laid aside. And this
selective desire is none other than the universal Law of Attraction.

Whether this law acts as the chemical affinity of apparently unconscious
atoms, or in the instinctive, if unreasoned, attractions of the
vegetable and animal worlds, it is still the principle of selective
affinity; and it continues to be the same when it passes on into the
higher kingdoms which are ruled by reason and conscious purpose. The
modes of activity in each of these kingdoms are dictated by the nature
of the kingdom; but the activity itself always results from the
preference of a certain subject for a certain object, to the exclusion
of all others; and all action consists in the reciprocal movement of the
two towards each other in obedience to the law of their affinity.

When this takes place in the kingdom of conscious individuality, the
affinities exhibit themselves as mental action; but the principle of
selection prevails without exception throughout the universe. In the
conscious

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

mind this attraction towards its affinity becomes desire; the desire to
create some condition of things better than that now existing. Our want
of knowledge may cause us to make mistakes as to what this better thing
really is, and so in seeking to carry out our desire we may give it a
wrong direction; but the fault is not in the desire itself, but in our
mistaken notion of what it

that it requires for its satisfaction. Hence unrest and dissatisfaction
until its true affinity is found; but, as soon as this is discovered,
the law of attraction at once asserts itself and produces that better
condition, the dream of which first gave direction to our thoughts.

Thus it is eternally true that desire is the cause of all feeling and
all action; in other words, of all Life. The whole livingness of Life
consists in receiving or in radiating forth the vibrations produced by
the law of attraction; and in the kingdom of mind these vibrations
necessarily become conscious out-reachings of the mind in the direction
in which it feels attraction; that is to say, they become desires.
Desire is therefore the mind seeking to manifest itself in some form
which as yet exists only in its thought. It is the principle of
creation, whether the thing created be a world or a wooden spoon; both
have their origin in the desire to bring something into existence which
does not yet exist. Whatever may be the scale on which we exercise our
creative ability, the motive power must always be desire.

Desire is the force behind all things; it is the moving

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

principle of the universe and the innermost centre of all Life. Hence,
to take the negation of desire for our primal principle is to endeavour
to stamp out Life itself; but what we have to do is to acquire the
requisite knowledge by which to guide our desires to their true objects
of satisfaction. To do this is the whole end of knowledge; and any
knowledge applied otherwise is only a partial knowledge, which, having
failed in its purpose, is nothing but ignorance. Desire is thus the
sum-total of the livingness of Life, for it is that in which all
movement originates, whether on the physical level or the spiritual. In
a word, desire is the creative power, and must be carefully guarded,
trained, and directed accordingly; but thus to seek to develop it to the
highest perfection is the very opposite of trying to kill it outright.

And desire has fulfilment for its correlative. The desire and its
fulfilment are bound together as cause and effect; and when we realise
the law of their sequence, we shall be more than ever impressed with the
supreme importance of Desire as the great centre of Life

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX. Touching Lightly](thp11)
