[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](thp11) 
[Next](thp13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766100413/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Hidden Power, by Thomas Troward \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

### X

### PRESENT TRUTH

IF Thought power is good for anything it is good for everything. If it
can produce one thing it can produce all things. For what is to hinder
it? Nothing can stop us from thinking. We can *think* what we please,
and if to think is to form, then we can form what we please. The whole
question, therefore, resolves itself into this: Is it true that to think
is to form? If so, do we not see that our limitations are formed in
precisely the same way as our expansions? We think that conditions
outside our thought have power over us, and so we think power into them.
So the great question of life is whether there is any *other* creative
power than Thought. If so, where is it, and what is it?

Both philosophy and religion lead us to the truth that "in the
beginning" there was no other creative power than Spirit, and the only
mode of activity we can possibly attribute to Spirit is Thought, and so
we find Thought as the root of all things. And if this was the case "in
the beginning" it must be so still; for if all things originate in
Thought, all things must be modes of Thought, and so it is impossible
for Spirit

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

ever to hand over its creations to some power which is not itself--that
is to say, which is not Thought-power; and consequently all the forms
and circumstances that surround us are manifestations of the creative
power of Thought.

But it may be objected that this is God's Thought; and that the creative
power is in God and not Man. But this goes away from the self-evident
axiomatic truth that "in the beginning" nothing could have had any
origin except Thought. It is quite true that nothing has any origin
except in the Divine Mind, and Man himself is therefore a mode of the
Divine Thought. Again, Man is self-conscious; therefore Man is the
Divine Thought evolved into *individual* consciousness, and when he
becomes sufficiently enlightened to realise this as his origin, then he
sees that he is a reproduction *in individuality* of the *same* spirit
which produces all things, and that his own thought in individuality has
exactly the same quality as the Divine Thought in universality, just as
fire is equally igneous whether burning round a large centre of
combustion or a small one, and thus we are logically brought to the
conclusion that our thought must have creative power.

But people say, "We have not found it so. We are surrounded by all sorts
of circumstances that we do not desire." Yes, you *fear* them, and in so
doing you *think* them; and in this way you are constantly exercising
this Divine prerogative of creation by Thought,

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

only through ignorance you use it in a wrong direction. Therefore the
Book of Divine Instructions so constantly repeats "Fear not; doubt not,"
because we can never divest our Thought of its inherent creative
quality, and the only question is whether we shall use it ignorantly to
our injury or understandingly to our benefit.

The Master summed up his teaching in the aphorism that knowledge of the
Truth would make us free. Here is no announcement of anything we have to
do, or of anything that has to be done for us, in order to gain our
liberty, neither is it a statement of anything *future*. Truth *is* what
is. He did not say, you must wait till something becomes true which is
not true *now*. He said: "Know what *is* Truth now, and you will find
that the Truth concerning yourself is Liberty." If the knowledge of
Truth makes us free it can only be because in truth we are free already,
only we do not know it.

Our liberty consists in our reproducing on the scale of the individual
the same creative power of Thought which first brought the world into
existence, "so that the things which are seen were not made of things
which do appear." Let us, then, confidently claim our birthright as
"sons and daughters of the Almighty," and by habitually thinking the
good, the beautiful, and the true, surround ourselves with conditions
corresponding to our thoughts, and by our teaching and example help
others to do the same.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI. Yourself](thp13)
