[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](thp24) 
[Next](thp26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766100413/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Hidden Power, by Thomas Troward \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

### XXIII

### THE CENTRAL CONTROL

IN contemplating the relations between body, soul, and spirit, between
Universal Mind and individual mind, the methodised study of which
constitutes Mental Science, we must never forget that these relations
indicate, not the separateness, but the unity of these principles. We
must learn not to attribute one part of our action to one part of our
being, and another to another. Neither the action nor the functions are
split up into separate parts. The action is a whole, and the being that
does it is a whole, and in the healthy organism the reciprocal movements
of the principles are so harmonious as never to suggest any feeling than
that of a perfectly whole and undivided self. If there is any other
feeling we may be sure that there is abnormal action somewhere, and we
should set ourselves to discover and remove the cause of it. The reason
for this is that in any perfect organism there cannot be more than one
centre of control.

A rivalry of controlling principles would be the destruction of the
.organic wholeness; for either the elements would separate and group
themselves round one or other of the centres, according to their
respective affinities, and thus form two distinctive individualities,

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

or else they would be reduced to a condition of merely chaotic
confusion; in either case the original organism would cease to exist.
Seen in this light, therefore, it is a self-evident truth that, if we
are to retain our individuality; in other words, if we are to continue
to exist, it can be only by retaining our hold upon the central
controlling principle in ourselves; and if this be the charter of our
being, it follows that all our future development depends on our
recognising and accepting this central controlling principle. To this
end, therefore, all our endeavours should be directed; for otherwise all
our studies in Mental Science will only lead us into a confused
labyrinth of principles and counter-principles, which will be
considerably worse than the state of ignorant simplicity from which we
started.

This central controlling principle is the Will, and we must never lose
sight of the fact that all the other principles about which we have
learnt in our studies exist only as its instruments. The Will is the
true self, of which they are all functions, and all our progress
consists of our increased recognition of the fact. It is the Will that
says "I AM"; and therefore, however exalted, or even in their higher
developments apparently miraculous, our powers may be, they are all
subject to the central controlling power of the Will. When the
enlightened Will shall have learnt to identify itself perfectly with the
limitless powers of knowledge, judgment, and creative thought which are
at its disposal, then the individual will have attained to perfect
wholeness,

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

and all limitations will have passed away for ever.

And nothing short of this consciousness of Perfect Wholeness can satisfy
us. Everything that falls short of it is in that degree an embodiment of
the principle of Death, that great enemy against which the principle of
Life must continue to wage unceasing war, in whatever form or measure it
may show itself, until "death is swallowed up in victory." There can be
no compromise. Either we are affirming Life as a principle, or we are
denying it, no matter on how great or how small a scale; and the
criterion by which to determine our attitude is our realisation of our
own Wholeness. Death is the principle of disintegration; and whenever we
admit the power of any portion of our organism, whether spiritual or
bodily, to induce any condition *independently of the intention of the
Will*, we admit that the force of disintegration is superior to the
controlling centre in ourselves, and we conceive of ourselves as held in
bondage by an adversary, from which bondage the only way of release is
by the attainment of a truer way of thinking.

And the reason is that, either through ignorance or carelessness, we
have surrendered our position of control over the system as a whole, and
have lost the element of *Purpose*, around which the consciousness of
individuality must always centre. Every state of our consciousness,
whether active or passive, should be the result of a distinct *purpose*
adopted by our own free will; for the passive states should be quite as
much

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

under the control of the Will as the active. It is the lack of *purpose*
that deprives us of power. The higher and more clearly defined our
purpose, the greater stimulus we have for realising our control over all
our faculties for its attainment; and since the grandest of all purposes
is the strengthening and ennobling of Life, in proportion as we make
this our aim we shall find ourselves in union with the Supreme Universal
Mind, acting each in our individual sphere for the furtherance of the
same purpose which animates the ruling principle of the Great Whole,
and, as a consequence, shall find that its intelligence and powers are
at our disposal.

But in all this there must be no strain. The true exercise of the Will
is not an exercise of unnatural force. It is simply the leading of our
powers into their natural channels by intelligently recognising the
direction in which those channels go. However various in detail, they
have one clearly defined common tendency towards the increasing of
Life--whether in ourselves or in others--and if we keep this steadily in
view, all our powers, whether interior or exterior, will be found to
work so harmoniously together that there will be no sense of independent
action on the part of any one of them. The distinctions drawn for
purposes of study will be laid aside, and the Self in us will be found
to be the realisation of a grand ideal being, at once individual and
universal, consciously free in its individual wholeness and in its
joyous participation in the Life of the Universal Whole.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIV. What is Higher Thought?](thp26)
