[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](thp22) 
[Next](thp24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766100413/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Hidden Power, by Thomas Troward \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

### XXI

### HEPHZIBAH

"THOU shalt no more be termed Forsaken; neither shall thy land any more
be termed Desolate; but thou shalt be called Hephzibah, and thy land
Beulah: for the Lord delighteth in thee, and thy land shall be married"
(Isaiah lxii, 4). The name Hephzibah--or, as it might be written,
Hafzbah--conveys a very distinct idea to any one who has lived in the
East, and calls up a string of familiar words all containing the same
root *hafz*, which signifies "guarding" or "taking care of," such as
*hafiz*, a protector, *muhafiz*, a custodian, as in the word *muhafiz
daftar*, a head record-keeper; or again, *hifazat*, custody, as
*bahifazat polis*, in custody of the police; or again, *daim-ul-hafz*,
imprisonment for life, and other similar expressions.

All words from this root suggest the idea of "guarding," and therefore
the name Haphzibah at once speaks its own meaning. It is "one who is
guarded," a "protected one." And answering to this there must be some
power which guards, and the name of this power is given in Hosea ii, 16,
where it is called "Ishi." "And it shall be at that day, saith the Lord,
that thou shalt call me Ishi; and thou shalt call me no more Baali."

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Baali" means
"lord," "Ishi" means "husband," and between the two there is a whole
world of distinction.

To call the Great Power "Baali" is to live in one world, and to call it
"Ishi" is to live in another. The world that is ruled over by Baali is a
world of "miserable worms of the dust" and such crawling creatures; but
the world that is warmed and lightened by "Ishi" is one in which men and
women walk upright, conscious of their own divine nature, instead of
dodging about to escape being crushed under the feet of Moloch as he
strides through his dominions. If the name Baali did not suggest a wrong
idea there would be no need to change it for another, and the change of
name therefore indicates the opening of the mind to a larger and sounder
conception of the true nature of the Ruling Principle of the universe.
It is no imperious autocrat, the very apotheosis of self-glorification,
ill-natured and spiteful if its childish vanity be not gratified by
hearing its own praises formally proclaimed, often from lips opened only
by fear; nor is it an almighty extortioner desiring to deprive us of
what we value most, either to satisfy its greed or to demonstrate its
sovereignty. This is the image which men make of God and then bow
terrified before it, offering a worship which is the worship of Baal,
and making life blank because all the livingness has been wiped out of
it.

Ishi is the embodiment of the very opposite conception, a wise and
affectionate husband, instead of a taskmaster exploiting his slaves. In
its true aspect the relation

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

of husband and wife is entirely devoid of any question of relative
superiority or inferiority. As well ask whether the front wheel or the
back wheel of your bicycle is the more important. The two make a single
whole, in which the functions of both parts are reciprocal and equally
necessary; yet for this very reason these functions cannot be identical.

In a well-ordered home, where husband and wife are united by mutual love
and respect, we see that the man's function is to enter into the larger
world and to provide the wife with all that is needed for the
maintenance and comfort of the home, while the function of the woman is
to be the distributor of what her husband provides, in doing which she
follows her own discretion; and a sensible man, knowing that he can
trust a sensible wife, does not want to poke his finger into every pie.
Thus all things run harmoniously--the woman relieved of responsibilities
which are not naturally hers, and the man relieved of responsibilities
which are not naturally his. But let any perplexity or danger arise, and
the woman knows that from her husband she will receive all the guidance
and protection that the occasion may require, he being the wise and
strong man that we have supposed him, and having this assurance she is
able to pursue the avocations of her own sphere undisturbed by any fears
or anxieties.

It is this relation of protection and guidance that is implied by the
word Hephzibah. It is the name of those who realise their identity with
the all-ordering

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Divine Spirit. He
who realises this unity with the Spirit finds himself both guided and
guarded. And here we touch the fringe of a deep natural mystery, which
formed the basis of all that was most valuable in the higher mysteries
of the ancients, and the substance of which we must realise if we are to
make any progress in the future, whatever form we may adopt to convey
the idea to ourselves or others. It is the relation of the individual
mind to the Universal Mind, the combination of unity with independence
which, though quite clear when we know it by personal experience, is
almost inexpressible in words, but which is frequently represented in
the Bible under the figure of the marriage relations.

It is a basic principle, and in various modes pervades all Nature, and
has been symbolised in every religion the world has known; and in
proportion as the individual realises this relation he will find that he
is able to *use* the Universal Mind, while at the same time he is guided
and guarded by it. For think what it would be to wield the power of the
Universal Mind without having its guidance. It would be the old story of
Phaeton trying to drive the chariot of the Sun, which ended in his own
destruction; and limitless power without corresponding guidance would be
the most terrible curse that any one could bring upon his head.

The relation between the individual mind and the Universal Mind, as
portrayed in the reciprocally connected names of Hephzibah and Ishi,
must never be lost

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

sight of; for the Great Guiding Mind, immeasurably as it transcends our
intellectual consciousness, is not another than *ourselves*. It is The
One Self which is the foundation of all the individual selves, and which
is, therefore, in all its limitlessness, as entirely one with each
individual as though no other being existed. Therefore we do not have to
go out of ourselves to find it, for it is the expansion to infinity of
all that we truly *are*, having, indeed, no place for those negative
forms of evil with which we people a world of illusion, for it is the
very Light itself, and in it all illusion is dispelled; but it is the
expansion to infinity of all in us that is Affirmative, all that is
really living.

Therefore, in looking for its guiding and guarding we are relying upon
no borrowed power from *without*, held at the caprice and option of
another, but upon the supreme fact of our own nature, which we can use
in what direction we will with perfect freedom, knowing no limitation
save the obligation not to do violence to our own purest and highest
feelings. And this relation is entirely *natural*. We must steer the
happy mean between imploring and ignoring. A natural law does not need
to be entreated before it will work; and, on the other hand, we cannot
make use of it while ignoring its existence.

What we have to do, therefore, is to take the working of the law for
granted, and make use of it accordingly; and since that is the law of
Mind, and Mind is Personality, this Power, which is at once ourselves
and

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

above ourselves, may be treated as a Person and may be spoken with, and
its replies received by the inner ear of the heart. Any scheme of
philosophy that does not result in this personal intercourse with the
Divine Mind falls short of the mark. It may be right so far as it goes,
but it does not go far enough, and fails to connect us with our vital
centre. Names are of small importance so long as the intercourse is
real. The Supreme Mind with which we converse is only to be met in the
profoundest depths of our own being, and, as Tennyson says, is more
perfectly ourselves than our own hands and feet. It is our natural Base;
and realising this we shall find ourselves to be in very truth "guarded
ones," guided by the Spirit in all things, nothing too great and nothing
too trivial to come within the great Law of our being.

There is another aspect of the Spirit in which it is seen as a Power to
be used; and the full flow of life is in the constant alternation
between this aspect and the one we have been considering, but always we
are linked with the Universal Mind as the flower lives by reason of its
root. The connection itself is intrinsic, and can never be severed; but
it must be consciously realised before it can be consciously used. All
our development consists in the increasing consciousness of this
connection, which enables us to apply the higher power to whatever
purpose we may have in hand, not merely in the hope that it may respond,
but with the certain knowledge that by the law of its own nature it

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

is bound to do so, and likewise with the knowledge that by the same law
it is bound also to guide us to the selection of right objects and right
methods.

Experience will teach us to detect the warning movement of the inner
Guide. A deepseated sense of dissatisfaction, an indescribable feeling
that somehow everything is not right, are the indications to which we do
well to pay heed; for we are "guarded ones," and these interior
monitions are the working of that innermost principle of our own being
which is the immediate outflowing of the Great Universal Life into
individuality. But, paying heed to this, we shall find ourselves
guarded, not as prisoners, but as a loved and honoured wife, whose
freedom is assured by a protection which will allow no harm to assail
her; we shall find that the Law of our nature is Liberty, and that
nothing but our own want of understanding can shut us out from it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXII. Mind and Hand](thp24)
