[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](thp19) 
[Next](thp21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766100413/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Hidden Power, by Thomas Troward \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

### XVIII

### ENTERING INTO THE SPIRIT OF IT

"ENTERING into the spirit of it." What a common expression! And yet how
much it really means, how absolutely everything! We enter into the
spirit of an undertaking, into the spirit of a movement, into the spirit
of an author, even into the spirit of a game; and it makes all the
difference both to us and to that into which we enter. A game without
any spirit is a poor affair; and association in which there is no spirit
falls to pieces; and a spiritless undertaking is sure to be a failure.
On the other hand, the book which is meaningless to the unsympathising
reader is full of life and suggestion to the one who enters into, the
spirit of the writer; the man who enters into the spirit of the music
finds a spring of refreshment in some fine recital which is entirely
missed by the cold critic who comes only to judge according to the
standard of a rigid rule; and so on in every case that we can think of.
If we do not enter the spirit of a thing, it has no invigorating effect
upon us, and we regard it as dull, insipid and worthless. This is our
everyday experience, and these are the words in which we express it.

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And the words are
well chosen. They show our intuitive recognition of the spirit as the
fundamental reality in everything, however small or however great. Let
us be right as to the spirit of a thing, and everything else will
successfully follow.

By entering into the spirit of anything we establish a mutual vivifying
action and reaction between it and ourselves; we vivify it with our own
vitality, and it vivifies us with a living interest which we call its
spirit; and therefore the more fully we enter into the spirit of all
with which we are concerned, the more thoroughly do we become *alive*.
The more completely we do this the more we shall find that we are
penetrating into the great secret of Life. It may seem a truism, but the
great secret of Life is its Livingness, and it is just more of this
quality of Livingness that we want to get hold of; it is that good thing
of which we can never have too much.

But every fact implies also its negative, and we never properly
understand a thing until we not only know what it is, but also clearly
understand what it is not. To a complete understanding the knowledge of
the negative is as necessary as the knowledge of the affirmative; for
the perfect knowledge consists in realising the relation between the
two, and the perfect power grows out of this knowledge by enabling us to
balance the affirmative and negative against each other in any
proportion that we will, thus giving flexibility to what would otherwise
be too rigid, and form to what would

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

otherwise be too fluid; and so, by uniting these two extremes, to
produce any result we may desire. It is the old Hermetic saying,
"*Coagula et solve*"--"Solidify the fluid and dissolve the solid"; and
therefore, if we would discover the secret of "entering into the spirit
of it," we must get some idea of the negative, which is the
"not-spirit."

In various ages this negative phase has been expressed in different
forms of words suitable to the spirit of the time; and so, clothing this
idea in the attire of the present day, I will sum up the opposite of
Spirit in the word "Mechanism." Before all things this is a mechanical
age, and it is astonishing how great a part of what we call our social
advance has its root in the mechanical arts. Reduce the mechanical arts
to what they were in the days of the Plantagenets and the greater part
of our boasted civilisation would recede through the centuries along
with them. We may not be conscious of all this, but the mechanical
tendency of the age has a firm grip upon society at large. We habitually
look at the mechanical side of things by preference to any other.
Everything is done mechanically, from the carving on a piece of
furniture to the arrangement of the social system. It is the mechanism
that must be considered first, and the spirit has to be fitted to the
mechanical exigencies. We enter into the mechanism of it instead of into
the Spirit of it, and so limit the Spirit and refuse to let it have its
own way; and then, as a consequence, we get entirely

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

mechanical action, and complete our circle of ignorance by supposing
that this is the only sort of action there is.

Yet this is not a necessary state of things even in regard to "physical
science," for the men who have made the greatest advances in that
direction are those who have most clearly seen the subordination of the
mechanical to the spiritual. The man who can recognise a natural law
only as it operates through certain forms of mechanism with which he is
familiar will never rise to the construction of the higher forms of
mechanism which might be built up upon that law, for he fails to see
that it is the law which determines the mechanism and not vice versa.
This man will make no advance in science, either theoretical or applied,
and the world will never owe any debt of gratitude to him. But the man
who recognises that the mechanism for the application of any principle
grows out of the true apprehension of the principle studies the
principle first, knowing that when *that* is properly grasped it will
necessarily suggest all that is wanted for bringing it into practical
use.

And if this is true in regard to so-called physical science, it is *a
fortiori* true as regards the Science of Spirit. There is a mechanical
attitude of mind which judges everything by the limitations of past
experiences, allowing nothing for the fact that those experiences were
for the most part the, results of our ignorance of spiritual law. But if
we realise the true law

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

of Being we shall rise above these mechanical conceptions. We shall not
deny the reality of the body or of the physical world as facts, knowing
that they also are Spirit, but we shall learn to deny their power as
causes. We shall learn to distinguish between the *causa causta* and the
*causa causans*, the secondary or apparent physical cause and the
primary or spiritual cause, without which the secondary cause could not
exist; and so we shall get a new standpoint of clear knowledge and
certain power by stepping over the threshold of the mechanical and
entering into the spirit of it.

What we have to do is to maintain our even balance between the two
extremes, denying neither Spirit nor the mechanism which is its form and
through which it works. The one is as necessary to a perfect whole as
the other, for there must be an *outside* as well as an *inside*; only
we must remember that the creative principle is always *inside*, and
that the outside only exhibits what the inside creates. Hence, whatever
external effect we would produce, we must first enter into the spirit of
it and work upon the spiritual principle, whether in ourselves or
others; and by so doing our insight will become greatly enlarged, for
from without we can see only one small portion of the circumference,
while from the centre we can see the whole of it. If we fully grasp the
truth that Spirit is Creator, we can dispense with painful
investigations into the mechanical side of all our problems. If we are
constructing from without, then we have to

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

calculate anxiously the strength of our materials and the force of every
thrust and strain to which they may be subjected, and very possibly
after all we may find that we have made a mistake somewhere in our
elaborate calculations. But if we realise the power of creating from
within, we shall find all these calculations correctly made for us; for
the same Spirit which is Creator is also that which the Bible calls "the
Wonderful Numberer." Construction from without is based upon analysis,
and no analysis is complete without accurate quantitative knowledge; but
creation is the very opposite of analysis, and carries its own
mathematics with it.

To enter into the spirit of anything, then, is to make yourself one in
thought with the creative principle that is at the centre of it; and
therefore why not go to the centre of all things at once, and enter into
the Spirit of Life? Do you ask where to find it? *In yourself*; and in
proportion as you find it there, you [will](errata.htm#1) find it
everywhere else. Look at Life as the one thing that is, whether in you
or around you; try to realise the livingness of it, and then seek to
enter into the Spirit of it by affirming it to be the whole of what you
are. Affirm this continually in your thoughts, and by degrees the
affirmation will grow into a real living force within you, so that it
will become a second nature to you, and you will find it impossible and
unnatural to think in any other way; and the nearer you approach this
point the greater you will find your control over

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

both body and circumstances, until at last you shall so enter into the
Spirit of it---into the Spirit of the Divine creative power which is the
root of all things--that, in the words of Jesus, "nothing shall be
impossible to you," because you have so entered into the Spirit of it
that you discover yourself to be *one with it*. Then all the old
limitations will have passed away, and you will be living in an entirely
new world of Life, Liberty and Love, of which you yourself are the
radiating centre. You will realise the truth that your Thought is a
limitless creative power, and that you yourself are behind your Thought,
controlling and directing it with Knowledge for any purpose which Love
motives and Wisdom plans. Thus you will cease from your labours, your
struggles and anxieties, and enter into that new order where perfect
rest is one with ceaseless activity.

1902\.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIX. The Bible and the New Thought](thp21)
