[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](thp21.md) 
[Next](thp23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766100413/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Hidden Power, by Thomas Troward \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

### XX

### JACHIN AND BOAZ

"AND he reared up the pillars before the temple, one on the right hand,
and the other on the left; and called the name of that on the right hand
Jachin, and the name of that on the left Boaz." (II Chron. 17.)

Very likely some of us have wondered what was the meaning of these two
mysterious pillars set up by Solomon in front of his temple, and why
they were called by these strange names; and then we have dropped the
subject as one of those inexplicable things handed down in the Bible
from old time which, we suppose, can have no practical interest for us
at the present day. Nevertheless, these strange names are not without a
purpose. They contain the key to the entire Bible and to the whole order
of Nature, and as emblems of the two great principles that are the
pillars of the universe, they fitly stood at the threshold of that
temple which was designed to symbolise all the mysteries of Being.

In all the languages of the Semitic stock the letters J and Y are
interchangeable, as we see in the modern Arabic "Yakub" for "Jacob" and
the old Hebrew "Yaveh" for "Jehovah." This gives us the form

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Yachin," which at
once reveals the enigma. The word Yak signifies "one"; and the
termination "hi," or "hin," is an intensitive which may be rendered in
English by "only." Thus the word "Jachin" resolves itself into the words
"one only," the all-embracing Unity.

The meaning of Boaz is clearly seen in the book of Ruth. There Boaz
appears as the kinsman exercising the right of pre-emption so familiar
to those versed in Oriental law--a right which has for its purpose the
maintenance of the Family as the social unit. According to this
widely-spread custom, the purchaser, who is not a member of the family,
buys the property subject to the right of kinsmen within certain degrees
to purchase it back, and so bring it once more into the family to which
it originally belonged. Whatever may be our personal opinions regarding
the vexed questions of dogmatic theology, we can all agree as to the
general principle indicated in the role acted by Boaz. He brings back
the alienated estate into the family--that is to say, he "redeems" it in
the legal sense of the word. As a matter of law his power to do this
results from his membership in the family; but his motive for doing it
is love, his affection for Ruth. Without pushing the analogy too far we
may say, then, that Boaz represents the principle of redemption in the
widest sense of reclaiming an estate by right of relationship, while the
innermost moving power in its recovery is Love.

This is what Boaz stands for in the beautiful story

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

of Ruth, and there is no reason why we should not let the same name
stand for the same thing when we seek the meaning of the mysterious
pillar. Thus the two pillars typify Unity and the redeeming power of
Love, with the significant suggestion that the redemption results from
the Unity. They correspond with the two "bonds," or uniting principles
spoken of by St. Paul, "the Unity of the Spirit which is the Bond of
Peace," and "Love, which is the Bond of Perfectness."

The former is Unity of Being; the latter, Unity of Intention: and the
principle of this Dual-Unity is well illustrated by the story of Boaz.
The whole story proceeds on the idea of the Family as the social unit,
the root-conception of all Oriental law, and if we consider the Family
in this light, we shall see how exactly it embodies the two-fold idea of
Jachin and Boaz, unity of Being and unity of Thought. The Family forms a
unit because all the members proceed from a common progenitor, and are
thus all of one blood; but, although this gives them a natural unity of
Being of which they cannot divest themselves, it is not enough in itself
to make them a united family, as unfortunately experience too often
shows. Something more is wanted, and that something is Love. There must
be a personal union brought about by sympathetic Thought to complete the
natural union resulting from birth. The inherent unity must be expressed
by the Individual volition of each member, and thus the Family becomes

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

the ideally perfect social unit; a truth to which St. Paul alludes when
he calls God the Father from Whom every family in heaven and on earth is
named. Thus Boaz stands for the principle which brings back to the
original Unity that which has been for a time separated from it. There
has never been any separation of actual Being--the family right always
subsisted in the property even while in the hands of strangers,
otherwise it could never have been brought back; but it requires the
Love principle to put this right into effective operation.

When this begins to work in the knowledge of its right to do so, then
there is the return of the individual to the Unity, and the recognition
of himself as the particular expression of the Universal in virtue of
his own nature.

These two pillars, therefore, stand for the two great spiritual
principles that are the basis of all Life: Jachin typifying the Unity
resulting from Being, and Boaz typifying the Unity resulting from Love.
In this Dual-Unity we find the key to all conceivable involution or
evolution of Spirit; and it is therefore not without reason that the
record of these two ancient pillars has been preserved in our
Scriptures. And finally we may take this as an index to the character of
our Scriptures generally. They contain infinite meanings; and often
those passages which appear on the surface to be most meaningless will
be found to possess the deepest significance. The Book, which we often
read so superficially,

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

hides beneath its sometimes seemingly trivial words the secrets of other
things. The twin pillars Jachin and Boaz bear witness to this
truth. <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[196:1](thp22.htm#fr_4.md) The following comment was
made by Judge Troward, after the publication of this paper in
*Expression*:

"*The Two Pillars* of the Universe are Personality and Mathematics,
represented by Boaz and Jachin respectively. This is the broadest
simplification to which it is possible to reduce things. Balance
consists in preserving the Equilibrium or Alternating Current between
these two Principles. Personality is the Absolute Factor. Mathematics
are the Relative Factor, for they merely Measure different Rates or
Scales. They are absolute in this respect. A particular scale having
been selected all its sequences will follow by an inexorable Law of
Order and Proportion; but the selection of the scale and the change from
one scale to another rests entirely with Personality. What Personality
can not do is to make one Scale produce the results of another, but it
can set aside one scale and substitute another for it. Hence Personality
contains in itself the Universal Scale, or can either accommodate itself
to lower rates of motion already established, or can raise them to its
own rate of motion. Hence Personality is the grand Ultimate Fact in all
things.

"Different personalities should be regarded as different degrees of
consciousness. They are different degrees of emergence of The Power that
knows Itself."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXI. Hephzibah](thp23.md)
