[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ioy06)  [Next](ioy08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

# Chapter Four

### SOURCES OF FOOD SUPPLY.

The food supply of the Sierra Indians was extensive and abundant,
consisting of the flesh of deer, antelope, elk and mustang horses,
together with fish, water-fowls, birds, acorns, berries, pine nuts,
esculent, herbage and the tuberous roots of certain plants, all of which
were easily obtained, even with their simple and limited means of
securing them. Mushrooms, fungi, grasshoppers, worms and the larvæ of
ants and other insects, were also eaten, and some of these articles were
considered great delicacies.

### HUNTING.

Their main effective weapons for hunting large game were their bows and
obsidian-pointed arrows. Their manner of hunting was either by the
stealthy still hunt, or a general turn-out, surrounding a large area of
favorable country and driving to a common center, where at close range
the

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

 

<span id="img_03200"></span>

[![A YOSEMITE HUNTER.&lt;BR&gt; He wears a false deer's head, to deceive
the game.](tn/03200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/03200.jpg.md)  
A YOSEMITE HUNTER.  
He wears a false deer's head, to deceive the game.  

*Drawing by Jorgensen*.

 

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

hunters could sometimes make an extensive slaughter.

When on the still hunt for deer in the brushy, sparsely timbered
foothills of the Sierra Range of mountains, or higher up in the
extensive forests, some of the hunters wore for a headgear a false
deer's head, by which deceptive device they were enabled to get to a
closer and more effective range with their bows and arrows. This
head-dress was made of the whole skin of a doe's head, with a part of
the neck, the head part stuffed with light material, the eyeholes filled
in with the green feathered scalp of a duck's head, and the top
furnished with light wooden horns, the branching stems of the manzanita
(*Arctostaphylos*) being generally used for this purpose. The neck part
was made to fit on the hunter's head and fasten with strings tied under
the chin. This unique style of headgear was used by some Indian hunters
for many years after they had guns to hunt with.

The high ranges of the mountains as already stated, were considered
common hunting ground by the different tribes. The deer, many of them,
were in some degree

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

 

<span id="img_03400"></span>

[![INDIAN SWEAT LODE.&lt;BR&gt; Used by the Yosemite hunters before
starting after game.](tn/03400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/03400.jpg.md)  
INDIAN SWEAT LODE.  
Used by the Yosemite hunters before starting after game.  

*Drawing by Jorgensen*.

 

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

migratory in their habits, being driven from the higher ranges to the
foothills by the deep winter snows, and in the spring following close to
the melting, receding snow, back again to their favorite summer haunts.

Late in the summer, or early in the fall, just before holding some of
their grand social or sacred festivals, the Indian hunters would make
preparation for a big hunt in the mountains, to get a good supply of
venison for the feast. One of the first absolute prerequisites was to go
through a thorough course of sweating and personal cleansing. This was
done by resorting to their sweat houses, which were similar in
construction to the *o'-chums*, except that the top was rounded and the
whole structure was covered thickly with mud and earth to exclude the
air. These houses were heated with hot stones and coals of fire, and the
hunters would then crawl into them and remain until in a profuse
perspiration, when they would come out and plunge into cold water for a
wash-off. This was repeated until they thought themselves sufficiently
free from all bodily odor so that the deer could not detect their
approach by scent, and flee for safety.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

After this purification they kept themselves strictly as celibates until
the hunt was over, though their women went along to help carry the
outfit, keep camp, cook, search for berries and pine nuts, and assist in
bringing to camp and taking care of the deer as killed, and in "packing"
the meat out to the place of rendezvous appointed for the grand
ceremonies and feast.

Their usual manner of cooking fresh meat was by broiling on hot coals,
or roasting before the fire or in the embers. Sometimes, however, they
made a cavity in the ground, in which they built a fire, which was
afterwards cleared away and the cavity lined with very hot stones, on
which they placed the meat wrapped in green herbage, and covered it with
other hot rocks and earth, to remain until suitably cooked.

When they had a surplus of fresh meat they cut it in strips and hung it
in the sunshine to dry. The dried meat was generally cooked by roasting
in hot embers, and then beaten to soften it before being eaten.

A young hunter never ate any of the first deer he killed, as he believed
that if he did

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

so he would never succeed in killing another.

### FISHING.

They had various methods of catching fish--with hook and line, with a
spear, by weir-traps in the stream, and by saturating the water with the
juice of the soap-root plant (*Chlorogalum pomeridianum*). Before they
could obtain fishhooks of modern make, they made them of bone. Their
lines were made of the tough, fibrous, silken bark of the variety of
milkweed or silkweed, already mentioned. Their spears were small poles
pointed with a single tine of bone, which was so arranged that it became
detached by the struggles of the fish, and was then held by a string
fastened near its center, which turned it crosswise of the wound and
make it act as an effective barb.

Their weir-traps were put in the rapids, and constructed by building
wing dams diagonally down to the middle of the stream until the two ends
came near together, and in this narrow outlet was placed a sort of
wicker basket trap, made of long willow sprouts loosely woven together
and closed

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

at the pointed lower end, which was elevated above the surface of the
water below the dam. The fish, in going down stream, ran into this trap,
and soon found themselves at the lower end and out of the water.

The soap-root was used at a low stage of water, late in summer. They dug
several bushels of the bulbous roots and went to a suitable place on the
bank, where the roots were pounded into a pulp, and mixed with soil and
water. This mixture, by the handful, was then rubbed on rocks out in the
stream, which roiled the water and also made it somewhat foamy. The fish
were soon affected by it, became stupid with a sort of strangulation,
and rose to the surface, where they were easily captured by the Indians
with their scoop baskets. In a stream the size of the South Fork of the
Merced River at Wawona, by this one operation every fish in it for a
distance of three miles would be taken in a few hours.

The fish were generally cooked by roasting on hot coals from burned oak
wood or bark.

### ACORNS AS FOOD.

Acorns were their main staple article of breadstuff, and they are still
used by the

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

 

<span id="img_03900"></span>

[![CHUCK'-AH.&lt;BR&gt; Storehouse for nuts and acorns, thatched with
pine branches, points downward, to keep out mice and
squirrels.](tn/03900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/03900.jpg.md)  
CHUCK'-AH.  
Storehouse for nuts and acorns, thatched with pine branches, points
downward, to keep out mice and squirrels.  

*Drawing by Mrs. Jorgensen*.

 

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

present generation whenever they can be obtained.

They are gathered in the fall when ripe, and are preserved for future
use in the old style Indian *cache* or storehouse. This consists of a
structure which they call a *chuck'-ah*, which is a large basket-shaped
receptacle made of long willow sprouts closely woven together. It is
usually about six feet high and three feet in diameter. It is set upon
stout posts about three feet high, and supported in position by four
longer posts on the outside, reaching to the top, and there bound firmly
to keep them from spreading. The outside of the basket is thatched with
small pine branches, points downward, to shed the rain and snow, and to
protect the contents from the depredations of squirrels and woodpeckers.
When filled, the top also is securely covered with bark, as a protection
from the winter storms. When the acorns are wanted for use, a small hole
is made at the bottom of the *chuck'-ah*, and they are taken out from
time to time, as required.

The acorns from the black or Kellogg's oak (*Quercus Californica*) are
considered

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

much the best and most nutritious by the Indians. This is the oak which
is so beautiful and abundant in the Yosemite Valley.

These acorns are quite bitter, and are not eaten in their natural
condition, as most fruit and nuts are eaten, but have to be quite
elaborately prepared and cooked to make them palatable. First, the hull
is cracked and removed, and the kernel pounded or ground into a fine
meal. In the Yosemite Valley and at other Indian camps in the mountains,
this is done by grinding with their stone pestles or *metats*
(*may-tat's*) in the *ho'yas* or mortars, worn by long usage in large
flat-top granite rocks, one of which is near every Indian camp. Lower
down in the foothills, where there are no suitable large rocks for these
permanent mortars, the Indians used single portable stone mortars for
this purpose.

After the acorns are ground to a fine meal, the next process is to take
out the bitter tannin principle. This is done in the following manner:
They make large shallow basins in clean washed sand, in the center of
which are laid a few flat, fan-like ends of fir branches. A fire is then
made near by,

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

 

<span id="img_04200"></span>

[![HO'-YAS AND ME-TATS'.&lt;BR&gt; Rude mortars and pestles for grinding
acorn meal. The holes have been worn in the granite by constant
use.](tn/04200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04200.jpg.md)  
HO'-YAS AND ME-TATS'.  
Rude mortars and pestles for grinding acorn meal. The holes have been
worn in the granite by constant use.  

*Photograph by Fiske*.

 

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

and small stones of four or five pounds in weight are heated, with which
they warm water in some of their large cooking baskets, and mix the
acorn meal with it to the consistency of thin gruel. This mixture is
poured into the sand basins, and as the water leaches out into the sand
it takes with it the bitter quality--the warm water being renewed until
all the bitter taste is washed out from the meal sediment, or dough.

This is then taken, and, after being cleansed from the adhering sand, is
put into cooking baskets, thinned down with hot water to the desired
condition, and cooked by means of hot stones which are held in it with
two sticks for tongs. The mush, while cooking, is stirred with a
peculiar stirring stick, made of a tough oak sprout, doubled so as to
form a round, open loop at one end, which is used in lifting out any
loose stones. When the dough is well cooked, it is either left *en
masse* in the baskets or scooped out in rolls and put into cold water to
cool and harden before being eaten. Sometimes the thick paste is made
into cakes and baked on hot rocks. One of these cakes, when rolled in
paper, will in a short time saturate it with

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

oil. This acorn food is probably more nutritious than any of the
cereals.

### INDIAN DOGS.

The Indian dogs, of which every family had several, are as fond of the
acorn food as their owners. These dogs are made useful in treeing
wild-cats, California lions and gray squirrels, and are very expert in
catching ground squirrels by intercepting them when away from their
burrows, and when the Indians drown them out in the early spring by
turning water from the flooded streams into their holes.

As far as can be learned, dogs were about the only domestic animals
which the Yosemites, and other adjacent tribes of Indians, kept for use
before the country was settled by the white people.

### NUTS AND BERRIES.

Pine nuts were another important article of food, and were much prized
by the Indians. They are very palatable and nutritious, and are also
greatly relished by white people whenever they can be obtained. The
seeds of the Digger or nut pine (*Pinus Sabiniana*) were the ones most
used on the

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

western side of the Sierras, although the seeds of the sugar pine (*P.
Lambertiana*) were also sometimes eaten. On account of their soft shell,
nuts from the piñon pine (*P. monophylla*), which grows principally on
the eastern side of the mountains, were considered superior to either of
the other kinds, and were an important article of barter with the tribes
of that region. All of these trees are very prolific, and their crop of
nuts in fruitful years has been estimated to be even greater than the
enormous wheat crop of California, although of course but a very small
portion of it is ever gathered. Many other kinds of nuts and seeds were
also eaten.

The principal berries used by the Indians of Yosemite and tribes lower
down in the foothills were those of the manzanita (*Arctostaphylos
glauca*). They are about the size of huckleberries, of a light brown
color, and when ripe have the flavor of dried apples. They are used for
eating, and also to make a kind of, cider for drinking, and for mixing
with some food preparations. Manzanita is the Spanish for "little
apple," and this shrub, with its rich red bark and

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

pale green foliage, is perhaps the most beautiful and most widely
distributed in California. Strawberries, black raspberries,
elderberries, wild cherries and the fruit of the Sierra plum (*Prunus
subcordata*) are also used by the Indians, but wild edible berries are
not as plentiful in California as they are in the Atlantic States.

### GRASSHOPPERS AND WORMS.

In addition to the staple articles of food already mentioned, many other
things were eaten when they could be obtained. These included
grasshoppers, certain kinds of large tree worms, the white fungi which
grows upon the oak, mushrooms, and the larvæ and pupæ of ants and other
insects. The pupæ of a certain kind of fly which breeds extensively on
the shores of Mono Lake, about forty miles from Yosemite, was an
important article of commerce across the mountains, and was made into a
kind of paste called *ka-cha'-vee*, which is still much relished by the
Indians, and is a prominent dish at their feasts.

The manner of catching grasshoppers was to dig a large hole, somewhat in
the shape

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

 

<span id="img_04700"></span>

[![A WOOD GATHERER.&lt;BR&gt; As in all Indian tribes, the women do most
of the work.](tn/04700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04700.jpg.md)  
A WOOD GATHERER.  
As in all Indian tribes, the women do most of the work.  

*Photograph by Fiske*.

 

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

of a fly trap, with the bottom larger than the opening at the top, so
that the insects could not readily get out of it. This hole was dug in
the center of a meadow, which was then surrounded by Indians armed with
small boughs, who beat the grasshoppers towards a common center and
drove them into the trap. A fire was then kindled on top of them, and
after they had been well roasted they were gathered up and stored for
future use.

Other articles of food were various kinds of roots, grasses and herbage,
some of which were cooked, while others were eaten in their natural
condition. The lupine (*Lupinus bicolor* and other species), whose
brilliant flowers are such a beautiful feature of all the mountain
meadows in the spring and summer, was a favorite plant for making what
white people would call "greens," and when eaten was frequently
moistened with some of the manzanita cider already referred to. Among
the roots used for food were those of the wild caraway (*Carum*), wild
hyacinth (*Brodiæa*), sorrel (*Oxalis*), and camass (*Camassia
esculenta*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Five: Religious Ceremonies and Beliefs](ioy08.md)
