[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ioy03)  [Next](ioy05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# INDIANS OF THE YOSEMITE

## Chapter One.

### EARLY HISTORY.

During the past few years a rapidly growing interest in the native
Indians has been manifested by a large majority of visitors to the
Yosemite Valley. They have evinced a great desire to see them in their
rudely constructed summer camps, and to purchase some articles of their
artistic basket and bead work, to take away as highly prized souvenirs.

They are also anxious to learn something of their former modes of life,
habits and domestic industries, before their original tribal relations
were ruthlessly broken up by the sudden advent of the white population
of gold miners and others in 1850, and the subsequent war, in which the
Indians were

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

defeated, and, as a result, nearly exterminated.

### ORIGIN OF THE YOSEMITE INDIANS.

According to statements made by Teneiya (*Ten-eye'-ya* <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0).md) chief of the Yosemites, to Dr. L. H.
Bunnell, and published by him in his book on the "Discovery of the
Yosemite," the original Indian name of the Valley was Ah-wah'-nee, which
has been translated as "deep grassy valley," and the Indians living
there were called Ah-wah-nee'-chees, which signified "dwellers in
Ah-wah'-nee."

Many years ago, the old chief said, the Ah-wah-nee'-chees had been a
large and powerful tribe, but by reason of wars and a fatal black
sickness, nearly all had been destroyed, and the survivors of the band
fled from the Valley and joined other tribes.

For years afterwards this locality was uninhabited, but finally Teneiya,
who claimed to be descended from an Ah-wah-nee'-chee

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

<span id="img_00300"></span>

[![YOSEMITE FALLS (CHO'-LACK),&lt;BR&gt; 2,634 Feet.](tn/00300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/00300.jpg.md)  
YOSEMITE FALLS (CHO'-LACK),  
2,634 Feet.  

*Photograph by Fiske*.

Near the foot of these falls was located the village of Ah-wah'-nee, the
Indian capital and residence of Chief Teneiya. There were eight other
villages in the Valley.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

chief, left the Mo'nos, where he had been born and brought up, and,
gathering some of his father's old tribe around him, visited the Valley
and claimed it as the birthright of his people. He then became the
founder of a new tribe or band, which received the name "Yo-sem'-i-te."
This word signifies a full-grown grizzly bear, and Teneiya said that the
name had been given to his band because they occupied the mountains and
valleys which were the favorite resort of the grizzly bears, and his
people were expert in killing them; that his tribe had adopted the name
because those who had bestowed it were afraid of the grizzlies, and also
feared his band.

The Yosemites were perhaps the most warlike of any of the tribes in this
part of the Sierra Nevada Mountains, who were, as a rule, a peaceful
people, dividing the territory among them, and indulging in few
controversies. In fact, these Indians in general were less belligerent
and warlike than any others on the Pacific Coast. When difficulties
arose, they were usually settled peacefully by arbitration, in a grand
council of

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

the chiefs and head men of the tribes involved, without resorting to
open hostilities.

### OTHER TRIBES

Other bands of Indians in the vicinity of the Yosemite Valley were the
Po-ho-nee'-chees, who lived near the headwaters of the Po-ho'-no or
Bridal Veil Creek in summer, and on the South Fork of the Merced' River
in winter, about twelve miles below Wawo'na; the Po-to-en'-cies who
lived on the Merced River; Wil-tuc-um'-nees, Tuol'-umne River;
Noot'-choos and Chow-chil'-las, Chowchilla Valley; Ho-na'ches and
Me'-woos, Fresno River and vicinity; and Chook-chan'-ces, San Joaquin
River and vicinity.

These tribes, including the Yosemites, were all somewhat affiliated by
common ancestry or by intermarriage, and were similar in their general
characteristics and customs. They were all called by the early
California settlers, "Digger Indians," as a term of derision, on account
of their not being good fighters, and from their practice of digging the
tuberous roots of certain native plants, for food.

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

### INDIAN WAR OF 1851.

Dr. Bunnell, in his book already referred to, has given the soldiers'
and white men's account of the cause of the Indian war of 1851, but a
statement of the grievances on the part of the Indians, which caused the
uniting of all the different tribes in the mining region adjacent to
Yosemite, in an attempt to drive the white invaders from their country,
has never been published, and a brief account of these grievances may be
interesting.

### AGGRESSIONS BY WHITE SETTLERS

The first parties of prospecting miners, were welcomed by the Indians
with their usual friendliness and hospitality toward strangers--a
universal characteristic of these tribes,--and the mining for gold was
watched with great interest. They soon learned the value of the gold
dust, and some of them engaged in mining, and exchanged their gold at
the trading stations for blankets and fancy trinkets, at an enormous
profit to the traders, and peace and good feeling prevailed for a short
time.

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

The reports, of the rich gold "diggin's" on the waters of the Tuolumne,
Merced, Mariposa, Chowchilla, and Fresno Rivers, soon spread, and miners
by thousands came and took possession of the whole country, paying no
regard to the natural rights or wishes of the Indians.

Some of the Indian chiefs made the proposition that if the miners would
give them some of the gold which they found in their part of the
country, they might stay and work. This offer was not listened to by the
miners, and a large majority of the white invaders treated the natives
as though they had no rights whatever to be respected. In some
instances, where Indians had found and were working good mining claims,
they were forcibly driven away by white miners, who took possession of
their claims and worked them.

Moreover, the Indians saw that their main sources of food supply were
being rapidly destroyed. The oak trees, which produced the acorns--one
of their staple articles of food,--were being cut down and burned by
miners and others in clearing up land for cultivation, and the deer and
other

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

 

<span id="img_00800"></span>

[![AN INDIAN DANCER.&lt;BR&gt; Chow-chil-la Indian in full war-dance
costume.](tn/00800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/00800.jpg.md)  
AN INDIAN DANCER.  
Chow-chil-la Indian in full war-dance costume.  

*Copyrighted Photograph by Boysen*.

 

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

food game were being rapidly killed off or driven from the locality.

In the "early days," before California was admitted as a free State into
the Union, it was reported, and was probably true, that some of the
immigrants from the slave-holding States took Indians and made slaves of
them in working their mining claims. It was no uncommon event for the
sanctity of their homes and families to be invaded by some of the "baser
sort," and young women taken, willing or not, for servants and wives.

### RETALIATION.

In retaliation, and as some, compensation for these many grievous
outrages upon their natural inalienable rights of domain and property,
and their native customs, the Indians stole horses and mules from the
white settlers, and killed them for food for their families, who, in
many instances, were in a condition of starvation.

Finally the chiefs and leading men of all the tribes involved met in a
grand council, and resolved to combine their warrior forces in one great
effort to drive all their white enemies from the country, before they
became more numerous and formidable.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

### BEGINNING OF HOSTILITIES

To prepare for this struggle for existence, they made raids upon some of
the principal trading posts in the mining sections, killed those in
charge, took all the blankets, clothing and provisions they could carry
away, and fled to the mountains, where they were soon pursued by the
soldiers and volunteer citizens, and a spirited battle was fought
without any decisive advantage to either side.

The breaking out of actual hostilities created great excitement among
the whites, and an urgent call was made upon the Governor of the State
for a military force to meet the emergency, and protect the settlers--a
force strong enough to thoroughly subdue the Indians, and remove all of
them to reservations to be selected by the United States Indian
Commissioners for that purpose.

Meantime the Governor and the Commissioners, who had then arrived, were
receiving numerous communications, many of them from persons in high
official positions, earnestly urging a more humane and just policy,
averring that the Indians had

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

real cause for complaint, that they had been "more sinned against than
sinning" since the settling of California by the whites, and that they
were justly entitled to protection by the Government and compensation
for the spoliations and grievances they had suffered.

These protests doubtless had some influence in delaying hostile
measures, and in the inauguration of efforts to induce the Indians to
come in and treat with the Commissioners, envoys being sent out to
assure them of fair treatment and personal safety. Many of the Indians
accepted these offers, and, as the different tribes surrendered, they
were taken to the two reservations which the Commissioners had
established for them on the Fresno River, the principal one being a few
miles above the place where the town of Madera is now located.

As before stated, these Indians were not a warlike people. Their only
weapons were their bows and arrows, and these they soon found nearly
useless in defending themselves at long range against soldiers armed
with rifles. Moreover, their stock of provisions

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

was so limited that they either had to surrender or starve.

### DISCOVERY OF YOSEMITE VALLEY.

The Yosemites and one or two other bands of Indians had refused to
surrender, and had retreated to their mountain strongholds, where they
proposed to make a last determined resistance. Active preparations were
accordingly made by the State authorities to follow them, and either
capture or exterminate all the tribes involved. For this purpose a body
of State volunteers, known as the Mariposa Battalion, was organized,
under the command of Major James D. Savage, to pursue these tribes into
the mountains; and, after many long marches and some fighting, the
Indians were all defeated, captured, and, with their women and children,
put upon the reservations under strong military guard.

It was during this campaign that Major Savage and his men discovered the
Yosemite Valley, about the 21st of March, 1851, while in pursuit of the
Yosemites, under old Chief Teneiya, for whom Lake Teneiya and Teneiya
Canyon have appropriately been named.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

 

<span id="img_01300"></span>

[![THREE BROTHERS (WAW-HAW'-KEE),&lt;BR&gt; 3,900 Feet.](tn/01300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/01300.jpg.md)  
THREE BROTHERS (WAW-HAW'-KEE),  
3,900 Feet.  

*Photograph by Foley*.

Named by the soldiers who discovered the Valley, to commemorate the
capture of the three sons of Teneiya near this place The Indian name
means "Falling Rocks."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[2:1](ioy04.htm#fr_0.md) The Indian names are
usually pronounced exactly as spelled, with each syllable distinctly
sounded, and the principal accent on the penult, as in Ah-*wah*'-nee, or
the antepenult, as in Yo-*sem*'-i-te. Where doubt might exist, the
accent will be indicated, or the pronunciation given in parenthesis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Two: Effects of the War.](ioy05.md)
