[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ioy09)  [Next](ioy11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

# Chapter Seven

### MYTHS AND LEGENDS.

The Indians of the Yosemite Valley and vicinity have a great fund of
mythological lore, which has been handed down verbally from generation
to generation for hundreds of years, but they are very reluctant to
speak of these legends to white people, and it is extremely difficult to
get reliable information on the subject. Moreover, the Indians most
familiar with them have not a sufficient knowledge of the English
language to be able to express their ideas clearly.

Many Yosemite legends have been published at different times and in
various forms, and it is probable that most of them have had at least a
foundation in real Indian myths, but many are obviously fanciful in some
particulars, and it is impossible to tell how much is of Indian origin
and how much is due to poetic embellishment. When asked about some of
these legends, many years ago, one of the old Yosemite Indians

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

remarked contemptuously, "White man too much lie."

On the other hand, red men as well as white men are sometimes given to
romancing, and I have known of cases where "legends" would be
manufactured on the spur of the moment by some young Indian to satisfy
an importunate and credulous questioner, to the keen but suppressed
amusement of other Indians present.

It will therefore be seen that this subject is surrounded with some
difficulty, and it must not be understood that the legends here given
are vouched for as of wholly Indian origin. Some of them, notably those
of the Tul-tok'-a-na and the second legend of Tis-sa'-ack, have been
accepted by eminent ethnologists, and are believed to be purely
aboriginal, while others have doubtless been somewhat idealized in
translation and in the course of numerous repetitions.

The Legend of To-tau-kon-nu'-la and Tis-sa'-ack is made up of fragments
of mythological lore obtained from a number of old Indians at various
times during the past fifty years. It varies somewhat from other legends
which have been published

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

regarding these same characters, but it is well known that the Indians
living in Yosemite in recent years are of mixed tribal origin and do not
all agree as to the traditional history of the region, nor the names of
the prominent scenic features, nor even of the Valley itself. And this
largely accounts for the fact that some of the legends do not harmonize
with each other in details or in sentiment. All of them, however, are
picturesque, and they certainly give an added interest to the natural
beauties and wonders with which they are associated.

### LEGEND OF TO-TAU-KON-NU'-LA AND TIS-SA'-ACK.

Innumerable moons and snows have passed since the Great Spirit guided a
little band of his favorite children into the beautiful vale of
Ah-wah'-nee, <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) and bid them stop and
rest from their long and weary wanderings, which had lasted ever since
they had been separated by the great waters from the happy land of their
forefathers in the far distant *El-o'-win* (West).

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

 

<span id="img_07900"></span>

[![MARY.&lt;BR&gt; Daughter of Captain John, one of the last Chiefs of
the Yosemites.](tn/07900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/07900.jpg.md)  
MARY.  
Daughter of Captain John, one of the last Chiefs of the Yosemites.  

*Photograph by Boysen*.

 

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

Here they found food in abundance for all. The rivers gave them plenty
of *la-pe'-si* (trout). They found in the meadows sweet *ha'-ker*
(clover), and sour *yu-yu'-yu-mah* (oxalis) for spring medicine, and
sweet *toon'-gy* and other edible roots in abundance. The trees and
bushes yielded acorns, pine nuts, fruits and berries. In the forests
were herds of *he'-ker* (deer) and other animals, which gave meat for
food and skins for clothing and beds. And here they lived and
multiplied, and, as instructed by their medicine men, worshipped the
Great Spirit which gave them life, and the sun which warmed and made
them happy.

They also kept in memory the happy land of their forefathers. The story
was told by the old people to the young, and they again told it to their
children from generation to generation, and they all believed that after
death their spirits would return to dwell forever in that distant
country.

They prospered and built other towns outside of Ah-wah'-nee, and became
a great nation. They learned wisdom by experience and by observing how
the Great Spirit taught the animals and insects to live, and

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

they believed that their children could absorb the cunning of the wild
creatures. And so the young son of their chieftain was made to sleep in
the skins of the beaver and coyote, that he might grow wise in building,
and keen of scent in following game. On some days he was fed with
*la-pe'-si* that he might become a good swimmer, and on other days the
eggs of the great *to-tau'-kon* (crane) were his food, that he might
grow tall and keen of sight, and have a clear, ringing voice. He was
also fed on the flesh of the *he'-ker* that he might be fleet of foot,
and on that of the great *yo-sem'-i-te* (grizzly bear) to make him
powerful in combat.

And the little boy grew up and became a great and wise chieftain, and he
was also a rain wizard, and brought timely rains for the crops.

As was the custom in giving names to all Indians, his name was changed
from time to time, as his character developed, until he was called
Choo'-too-se-ka', meaning the Supreme Good. His grand *o'-chum* (house)
was built at the base of the great

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

rock called To-tau-kon-nu'-la, <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md) because
the great *to-tau'-kons* made their nests and raised their young in a
meadow at its summit, and their loud ringing cries resounded over the
whole Valley.

As the moons and snows passed, this great rock and all the great rocky
walls around the Valley grew in height, and the hills became high
mountains.

After a time Choo'-too-se-ka' built himself a great palace *o'-chum* on
the summit of the rock To-tau-kon-nu'-la, and had his great chair of
state a little west of his palace, where on all festival occasions he
could overlook and talk to the great multitude below; and the remains of
this chair are still to be seen.

Choo'-too-se-ka' was then named To-tau-kon-nu'-la, because he had built
his *o'-chum* on the summit of the great rock and taken the place of the
*to-tau'-kons*. He had no wife, but all the women served him in his
domestic needs, as he was their great chief, and his wishes were
paramount. The many valuable donations which he received from

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

his people at the great annual festivals made him wealthy beyond all
personal wants, and he gave freely to the needy.

One day, while standing on the top of the great dome <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) above the south wall of the Valley, watching
the great herds of deer, he saw some strange people approaching, bearing
heavy burdens. They were fairer of skin, and their clothing was
different from that of his people, and when they drew near he asked them
who they were and whence they came.

And a woman replied, "I am Tis-sa'-ack, and these are some of my people.
We come from *cat'-tan chu'-much* (far South). I have heard of your
great wisdom and goodness, and have come to see you and your people. We
bring you presents of many fine baskets, and beads of many colors, as
tokens of our friendship. When we have rested and seen your people and
beautiful valley we will return to our home."

To-tau-kon-nu'-la was much pleased with his fair visitor, and built a
large *o'-chum* for her and her companions on the summit

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

 

<span id="img_08400"></span>

[![HALF DOME (TIS-SA'-ACK),&lt;BR&gt; 5,000 Feet.&lt;BR&gt; Named for a
woman In Indian mythology who was turned to stone for quarreling with
her husband. See ''Legend of Tis-sa'-ack.''](tn/08400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08400.jpg.md)  
HALF DOME (TIS-SA'-ACK),  
5,000 Feet.  
Named for a woman In Indian mythology who was turned to stone for
quarreling with her husband. See ''Legend of Tis-sa'-ack.''  

*Photograph by Foley*.

 

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

of the great dome at the east end of the Valley, <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md) and this dome still retains her name,

And she tarried there and taught the women of Ah-wah-nee how to make the
beautiful baskets which they still make at the present day; and
To-tau-kon-nu'-la visited her daily, and became charmed with her
loveliness, and wanted her to remain and be his wife, but she denied
him, saying, "I must return to my people," and, when he still persisted,
she left her *o'-chum* in the night, and was never seen again. And the
love-stricken chieftain forgot his people, and went in search of her,
and they waited many moons for his return and mourned his long absence,
but they never saw him more.

This was' the beginning of a series of calamities which nearly destroyed
the great tribe of Ah-wah-nee'-chees. First a great drouth prevailed,
and the crops failed, and the streams of water dried up. The deer went
wild and wandered away. Then a dark cloud of smoke arose in the East and
obscured the sun, so that it gave no heat,

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

and many of the people perished from cold and hunger. Then the earth
shook terribly and groaned with great pain, and enormous rocks fell from
the walls around Ah-wah'-nee. The great dome called Tis-sa'-ack was
burst asunder, and half of it fell into the Valley. A fire burst out of
the earth in the East, and the *ca'-lah* (snow) on the sky mountains was
changed to water, which flowed down and formed the Lake
Ah-wei'-yah. <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md) And all the streams were
filled to overflowing, and still the waters rose, and there was a great
flood, so that a large part of the Valley became a lake, and many
persons were drowned.

After a time the Great Spirit took pity on his children, and the dark
cloud of smoke disappeared, the sun warmed the Valley again into new
life, and the few people who were left had plenty of food once more.

Many moons afterwards there appeared on the face of the great rock
To-tau-kon-nu'-la the figure of a man in a flowing robe, and with one
hand extended toward the West, in which direction he appears to be

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

traveling. This figure was interpreted to be the picture of the great
lost Chieftain, indicating that he had gone to the "happy hunting
grounds" of his ancestors, and it is looked upon with great veneration
and awe by the few Indians still living in Yosemite.

At about the same time the face of the beautiful Tis-sa'-ack appeared on
the great flat side of the dome which bears her name, and the Indians
recognized her by the way in which her dark hair was cut straight across
her forehead and fell down at the sides, which was then considered among
the Yosemites as the acme of feminine beauty, and is so regarded to this
day.

### ANOTHER LEGEND OF TIS-SA'-ACK.

Tis-sa'-ack and her husband traveled from a far-off country, and entered
the Valley footsore and weary, She walked ahead, carrying a great
conical burden-basket, which was supported by a band across her
forehead, and was filled with many things. He followed after, carrying a
rude staff in his hand and a roll of woven skin blankets over his
shoulder. They had come across the mountains and were very thirsty, and

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

 

<span id="img_08800"></span>

[![A BURDEN BEARER.&lt;BR&gt; The women are the principal burden
bearers, and all the others are carried in large baskets, supported by a
band across the forehead.](tn/08800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08800.jpg.md)  
A BURDEN BEARER.  
The women are the principal burden bearers, and all the others are
carried in large baskets, supported by a band across the forehead.  

*Photograph by Fiske*.

 

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

they hurried to reach the Valley, where they knew there was water. The
woman was still far in advance when she reached the Lake
Ah-wei'-yah, <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6.md) and she dipped up the
water in her basket and drank long and deep. She was so thirsty that she
even drank up all the water in the lake and drained it dry before her
husband arrived. And because the lake was dry there came a terrible
drouth in the Valley, and the soil was dried up and nothing grew.

And the husband was much displeased because the woman had drunk up all
the water and left none for him, and he became so angry that he forgot
the customs of his people and beat the woman with his staff. She ran
away from him, but he followed her and beat her yet more. And she wept,
and in her anger she turned and reviled her husband, and threw her
basket at him. And while they were in this attitude, one facing the
other, they were turned into stone for their wickedness, and there they
still remain. The upturned basket lies beside the husband, where the
woman threw it, and the woman's

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

face is tear stained with long dark lines trailing down.

Half-Do-me is the woman Tis-sa'-ack and North Dome is her husband, while
beside the latter is a smaller dome which is still called Basket Dome to
this day.

### LEGEND OF THE GRIZZLY BEAR

The significance and derivation of the name "Yosemite," as given by old
Tenei'ya, chief of the tribe, have been explained in another chapter,
but there is also a legendary account of its origin, which may be of
interest.

Long, long ago, when the remote ancestors of the Yosemite Indians dwelt
peacefully in the valley called Ah-wah'-nee, <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7.md) one of the stalwart young braves of the
tribe went early one morning to spear some fish in the lake
Ah-wei'-yah. <span id="fr_8"></span>[2](#fn_8.md) Before reaching his
destination he was confronted by a huge grizzly bear, who appeared from
behind one of the enormous boulders in that vicinity. and savagely
disputed his passage.

Being attacked in this unexpected manner, the Indian defended himself to
the best

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

 

<span id="img_09100"></span>

[![NORTH DOME (TO-KO'-YA),&lt;BR&gt; 3,725 Feet.&lt;BR&gt; This rock is
believed by the Indians to represent Tis-sa'-ack's husband. turned into
stone for beating his wife. The lower dome to the right is the basket
which she threw at him. See ''Legend of Tis-sa'-ack.''](tn/09100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/09100.jpg.md)  
NORTH DOME (TO-KO'-YA),  
3,725 Feet.  
This rock is believed by the Indians to represent Tis-sa'-ack's husband.
turned into stone for beating his wife. The lower dome to the right is
the basket which she threw at him. See ''Legend of Tis-sa'-ack.''  

*Photograph by Fiske*.

 

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

of his ability, using for the purpose the dead limb of a tree which was
near at hand, and, after a long and furious struggle, in which he was
badly wounded, he at length succeeded in killing the bear.

His exploit was considered so remarkable by the rest of the tribe that
they called him Yo-sem'-i-te (meaning a full-grown grizzly bear), in
honor of his achievement, and this name was transmitted to his children,
and eventually to the whole tribe.

### LEGEND OF THE TUL-TOK'-A-NA.

There were once two little boys living in the Valley of Ah-wah-nee, who
went down to the river to swim. When they had finished their bath they
went on share and lay down on a large boulder to dry themselves in the
sun. While lying there they fell asleep, and slept so soundly that they
never woke up again. Through many moons and many snows they slept, and
while they slept the great rock <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9.md) on
which they lay was slowly rising, little by little, until it soon lifted
them up out of sight, and their friends searched for them everywhere
without success.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

 

<span id="img_09300"></span>

[![EL CAPITAN (TO-TAU-KON-NU'-LA),&lt;BR&gt; 3,300 Feet.&lt;BR&gt; The
Indians believe that this great rock grew from a small boulder. See
''Legend of the Tul-tok'-a-na.''](tn/09300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/09300.jpg.md)  
EL CAPITAN (TO-TAU-KON-NU'-LA),  
3,300 Feet.  
The Indians believe that this great rock grew from a small boulder. See
''Legend of the Tul-tok'-a-na.''  

*Photograph by Foley*.

 

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Thus they were carried up into the blue sky,
until they scraped their faces against the moon; and still they slept
on.

Then all the animals assembled to bring down the little boys from the
top of the great. rock. Each animal sprang up the face of the rock as
far as he could. The mouse could only spring a hand's breadth, the rat
two hands' breadths, the raccoon a little more, and so on. The grizzly
bear made a great leap up the wall, but fell back like all the others,
without reaching the top. Finally came the lion, who jumped up farther
than any of the others, but even he fell back and could not reach the
top.

Then came the *tul-tok'-a-na*, the insignificant measuring worm, who was
despised by all the other creatures, and began to creep up the face of
the rock. Step by step, little by little, he measured his way up until
he was soon above the lion's jump, and still farther and farther, until
presently he was out of sight; and still he crawled up and up, day and
night, through many moons, and at length he reached the top, and took
the little boys and brought them safely down to the ground. And
therefore the rock was named

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

for the measuring worm, and was called Tu-tok-a-nu'-la.

### THE LEGEND OF GROUSE LAKE.

I will here relate a personal experience which occurred in September,
1857, while out with a large party of Indians on a deer hunt in the
mountains.

One day, after a long tramp, I stopped to rest by the side of a small
lake about eight miles from the present site of Wawona, and I then named
it Grouse Lake on account of the great number of grouse found there.
Very soon a party of Indians came along carrying some deer, and stopped
on the opposite side of the lake to rest and get some water. Soon after
they had started again for their camp I heard a distinct wailing cry,
somewhat like the cry of a puppy when lost, and I thought the Indians
must have left one of their young dogs behind.

When I joined the Indians in camp that night I inquired of them about
the sound I had heard. They replied that it was not a dog--that a long
time ago an Indian boy had been drowned in the lake, and that every time
any one passed there he always cried after them, and that no one dared
to

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

go in the lake, for he would catch them by the legs and pull them down
and they would be drowned. I then concluded that it must have been some
unseen water-fowl that made the cry, and at that time I thought that the
Indians were trying to impose on my credulity, but I am now convinced
that they fully believed the story they told me.

Po-ho'-no Lake, the headwaters of the Bridal Veil Creek, was also
thought to be haunted by troubled spirits, which affected the stream
clear down into the Yosemite Valley; and the Indians believed that an
evil wind there had been the cause of some fatal accidents many years
ago. The word Po-ho'-no means a puffing wind, and has also been
translated "Evil Wind," on account of the superstition above referred
to.

### LEGEND OF THE LOST ARROW.

Tee-hee'-nay was a beautiful Ah-wah-nee maiden, said to be the most
beautiful of her tribe, and she was beloved by Kos-su'-kah, a strong and
valiant young brave. Valuable presents had been made to the bride's
parents, and they had given their consent to an early marriage, which
was to be celebrated by a great feast.

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

 

<span id="img_09700"></span>

[![BRIDAL VEIL FALL (PO-HO'-NO),&lt;BR&gt; 940 Feet.&lt;BR&gt; The
source of this stream is supposed by the Indians to be haunted by
troubled spirits, which affect the water along its whole course. The
word Po-ho'-no means a ''puffing wind.''](tn/09700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/09700.jpg.md)  
BRIDAL VEIL FALL (PO-HO'-NO),  
940 Feet.  
The source of this stream is supposed by the Indians to be haunted by
troubled spirits, which affect the water along its whole course. The
word Po-ho'-no means a ''puffing wind.''  

*Photograph by Fiske*.

 

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

To provide an abundance of venison and other meat for this banquet,
Kos-su'-kah gathered together his young companions and went into the
mountains in search of game. In order that Tee-hee'-nay might know of
his welfare and the success of the hunt, it was agreed between the
lovers that at sunset Kos-su'-kah should go to the high rock to the east
of Cho'-lack, <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10.md) and should shoot an
arrow into the Valley, to which should be attached a number of grouse
feathers corresponding to the number of deer that had fallen before the
skill of the hunters.

At the time appointed Tee-hee'-nay went near the foot of the great cliff
and waited, with her eyes raised to the towering rocks above, hoping
with her keen sight to see the form of her lover outlined against the
sky, but no form could she see, and no arrow fell into the Valley. As
darkness gathered, gloomy forebodings took possession of her, and she
climbed part way up the canyon called Le-ham'-i-tee <span
id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11.md) because the arrow-wood grew there, and
finally she stood at the

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

very foot of the rocky wall which rose to dizzy heights above her, and
there she waited through the long night.

With the first streak of dawn she bounded swiftly up the rough canyon,
for she was fully convinced that some terrible fate had overtaken the
brave Kos-su'-kah, and soon she -stood upon the lofty summit, <span
id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12.md) where she found her lover's footsteps
leading towards the edge of the precipice. Drawing nearer she was
startled to find that a portion of the cliff had given way, and, upon
peering over the brink, what was her horror to discover the
blood-stained and lifeless body of Kos-su'-kah lying on a rocky ledge
far beneath.

Summoning assistance by means of a signal fire, which was seen from the
Valley below, a rope was made of sapling tamaracks lashed firmly
together with thongs from one of the deer that was to have furnished the
marriage feast, and Tee-hee'-nay herself insisted on being lowered over
the precipice to recover the body of her lover. This was at last
successfully accomplished, and when his ghastly form lay once

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

more upon the rocky summit, she threw herself on his bosom and gave way
to a passionate outburst of grief.

Finally she became quiet, but when they stooped to raise her they found
that her spirit had fled to join the lost Kos-su'-kah, and that the
lovers were re-united in death.

The fateful arrow that was the cause of so much sorrow could never be
found, and the Indians believe that it was taken away by the spirits of
Kos-su'-kah and Tee-hee'-nay. In memory of them, and of this tragedy,
the slender spire of rock <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md) that rises
heavenward near the top of the cliff at this point is known among the
Indians as Hum-mo', or the Lost Arrow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[78:1](ioy10.htm#fr_1.md) Yosemite Valley.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[82:1](ioy10.htm#fr_2.md) El Capitan.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[83:1](ioy10.htm#fr_3.md) Sentinel Dome.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[85:1](ioy10.htm#fr_4.md) Half Dome.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[86:1](ioy10.htm#fr_5.md) Mirror Lake.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[89:1](ioy10.htm#fr_6.md) Mirror Lake.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[90:1](ioy10.htm#fr_7.md) Yosemite Valley.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[90:2](ioy10.htm#fr_8.md) Mirror Lake.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[92:1](ioy10.htm#fr_9.md) El Capitan.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[98:1](ioy10.htm#fr_10.md) Yosemite Falls.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[98:2](ioy10.htm#fr_11.md) Now known as Indian
Canyon.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[99:1](ioy10.htm#fr_12.md) Yosemite Point.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[100:1](ioy10.htm#fr_13.md) Sometimes called "The
Devil's Thumb."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix](ioy11.md)
