[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dg09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XL.

### The External Worship of the Devî

1-5. The Devî said:--Getting up from the bed early in the morning, one
is to meditate on the thousand petalled lotus, bright, of the colour of
camphor, in the top part his brain on the head. On this he should
remember his S'rî Guru, very gracious looking, well decorated with
ornaments, with His Consort S'akti and bow down to Him and within Him he
should meditate the Ku<u>nd</u>alinî Devî thus --"I take refuge unto
that Highest S'akti Ku<u>nd</u>alinî, of the nature of the Supreme
Consciousness, Who is manifestm Chaityana while up-going to the
Brahmarandhra (the aperture supposed to be at the crown of the head,
through which the soul takes its flight at death) and Who is of the
nature of nectar while returning back in the Susumnâ canal. After
meditating thus, he should meditate on the Blissful Form of Mine within
the Ku<u>nd</u>alinî Fire stuatea in the Mulâdhâra Lotus (coccygeal
lotus). Then he should rise up to go for the calls of nature, etc., and
complete Sandhyâ, Bandanams and other duties. The best of the
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, then, should for My satisfaction perform the Agnihotra
Homa and sitting in his Âsana make Sankalap (determination) to do My
Pûjâ (Worship).

N. B.--The brain has three divisions, the lower, the middle and the
higher, or top-most part which is very pure.

6-10. Next he is to make Bhûta S'uddhi (purification of elements of the
body by respiratory attraction and replacement) and then the Mâtrikâ
Nyasa, Then he should arrange the letters of the root Mantra of Mâyâ and
execute the Hrîllekhâ Mâtrikâ Nyâsa. In this he is to place the letter
"Ha" in the Mulâdhâra, the letter "Ra" in his heart and the vowel "î" in
the middle of his brows aud, Hrîm on the top part of his head. Finishing

<span id="page_738">p. 738</span>

then all the other Nyâsas according to that Mantra, he should think
within his body Dharma, Jñâna, Vairâgyam, and Prosperity as the four
legs of the seat and Adharma, Ajñâna, Avairâgyam and non-prosperity,
these four as the body of the seat on the four quarters East, South,
West and North. Then he should meditate on the Great Devî in the lotus
of his heart blewn by Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma, situated on the five seats of
the Pretas. O Mountain! Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Rudra, Sadâs'iva and
Îs'vara are the five Pretas situated under My feet.

11\. These are of the nature of earth, water, fire, air, and ether, the
five elements and also of the nature of Jâgrat (waking), Svapna
(dreaming) Su<u>s</u>upti (deep sleep state) Turiyâ (the fourth state)
and Atîta Rûpa, the (the fifth state) excluding the 4 states,
corresponding to the five states. But I, who am of the nature of Brahma,
am over and above the five elements and the five states; therefore My
Seat is always or. the top of these five forces.

12\. Meditating on Me thus and worshipping Me with his mind
concentrated, he is next to make Japam (reciting My name slowly). After
Japam he is to make over the fruits of Japam to Me. He should then place
the Arghya for the external worship.

13\. Then the worshipper is to sprinkle vith the Astra mantra
'Pha<u>t</u>', all the articles of worship that are placed in front of
him and purify them.

14-18. He should close the ten quarters with the Chbo<u>t</u>ikâ Mudrâ
and bow down to his Guru. Taking his permission, he should meditate on
the outside seat, the beauiful divine form of his heart lotus and invoke
the Deity outside and place Her on the seat by Prâ<u>n</u>a
Prati<u>st</u>hâ and perforn Âvâhana, and present to Her Arghya (an
offer of green grass, rice, etc., made in worshipping a god), Pâdya
(water for washing legs and feet), Âchaman, water for bath, a couple of
clothes, all sorts of ornaments, or scents, flowers and the necessary
articles with due devotion and he should worship the attendant deities
of the Yantra. If one be unable to wurship daily the attendant deities,
one wust worship them on Friday.

19\. Of the attendant deities, one must meditate the principal deity of
the nature of Prabhâ (illumination) and think that by Her rays the three
worlds are pervaded.

20\. Next he should worship again the Bhuvaues'vari Devî, the Chief
Deity along with other attendant deities with scent, good smelling
flowers; and Naivedya and various other tasteful dishes.

<span id="page_739">p. 739</span>

21-22. He should then recite the Sahasranâma (thousand names) stotra and
the Devî Sûkta Mantra "Aham Rudrebhih, etc.," and "Sarve vai Devâ Devî
mupatasthu<u>h</u> etc.," the Devî Atharva S'iro Mantra and the
Upani<u>s</u>ads' Mantra of Bhuvanes'varî, the famous mantras,
repeatedly and thus bring My satisfaction.

23-24. With hearts filled with love and with hairs standing on their
ends all should satisfy Me frequently with tears of love flowing from
their eyes and with voice choked with feelings and with dancing music
and singing and with his whole body filled with joy.

25\. My glory is well established in the Veda Pârâyana and in all the
Purâ<u>n</u>as. So for My satisfaction, one should offer daily to Me
one's everything with one's body and recite the readings from the Vedas.

26-27. Next, after completing the Homa offerings, he should feed the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as, tha young virgins well clothed, the boys and the
public and the poor, thinking all of them to be so many forms of the
Devî. Than he should bow before the Devî that resides in his heart and
finally by Samhâra Mudrâ take leave of the Deity invoked.

28\. O One of good vows! The Hrîllekhâ Mantra (Hrîm) is the chief of all
mântrams; so My worship and all other actions ought to be performed with
this Hrîllekhâ Mantram.

29\. I am always reflected in this Mirror of Hrîllekhâ form; so anything
offered in this Hrîllekhâ Mantra of Mine is offered as it were with all
the Mantras. Then one should worship the Guru with ornaments, etc., and
think oneself blessed.

30-31. O Himavan! Nothing remains at any time unavailable to him who
worships thus the Bhuvanes'varî Devî. After quitting his body, he goes
to theMa<u>n</u>i Dvîpa, My Place. He gets the form of the Devî; and the
Devas constantly bow down to him.

82-45. O Mahîdhara! Thus I have described to you the rules of
worshipping the Great Devî; consider this in all the aspects and worship
Me according to your Adhikâra (claim) and you will attain your Goal.
There is no doubt in this. O Best of mountains! This S'âstra Devigîtâ
you are not to tell to those who are not the devotees, to those who are
enemies, and to those who are cunning. If one gives out this secret of
Gîtâ, it is like taking off the covering from the breast of the mother;
so carefully keep it secret and think that this is very necessary. This
Devî Gîtâ ought to be given to A disciple, a Bhakta, the eldest son, and

<span id="page_740">p. 740</span>

to one who is good natured, and well dressed and devoted to the Devî. O
Mountain! In the time of S'râddha (solemn obsequies performed in honour
of the manes of deceased ancestors) he gets the highest place of the
Pitris who reads this Devî Gîtâ before the Brâhma<u>n</u>as. Vyâsa
said:--The Devî vanished there after describing all these. The Devas
were glad and considered themselves blessed by the sight of the Devî. O
Janamejaya! The Haimavatî next took Her birth in the house of the
Himâlayâ and was known by the name of Gaurî. S'â<u>n</u>kara, the Deva
of the Devas, marricd Her. <u>S</u>a<u>d</u>ânana (Kâtrtika) was born of
them. He killed the Tâ<u>d</u>akâ Asura. O King! In ancient times, when
the ocean was churned, many gems were obtained. At that time the Devas
chanted hymns to the Devî with a concentrated mind to get Lak<u>s</u>mî
Devî. To show favour to the Devas, Ramâ Devî got out of the ocean. The
Devas gave La<u>ks</u>mi to Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Lord of the
Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha. Vi<u>sn</u>u was very glad at this. O King! Thus I
have described to you the Greatness of the Devî and the birth of Gaurî
and Lak<u>s</u>mî. One's desires are all fulfilled when one hears this.
O King! This secret I have described to you. Take care not to divulge it
to any other body. This is the secret of the Gîtâ; so carefully conceal
it. O One of pure heart! I have told to you this Divine and
Sin-destroying narration, that you asked. What more do you want to hear?
Say.

Here ends the Fortieth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the External
Worship of the Devî in the Mahapurinsm, S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, of
18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

\[The. Seventh Book Completed.\]
