<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phc00)  [Next](phc02) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Philistines*, by R.A.S. Macalister, \[1913\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

### PREFACE

<span class="smallcaps">Among</span> the Nations that came within the
purview of the Old Testament Writers—nations seldom mentioned without
stricture, whether for idolatry, immorality, or cruelty—perhaps none
were the object of so concentrated an aversion as were the Philistines.
The licentiousness of the Amorites, the hard-heartedness of the Egyptian
taskmasters, the fiendish savagery of the Assyrian warriors, each of
these in turn receives its due share of condemnation. But the scornful
judgement passed by the Hebrews on the Philistines has made a much
deeper impression on the Bible-reading West than have their fulminations
against other races and communities with which they had to do. In
English, from at least the time of Dekker, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) the word 'Philistine' has been used in one
or other of the senses of the modern colloquialism 'outsider'; and,
especially since the publication of the essays of Mr. Matthew Arnold, it
has become almost a technical term for a person boorish or bucolic of
mind, impervious to the higher influences of art or of civilization. In
French and German—probably, indeed, in most of the languages of
Europe—the word is used in familiar speech with a greater or less
approximation to the same meaning.

The following little book is an attempt to collect in a convenient form
the information so far available about the Philistine people. It is an
expansion of a course of three lectures, delivered in 1911 before the
British Academy under the Schweich Fund. In preparing it for
publication, the matter has been revised and re-written throughout; and
the division into lectures—primarily imposed by the exigencies of
time-allowance—has been abandoned for a more systematic and convenient
division into chapters and sections.

It is hoped that the perusal of these pages will at least suggest

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

a doubt as to the justice of the colloquial use of the name of this
ancient people.

As it may be well to preserve a record of the syllabus of the original
lectures, a copy of it is subjoined.

*Lecture I* (15 December, 1911). The evil reputation of the Philistines.
Recent researches and discoveries. A sketch of the development of Cretan
civilization. The Keftiu in the Egyptian records. The sack of Cnossos
and subsequent developments. The 'Peoples of the Sea'. Their raid on
Egypt. Its repulse. Recovery of the 'Peoples of the Sea' from their
reverse. The adventures of Wen-Amon. The earliest reference to the
Philistines in the Old Testament. The Abraham and Isaac stories. The
references in the history of the Exodus. Shamgar. Samson.

*Lecture II* (18 December, 1911). The domination of the Philistines. The
capture of the Ark and the outbreak of plague. Samuel and Saul. Relative
culture of Philistines and Hebrews during the reign of Saul. The
incidents of David's outlawry. Achish, king of Gath. Gilboa. The
Philistine domination broken by David. The various versions of the story
of Goliath. The Philistines under the later monarchy. The Philistines in
the Assyrian records. Nehemiah. The Maccabees. Traditions of the
Philistines among the modern peasants of Palestine. Theories of the
origin of the Philistines. Caphtor and the Cherethites.

*Lecture III* (22 December, 1911). The Organization of the Philistines.
Their country and cities. The problem of the site of Ekron. The language
of the Philistines. Alleged traces of it in Hebrew. Their religion and
deities. Their art. Recent discoveries. The place of the Philistines in
History and civilization.

I have to express my acknowledgements to my friends and colleagues, the
Rev. P. Boylan, Maynooth, and the Rev. Prof. Henry Browne, S. J.; also
to the Very Rev. Principal G. A. Smith, Aberdeen, and Mr. E. H. Alton,
of Dublin University, for allowing me to consult them on various points
that arose in the course of this work. The first and last named have
most kindly read through proof-sheets of the work and have made many
valuable suggestions, but they have no responsibility for any errors
that the discerning critic may detect.

The figures on pp. 118, 119 are inserted by permission of the Society
for Promoting Christian Knowledge.

R. A. S. M.

    <span class="smallcaps">Dublin</span>,  
*New Year*, 1913.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xv:1](phc01.htm#fr_0) The *New English
Dictionary* quotes, *inter alia*, 'Silke and satten, you mad
Philistines, silke and satten' (Dekker, 1600): 'They say, you went to
Court last Night very drunk; nay, I'm told for certain you had been
among Philistines' (Swift, 1738): 'The obtuseness of a mere English
Philistine we trust is pardonable' (*The Examiner*, 1827):
'Philistinism! we have not the expression in English. Perhaps we have
not the word because we have so much of the thing' (M. Arnold. 1863):
and the quotation from the *Quarterly Review*, which is printed on the
title-page.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](phc02)

</div>
