[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [African](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ppj008.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## BIBLIOGRAPHY

Space restricts us to such works as may be found in the Boston College
Library, Chestnut Hill, Mass.

ANONYMOUS.

Acts of Assembly, passed in the Island of Jamaica from 1681 to 1737,
inclusive, London, 1743.

Acts of Assembly, passed in the Island of Jamaica from 1681 to 1754,
inclusive, London, 1756.

Acts of Assembly, passed in the Island of Jamaica from 1770 to 1783,
Kingston, 1786.

Act to Remedy the Evils arising from irregular Assemblies of Slaves,
etc. Passed by the Assembly of Jamaica in December, 1760. (Photostatic
copy in the Boston College Library.)

Consolidated Slave Law, passed 22 December 1826 .London, 1827

.

Hints respecting Christian Education of the Negro Population in the
British Colonies, London, 1833.

Religious Instruction of the Coloured and Slave Population of Jamaica,
London, 1832.

Report of the Jamaica Royal Commission of Inquiry respecting certain
Disturbances in the Island of Jamaica and the Measures taken in the
Course of their Suppression, London, 1866.

Report of the Lords of the Committee of the Council appointed for the
Consideration of all Matters relating to Trade and Foreign Plantation,
London, 1789,

Re-view of Hamel, the Obeah Man, London, 1827

.

Slave Law of Jamaica and Documents relative thereto, London, 1828.

ANDERSON AND CUNDALL.

Jamaica Proverbs and Sayings, London, 1927, 296

{p. 287}

ARMISTEAD, WILSON.

Tribute for the Negro, Manchester, 1848.

ARNAUD, ODETTE.

Mer Caraïbe, Paris, 1934

.

BACON, EDGAR MAYHEW.

The New Jamaica, New York, 1890.

BANBURY, R. THOMAS.

Jamaica Superstitions or The Obeah Book, Kingston, 1894.

BARCLAY, ALEXANDER.

A Practical View of the Present Stage of Slavery in the West Indies,
London, 1828.

BASTIAN, ADOLF.

Der Fetisch an der Küste Guineas, Berlin, 1884

.

BAYLEY, F. W. N.

Four Years' Residence in the West Indies, London, 1830

.

BECKFORD, WILLIAM.

A Descriptive Account of the Island of Jamaica, London, 1790.

BECKWITH, MARTHA WARREN.

Folk-Games of Jamaica, Poughkeepsie, 1922.

Christmas Mummings in Jamaica, Poughkeepsie, 1923

.

The Hussey Festival in Jamaica, Poughkeepsie, 1924.

Jamaica Anansi Stories, New York, 1924

.

Jamaica Folk-Lore, New York, 1928.

Black Roadways; a Study of Jamaica Folk-Lore, Chapel Hill, 1928.

BELL, HESKETH J.

Obeah; Witchcraft in the West Indies, London, 1889.

BICKNELL, R.

West Indies as they are, or a Real Picture of Slavery, but more
particularly as it exists in the Island of Jamaica, London, 1825.
BIGELOW, JOHN.

Jamaica in 1850, New York, 1851

BLEBY, HENRY.

Death Struggle of Slavery, London, 1853

.

Scenes in the Caribbean Sea, London, 1868.

The Reign of Terror, London, 1868.

BLOME, RICHARD.

Description of the Island of Jamaica, London, 1678

{p. 288}

BOSMAN, WILLIAM.

A New and Accurate Description of the Coast of Guinea, London, 1705.

BOWDITCH, T. EDWARD.

Mission from Cape Coast Castle to Ashantee, London, 1819.

Essay on Superstitions, Customs and Acts, Common to the Ancient
Egyptian, Abyssineans and Ashantee, Paris, 1821.

BOWLER, LOUIS P.

Gold Coast Palava: Life on the Gold Coast, London, 1911.

BRAWLEY, B. G.

Short History of the American Negro, New York, 1913.

Social History of the American Negro, New York, 1921.

BRIDGES, GEORGE WILSON.

A Voice from Jamaica; in reply to William Wilberforce, London, 1823

.

Annals of Jamaica, London, 1828.

BROWNE, PATRICK.

Civil and Natural History of Jamaica, London, 1756.

BRYMNER, D.

The Jamaica Maroons, London, 1895.

BUCHANAN, CLAUDIUS.

Colonial Ecclesiastical Establishment, London, 1812.

BURDETT, WILLIAM.

Life and Exploits of Mansong, commonly called Three-finger Jack, the
Terror of Jamaica, Sommers Town, 1800.

BURKHARDT, G. E.

Die Evangelische Mission unter den Negern in Westindien und
Sued-Amerika, Leipzig, 1876.

CALDECOTT, A.

The Church in the West Indies, London, 1898.

CAMERON, NORMAN EUSTACE.

The Evolution of the Negro, Georgetown, Demerara, 1929.

CARDINALL, A. W.

In Ashanti and Beyond, London, 1927

.

{p. 289}

CARMICHAEL, MRS. A. C.

Domestic Manners and Social Conditions of the White, Coloured and Negro
Population of the West Indies, London, 1834

.

CHRISTALLER, J. G.

Dictionary of the Asante and Fante Language Called Tshi (Twi), Basel,
1933.

CLARIDGE, W. WALTON.

History of the Gold Coast and Ashanti, London, 1915

.

CLARK, A. H.

Ingenious Method of Causing Death Employed by the Obeah Men of the West
Indies,--American Anthropologist, 1912.

CLARKE, JOHN.

Memoir of Richard Merrick, Missionary in Jamaica, London, 1850

.

COKE, THOMAS.

History of the West Indies, Liverpool, 1808-11.

COLERIDGE, HENRY NELSON.

Six Months in the West Indies in 1825, New York, 1826.

COOK, E. M.

Jamaica: The Lodestone of the Caribbean, Bristol, 1924

.

COOPER, THOMAS.

Facts, illustrative of the Condition of the Negro Slaves in Jamaica,
London, 1824.

Correspondence Relative to the Condition of the Negro Slaves in Jamaica,
London, 1824

.

CROWNINSHIELD, MRS. SCHUYLER.

West Indian Tales, New York, 1898.

CUNDALL, FRANK.

Historic Jamaica, London, 1915.

Chronological Outlines of Jamaica History, 1492-1926, Kingston, 1927

.

Studies in Jamaica History, London, 1900.

DALLAS, ROBERT CHARLES.

History of the Maroons, London, 1803

.

DANQUAH, J. B.

Akan Laws and Customs, London, 1928.

{p. 290}

DELANY, FRANCIS X.

History of the Catholic Church in Jamaica, New York, 1930.

DeLISSER, HERBERT G.

In Jamaica and Cuba, Kingston, 1927

.

Twentieth Century Jamaica, Kingston, 1913.

Revenge: a Tale of Old Jamaica, Kingston, 1919.

White Witch of Rosehall, London, 1929.

DENNETT, R. E.

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, London, 1906.

DODSWORTH, FRANCIS.

Book of the West Indies, London, 1904.

DOWD, JEROME.

The Negro Races, New York, 1907.

DUNCAN, PETER.

Narrative of the Wesleyan Mission to Jamaica, London, 1849.

DUPUIS, JOSEPH.

Journal of a Residence in Ashantee, London, 1824.

EDWARDS, BRYAN.

History, Civil and Commercial, of the British Colonies in the West
Indies, London, 1793.

Proceedings of the Governor and Assembly of Jamaica in regard to the
Maroon Negroes, London, 1796.

ELLIS, ALFRED BURTON.

The Land of Fetish, London, 1883.

The Tshi-Speaking Peoples of the Gold Coast of West Africa, London, 1887

.

History of the Gold Coast of West Africa, London, 1893.

West African Folklore--Popular Science Monthly, 1894

.

EMERICK, ABRAHAM J.

Obeah and Duppyism in Jamaica (Printed Privately) Woodstock, 1915.

Jamaica Mialism, (Printed Privately) Woodstock, 1916.

Jamaica Duppies, (Printed Privately) Woodstock, 1916.

EVANS, H. B.

Our West Indian Colonies, London, 1855.

EVES, CHARLES WASHINGTON.

West Indies, London, 1889.

FISKE, Amos KIDDER.

The West Indies, New York, 1899.

{p. 291}

FOULKES, THEODORE.

Eighteen Months in Jamaica, London, 1833

.

FOX-BOURNE, H. R.

Story of the Colonies, London, 1869.

FRANK, HARRY A.

Roaming through the West Indies, New York, 1920.

FREEMAN) RICHARD AUSTIN.

Travel and Life in Ashanti and Jaman, Westminster, 1898.

FREEMAN, THOMAS B.

Journal of Various Visits to the Kingdoms of Ashanti, etc., London,
1844.

FROUDE, JAMES ANTHONY.

England in the West Indies or the Bow of Ulysses, London, 1888.

FULLER, STEPHEN.

New Act of Assembly of the Island of Jamaica . . . commonly called the
New Consolidated Act, London, 1789

.

Two Reports from the Committee of the Honourable House of Assembly of
Jamaica, London, 1789.

Proceedings of the Honourable House of Assembly of Jamaica, on the Sugar
and Slave Trade, London, 1793.

GARDNER, WILLIAM JAMES.

History of Jamaica from its Discovery by Christopher Columbus to the
Present Time, London, 1873.

GAUNT, MARY.

Where the Twain Meet, New York, 1922.

Reflection--In Jamaica, London, 1932.

GRAINGER, JAMES.

The Sugar-Cane; a Poem, London, 1766.

GREEN, SAMUEL.

Baptist Mission in Jamaica, London, 1842.

GROS, JULES.

Voyages, Aventures et Captivitié de J. Benet chez les Achantis, Paris,
1884

.

GURNEY, JOHN JOSEPH.

Familiar Letters to Henry Clay of Kentucky, Describing a Winter in the
West Indies, New York, 1840

.

HARVEY, THOMAS.

Jamaica in 1866, London, 1867,

{p. 292}

HAWTAYNE, G. H. ("X. BEKE").

West Indian Yarns, Demerara, 1890.

HAY, J. DALRYMPLE.

Ashanti and the Gold Coast, London, 1874

.

HAYFORD, CASELY.

Gold Coast Native Institutions, London, 1874,

HERSKOVITS, MELVILLE J.

On the Provenience of New World Negroes, Evanston, 1933.

The Second Northwestern University Expedition for study of the Suriname
Bush-Negroes, 1929, The Hague, 1929.

HILL, ROBERT T.

Cuba and Porto Rico with the Other Islands of the West Indies, New York,
1898.

HINE, JOHN B.

Jamaican Obeah texts, Miskatonic University Press, 1886

HOLFORD, G.

Observations on the Necessity of Introducing a Sufficient Number of
Respectable Clergymen into Our Colonies in the West Indies, London,
1808.

HOVEY, SYLVESTER.

Letters from the West Indies: relating especially to Jamaica, New York,
1838,

HOWE, E. W.

The Trip to the West Indies, Topeka, 1910.

JAY, CHARLES.

Observations on the Present State and Future Prospects of the West
Indies, London, 1847

.

JAY, E. A. HASTINGS.

Glimpse of the Tropics, or, Four Months Cruising in the West Indies,
London, 1900.

JECKYLL, WALTER.

Jamaica Song and Story; Anancy Stories, Digging Songs, Ring Tunes and
Dancing Tunes, London, 1907

.

JOHNSTON, HARRY H.

The Negro in the New World, London, 1910.

JONES, CHESTER LLOYD.

Caribbean Backgrounds and Prospects, New York, 1931

.

KEMP, DENNIS.

Nine Years at the Gold Coast, London, 1898.

{p. 293}

KINGSLEY, CHARLES.

At Last: a Christmas in the West Indies, London, 1871

.

KINGSLEY, MARY H.

Travels in West Africa. London, 1897

.

West African Studies, London, 1899.

KNATCHBULL-HUGESSON, E. H.

Immigrants and Liberated Africans admitted into each of the British West
India Colonies, London, 1872

.

KNIBB, WILLIAM.

Facts and Documents connected with the late Insurrection in Jamaica and
the Violations of Civil and Religious Liberty arising out of it, London,
1832

.

LABAT, PÈRE.

Nouveau Voyage aux Isles de l'Amérique, La Haye, 1724

.

LESLIE, CHARLES.

New History of Jamaica, London, 1740.

LEWIS, MATTHEW GREGORY.

Journal of a West Indian Proprietor, kept during a Residence in the
Island of Jamaica, London, 1834

.

LINDBLOM, GERHARD.

Africanische Relikte und Indianische Entelehnungen in der Kultur der
Busch-Neger Surinams, Göteborg, 1924.

LIVINGSTON, WILLIAM PRINGLE.

Black Jamaica: a Study in Evolution, London, 1899.

LLOYD, WILLIAM.

Letters from the West Indies, London, 1837.

LONG, EDWARD.

History of Jamaica, London, 1774

.

LOWE, JOSEPH.

Inquiry into the State of the British West Indies, London, 1807

.

LUCKOCK, BENJAMIN.

Jamaica: Enslaved and Free, New York, 1846.

LUNAN, JOHN.

Abstract of the Laws of Jamaica relating to Slaves, St. Jago de la Vega,
1819.

McCREA, HARRY.

Sub-Officers' Guide, Kingston, 1903.

MAC DONALD, GEORGE.

The Gold Coast, Past and Present, New York, 1898.

{p. 294}

McKAY, CLAUDE.

Banana Bottom, New York, 1933.

MAC LEAN, ISABEL CRANSTOUN.

Children of Jamaica, Edinburgh, 1910.

McMAHON, BENJAMIN.

Jamaica Plantership, London, 1839

.

MADDEN, RICHARD ROBERT.

A Twelvemonths' Residence in the West Indies, during the Transition from
Slavery to Apprenticeship, London, 1835

.

MANNINGTON, GEORGE.

West Indies with British Guiana and British Honduras, New York, 1925.

MARRYAT, JOSEPH.

Thoughts on the Abolition of the Slave Trade, London, 1816.

More Thoughts occasioned by two Publications, London, 1816.

More Thoughts Still on the State of the West India Colonies, London,
1818.

MARTIN, ROBERT MONTGOMERY.

History of the West Indies, London, 1836-37

.

MEREDITH, HENRY.

Account of the Gold Coast of Africa, London, 1812.

MILNE-HOME, MARY PAMELA.

Mamma's Black Nurse Stories, Edinburgh, 1890.

MILNER, T. H.

Present and Future State of Jamaica Considered, London, 1839

.

MONTAGNAC, NOEL DE.

Negro Nobodies, London, 1899.

MOORE, J. HAMPTON.

With Speaker Cannon through the Tropics, Philadelphia, 1907

.

MORAND, PAUL.

Magie Noire, Paris, 19,28.

MORETON, J. B.

West India Customs and Manners, London, 1793.

MOSELEY, BENJAMIN.

A Treatise on Sugar, London, 1800.

{p. 295}

NASSAU, ROBERT HAMMILL.

Fetishism in West Africa, London, 1904

.

Where Animals Talk, London, 1914

.

NUGENT, LADY MARIA.

Journal of a Voyage to, and Residence in, the Island of Jamaica from
1801 to 1805, London, 1839

.

OLDMIXON, JOHN.

History of Jamaica, London, 1708.

OLIVER, VERE LANGFORD.

Caribbeana, London, 1910-19.

PARSONS, ELSIE CLEWS.

Folk-Lore of the Antilles, New York, 1933.

PHILLIPPO, JAMES MURCEL.

Jamaica: Its Past and Present State, London, 1843,

PIM, BEDFORD CLAPPERTON THEVELYAN.

The Negro and Jamaica, London, 1866.

PITMAN, FRANK WESLEY.

Development of the British West Indies 1700-1763, New Haven, 1917

.

PITTARD, EUGÈNE.

Contribution à l'Étude Anthropologie des Achanti,--L'Anthropolie, Paris,
1925

.

PULLEN-BURRY, BESSIE.

Jamaica as it is, 1903, London, 1903.

Ethiopia in Exile: Jamaica Revisited, London, 1905.

RAGATZ, LOWELL JOSEPH.

Fall of the Planter Class in the British Caribbean, 1763-1833, New York,
1928.

RAMPINI, CHARLES.

Letters from Jamaica, Edinburgh, 1873.

RATTRAY, R. SUTHERLAND.

Ashanti Proverbs, Oxford, 1916.

Ashanti, Oxford, 1923

.

Religion and Art in Ashanti, Oxford, 1927.

Ashanti Law and Constitution, Oxford, 1929.

Akan-Ashanti Folk-Tales, Oxford, 1930

.

REGNAULT, ELIAS.

Histoire des Antilles, Paris, 1849

.

RENNY, ROBERT.

History of Jamaica, London, 1807

{p. 296}

RILAND, JOHN.

Memoir of a West India Planter, London, 1827,

ROBERTS, HELEN H.

Three Jamaica Folk Stories,--Journal of American Folklore, 1922.

A Study of Folksong Variants based on Field Work in Jamaica,--Journal of
American Folklore, 1925

.

RODWAY, JAMES.

West Indies and the Spanish Main, London, 1896.

ROSE, G. H.

Letter on the Means and Importance of Converting the Slaves in the West
Indies to Christianity, London, 1823

.

ROSNY, LUCIEN DE.

Les Antilles, Paris, 1886.

ROUGHLEY, THOMAS.

The Jamaica Planter's Guide, London, 1823.

ST. JOHNSTON, T. R.

West India Pepper-pot, or Thirteen "Quashie" Stories, London, 1928.

SAMUEL, PETER.

Wesleyan-Methodist Missions in Jamaica and Honduras London, 1850.

SCOTT, MICHAEL.

Tom Cringle's Log, Edinburgh, 1833

.

Cruise of the Midge, Paris, 1836.

Captain Clutterbuck's Champagne, Edinburgh, 1862.

SCOTT, SIBBALD DAVID.

To Jamaica and Back, London, 1876.

SELIGMAN, C. G.

Races of Africa, London, 1930

.

SENIOR, BERNARD MARTIN.

Jamaica as it was, as it is, and as it may be, London, 1835

.

SEWELL, WILLIAM G.

Ordeal of Free Labour in the British West Indies, New York, 1861.

SHERLOCK, P. M.

Jamaica Superstitions, Empire Review, 1924.

SHORE, JOSEPH.

In Old St. James, Kingston, 1911.

{p. 297}

SINCLAIR, AUGUSTUS CONSTANTINE.

Parliamentary Debates of Jamaica, Vol. XIII, Spanish-Town, 1866.

Chronological History of Jamaica, Jamaica, 1889.

SINGLETON, J.

Description of the West Indies: a Poem, London, 1776.

SLOANE, HANS.

Voyage to the Islands . . . and Jamaica, London, 1707-25

.

SPENCER, HERBERT.

Descriptive Sociology: African Races: Compiled and abstracted by Prof.
Duncan, London, 1875.

Reissue, entirely rewritten by E. Torday, London, 1930

.

STEPHEN, JAMES.

The Slavery of the British West India Colonies, delineated, London, 1824

.

STERNE, HENRY.

A Statement of Facts, London, 1837

.

STEWART, J.

Account of Jamaica and Its Inhabitants, London, 1808.

View of the Past and Present State of the Island of Jamaica, Edinburgh,
1817

.

STODDARD, CHARLES AUGUSTINE.

Cruising among the Caribbees, New York, 1895.

STUART, VILLIERS.

Jamaica Revisited, London, 1891.

STURGE, JOSEPH.

West Indies in 1837, London, 1838.

TALBOYS, W. P.

West India Pickles, New York, 1876.

TAYLOR, R.

Negro Slavery Especially in Jamaica, London, 1823

.

THOMAS, HERBERT T.

Untrodden Jamaica, Kingston, 1890.

TREVES, FREDERICK.

Cradle of the Deep, New York, 1920.

TROLLOPE, ANTHONY.

West Indies and the Spanish Main, London, 1857

.

TROWBRIDGE, WILLIAM R. H.

Gossip of the Caribbies. Sketches of Anglo-West Indian Life, London,
1895

{p. 298}

TRUMAN, GEORGE.

Narrative of a Visit to the West Indies in 1863-64, Philadelphia, 1867.

TURNBULL, DAVID.

The Jamaica Movement, London, 1850.

UDAL, J. S.

Obeah in the West Indies, Folk-Lore, London, 1915

.

UNDERHILL, EDWARD BEAN.

West Indies: their Social and Religious Condition, London, 1862.

VAN DYKE, JOHN C.

In the West Indies, New York, 1932.

VERRILL, ALPHEUS HYATT.

Book of the West Indies, New York, 1917.

WALKER, H. DE R.

West Indies and the Empire, London, 1901.

WALKER, JAMES.

Letters on the West Indies, London, 1818.

WALKER, WILLIAM.

On the Social and Economic Position and Prospects of the British West
India Possessions, London, 1873

.

WATSON, RICHARD.

Defence of the Wesleyan Methodist Missions in the West Indies, London,
1817.

WEATHERFORD, WILLIS DUKE.

The Negro from Africa to America, New York, 1924.

WENTWORTH, TRELAWNEY.

West India Sketch Book, London, 1834

.

WERNER, ALICE.

Natives of British Central Africa. London, 1906.

WHITEHEAD, HENRY S.

Obi in the Caribbean, The Commonweal, 1927.

WHITELEY, HENRY.

Three Months in Jamaica in 1832, London, 1833

.

WILBERFORCE, WILLIAM.

An Appeal to the Religion, Justice, and Humanity of the Inhabitants of
the British Empire, in behalf of the Negro Slaves in the West Indies,
London, 1823

.

WILCOX, ELLA WHEELER.

Sailing Sunny Seas, Chicago, 1909.

{p. 299}

WILLIAMS, CYNRIC R.

Tour through the Island of Jamaica from the Western to the Eastern End,
in the Year 1823, London, 1826.

WILLIAMS, JAMES.

Narrative of Events since the First of August, 1834, London, 1837,

WILLIAMS, JOSEPH JOHN.

Whisperings of the Caribbean, New York, 1925

.

Hebrewisms of West Africa, New York, 1930.

Voodoos and Obeahs, New York, 1932

.

WILSON, J. LEIGHTON.

Western Africa, Its History, Condition and Prospects, London, 1856.

WILSON, MRS. W. E. (WONA).

Selections of Anancy Stories, Kingston, 1899.

YOUNG, ROBERT.

View of Slavery in connection with Christianity, London, 1825.

ZELLER, RUDOLF.
