[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [African](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ppj003)  [Next](ppj005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER IV

### POPULAR BELIEF IN GHOSTS

SR HENRY HESKETH JOUDOU BELL, who recently retired as Governor of
Mauritius, spent many years in the British Colonial Service in the West
Indies, where he began his career in 1882.

Writing of his experiences in Granada and describing Quashie's "love for
and unshaken belief in the uncanny" with consequent "profound faith in
the existence of" ghosts, or as they are called in the West Indies,
"jumbies" or duppies, Sir Hesketh relates the following experience of
his own.

"I rented for some time a place rejoicing in the name of 'Paradise.' It
was in rather a lonely situation and had no near neighbours. On account
of the reputation the house bore, namely, of being haunted by troops of
jumbies, it was with the greatest difficulty that I could induce a groom
to sleep in the place, and only succeeded in getting one to stay by
allowing him to sleep on the mat outside my bedroom door.

"I certainly used to hear, during the night, all sorts of peculiar
noises and gruesome sounds, but the house, being an old one, was
infested by rats, and

{p. 145}

to the gambols of these gentry I ascribed the uncanny noises.

"The groom, however, emphatically denied the culpability of the rats,
and insisted on blaming the ghosts for the noise. Over and over he would
tell me that he would have to leave the work, as 'De jumbies does
trouble me too much,' and frequently, in the middle of the night, I
would wake up with a start, hearing the boy yelling out to me. 'What on
earth is the matter, you----?' I would call out in exasperation, only to
receive every time the same answer about the jumbies. 'Just listen, sah,
dey lighting matches all round the house.' I certainly could hear sounds
as of matches being drawn, but that was all, and the other sounds could
be put down to the hats that infested the place.

"One night, however, I was really horribly alarmed, and experienced a
good share of the feelings engendered by reading some of Edgar Poe's
ghastly tales. I was quite alone in the house and had given the boy
leave to sleep out for the night. I went to bed as usual and was
awakened after a few hours' sleep by some sound or other. The wind was
pretty high, and whistled mournfully through the trees. I had not had a
pleasant dream, and awakened with a feeling of uneasiness, while my
thoughts reverted to unpleasant ideas and some gruesome tales I had read
the day before.

"The mournful cry of an owl resounded from time to time, and it seemed
to me the rats and bats seemed unusually restive and ghostlike. Heavens!
what was that rustling sound just outside beneath

{p. 146}

the window? It sounded like a footfall. There it is again! Gracious! I'd
swear that was the clank of iron, it sounded like fetters! A cold
perspiration broke over me, my hair was quite damp. I held my breath to
catch the slightest sound. Again I heard the clank of the chain, now
close beneath the window. All the blood-curdling stories of fettered
ghosts I had ever read flew through my brain. The moon shed fitful rays
from behind a cloud and enabled me to distinguish objects. Again the
clank and a rustle.

"Do all I could, I could not tear my eyes away from the window, and
every second I expected and dreaded to see a cold, white face with
gleaming eyes pressed against the window pane. I could stand it no
longer, and don't know what I was about to do, when an awful sound broke
the ghostly stillness of the night. 'Hee Haw! Hee Haw!' 'Twas the other
donkey loose outside. Never had I thought there was such enchantment in
a donkey's bray, never so sweet a sound had I ever heard, nor one so
full of comforting melody. Once more I was at peace, and, calling myself
some inelegant names, I turned on my other side and slept till morning."
(1)

No doubt, many a ghost-story in Jamaica may be as easily explained away
by the incredulous visitor to the island, but certainly neither he nor
anyone else will be able to shake the superstitious belief of the "bush"
in the active agency of spiritual entities that exerts a really
extraordinary influence on the daily life of practically every Negro
whether he is in the West Indies or elsewhere.

Unquestionably, many a hair-raising experience is

{p. 147}

wrought with terrors that have their sole foundation in hysteria or
imaginative fear as a consequence of an attack of nerves, and one must
be careful about the uncritical acceptance of every story told,
particularly if it is of the hear-say variety.

On the other hand, it has been my experience, that the seasoned
missionary is naturally so sceptical on these matters that his tendency
is to sift all evidence and try to find a normal explanation for
everything and as a general rule his quest is not in vain.

Thus the very next district to my own was at one time in charge of a
missionary who suddenly found that his alarm-clock had developed a
strange propensity. He would leave it on the table and at his return
find it on the floor under the table. Sometimes he was awakened at night
by the clock's insistence on returning to the floor. Circumstances
precluded all possibility of the perpetration of a practical joke--he
was alone in the house. Finally, one day in broad daylight, while in an
adjoining room, he heard the clock crash to the floor from the table.
This started a serious investigation. The clock was an old one and would
run only when placed on its back. After due experiment and long
observation, it was found that the unwinding of the main-spring caused
the key at the back to revolve, and as the clock was resting on it, a
slow but perceptible movement was noticeable which made it gradually
edge off the table. Thus another perfectly good ghost story was spoiled.

Later the same missionary was able to trace a troublesome knocking that
had disturbed a household at all hours of the night, to an inoffensive
dog

{p. 148}

which in the customary fashion of easing the annoyance of fleas had
caused the mysterious disturbance.

These instances are cited merely as illustration of the usual calm and
determined attitude of those who are habituated to the "bush" and who
necessarily cannot afford to let their nerves run away with them. They
instinctively seek to find a normal explanation for the phenomena that
would otherwise destroy their peace of mind.

What, then, am I to think of the accounts that have reached me from
seasoned missionaries and other equally reliable witnesses, giving me
such personal experiences as have defied their every effort at
explanation by natural causes? Several such signed statements are before
me on my desk. The writers generously give me permission to use the
facts but naturally ask to be spared undue publicity. I can appreciate
their feeling as it has taken me a quarter of a century to find enough
courage to state openly my own views and experiences. Personally I know
each witness and can vouch for his sincerity and soundness of judgment.
Let me outline a few cases. Some of these incidents are of comparatively
recent occurrence, others happened as much as thirty years ago or more.
I have gathered them as I could pick them up. But in every case I have
obtained the account in writing and over the narrator's signature.

Here we have an incident in Kingston. A man is annoyed by his dead
brother who "appeared to him several times over his bed and at eleven
o'clock in the morning, looking just as he did when he was in the
coffin, but no words were uttered." Two ordinary

{p. 149}

blessings of the house have no effect. The apparition continues on
unchecked. A special blessing is employed and the spectre comes no more.
To all appearances, the harassed man is sane and normal. If it is only a
delusion, it has so taken hold of the unfortunate that he is certainly
convinced of its reality.

Also in Kingston we have a distracted woman and her children who are
almost driven mad by the repeated apparition of a man in their house who
disappears as soon as accosted. The account continues: "Upon going to
the house and questioning the woman, what struck me as sincere and
genuine was that the woman and especially the son of about ten years
were really terrified, so much so that I was concerned for the boy lest
he become deranged by fear. There was no fooling about his story, and no
contradictions in it. I made him tell me the details, and show me the
places where he stood and where the man was, in the repeated
apparitions. I blessed the house and warned the mother to keep the boy's
mind off the whole affair. They were bothered once or twice again and
then the trouble disappeared. At least the people were sincere in their
fear. There was no request for money or material aid. Certainly the
little boy was living in an agony of terror. The mother was a very
nervous person and I suspected her for a while of terrorizing the boy.
But I found out that to them, at least, it was real. Who can say,
whether it was so or not?"

Out in Westmoreland we encounter the conviction

{p. 150}

that unless a child of four is "properly" buried, the ghost will come
back and haunt the home.

Up in the Dry Harbour Mountains, an unbaptized boy is "troubled with
spirits" and his father seeks the help of the priest who writes: "I
started out with the boy's father and tramped through the mountains
until I wondered whether a white man had ever penetrated into that part
of Jamaica before. After a long climb, we at last reached the hut. Much
to my amazement I found the sick boy sitting on a high home-made bed. He
looked far stronger and more healthy than myself with apparently nothing
wrong with him. When I questioned him, he gave me the same story as his
father had given me, that he was troubled with spirits. As he lived so
far away from civilization, I gave him what instruction was necessary
and baptized him. A few days later I heard that the boy had died almost
immediately after my departure."

Now we have the example of an unfortunate leper who "during his sickness
used to be taken up and thrown around the room by some unknown spirit."

From another part of the island this comes to us: "A woman sent for me
to come and bless her house for the reason that she and her daughter
were annoyed by evil spirits. I went and first questioned her on the
nature of the molestation. Her first complaint was that the malignant
spirits 'rattled the shutters.' 'But that could be the wind,' I
suggested. 'But den dey trow stones in der window.' 'Some boys plaguing
you.' She was visibly annoyed at my difficulty to be convinced. 'Fader,
I gwine tell you der whole trute.

{p. 151}

My daughter and me in bed and dey empty der pitcher of water ober us.'"

Here is a somewhat longer account in the very words of the narrator.
"The following is the story told me by a black boy at X. He was lodged
by a woman who owns and lives in a haunted house. His bed was placed
across the floor in front of the door leading to the woman's bedroom.
Though he slept there for some time, he saw something only once, but he
often heard footsteps walking up and down the front steps. He swears to
the truth of these footsteps and also to the following. One night he
awoke and saw a woman standing above him. She stood there for a time
while he looked at her. She said never a word and finally turned and
went out. He gathered the impression that she wanted to get into the
bedroom but his presence had stopped her.

"The next day I spoke with the woman who owns the house. She says that
she used to see ghosts when she was a little girl but was never afraid
because they never harmed her, but just appeared to her. That stopped
and she had never any more experiences with the supposedly preternatural
until eight years ago, she is now about forty-five years old.

"She had bought a house and was living there alone. One night as she
entered her home, something took her by the arm and led her into the
house and then departed. She gathered it was a person. This was her
first experience. From that time to this day, she has been constantly
frightened by noises of various kinds and of a haunting character but
mainly by footsteps climbing the stairs. This is always at night,

{p. 152}

never in the daytime. Among others which she did not have time to tell
me, these were her special experiences.

"One night she woke up and heard footsteps coming to her door, in
through the door and across to a washstand which stood in the way to her
bed. She sat up, the ghost splashed in her wash basin and then flicked
her face with water. She screamed and the ghost departed. She touched
the drops of water on her face and wiped them off.

"Another night, she had a woman sleep with her to whom she told nothing
of the haunted character of the house. The woman in the morning, in
great fright, told her the same thing had happened to her, the flicking
of the water, and refused to sleep in the house with her again.

"Still another night, and this has happened a number of times, she woke
up from sleep, although not roused by noises. She turned over on her
side and screamed with fright, for she had turned over on an, other
body. It disappeared and she went to sleep again. Sometimes she is
awakened by a suffocating feeling and finds something pressing down on
her shoulders and body and enveloping her.

"Another night footsteps came across the floor; she sat up in bed; the
ghost approached and gave her a terrific blow in the abdomen. Since that
time she has suffered from a fiery internal fever which no doctor on the
island seems to be able to cure although she has seen many of them.

"Whenever she screams, the ghost departs. She cannot see the ghost but
only hears it and feels it. {p. 153} Asked if she knew any obeah-man,
she said that she didn't, but if she did, she would go to him if he
could help her.

"Apparently the ghost is afraid of men. For, when she has a boy sleeping
in the house she is not disturbed. But when a woman is with her the
ghost bothers her as usual.

"I believe there is something in her story. She was so certain of the
details, and there are a number of people who support her testimony. She
vowed several times that she was telling the truth and is tortured by
the ghost and she wants to sell a house on which she has spent money and
energy in making it comfortable for herself."

Whatever may be thought concerning the physical actuality of these
various incidents, even if the credibility of the witnesses should be
called into question by some, this much is certain, that to those
unfortunates who went through the experiences they were of terrifying
reality; and no amount of explanation or argument to the contrary would
shake their belief that they were victims of some spiritual force, call
it duppy, shadow or any other name you please.

This does not mean that they regard the agent, whatever it may be, as in
any way diabolical. Far from it. According to "bush" ideas concerning
the human composite of body and soul, there are qualities in the
spiritual element of man that enables it under particular circumstances
to produce certain extrinsic phenomena and to exercise a powerful
influence for good or evil as regards others, occasionally

{p. 154}

here in life but especially after death when it is freed from the
trammels of the body. In other words, the operations of duppy and shadow
are not to be regarded in themselves as supernatural but purely natural
since there is no intervention of a spiritual force outside themselves,
except perhaps as happens in the case of the obeah-man, when he
undertakes the control and use of these natural forces of the human
soul. And even then, it is really a supernatural use of a natural force
that is understood by the "bush" psychology.

Be that as it may, whether we regard them as psychic phenomena or merely
as popular superstitions, two elements are to be carefully distinguished
in Jamaica, the duppy and the shadow. It was once commonly the belief
that the obeah-man could catch the shadows of living people and imprison
them in a silk-cotton tree, with the consequence that the victim of the
lost shadow pined away and died unless the myal-man undid the mischief
by releasing the shadow and returning it to its owner. So, too, while
the obeah-man might "set duppies" on people for their endless annoyance,
the myal-man could free them from their spectral tormenters. To
differentiate properly these two elements, the shadow and the duppy, we
must go back to the Ashanti from whom they were originally brought to
Jamaica in the days of slavery.

Captain Rattray tells us: "The Ashanti use a number of names translated
into English by the words soul or spirit or ghost." (2) He then goes on
to define the various terms employed. Thus he writes:

{p. 155}

Saman is "a ghost, an apparition, a spectre; this term is never applied
to a living person or to anything inherent in a living person. It is
objective and is the form which the dead are sometimes seen to take,
when visible on earth, and in it they go about in the *asaman* or
*samandow* (the place of ghosts); *samanpow* is the 'thicket of ghosts';
*samanfo*, the ghosts, *i.e.* spirits of ancestors. The word has no
connexion whatever with any kind of soul." (3) Elsewhere Captain Rattray
asserts: "A *saman* is in the form and shape of the mortal body and has
all its senses, or some at any rate, and feels hunger and thirst." (4)
It is further explained by the same author that according to Ashanti
belief, when a man dies, his spirit or *saman* immediately appears
before the Supreme Being, or as some think, before a subordinate deity,
and ascertains whether it is to go to the spirit world below or haunt
the earth for a time, if not permanently. He adds: "Such a spirit then
becomes 'a wait-about, wait-about spirit . . . . . . It does not seem,"
he says, "to have much power for harm, and is shy generally, and
confines itself to frightening people. The *saman*, whose stay on earth
has been only ordained to last until his destiny has been fulfilled,
eventually disappears to the world where all spirits live." (5) It is
also observed that "food is constantly placed aside" for the *saman*,
and that when they are visible to the human eye they are "reported
generally as being white or dressed in white." (6) This is the Jamaica
duppy in every detail.

The Reverend R. Thomas Banbury describing

{p. 156}

Jamaica of his day, expressed the opinion: "The word *duppy* appears to
be a corruption of *doorpeep*, something peeping through the keyhole."
(7) Personally I am absolutely opposed to this derivation of the word
duppy, but as far as I can determine it is the only one that has been
suggested in Jamaica. Doctor Werner, writing to me, ascribed the origin
to *Dupe*, "ghost" in the "Bube" language of the southern and eastern
parts of the island of Fernando Poo. But while the cultural influence of
the Ashanti in Jamaica is paramount, there is no indication of influence
from the Fernando Poo group of slaves. Since, then, Ashanti terminology
has so dominated everything Jamaican, it is but reasonable to turn to
the Ashanti again when seeking further elucidation of Jamaican problems.
As a matter of fact we find in Ashanti the word *dupon* signifying "the
broad and large part of the root of certain trees above ground,
projecting like a buttress from the low part of the trunk," (8) and it
gives reference to the *odum*, or silk-cotton tree. Now it is precisely
among these buttressed roots of the silk-cotton tree that the duppies in
Jamaica are supposed to reside, and I cannot help feeling that either
the word duppy is derived from *dupon*, or possibly the latter has
acquired its name from the duppies who frequent the roots.

Mr. Banbury further states: "Duppies are ghosts which are supposed to
appear to persons in this country termed *foyeyed* or gifted with second
sight. It is commonly believed that departed souls return to earth,
haunt their habitations, or remain near

{p. 157}

where their bodies are buried. These eat and drink like living beings
and are displeased when the inmates of houses leave nothing for them in
the house at nights. For this reason the superstitious are known to let
food remain on the table for the duppies." (9) He further observes: "The
duppies generally appear in their grave clothes." (10)

While the duppies are primarily spiritual entities, they unquestionably
include a material element in their composition. On occasions of deaths
in the neighbourhood, especially if by violence, good care is taken at
night to plug up every crack and crevice in the hovels, "to keep the
duppies out." In fact, when about a hundred unfortunates were drowned at
Montego Bay during the hurricane of 1912, it was almost impossible to
find a messenger to go on an errand that would keep him out after dark,
the general excuse being, "Too many det (dead) round, sah!" Moreover,
while Mr. Banbury maintained: "Duppies are believed to act the part of
guardian angels to their friends and relatives," (11) I certainly never
met any Jamaican who was not averse to meeting the duppies of even those
who had been nearest and dearest to him in life.

Father Emerick writes: "The usual meaning of the word duppy, when not
taken in connexion with other superstitions, is the same as that of our
word ghost. The Jamaica duppies, like our ghosts, retain an interest in
the persons and the world they left behind, and seek intercommunication
with them. But their interest is seldom, if ever, otherwise than
selfish, or malicious, or vindictive. To be able to see and

{p. 158}

converse with duppies you must be a 'foyeyed,' that is a four-eyed,
gifted with a second sight, by which you can see what is going on in the
spirit world. For the foyeyed to see duppies it is not necessary for
them, like the mediums in our modern spiritualism, to shut themselves up
in a spirit cabinet or pass into a hypnotic sleep of any kind; they
simply cannot help seeing the spirits when they are around. Like our
ghosts, duppies amuse themselves by haunting houses, frightening people
by slamming doors, upsetting chairs, drawing bed curtains, etc. They
have a special attraction for untenanted houses and lonesome places.
Haunted houses are common in the country and to be found even in the
city." (12)

Father Emerick goes on to relate the following personal experience. "One
of the city duppy houses was a large two-storey house. When I was sent
to Jamaica in 1895, to help Reverend Patrick Kelly, he was in the throes
of resurrecting a school in this same building. Father Kelly and myself
lived in this building, sleeping there during the night. This building
was said to be haunted by the soul of a wealthy leper who died in it.
Whether it was due to the dead leper or some other kind of a duppy, we
had some curious duppy experiences. One night we were both disturbed by
someone apparently coming to our door. About an hour or so after I had
grabbed quickly the knob of my door to keep out the mysterious intruder,
I heard Father Kelly calling out lustily from beyond a vacant room
between us, asking me if I had come to his door." (3)

Later the same author tells us: "But the Jamaica

{p. 159}

duppies do not limit their operations to haunting houses, but, like the
fairies they like to wander about. On this account, according to duppy
belief, you must not speak to unknown persons you meet in the road at
night. You might make a mistake and address a duppy and be knocked by
it." (14) And again: "These duppy knockers not only knock people but
they have a peculiar way of knocking in and about houses and making it
very uncomfortable for those living in them. There was scarcely a
district where these knocking duppies were not busy bothering some
house." (15)

The Jamaica duppy, then, for all practical purposes, may be regarded as
substantially the same as our ghost, both as to its nature and its
method of manifestation and annoyance.

As already mentioned, according to Ashanti acceptation, the "wait-about,
wait-about spirit" is doomed to haunt the earth permanently. The name
for such a spirit is *osaman-twentwen* which is explained by Christaller
as "a departed spirit that is not admitted to the *asaman*, on account
of his wickedness in his life-time, but must hover about behind the
dwellings." (16) *Twen* literally means "to wait" and the reduplicated
form is an adverb signifying nimbly or cleverly.

In the Jamaica "bush" there is a similar belief that in the case of
notoriously wicked individuals, their ghosts of duppies go about
ordinarily in the form of a calf, with a piece of chain attached to the
neck, as a warning of the consequences of evil-doing. These creatures
are known popularly as "Rollen

{p. 160}

Calves," and they are thus described by Mr. Banbury.

"1 now advert to a curious superstition that is still rife in Jamaica
that is, the belief in what are called *Rollen Calves*. These are a set
of animals, or rather as it is believed, evil spirits in the shape of
animals, which travel at nights, and are often seen by the people. There
is hardly any of them but who will tell you that they have met with
*Rollen Calves* in the dark. These creatures of *transmigrated* souls
are seen in a variety of forms, like cats, dogs, hogs, goats, horses,
bulls, etc., and are said to be most dangerous and inveterate when met
in the feline form and of a *black* or *brindled* colour. A bit of chain
is generally attached to their necks, which they carry with them from
the *infernal regions*. People affirm that they often hear the rattle of
the rollen calf's chain about their yard at nights, and listened to his
battle with the dogs, who are its bitter enemies. They fly at it with
precipitation and compel it to retreat when they encounter it. They are
supposed to take up their abode in the daytime at the roots of cotton
trees, bamboos, and in caves, as duppies do. But at such a time are not
visible except to the *foyeyed*, or those that can see spirits.

"These creatures are also believed to be sometimes under an obeah spell,
when they will attack people in the night, and obstinately dispute the
path with them. They possess the extraordinary power of suddenly growing
from the size of a cat or dog to that of a horse, or bull. The only way
of getting rid of the *infernal* monster on such occasions, is to flog

{p. 161}

him with the left hand. He is exceedingly afraid of a *tarred* whip.
Waggon men and others who affirm that they have encountered the *roaring
calf*, declare that they have heard him cry out when flogged 'Me dead
two time, oh,' (I am twice dead.) They are very fond of molasses, and
for that reason are often seen at crop time about sugar estates at
nights, seeking to satiate themselves with this article. For the same
cause they have been known to follow the sugar wains, in the night,
conveying sugar to the wharf. They are said to be fond of cattle, this
occasions the breaking of the 'cow pen', the rollen calf getting in
among the cattle, and causing terror." (17)

In passing, Mr. Banbury illustrates his account with the following
anecdote. "A man who is a member of the Church of a certain
denomination, an educated and upright man, one whom I believe would not
tell a lie, informed me that he was travelling late one night, the moon
was shining brightly--when he came upon a very large black creature
lying at full length across the road. No dog, he said, could have been
so large. He made a lick at it with his stick in *terror*. The stick
flew out of his hand, and he never saw where the beast went. He got
home, and took in with fever and was ill for some time-no doubt from the
fright. Of course, he set it down to have been one of these *fabulous*
creatures of the night. His terrified imagination transformed what was
most likely a large black dog into a *Rollen Calf*." (18)

That Mr. Banbury regards the whole belief with

{p. 162}

absolute scepticism, is clearly evidenced. "I remember," he says, "one
night riding on a mule very late, and dozing going along, when the mule
made a leap on a sudden up a steep bank, from the road, and began to
snort at a great rate working his ears backwards and forwards. Nor with
all my efforts would he go down again. I was determined to find out the
cause of his fright, I alighted, went down into the road, and saw a very
curious-looking animal lying in the middle of the way, doubled up. I
could not make out what it was at all. It had long woolly hair of a
whitish colour. I gave it a sharp lick with my supple-jack, and up it
sprang. I then saw by the light of the moon that it was a young ass.
After going on a little further, I came upon the mother feeding. If
there was ever a close resemblance to a *Rollen Calf*, that was one; and
any superstitious person, without taking the trouble to examine it,
would have set it down to be one. These circumstances in point prove
most conclusively that 'Mr. Rollen' is nothing more than one of our
domestic animals seen in the night; or an animal that is not generally
met with, as was before hinted." (19)

Mr. Banbury suggests that the word *rollen* does not signify *rolling*
but *roaring*. (20) Once again I must disagree with him. Never did I
find any indication of such an interpretation in any part of the "bush."
I am rather inclined to think that we have here one of the rare examples
where *rolling* is used in the sense of wandering or roaming.

As regards the superstition itself, this belief in the *Rollen Calf* is
rapidly dying out in Jamaica. The

{p. 163}

"bush" still talks about it, but in an incredulous sort of a way with an
air of amused toleration. At least, that is the conclusion I drew from
personal contacts in various parts of the island.

Entirely distinct from the *saman* or duppy or ghost, is the Ashanti
*sasa* which according to Captain Rattray "is the invisible spiritual
power of a person or an animal, which disturbs the mind of the living,
or works a spell or mischief upon them, so that they suffer in various
ways. Persons who are always taking life have to be particularly careful
to guard against *sasa* influence, and it is among them that its action
is mainly seen, *e.g.* among executioners, hunters, butchers, and as a
later development--among sawyers--who cut down the great forest trees.
The remorse that might drive the murderer in this country to confession
or to suicide, the Ashanti would explain at once as the operation of the
sasa of the murdered man upon his murderer. I have mentioned
occasionally in the preceding pages of steps taken to avoid the
vengeance of the sasa. The *sasa* is essentially the bad, revengeful,
and hurtful element in a spirit; it is that part which at all costs must
be 'laid' or rendered innocuous. The funeral rites . . . are really, I
believe, the placating, appeasing, and the final speeding of a soul
which may contain this very dangerous element in its composition." (21)

This is substantially the shadow of Jamaica. However, as in the case of
the duppy, we find a material element connected with the shadow in the
general acceptation of the "bush." Further it should be

{p. 164}

noted in passing that at a Jamaica funeral, as will be seen later, at
times the *sasa* or shadow is "laid" with as elaborate a ceremonial as
happens among the Ashanti.

In connexion with what is known as the *Apo Custom*, an annual festival
among the Ashanti, there is a lampooning liberty which is thus described
to Captain Rattray "by the old high-priest of the god Ta Kese at
Tekiman."--"You know that every one has a *sunsum* (soul) that may get
hurt or knocked about or become sick, and so make the body ill. Very
often, although there may be other causes, *e.g.* witchcraft, ill health
is caused by the evil and the hate that another has in his head against
you. Again, you too may have hatred in your head against another,
because of something that person has done to you, and that, too, causes
your sunsum to fret and become sick. Our forebears knew this to be the
case, and so they ordained a time, once every year, when every man and
woman, free man and slave, should have freedom to speak out just what
was in their head, to tell their neighbours just what they thought of
them and their actions, and not only their neighbours, but also the king
or chief. When a man has spoken freely thus, he will feel his *sunsum*
cool and quieted, and the *sunsum* of the other person against whom he
has now freely spoken will be quieted also. The King of Ashanti may have
killed your children, and you hate him. This had made him ill, and you
ill, too; when you are allowed to say before his face what you think,
you both benefit. That was why the King of Ashanti in ancient times,
when he fell ill,

{p. 165}

would send for the Queen of Nkoranza to insult him, even though the time
for the ceremony had not come round. It made him live longer and did him
good." (22)

1 sometimes wonder if this ceremony may not have given rise to the
practice still in vogue in Jamaica of "throwing words at the moon?" You
may tell the moon the most insulting things about a party within his
hearing without being liable for libel, as you would be if you addressed
the same words to your victim or to another person. Thus you in turn may
be called "a tief" or "a liar fee true," every word reaching you and
those who are standing about, and yet if you ask the vilifier what he is
saying, the answer will be: "Not you, sah, Him moon talk." It certainly
"cools the sunsum" of the speaker who goes away contented and satisfied,
though it must be confessed it has a far different effect on the object
of the remarks. I speak from experience.

At all events, with the Ashanti it is believed that malignity towards
another can physically affect the object of one's hatred, inducing
sickness and even death. It is this spiritual power of the soul, or as
Captain Rattray called it, "the bad, revengeful and hurtful element in a
spirit," that is known as the Ashanti sasa or Jamaica shadow. This is
its normal or natural function, independent of any supernatural
co-operation. It is, however, believed that it is within the scope of
obeah-practice to dissociate from living man this *sasa* or shadow,
which accordingly must have some entity of its own independent of the
*sunsum* or soul. Furthermore, unless the victim of this

{p. 166}

obeah interference succeeds in regaining his lost shadow through the
instrumentality of the myal-man, he is doomed to waste away with fatal
results.

On the other hand, when a man comes to die in the ordinary course of
events, his sasa or shadow tends to demand an independent existence of
its own to the annoyance of those who remain in life, unless it is
captured and "properly laid" at the funeral, as will be seen in the next
chapter.

Accordingly, Mr. Banbury tells us that depriving persons of their
shadows is also called in Jamaica "setting the deaths on them," and he
explains: "It is believed that after the shadow of any one is taken, he
is never healthy; and if it be not caught, he must pine away until he
dies. The shadow when taken is carried and nailed to the cotton-tree."
(23) This of course, would be the work of an obeah-man.

It now becomes the task of the myal-man to try and restore the shadow to
the person from whom it had been taken.

After the great myalistic revival that followed on the emancipation of
the slaves the catching of shadows became almost as important as the
digging up of obeah, on the part of the myal-man who according to Mr.
Banbury, "declared that the world was to be at an end: Christ was
coming, and God had sent them to pull all the obeahs, and catch the
shadows that were spell-bound at the cotton-trees. In preparation for
that event they affected to be very strict in their conduct. They would
neither drink nor smoke. Persons who were known to be notorious for bad
lives were excluded from their society. At

{*Two pages (167 and 168) missing in book--jbh.*}

{p. 169}

been properly laid at the funeral, is ordinarily ascribed to the
duppies. This is probably due to the fact that, as in many parts of
Africa, it is not well to speak of the dead, especially under the
malevolent aspect, and so duppies in general are blamed for everything
and there is then no need of any reference to a particular shadow, which
otherwise hearing itself named, might feel called upon to make its
presence felt to the utter annoyance of the invoker.

Still another Ashanti term is the *sunsum* which is thus described by
Captain Rattray: "It is a man's sunsum that may wander about in sleep.
'It may encounter other sunsum and get knocked about, when you will feel
unwell, or killed, when you will sicken and die.' Perhaps the *sunsum*
is the volatile part of the whole '*kra*'" (27) *i.e.* the human soul.
It was only on very rare occasions that I came across any indications of
vestiges of belief in this dream-soul during all the time I was in
Jamaica. Possibly there are still some who secretly place credence in
the theory that his dreams are actual experiences of a portion of his
soul far afield during the hours of sleep. But, I feel quite sure that
even the most ignorant in the "bush" have become too sophisticated to
openly admit such a belief.

Another superstition, now rapidly dying out in Jamaica, is that
regarding "Ole Hige," a sort of vampire that haunts the hovels of the
Blacks or is seen at times gliding along the roads at night in a fiery
glow. For many years I was convinced that this was nothing more than an
ingraft on Negro superstition due to contacts with the whites, as "Ole

{p. 170}

Hige" really means Old Hag and when she assumes her rôle as vampire, in
good European witch fashion, she doffs her skin before setting out on
her mission. In this connexion, we even find recorded the time-honoured
story of the husband who suspected the nefarious practice of his wife
and feigning sleep until her departure rubbed pepper and salt inside the
temporarily discarded skin. The usual discomfiture of the witch followed
in natural course. (28) What was my surprise, then, to find Christaller
in connexion with the Ashanti stating under the term *Obayifo*, meaning
witch, hag; wizard, sorcerer: "The natives describe a wizard or witch as
a man or woman who stands in some agreement with the devil. At night,
when all are asleep, he (or she) rises or rather leaves his (her) body,
as a snake casts its slough, and goes out emitting flames from his eyes,
nose, mouth, ears, armpits; he may walk with his head on the ground and
his feet up; he catches and eats animals, or kills men either by
drinking their blood or by catching their soul, which he boils and eats,
whereupon the person dies; or he bites them that they become full of
sores." (29)

Concerning the Jamaica belief in "Ole Hige" in his day, we are informed
by Mr. Banbury: "This is another most curious creature of the
imagination which was much believed in times of old and greatly dreaded;
and the notion respecting the fabulous being of blood has not quite died
out. It delights in human blood, especially that of new-born infants. In
days gone by the "*Old Suck*," as she was also designated on account of
her imagined propensity, was

{p. 171}

to be seen enveloped in a flame of fire, wending her way late at nights
through the 'nigger houses,' or along the high road, bent on robbing
some poor innocent of its newly circulating blood of life. For this
reason infants just born were guarded with the utmost care from the
voracious creature of blood. This has given rise to the foolish notion,
still generally practised amongst the people throughout the island, of
keeping up the ninth night after the birth of an infant. This night is
thought the most critical, as on it the old hag uses her utmost
endeavour to get at the babe. It is the night previous to 'coming out of
room' after child and mother are confined for some days. On this night a
constant watch is kept up by the anxious mother, the midwife, and her
friends. If the infant comes off safe this night there is no more fear.
The hag would not after that molest it. Knives and forks, and sometimes
the bible are placed at the head of the infant to scare away the
'blow-fire'. The doors are marked all over with chalk. This has the
effect of keeping the old hag all night counting until it be too late to
enter. Sometimes mustard seeds are scattered before them which have the
same effect. Her approach is suspected by an irresistible drowsiness and
the flickering of the light. If those who are watching should give way
to this feeling and fall asleep, woe to the unfortunate infant. The hag
enters and sucks it. As soon as this is done the child cries, the people
wake up in a fright, the babe takes in immediately with the locked-jaw
and refuses the breast. The little one is now considered doomed. The
locked-jaw was always believed

{p. 172}

an invariable sign of the suck of an old hag, and in times of slavery a
great majority of infants died of it, no doubt from the bad treatment of
the mothers near up to the time of delivery by their owners, and from
exposure of the infants after birth. There were mothers also, who on
account of the rigour of slavery, no doubt used means to get off their
babes, rather than that they should have been subjected to the same
hardships as themselves. The strangest thing in connexion with this
superstition is, that it was believed to be the living that acted the
part of the 'old hige.' Women who were addicted to it had the power of
divesting themselves of their skins, and with their raw bodies issued
out at nights, in quest of blood. People have affirmed that they have
seen the 'ole hige' going along in the night as swift as lightning, with
blazes of fire issuing out of her armpits." (30)

Strictly speaking, therefore, *ole hige* should have been dealt with in
the previous chapter on witchcraft, for she is a witch pure and simple.
And so she would have been, were it not for the fact that the little
residue of the superstition that still remains in the "bush" is, by
common consent, usually associated with duppies in general, probably for
the same reason as in the case of shadows already referred to, that no
one wants to attract *ole hige's* attention by naming her.

Mr. Banbury further speaks of the Jamaica "Rubba Mumma" or River Mother
which is known in Haiti as *Mère de l'eau*, and in Surinam as *Water
Mama*. Thus he says: "This superstition most likely

{p. 173}

took its rise from the story of the *mermaid* or *water nymph* of
England; she is believed to inhabit every fountain-head of an
inexhaustible and considerable stream of water in Jamaica. For this
reason the sources of such streams were worshipped, and sacrifices
offered to the 'Rubba Missis.' It is a well-known fact that the slaves
on water-works used to persuade their overseers or masters, to sacrifice
an ox at the fountain-head of the water turning the mill in times of
much drought, in order to propitiate the mistress of the river, that she
may cause rain and give an adequate supply of water to turn the mill. It
is said a bullock was yearly killed on some of the sugar estates at such
places for this purpose." (31)

One's first impulse would be to agree with Mr. Banbury and find here
nothing more than a European nymph transplanted to a West Indian
setting. But maturer consideration leads me to think that this is rather
a residue of the old Ashanti myth about the divine origin of water, (32)
as well as a reflexion of what constitutes the very basis of Ashanti
theological beliefs, as Captain Rattray calls it, namely, the accepted
relation of every important body of water in Ashanti to the Supreme
Being as "a son of God." (33) For, as we are told, "Waters in Ashanti,
some in a greater, others in a lesser degree, are all looked upon as
containing the power or spirit of the Divine Creator, and thus as being
a great life-giving force. 'As a woman gives birth to a child, so may
water to a god,' once said a priest to me." (34)

Among Jamaica Proverbs concerning duppies in general, the following may
be mentioned in passing:

{p. 174}

In the Jamaica Alphabet we have: "D is for duppy, him yeye shine like
fire," which would rather seem to have reference to *Ole Hige* than to
the ordinary run of duppies.

"Man don dead, no call him duppy," showing that a duppy is an after
death manifestation. This is clearly a use of duppy in its strictest
sense.

"Duppy say: 'day fe you, night fe me,'" meaning "Every man to his
taste," and implying the activity of the duppy by night.

"Ebery cave-hole hab him own duppy," that is, "Everyone has his own
trouble," but indicating the association of duppies with the darkness of
the caves.

"Duppy know who fe frighten," signifying "People will only injure those
who they know cannot retaliate." Doctor Martha Warren Beckwith,
President of the American Folk-Lore Society, paraphrases this as "The
devil knows whom to frighten," and defines a duppy as a ghost or an evil
spirit of any kind. (35) This, of course, is the most extended use
possible for the word duppy, but there are times in Jamaica when it is
so used.

The present chapter has been concerned with the "bush" ideas in Jamaica
on ghosts and kindred spirits. Its purpose has been to analyse and
differentiate these beliefs as beliefs, and nothing more. There is no
question here of determining the underlying facts, if any.

The average Englishman or American in Jamaica, as elsewhere, would scorn
to admit any belief whatever in ghosts. And yet, if put to it, either at
home or abroad, how many of them would be ready to go

{p. 175}

alone into a cemetery at midnight without bolstering up their courage by
whistling? They may not believe in ghosts, but they are at least a
little nervous, to say the least.

So, too, I am convinced that while educated Jamaicans generally are apt
to protest loudly against this foolish superstition concerning duppies,
yet in their heart of hearts, after dark they have a wholesome respect
for the reputed habitat of Mr. Duppy, if not a positive dread of meeting
him.

Certainly, in the "bush," duppies are accepted as fearsome realities.
Even were we able to prove dogmatically that such an entity could not
possibly exist, we would make little impression on the minds of the
masses of the simple children of Nature among the Jamaica hills. For, as
the Ashanti say: "If the spirit world possesses nothing else, it has at
least the power of its name." (36)

{p. 176}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER V](ppj005)  
