[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [African](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Next](ppj001.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PSYCHIC PHENOMENA OF JAMAICA

### By JOSEPH J. WILLIAMS, S.J.

##### Ph.D. (Ethnol.), Litt.D.

##### Professor of Cultural Anthropology, Boston College Graduate School

##### FELLOW of The Royal Anthropological Institute; The Royal Geographical Society; The American Geographical Society; The Royal Society of Arts.

##### MEMBER of Congrès International des Sciences Anthropologiques et Ethnologiques; International Institute of African Languages and Cultures; American Association for the Advancement of Science; American Council of Learned Societies; American Anthropological Association; American Ethnological Society; Catholic Anthropological Conference; American Folklore Society; African Society; etc.

##### AUTHOR of "Voodoos and Obeahs," "Hebrewisms of West Africa," "Whence the 'Black Irish' of Jamaica?" "Whisperings of the Caribbean," etc.

THE DIAL PRESS

NEW YORK MCMXXXIV \[1934\]

# CONTENTS

|         |                                       |      |
|---------|---------------------------------------|------|
|         |                                       | PAGE |
|         | INTRODUCTION-WEIRD HAPPENINGS         | 1    |
| CHAPTER |                                       |      |
| I.      | ASHANTI CULTURAL INFLUENCE IN JAMAICA | 23   |
| II\.    | JAMAICA WITCHCRAFT                    | 50   |
| III\.   | APPLIED MAGIC                         | 109  |
| IV\.    | POPULAR BELIEF IN GHOSTS              | 144  |
| V.      | FUNERAL CUSTOMS                       | 176  |
| VI\.    | POLTERGEIST                           | 220  |
| VII\.   | CONCLUSIONS                           | 244  |
|         | DOCUMENTATION                         | 266  |
|         | BIBLIOGRAPHY                          | 286  |

{p. 1}

## INTRODUCTION

### WEIRD HAPPENINGS

EARLY in December, 1906, I first visited Jamaica, where I planned
staying a couple of months. On January 14th, the day of the disastrous
earthquake, I was returning from the north side of the island, driving
by way of Mount Diabolo, and I arrived at the Ewarton Railway Station
about an hour before the starting time of the train that was to carry me
back to Kingston.

The day was unusually tropical for that season of the year in Jamaica,
with a cloudless sky, and what was really strange, at a time when the
Trade Winds should have been at their height, not a breath of air was
stirring. One could almost feel the stillness, and the brightness of the
sunshine was simply dazzling. As I reached the station platform, a
gentleman and a young lady were attracting much attention. They were
brown people of the mulatto type, well dressed and with every indication
of refinement. But the young lady, who, I should judge, was about
twenty-five years of age, had become hysterical. She was wringing her
hands, and between convulsive sobs kept repeating: "Father, we should
never have left home to-day. I told you that something dreadful is going
to happen."

{p. 2}

The gentleman naturally showed great embarrassment as he vainly strove
to quiet his daughter who kept repeating in a mechanical sort of way
that she knew that something dreadful was going to happen. Finally, her
father led her away and I saw nothing more of either of them. But just
about half an hour after their departure, suddenly the ground began to
tremble and to run in waves with a crackling, sputtering sound similar
to the disruption of a gigantic Leyden jar--an earthquake was upon us.
Then as the tremors ceased, I glanced at my watch, the time was exactly
eighteen minutes past three.

It was the following morning before I reached Kingston, and I found the
city a mass of ruins with a ravaging fire still sweeping over the
débris. More than a thousand persons had been killed outright and many
hundreds of others were succumbing to their injuries.

Amid the general confusion and excitement, I repeatedly heard stories of
a weird prophet who, it was said, had passed along the city's streets
some hours before the disaster, sounding a cry of warning that had gone
unheeded by the populace who had only laughed at him.

Ordinarily, I would not have given any credence to these rumors which I
would have classified with those numerous after-fact delusions to be
expected on such occasions. But the memory of the strange scene at the
Ewarton Station haunted me as it had baffled any explanation that I
could offer. Consequently, I made it a point to inquire carefully from
the least imaginative of my confrères and they were

{p. 3}

in agreement that they had heard the rumor many hours before the
earthquake had happened.

Years later, this incident was reported in The Times of London for
January 13, 1921, as follows: "It is noteworthy that in the forenoon of
January 14, 1907, a man wearing a red mantle, who was regarded as an
irresponsible person, made his appearance in Kingston warning the people
that before evening Kingston would be destroyed. At 3:30 p.m. Kingston,
and in fact the entire island, was visited by an earthquake of great
magnitude which not only laid a large area of the capital in ruins but
killed at least 2,000 persons."

Needless to say, the following days in Kingston were filled with rumors
of prophecies of new disasters that never eventuated, and which drove
the distraught people to an emotional frenzy of despair. Even the
revivalist Bedwardites, clothed in white, as they paraded the city in
single files, with that peculiar hip-movement which is so characteristic
of myalism,\[1\] adapted their hymns to the spirit of the occasion. Over
and over again, in seemingly interminable reiteration, they sang with a
distinctively myalistic lilt to their tune: "It is a warning! It is a
warning! On the dreadful judgment day, Heaven and earth will pass away.
It is a warning! It is a warning! On the dreadful judgment day there'll
be no warning." At first I could not catch the words, but the air itself
seemed to burn into my very soul.

\[1. As shown in *Voodoos and Obeahs* Myalism is a residue of the old
Ashanti religious rites as found in Jamaica just as obeah is a
continuation of Ashanti witchcraft.\]

{p. 4}

I asked a youngster to find out for me what they were saying with the
result that I have here set down.

Since that fateful day, about twenty-seven years ago, I have made three
other visits to Jamaica and I have spent there in all nearly six years.
It has been my good fortune to penetrate to some of the least accessible
parts of mountain and "bush" and I have lived for considerable time in
those remote districts where superstitious practices are most prevalent.
It has been my constant purpose to forward a scientific study of such
unusual phenomena as might be regarded as psychic, both by discussing
the incidents with natives of every class and colour, and by seeking out
those who were reputed as practitioners of the black man's witchcraft.

Time and again I sought to draw out in conversation the professional
obeah-men, but I invariably found them evasive and non-committal. As
occasion offered, I closely questioned youngsters who, according to
common report, were apprenticed to obeah-men as disciples to acquire the
art, but they had already learned their lesson of secrecy and I could
make no impression on them. I repeatedly watched a black boy whom I knew
well, the son of a notorious obeah-woman, as he stood motionless for
long periods staring straight at the sun,--a sure indication in itself
that he was in preparation for the practice of obeah, yet despite the
fact that I remunerated him generously for trifling errands and
otherwise strove to win his confidence, I never succeeded

{p. 5}

in gaining from him any information of value.

It was only from disillusioned clients of obeah-men who shame-facedly
made admissions connected with their own experiences, that I was really
able to gather directly any reliable facts. Chance, however,
occasionally favoured my effort. At rare intervals I stumbled on
nocturnal workings of the obeah-man, but even here there was no
prearrangement--I am extremely sceptical of all stories of surreptitious
rendezvous--and even what I did see usually savoured rather of myalism
than of obeah proper, as we shall see in the course of the narrative.

Meanwhile, however, I have carefully studied the works of others and I
have searched diligently for every scrap of information on the subject,
making it my great objective to sort out judiciously to the best of my
ability, what appears to be authentic facts from the mass of fiction
that has been written on the subject.

At the Congrès International des Sciences Anthropologiques et
Ethnologiques, held in London, July 30 to August 4, 1934, I presented a
paper to the Section on Religions bearing the title "Psychic Phenomena
in Jamaica." Over a thousand delegates had assembled from forty-two
different countries, and it was my purpose to place dispassionately
before the learned gathering the results of more than a quarter of a
century of intensive research.

After a brief description of the various forms of local belief in
Jamaica regarding duppies, shadows, and the like, I then proceeded:--

{p. 6}

Without attempting to classify the various phases, we may now take up
some particular instances of "Psychic Phenomena in Jamaica". No idle
rumors are to be reported. Almost without comment, I purpose citing a
series of cases, as far as possible quoting the very words of witnesses
for whom I can personally vouch, and also giving an incident or two that
actually came under my own observation. The Reverend A. J. E. to whom
repeated reference will be made was the Reverend Abraham J.
Emerick,\[1\] a Jesuit Missionary who took up work in Jamaica in 1895,
at first in Kingston, and subsequently in the heart of the mountains
where for ten years, as he expressed it himself, he "lived in an
atmosphere impregnated with obeah and other superstitions."

#### CASE 1. (BY REV. A. J. E.)

One of the favourite pastimes of the duppies is stone-throwing. Reports
of persons and places being stoned by duppies are very common. My first
experience of stone-throwing duppies was rather startling and trying. It
happened soon after my undertaking the mountain missions on the north
side of the island, and before I was acquainted with the habits of the

\[1. The Reverend Abraham J. Emerick, S.J., was born at Falmouth,
Pennsylvania, November 211, 1856, and died at Woodstock, Maryland,
February 4, 1931. After missionary work in Jamaica from 1895 to 1905, he
laboured for a time among the coloured people of Philadelphia and
subsequently spent more than a dozen years in Saint Mary's County,
Maryland, where he devoted himself especially to his beloved Negroes
whom he had come to know so well.\]

{p. 7}

people and knew anything about their superstitions and occult practices.
One evening after dark, I was on my way to Alva mission, situated at a
lonesome spot on a hill in the Dry Harbour Mountains. I was met by a
crowd about a mile away from the mission. They got around me and warned
me in an excited way against going up to the mission. They said that
duppies were up there at night throwing stones; that the duppies had
stoned the teacher away from the Alva school. It seems that the
stone-throwing had been going on for a week or more before my arrival.
For several nights crowds went up to the old Alva school, not far from
the church on a mountain spur partly surrounded by a deep ravine covered
with thick bush. The teacher of the school, a certain Mr. D. lived in
two rooms that overlooked the declivity. Every night the crowd was
there, stones were thrown from various directions, but most of them
seemed to come from the bush-covered ravine. What mystified the people
most and made them believe and say, as did the teacher and the most
intelligent store-keeper in the district, that the stones were thrown
not by human hands but by spirits, was that those who were hit by the
stones were not injured, and that some of the stones which came from the
bushy declivity, after smashing through the window turned at a right
angle and broke the teacher's clock, glasses, etc. on a sideboard. In
spite of the dreadful stone-throwing duppies, I went up to the hill
followed by a crowd. I found the school building littered with stones,

{p. 8}

broken windows and a generally smashed-up, sure-enough ghost-haunted
place. The story of the stone-throwing, which I afterwards put together,
amounted to this. On a Saturday night Mr. D. and a hired girl noticed a
suspicious person lurking around the premises. They became frightened,
left the place, and returned later with a man by the name of H. who
brought a gun with him. They were not long in the school building before
stones began to fall here and there in different rooms, at first one by
one but gradually very plentifully. They ran away in fright with the
stones pelting after them as they ran. H. turned around once and fired,
pointing his gun in the direction from which the stones were coming. As
he did so, a stone flying from the opposite direction hit him in the
back of the neck. The stone-throwing followed them into the house to
which they fled for refuge about a quarter of a mile away. They, with
the family living in the house, made a gathering of six or seven or
more. Stones were fired into this house and broke a number of things on
the sideboard, but no one could tell from where the stones were coming.
Some of them seemed to come in the open door, turn around and fall at
the teacher's feet. One of the persons marked a stone and threw it out
saying: "If him be a true duppy, him will throw this stone back." This
marked stone was said to have been thrown back, proving that the
stone-thrower was a true duppy. A while after they went to bed, the
stone-throwing ceased.

{p. 9}

#### CASE 2. (BY REV. A. J. E.)

Strange to say the old mission house at All Saints, with a history and
location as weird as that of the "House of the Seven Gables," was said
to be haunted. A strange coincidence in connexion with its being haunted
happened to one of our Fathers. The Father, who had come to the country
for a change, was to stop in this house on Saturday night and say Mass
at All Saints on Sunday, while I went on to Falmouth about eight miles
away to say Mass there. Before going I said to the Father, "As you are
not accustomed to sleep alone in a house, you had better have a boy
remain in the house with you." "Do you think," he asked, "that I am
afraid to sleep alone in the house?" "No," I said, "but I think it more
prudent that you have the boy in the house in case anything should
happen."

The next day the Father seriously asked me why I warned him against
sleeping alone in the house. He said that during the night the boy who
was sleeping in the hall called him and said that a lady and gentleman
were there and wanted to see him. The Father, having dressed hurriedly
and come out of his room into the hall, asked the boy where were the
lady and gentleman. The boy pointed to the corner where he said he had
seen them; but when the lady and gentleman were not there, the boy was
so frightened that he could not be persuaded to remain alone in the
hall.

So much for Father E's account. In January, 1907, On the occasion of my
first visit to Jamaica

{p. 10}

and just a few days before the earthquake to which reference has been
made at the opening of this Introduction, I myself spent a night at All
Saints in this very mission house which was supposed to be haunted. At
the time, however, I was absolutely in ignorance of its ill-repute, and
it was only later that I heard of other incidents similar to the one I
have just related. I should note, too, that Father E. knew nothing
whatever of my experience when he wrote his own account some time later.
After we had both committed the facts to paper we met and talked them
over.

All Saints mission is located in a mountain district, looking out over
the Caribbean towards Cuba. The night that I spent there found my
sleeping accommodations restricted to a sofa in the front room which was
of unusual size. It was this very room which in Father E's account is
called the hall where the boy was sleeping and where the lady and
gentleman so unceremoniously disappeared.

On three sides of this room there were windows and on the fourth a
passage led to the rear of the house. This passage was cut off from the
room by a pair of swinging doors. It was a bright moonlight night and as
there were no curtains on the windows I might easily have read without
artificial light. As I put out the lamp, the doors of the passage began
to swing back and forth in unison. When I touched them, the motion
ceased. But while I felt no pressure of any kind, as soon as I withdrew
my hand they immediately began to swing again. I could feel no draft of
air and examining all around the

{p. 11}

doors I found no explanation of the movement. After about three-quarters
of an hour, the doors ceased of their own accord.

Going over to the sofa, I lay down and tried to sleep. While I could see
nothing out of the ordinary, I was disturbed by all kinds of sounds.
First it was as if someone came tramping across the floor in my
direction. That might easily have been imagination. Then a hand or
something similar, I could see nothing, seemed to press heavily against
various parts of my head and arms. That, too, might possibly have been
imagination. But this was no imagination: while the rest of my body was
burning hot with fright, the parts touched were left not merely clammy
but actually wringing wet with water which I mopped up with my
handkerchief in sufficient quantities to be squeezed out. And that, I
repeat, was no imagination.

#### CASE 3. (BY REV. A. J. E.)

One day a man living about a mile away from Alva mission, came to me and
said that he was in trouble and asked me to help him out of it. He said
that the spirits had been troubling him and his family for a long time,
and that it had become unbearable. "The duppies," he said, "come every
night and knock from sunset to sunrise, frightening the life out of my
wife and children. I tried to shoot one the other night but I could not.
I put a cap on the pivot ammunition in my gun and fired at the place
from which the knocking came, but the gun

{p. 12}

would not go off. I went into the house, opened the pivot with a pin and
tried to fire at the ghost again, but again the gun would not go off. I
felt something shaking in my hat rim, which turned out to be the cap I
had put on the pivot of my gun. I tried the gun again, firing in another
direction, and it went off." I told him that I would go to his house and
bless it.

At the appointed time I went to the house. After closing the door, I
heard the knocking and all in the room heard it. It was a slow dull
knock. The man went out and knocked at the place from which the sound
seemed to come, but it was not the same sound at all. I listened to the
knocking for awhile but could come to no conclusion as to the source of
the sound. I was not in the least afraid or nervous but rather
indifferent, having become habituated to sleeping alone in lonesome,
outlandish places and hearing at night all sorts of creepy sounds,
rappings, knockings, clankings, crawlings, etc., so that this knocking
made very little impression on me. I thought to myself, I will bless the
house and by so doing I will not commit myself to passing any judgment
as to the source of the knocking. When I pulled out my ritual to read
the blessing of the house, I was, as far as I remember, trying in my
mind to account for the knocking by some kind of insect concealed
somewhere in the house. While reading the prayer I suddenly became
excited and with great difficulty finished it. I felt as if I had been
put under some kind of an exhaust pump that drained me of all my
supernatural energy. I felt as if I were injuring someone and tears, or
a feeling

{p. 13}

of tears, came to my eyes. I tried to conceal what happened to me by
saying in a joking way, "Now duppy him gone." My embarrassment left me.
I sprinkled holy water in the house and out in the yard and especially
in the place from which the sound seemed to come. When I returned into
the house I raised my hand to give the common blessing, "Benedictio
Domini Nostri Jesu Christi descendat super hanc domum et maneat semper."
("May the Blessing of Our Lord Jesus Christ descend on this house and
remain forever.") I found the same excitement come over me and the same
difficulty in finishing the blessing, but it was not so strong as the
first time. I was told that after I left, the duppy gave two hard bangs
and then stopped knocking. Sometime afterwards, I heard the people
speaking of its return,--this time it was outside of the house,--and
that crowds went up to see it, and some claimed that they saw it. It
left shortly after, not to return. I learned later that the wife of the
man whose house was troubled by the duppy was a revivalist, one of a
religion which is nothing but a form of myalism. If they are not
possessed by the devil at times, there is no lacking in appearances of
their being possessed.

#### CASE 4.

The following incident was related to me by both parties concerned and
their accounts agreed in all details As they are still alive I do not
feel free at present to disclose their identity even by initials or

{p. 14}

to fully identify the locality itself. It all happened at a particularly
lonely spot on a mountain overlooking the sea where a priest made his
headquarters in a house that was since demolished by a hurricane. A
brother priest who came to visit him was spending the night in a room
concerning which weird stories were told, although the occupant knew
nothing of the fact at the time.

On retiring, finding that there were no matches in the room, the visitor
went in quest of a box and left it with a candle on a table near the
door of the room. Three times during the night he was awakened by
someone entering the room, striking a match and lighting the candle.
Each time he could just make out the figure of a man withdrawing from
the room with face averted and closing the door behind him. Knowing that
he and his host were alone in the house, he naturally concluded that it
was all a practical joke that was being played on him.

On the first two occasions he got up, extinguished the candle and
retired again to bed. But on the third perpetration he felt that the
joke had been carried far enough. Quickly he sprang from the bed and
rushed to the door just as it closed behind the figure. When he reached
the hall, the figure had vanished, and going to the far end to his
host's room, he found the occupant sleeping soundly, with the door of
the room securely locked. On being aroused, the host vainly protested
and strove to persuade his guest that he had been playing no tricks, and
that the whole incident must have been

{p. 15}

a dream. But, on returning to his own room again, the visitor counted on
the table three partially burnt matches where there had been no loose
matches at all when he retired. Next morning he made his departure from
the house as early as possible.

#### CASE 5. (BY REV. A. J. E.)

It sometimes happens that the duppy's attacks upon human beings resemble
possession by the devil. One day I was asked to come and see some sick
children. When I arrived, I found two young girls under a peculiar spell
which came about, I was told, in the following manner. Mrs. D. said she
was sitting in a room with a girl named J., when three slow raps came
upon the jalousies, then came three more slow raps, followed by three
more slow raps; then a warm wave passed through the room. At the same
time J. leaped into the air crying out, "Old man come," and from that
time up to my arrival she had been acting queerly. When I arrived, about
three days after the event, she was much better, I was told, than she
was at first. While under this strange influence she said, "Old man
catch M." The M. in question was a quiet, shy, modest girl of about
seventeen years whose father was a Portuguese and whose mother was a
slightly brown woman. When she came home she started laughing and kept
it up for two or three days. When I came she was hoarse from laughing.
The people of the house told me

{p. 16}

that a peculiar mutual sympathetic influence controlled J. and M. If one
laughed the other laughed, if one had a headache the other had a
headache, and so on. I was told that similar occurrences had been going
on in this family for years, and that it was attributed to the malicious
black-art working of a family enemy.

Some of the effects of this possession, if I may use the word, was that
those affected spoke in an unknown tongue. I read Latin at them and they
thought the unknown tongue sounded like Latin. Another strange effect of
this possession was the impulse to run wild in the woods, climb trees,
etc. I was told that in past years those attacked had to be constantly
watched, and that at times it was difficult to hold them down, and that
they would even work themselves loose from ropes with which they were
tied.

I asked J. what had happened to her. Speaking with difficulty and with a
guttural sound she said, "A dooorrrg queeezed me," that is, a dog
squeezed me, or a dog jumped up against me. I did not think it a case of
diabolical possession, nor, did I attempt to exorcise the children, but
I read some of the prayers taken from the form of exorcism, and blessed
the two girls, the house, and the yard. I remained around for some time,
and on my way home, I met the girls returning from a spring with pails
of water on their heads, laughing and chatting as happy as larks,
apparently well. I never heard of them being again troubled by duppies.

{p. 17}

#### CASE 6. (BY REV. M. E. P.)

Father p. who died in Jamaica during the "Flu" epidemic, once told me of
an experience of his own. He was called to a young woman who was dying.
She had been baptized as a Catholic, but had never attended church and
had led a notoriously immoral life. He found her unconscious, lying on a
couch in a single-room hovel. After sending everybody out of doors, he
strove for some minutes to elicit from the dying woman at least some
sign of contrition for her misspent life. Failing in his effort, he gave
conditional absolution, real zing that possibly the wretched woman,
while unable to give any external sign, might still be fully conscious
of what was going on. Father p. then prepared to anoint her according to
the Catholic ritual which gives even a poor creature like this the
benefit of every doubt when eternity is at stake.

Just as he stooped over to begin, a black arm reached around him and
struck the woman on the side of the head with such violence that the
head was dislodged from the pillow. Father p. turned quickly, but the
arm was gone and he was alone in the room with the dying woman. Trying
to persuade himself that it was all a trick of the imagination, he
started again. Once more the arm reached around and this time it
actually threw the woman from the couch to the ground. Father-P.
immediately looked for the body to which the arm should have been
attached, but as he did so, the arm itself vanished, and he was still
alone. Then, as he turned back

{p. 18}

again, he found the woman, to all appearances, dead at his feet.

This same clergyman, I have heard, on another occasion witnessed the
severe flogging of a woman by unseen hands which left cruel welts upon
the body. But, as I never received the story from his own lips, I omit
it here, as I am now confining myself strictly to first-hand
information.

#### CASE 7.

The weirdest happening in my own experience occurred when I took up
residence at my first mission with headquarters at M. The house was a
spacious one that was intended ultimately for a school. A large double
hall passed down the centre with a range of rooms on either hand. On the
side that I occupied, my bedroom was the second from the rear. Next came
a vacant room with doors on the four sides including an entrance from
the yard. The door that connected this room with mine was always left
open for purposes of ventilation. The other three doors were kept locked
and were bolted on the inside of the room which had formerly been a
bathroom. About twenty minutes past eleven one night, shortly before the
Hurricane of November, 1912, I was awakened by a loud knocking at the
side entrance. My first thought was that I was needed for a sick-call.
Calling to my supposed visitor to wait a minute, I began to dress
hurriedly. When I was about half-clad, the knocking changed to a series
of

{p. 19}

crashing sounds as if someone was forcing an entrance with a crowbar. At
this I concluded that thieves were breaking in. Being alone in the
house, I flung my shoe against the door and saw it bounce back a couple
of feet or so, and I then shouted to the marauders to go away. As I did
so, the door crashed open towards me and I sprang back to escape being
knocked down. It was a dark night and I saw nothing beyond the door.
There was an old gun in the corner of my room. I did not know whether it
was loaded or not. But as I turned to get it, still thinking that it was
thieves that I had to deal with, I could hear a tramp of feet across the
room next to mine and it sounded as if the door into the hall had been
forced open in the same way as the outer door had been. Opening my own
door that led into the hall, I thrust the gun in the general direction
that I supposed the thieves must be, and aiming high, I pulled the
trigger. There was a snap and that was all. The gun was not loaded. But
as all noise had now ceased, I hurried through my room to gain the side
entrance, with the purpose of summoning help, only to find that the door
that I had seen crash open was now closed and locked and bolted on the
inside and nothing was broken. And it was only then that I realized that
I was not dealing with thieves, as my hair seemed literally to stand on
end, especially when I found my shoe that I had seen fall well in front
of the door actually back against the wall where it had been pressed
when the door swung open.

{p. 20}

And so it is that, as I ponder upon the weirdest stories of the Jamaica
"bush," I find the question arising in my mind: Is it then all
hallucination? Or is there some mesmeric influence at work, as more than
one critic has suggested in connexion with Haitian voodoo? Or, again,
have we here a recrudescence of the diablerie found recorded in the
Scripture narrative? What must the answer be? The out-and-out
materialist will meet my question with a sneer, perhaps even question my
sobriety if not my veracity, and dismiss the matter from his mind as
unworthy of further consideration. The devotees of spiritual séances, on
the other hand, may seek to turn it all to their foolish ends and claim
to find here a verification of the potency of spirits who may be used to
impose upon the ignorant and superstitious for the entirely unspiritual
purposes of material gain.

For my own part, with full realization of the seeming bathos of the
confession, as regards the individual cases considered separately by
themselves, I must simply say: I do not know. I state the facts. I admit
man's proneness to exaggerate and that even by a process of
self-hypnotism there is a possibility of his becoming convinced at times
that the figments of the imagination have actual objective reality in
the material order of things. I acknowledge no less the power and
machinations of the evil one, always subordinate, of course, to the
limitations set by Almighty God. And so it is, that in each particular
case, if considered by itself, I am constrained to shake my head and
admit: I am not sure.

{p. 21}

But, taking all the cases cited as a group, the collective evidence, I
feel, compels us to acknowledge that we are dealing with some
preternatural agencies or forces, call them what you will. All the
witnesses cannot have been victims of delusions. I knew them
individually, and without exception, they were men of mature years,
characterized by sound judgment. They were practical men and
distinctively unimaginative. In fact, they were rather phlegmatic than
otherwise, and had in each case sifted every possible natural cause as
an explanation. In consequence of the years of missionary service which
they had seen in Jamaica, they had become accustomed to the creepy
sounds of the tropical night in the "bush," that invariably disturb the
uninitiated.

However, I do not feel that we have here sufficient data to propound any
clearly defined theory as to whether the preternatural forces are
influences for good or evil. Consequently, while obeah contacts might
seem to imply his Satanic Majesty as the principal agent, I am far from
considering this here as an established fact.

So concluded the paper presented at the London Gathering of
Anthropologists, and it was so favourably received that I feel
constrained to treat the whole matter in more detail since the limited
time afforded by the Congress restricted me to a very cursory review of
the subject.

It is the aim of the present work, to go more deeply into the question
of weird happenings and

{p. 22}

superstitions in Jamaica; to examine carefully the curious beliefs,
still prevalent in the island; to analyze critically the extraordinary
manifestations that are reported from time to time; and, to seek some
plausible explanation for the various phenomena. It is the purpose,
however, to restrict the study to such phenomena as are distinctively
Jamaican, and consequently a residue of the days of slavery and so
presumably of African origin. Our field of investigation, then, is Negro
culture, which precludes such occult practices as have been acquired
through contacts with the Whites as well as European superstitions,
however they may have been introduced to the island. For these latter
cannot be regarded as peculiarly Jamaican, either in origin or practice.
They are ingrafts and nothing more.

To understand properly many of the superstitions and practices in
Jamaica, it is necessary to trace them back to their origins in Africa
whence they were brought in the days of slavery and adapted to the
exigencies of new surroundings and varying contacts. Hence we must
determine in the first place just what tribal centres exerted the
greatest influence in the cultural development of Jamaica, especially as
it concerns the "bush" to-day. And here it should be carefully noted
that the word "bush" is a colloquial term for the less accessible
country districts in Jamaica. For, in the Isle of Springs, there is
neither jungle nor forest. Even the most remote parts of the island are
well cultivated and provided with schools and local shops where all
necessities and even conveniences may be procured.

{p. 23}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER I](ppj001.md)  
