[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [African](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ppj002)  [Next](ppj004.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER III

### APPLIED MAGIC

DESPITE the fact that obeah is clearly defined as regards its origin in
Ashanti witchcraft, and its early development among the Jamaica slaves,
in course of time it has become so confused with voodoo and other
superstitious practices that now the word is used as a generic term for
any kind of West India witchcraft and by extension it embraces even "a
fetish or magic object used in witchcraft." (1)

As a consequence, it is difficult for the average reader to clearly
differentiate the real from pseudo-obeah unless he keeps in mind the
fundamental principles which were established in the preceding chapter,
and which may be briefly summarized as follows.

Obeah, as the continuation of Ashanti witchcraft, is professedly a
projection of spiritual power with the harm of an individual as an
objective. Practically, its end is attained through fear, supplemented
if needs be by secret poisoning. The agent is the servant of the
Sasabonsam or Devil who is invoked and relied upon to produce the
desired effect. Consequently real obeah must be regarded as a form of
Devil-worship.

{p. 110}

In daily practice, much that is referred to as obeah is in reality only
applied magic which may be called pseudo-obeah, and it is with this that
we are now to interest ourselves.

During my researches in the British Museum, I came across a pamphlet of
thirty pages entitled *The Monchy Murder. The Strangling and Mutilation
of a Boy for Purposes of Obeah*. It is a sordid story. The boy, Rupert
Mapp, twelve years of age, had been enticed away from Bridgetown,
Barbados, by Monteul Edmond and brought to St. Lucia. The day after
their arrival at the town of Monchy, the lad disappeared. A week later
his body was dug up but it was found that the two hands, and the heart
had been removed. The missing parts had been found in the possession of
an accomplice of Edmond who was forthwith arrested and charged with the
crime. (2)

The search of the prisoner's person brought to light a notebook in which
had been copied in French a number of formulae and instructions
connected with magical practices. One of these was entitled *La Main de
Gloire* and it prescribed: "Take the hand of one who has been hanged, or
strangled, dry it in the sun in the dog days, (August, September,
October) or if the sun should not be hot enough to dry thoroughly and
quickly, dry the hand in an oven. When thoroughly dry, sprinkle the hand
with salt and a number of other ingredients (which are stated) and wrap
it in a piece of coffin-pall. Then make a taper of virgin wax, anoint it
with various fantastic oils and fats. Fix the taper between the

{p. 111}

fingers of the dried hand. The light of the taper will paralyze
completely the faculties both mental and physical of everybody who comes
within its influence."

Unquestionably, it was Edmond's purpose to apply this formula in the
hopes that he would be able in this way to enter any house that pleased
him and to rob it with impunity as the victim would supposedly be
rendered utterly incapable either of resisting the intrusion or of
remembering later who it was that perpetrated the crime. However, it is
a serious mistake to associate such practices with obeah in the true
sense of the word.

It was brought out in the course of Edmond's trial at St. Lucia that the
formulae which had been found in his possession had been "copied from a
work entitled *Petit Albert* the pretended author of which is claimed to
be a monkish occultist of the middle ages." (3) Edmond had spent many
years in Haiti where he had formally studied the black art and had
gained access to the book from which he had copied his formulae for
spells, etc.

The volume ascribed to *Petit Albert*, written originally in Latin was
for a time regarded as a posthumous work of Albertus Magnus either as a
whole or in part. (4) However, such a supposition is definitely
disproved by a critical edition of the work which appeared in Paris in
1885 under the title

Les Secrets Admirables du Grand Albert comprenant son traité des herbes
des pierres et de animaux avec son traité des merveilles du monde suivi
du Trésor des Merveilleux Secrets du Petit Albert avec Préface et

{p. 112}

Annotations par Marius Decrespe. Herein Decrespe explicitly discredits
the opinions of those who "attribute this dual work either to Albertus
Magnus or to a compiler of about the 15th century who based them on an
unedited manuscript of Albert the Great supplemented by the works of
more modern authors, such as Paracelsus, Cornelius Agrippa, etc." (5) On
the following page, Decrespe insists: "What appears much more probable
is that *Grand Albert* as well as *Petit Albert* are both the work of
several individuals whose discoveries have been joined together
regardless of order by some poorly instructed and unscrupulous
librarian, who produced these disorderly collections at Lyons, towards
the end of the 16th century. Actually, there is a tradition, very useful
in practice, that when one gives himself to the study of occultism, just
as when one experiments in Chemistry, he should have a Laboratory Record
wherein he records all experiments with their results." (6)

This suggestion is supported by the fact that *La Main de Gloire* does
not appear in the edition of *Petit Albert* which I have before me as I
write and which was published at Lyons in 1668. It was evidently added
to the collection after that date.

Consequently, such abnormalities as the Monchy Murder should not be
attributed to the practice of obeah or any other form of Negro
witchcraft. It was nothing but cold-blooded murder, instigated, if you
will, by medieval superstitions which had become impinged on Haitian
voodoo, but even then it was

{p. 113}

not the product of the Negro in any way beyond the fact that he had
borrowed it from the white man.

Another common mistake is to classify as obeah the use of protective
charms simply because they are the product of the obeah-man when he is
actually working in the capacity of myal-man. We have seen in the case
of slave rebellions how general was the misapprehension that the
instigator was the obeah-man, when as a matter of fact it was the
myal-man who stirred up the trouble and administered the terrible oath
of secrecy and distributed powders that were supposed to impart
invulnerability against the weapons of the white man. So, too, it has
become customary to regard as obeah-practice much that is really
myalistic in the amulets imparted to individuals to enable them to
overreach the law or to defy their enemies by a charmed life.

Thus we have the example of the notorious outlaw known as Three-fingered
Jack from the fact that early in his career he had lost two fingers in
an encounter with a Maroon. His depredations, after the scattering of
the little group of runaway slaves who gathered around him at the
beginning of his career, were actually accomplished single-handed.
Moreover, his operations covered so wide an area that it left the
impression that he was leading a numerous and well-organized band of
desperadoes, and his name became synonymous with terror throughout the
country districts, especially as it was generally accepted that his
reliance was the machinations of a particularly powerful obeah-man from
whom he had

{p. 114}

received a gruesome amulet which will be described later. As this
incident is absolutely unique in the history of Jamaica, we may be
pardoned going into some details.

Under date of August 5, 1780, we find the following Newspaper item: "A
gang of run-away Negroes of above forty men and about eighteen women,
have formed a settlement in the recesses of Four Mile Wood in St.
David's; are become very formidable to that neighbourhood, and have
rendered travelling, especially to Mulattoes and Negroes, very
dangerous; one of the former they have lately killed, belonging to Mr.
Duncan Munro of Montrose, and taken a large quantity of linen of his
from his slaves on the road: they also have robbed many other persons'
servants, and stolen some cattle, and great numbers of sheep, goats,
hogs, poultry, etc., particularly a large herd of hogs from Mr. Rial of
Tamarind Tree Penn. They are chiefly Congos, and declare they will kill
every Mulatto and Creole Negro they can catch. Bristol, alias
Three-fingered Jack, is their Captain, and Caesar, who belongs to Rozel
estate, is their next officer. This banditti may soon become dangerous
to the Public, if a party agreeable to the 40th and 66th Acts in Volume
I of the Laws of the Island, or the Maroons, are not sent out against
them; which should be applied for, and no doubt it would be ordered."
(7)

December 2, 1780, it is announced: "Three-fingered Jack continues his
depredations in St. David's; last week he intercepted three Negroes
coming to town with loads, and carried them off. A

{p. 115}

Mulatto of Dr. Allen's with a party, went in pursuit of him and
recovered the Negroes, who gave him information where Three-fingered
Jack was, and he laid a plan for securing him, but Jack being on his
guard, shot the Mulatto through the head and made his escape." (8)

Three weeks later, there is the further item: "We are informed that the
wife of Three-fingered Jack has been lately removed from St. David's, to
the jail in this town; and that directions have been given some time
since, to deliver her and the other Negroes, taken by the Maroons, to be
dealt with as the law directs." (9)

Another fortnight, and we find a formal Proclamation that continues
through several issues of the *Royal Gazette*. (10)

By the King.

A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas we have been informed by our House of Assembly of this our
Island of Jamaica, that a very desperate gang of Negro Slaves, headed by
a Negro Man Slave called and known by the name of

Three-fingered J A C K

hath for many months past committed many Robberies and carried off many
Negro and other Slaves on the Windward roads into the woods, and hath
also committed several Murders; and that repeated parties have been
fitted out and sent against the said Three-fingered Jack, and his gang,
who have returned without being able to apprehend the said Negro, or to
prevent his making head again: And

{p. 116}

whereas our House of Assembly hath requested us to give directions for
issuing a Proclamation, offering a reward for apprehending the said
Negro called Three-fingered jack, and also a further reward for
apprehending each and every Negro Man Slave belonging to the said gang,
and delivering him or them to any of the gaolers of this island; We have
taken the same into our consideration, have thought fit to issue this
our Royal Proclamation; hereby strictly charging and commanding, and we
do hereby strictly charge and command all and every our loving subjects
within our said island, to pursue and apprehend, or cause to be pursued
and apprehended the body of the said Negro man named, Three-fingered
Jack, and also of each and every Negro Man Slave belonging to the said
gang, and deliver him or them to any Gaolers of this Island. And we do,
at the instance of our said House of Assembly offer a reward of one
hundred pounds, to be paid to the person or persons who shall so
apprehend and take the body of the said Negro called Three-fingered
Jack: And we do, at the instance of our said House of Assembly, offer a
further reward of five pounds over and above what is allowed by law, for
apprehending each and every Negro Man Slave belonging to the said gang,
and delivering him or them to any of the gaolers of this island, to be
dealt with according to law." Then follow the usual signatures and
attestations.

An additional offer of reward on the part of the Assembly immediately
follows:

{p. 117}

HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY  
DECEMBER 29, 1780

Resolved: That over and above the reward of One Hundred pounds offered
by his Majesty's Proclamation for the taking or killing the rebellious
Negro called Three-fingered Jack, the further reward of Freedom shall be
given to any slave that shall take or kill the said Three-fingered Jack;
and that the House will make good the value of such slave to the
proprietor thereof. And if any one of his accomplices will kill the said
Three-fingered Jack, and bring in his head, and hand wanting the
fingers, such accomplice shall be entitled to a *Free Pardon*, and his
*Freedom* as above, upon due proof being made of their being the head
and hand of the said Three-fingered Jack." This is signed in the name of
the House by Samuel Howell, Clerk of Assembly.

Within a month, under date of February 3, 1781, the announcement is
made: "We have the pleasure to inform the public, of the death of that
daring freebooter Three-fingered Jack.--He was surprised on Saturday
last, by a Maroon Negro named John Reeder, and six others, near the
summit of Mount Libanus, being alone and armed with two muskets and a
cutlass.--The party came upon him so suddenly, that he had only time to
seize the cutlass, with which he desperately defended himself, refusing
all submission, till having received three bullets in his body and
covered with wounds, he threw himself about forty feet down a precipice,
and was followed by Reeder, who soon overpowered him, and

{p. 118}

severed his head and arm from the body which were brought to this town
on Thursday last. Reeder and another Maroon were wounded in the
conflict.--The intrepidity of Reeder in particular, and the behaviour of
his associates in general justly entitle them to the reward offered by
the public. (11)

As an aftermath of this whole incident, we find in the Postscript to the
*Royal Gazette* of June 9, 1792, the information that a runaway Negro
named Dagger, a former comrade of the notorious Three-fingered Jack, and
now on trial for his many crimes "has so much confidence in a
supernatural agency that he not only defies every effort of justice to
bring him to punishment but even threatens the severest revenge in
retaliation." And again in the Postscript to the *Royal Gazette* Of July
7, 1792, we read: "After the trial of Dagger was closed two other
Negroes that have been for a considerable time in the practice of obeah
and who, from the evidence given, appeared to be thorough adepts . . .
were found guilty and also sentenced to be transported."

Concerning Three-fingered Jack himself, the most authentic account which
has come down to us is furnished by Doctor Benjamin Moseley who was a
resident of Jamaica at the time of his exploits. Fixing the date of the
death of Three-fingered Jack as January 27, 1781, Doctor Moseley tells
us: "I saw the obi of the famous Negro robber, Three-fingered Jack, the
terror of Jamaica in 1780. The Maroons who slew him brought it to me.
His obi consisted of the end of a goat's horn, filled with a

{p. 119}

compound of grave dirt, ashes, the blood of a black cat, and human fat;
all mixed into a kind of paste. A cat's foot, a dried toad, a pig's
tail, a flip of virginal parchment of kid's skin, with characters marked
in blood on it, were also in his *obian* bag.

"These with a keen sabre, and two guns, like *Robinson Crusoe*, were all
his obi; with which, and his courage in descending into the plains and
plundering to supply his wants, and his skill in retreating into
difficult fastnesses, among the mountains, commanding the only access to
them, where none dared to follow him, he terrified the inhabitants, and
set the civil power, and the neighbouring militia of the island at
defiance for nearly two years.

"He had neither accomplice, nor associate. There were a few runaway
Negroes in the woods near Mount Libanus, the place of his retreat; but
he had crossed their foreheads with some of the magic of his horn, and
they could not betray him. But he trusted no one. He scorned assistance.
He ascended above Spartacus. He robbed alone; fought all his battles
alone; and always killed his pursuers.

"By his magic, he was not only the dread of the Negroes, but there were
many white people, who believed he was possessed of some supernatural
power.

.      .      .      .      .      .

"But even Jack himself was born to die. Allured by the rewards offered
by Governor Dalling, in proclamations, dated December 12, 1780 and
January 13, 1781; and, by a resolution of the House of Assembly, which
followed the first proclamation;

{p. 120}

two Negroes, named Quashee and Sam (Sam was Captain Davy's son, he who
shot a Mr. Thompson, the master of a London ship, at Old Harbour), both
of *Scot's Hall* Maroon Town, with a party of their townsmen, went in
search of him. Quashee, before he set out on the expedition, got himself
christianed, and changed his name to James Reeder.

"The expedition commenced; and the whole party had been creeping about
in the woods, for three weeks, and blockading, as it were, the deepest
recesses of the most inaccessible part of the island, where Jack, far
remote from all human society, resided,--but in vain.

"Reeder and Sam, tired with this mode of war, resolved on proceeding in
search of his retreat; and taking him by storming it, or perishing in
the attempt. They took with them a little boy, a proper spirit, and a
good shot, and left the rest of the party.

"These three, whom I well knew, had not been long separated from their
companions, before their cunning eyes discovered, by impressions among
the weeds and bushes, that some person must have lately been that way.
They softly followed these impressions, making not the least noise.
Presently they discovered smoke. They prepared for war. They came upon
Jack before he perceived them. He was roasting *plantains*, by a little
fire on the ground, at the mouth of a cave.

"This was a scene:--not where ordinary actors had a common part to play.
Jack's looks were fierce and terrible. He told them he would kill them.

{p. 121}

Reeder, instead of shooting Jack, replied that his obi had no power to
hurt him; for he was christianed; and that his name was no longer
Quashee. Jack knew Reeder; and, as if paralysed, he let his two guns
remain on the ground, and took up only his cutlass.

"These two, had a severe engagement several years before, in the woods;
in which conflict Jack lost the two fingers, which was the origin of his
present name; but Jack then beat Reeder, and almost killed him, with
several others who assisted him, and they fled from Jack.

"To do Three-fingered Jack justice, he would now have killed both Reeder
and Sam; for, at first, they were frightened at the sight of him, and
the dreadful tone of his voice; and well they might: they had besides no
retreat, and were to grapple with the bravest, and strongest man in the
world. But Jack was cowed; for, he had prophesied, that *white* obi
would get the better of him; and, from experience, he knew the charm
would lose none of its strength in the hands of Reeder.

"Without further parley, Jack, with his cutlass in his hand, threw
himself down a precipice at the back of the cave. Reeder's gun missed
fire. Sam shot him in the shoulder. Reeder, like an English bull-dog,
never looked, but, with his cutlass in his hand, plunged headlong down
after Jack. The descent was about thirty yards, and almost
perpendicular. Both of them had preserved their cutlasses in the fall.

"Here was the stage,--on which two of the stoutest hearts, that were
ever hooped with ribs, began

{p. 122}

their bloody struggle. The little boy, who was ordered to keep back, out
of harm's way, now reached the top of the precipice, and during the
fight, shot Jack in the belly. Sam was crafty, and coolly took a
round-about way to get to the field of action. When he arrived at the
foot where it began, Jack and Reeder had closed, and tumbled together
down another precipice, on the side of the mountain, in which fall they
both lost their weapons. Sam descended after them, though without
weapons, they were not idle; and, luckily for Reeder, Jack's wounds were
deep and desperate, and he was in great agony. Sam came up just time
enough to save Reeder; for, Jack had caught him by the throat, with his
giant's grasp. Reeder then was with his right hand almost cut off, and
Jack streaming with blood from his shoulder and his belly; both covered
with gore and gashes. In this state Sam was umpire; and decided the fate
of the battle. He knocked Jack down with a piece of a rock.

"When the lion fell, the two tigers got upon him, and beat his brains
out with stones. The little boy soon found his way to them. He had a
cutlass, with which they cut off Jack's head, and three-fingered hand,
and took them in triumph to Morant Bay. There they put their trophies
into a pail of rum; and followed by a vast concourse of Negroes, now no
longer afraid of Jack's obi, blowing their shells and horns, and firing
guns in their rude method, they carried them to Kingston, and Spanish
Town; and claimed the rewards offered by the King's Proclamation, and
the House of Assembly." (12)

{p. 123}

William Burdett, also a contemporary in Jamaica, thus described the
obeah-man who bestowed the gruesome amulet on Three-fingered Jack, whom
he calls Manson in his narrative: "Amalkir, the obeah-practitioner,
dwelt in a loathsome cave, far removed from the inquiring eye of the
suspicious whites, in the Blue Mountains; he was old and shrivelled; a
disorder had contracted all his nerves, and he could hardly crawl. His
cave was the dwelling-place, or refuge of robbers; he encouraged them in
their depredations; and gave them obi, that they might fearlessly rush
where danger stood. This obi was supposed to make them invulnerable to
the attacks of the white man, and they placed implicit belief in its
virtue." (13) As might be expected, he thus played the part of myalist
as well as that of obeah-man.

A far less reliable narrative is entitled: *The Wonderful Life and
Adventures of Three-Fingered Jack, the Terror of Jamaica!* "Giving an
Account of his persevering Courage and gallant Heroism, in revenging the
Cause of his Injured Parents; with an account of His desperate Conflict
with Quashee! Who, after many attempts, at last overcomes him and takes
his Head and Hand to Jamaica, (*sic*) and receives a large Reward for
destroying him." This little book, published in London in 1829, is a
melodramatic piece of fiction of no historical value whatever. Its
mission is to stir up a morbid sentimentality for the slave. In some
respects it is a forerunner of *Uncle Tom's Cabin* but devoid of the
latter's literary merit. It is crude withal, and evidently the work of
one who knows little or nothing

{p. 124}

about Jamaica. On page 7, Jack is made the offspring of Makro and Amri,
"a beautiful slave, the property of Mr. Moreton, of Maroons Town."
Actually Maroon Town was reserved for the Maroons and there could have
been no white man established there on a plantation with slaves. Then,
too, there are no Savannahs around Maroon Town as described on page 17.
Again page 18 places the plantation near enough to Mount Libanus for a
night journey there to the cave of Bashra, the obi-woman, who is
represented as slinging the obi-horn around Jack's neck as she starts
him on his way of revenge. On page 25, "Quashee, a brave black of Scot's
Hall, Maroon Town, on the promise of that liberty which was so dear to
him, resolved to try the effect of an expedition." But, being a Maroon,
he was already free. Finally on page 26, when Amri is to be burned at
the stake, "a priest, in Christian mercy, implored rest for her soul,"
despite the fact that at the date of the supposed incident there were no
priests in Jamaica, unless the Anglican Rectors are meant and they were
never referred to under this title. And yet caricatures of this sort
find their way at times into presumably historical descriptions of obeah
in Jamaica.

There is preserved in the Jamaica Institute of Kingston a Scrap Book
that contains many interesting items, usually, however, without
disclosing the source of the clippings. Thus we find on page 10, a
couple of tracts that were used as evidence by the Hon. D. G. Gideon in
the Legislative Council when discussing the Obeah Bill, on March 17,
1898. We

{p. 125}

have here the confession of an obeah-man named Daniel Hart, a native of
Long District, Portland, who is dying to all appearances under the curse
of another obeah-man of stronger power than his own. He acknowledges
that in his own practice of obeah his fees varied from a few shillings
up to six pounds for a single "job." His efforts had been directed to
all sorts of ends--mainly to kill people, to drive them mad, to exact
revenge for jilted lovers, to make goods sell better in the market, etc.

He frequently uses in his confession the terms: "I play hell"; "I play
fire"; "Like rolling calf"; as regards different people. He declares
that he often sent john-crows, *i.e.* buzzards, as ministers of his evil
power, but that the main instruments were obeah-pots and vials which he
planted at the places where his influence was to work. He sent other men
who killed for him. He put duppies on people and they went mad. He
openly confesses to the gross immorality of his personal actions.

One passage of this confession runs as follows: "On Monday evening this
wicked obeah-man cry out: I am going to die and cannot wait until the
10th of this month for I am only skin and bones. I wanted Portland
people to come and see how flies eat my skin. To-day is my ripping day.
I will call names, and who want mad, can mad. Me da Bungo man and make
it plain ABC, that you can know friend from enemy. I play hell with
people, but the devil is riding me down to hell." It might be remarked
that "Bungo" is probably a corruption of the Ashanti *bunkam*, to be
supereminent.

{p. 126}

On page 55 of the Jamaica Institute Scrap Book, are three printed
tracts. The first of these describes the death and confession of a
notorious obeah-woman who had been known as "Old Mother Austin." She
died on June 25, 1892, after having lived and practised her art at
Llandewey in St. David's. She called herself "Fire Rush" and makes the
terrible avowal that she has killed twenty-five babies, seven women and
thirteen men in the district. She claims to have employed two "Old
Higes" and "when dey gash der fire in dem eyes, it shine as lightning."
"Any way I send, death must come," is her boast. By means of a
"peace-cup and spoon" she says that she dropped off all the fingers and
toes of a woman who had stolen from her, possibly she had communicated
leprosy to her victim by mixing the saliva of a leper in what she calls
the "Peace-cup." On her death bed she cried out: "Fire, O! Fire, O!,
Fire."

The second tract consists of the disclosures contained in the obeah-book
of a dead obeah-man named John Nugent who had hidden the book in a
cave-hole. He professes to have killed a man for cutting a bunch of
plantain off his father's plantation; to have killed another man for a
fee of twenty-five pounds; to have put a frog in a woman's womb and made
her carry it for two years; to have received eighteen pounds and ten
shillings for cutting the nose and teeth of a woman; to have killed her
husband for another woman who gave him her body in payment; to have
charged fifteen pounds for killing another man, but as three pounds were
not paid

{p. 127}

he let the man off, "but the ghost still blow on him and he don't get
over as yet."

The third tract purports to be the confession of "Old George Elleth," a
native of Hampton Road in Porus. His father and his grandfather had been
famous obeah-men before him. It is his claim to have killed 241 persons
and to have "put 655 persons to suffer." According to his testimony,
"Suck River is a little Hell below"; "Kendall, that dreadful place, the
people run to me day and night, I was working for that place twenty
years; in that district I play hell"; "Watson Gate at the cross road of
evil deeds, the people around are like bitter weeds, there are nine
obeah-men in that place, no young man can make a rise there." He asserts
that people went to church and "call God's name in vain" and then on the
way back call to him for obeah.

Another tract on page 56 of the Scrap Book declares how Richard Daly
consults about killing an old man for his money. The obeah-man sends him
to fill a bottle from an old stagnant pool. The old man dies. Daly
further confesses before his death to several other murders, and to a
friend who comes to offer prayers at his death-bed, he says: "Go to
hell," and drives him out. He declares that he sees a gulf and asks for
his mule to ride across.

Page 57 of this same Scrap Book contains still another tract which tells
how Peter was a vicious obeah-man with a very loose and obscene tongue.
He is said to have killed many people and to have been killed himself by
the overflow from a cup of poison which he had been preparing for
another.

{p. 128}

These cases from the Scrap Book are for the most part workings of real
obeah, in marked contrast with the examples of recent occurrences to be
mentioned shortly. Daniel Hart, in striving "to make goods sell better
in the market," does display a myalistic tendency, but even he is
habitually true to form in his obeah-practice. The objective is almost
invariably harmful or vindictive.

As a general rule such cases as are brought to trial under the Obeah
Law, which does not distinguish between obeah and myalism, are usually
instances of applied magic, and that too of the "white" variety.

It would be a difficult matter to prosecute for real obeah. Even a clear
case with serious consequences would have to rely almost entirely on
circumstantial evidence. No one would dare take the witness-stand
against an obeah-man charged with grave misconduct. Sooner or later he
would have to pay the penalty for incurring the enmity of the servant of
the Devil.

In his real professional practice, the obeah-man to-day is as secretive
as ever. He has a wholesome respect for British Colonial administration
of the law. He will take his chances removing duppies, helping in market
or Court and even further the interests of lovers--all of which is
merely applied magic.--It is simply a gamble with him. If caught, he
pays the price, and returns to his trade and adds a little to his next
fees to recoup his losses or as a balm for his injured feelings. But
when it comes to real obeah, he will take good care to assure himself

{p. 129}

of inviolable secrecy as he will never risk having a capital offence
proved against him. Hence it is that most of the cases that are aired in
Court must be regarded only as applied magic, and usually of a most
amateurish type, as a means of livelihood, and characterized in great
part by imposition and pretence.

One has only to pick up a newspaper file in Jamaica of any period at
all, to realize the enduring prevalence of such practices. Thus on the
occasion of my last visit to Jamaica in the Summer of 1931, I noted down
the following cases as reported in *The Daily Gleaner* of Kingston, and
I do not imagine that I was so observant that none escaped my notice.

June 10, 1931:--"*Obeahman Given 3 Months Hard Labour in Whithorn R. M.
Court*". Charles Slater pleaded guilty "to a charge of practising obeah
in the St. Leonard's District of Westmoreland on Wednesday the 20th May,
1931."

June 23, 1931:--"*Ganja and Obeah Case at Spanish-Town To-day.*" George
Sykes of Bog Walk is charged with having ganja in his possession and
also with having implements for practising obeah.

July 8, 1931:--"*Three Men Sentenced to 3 Months Each for Practising
Obeah.*" Case at Chapelton, July 2nd.

July 11, 1931:--"*Obeahman Sentenced to Prison for 6 Months.*" In the
Kingston R. M. Court (on July 9th) James Thomas.

August 4,1931--"

Worked Black Art: 70-yr. Old

{p. 130}

Man Fined £15. Joseph Reid Found Guilty of Charge in Whithorn R. M.
Court."

August 8, 1931:--"*Charged at Richmond for Practising Obeah.*" Thomas
Steward accused of working Obeah at "Big Gut" on Monday, 27th July.

August 28, 1931:--"*Obeahman Fined £25 in Linstead Court.*" Robert
Watson of Bog Walk.

August 31, 1931:--"*Jamaican Obeahman in British Honduras to Be Deported
Home.* Alexander Brown Practised Deception on Countrymen And Sent to
Serve Sentence. 7 Yrs. Hard Labour. Case Heard by Acting Chief justice
and Jamaican jury in Colony." Sentenced in Belize to seven years'
imprisonment in British Honduras, at the expiration of which he was to
be deported to Jamaica.

Since then I have watched the papers from Jamaica that have reached me
from time to time, and the regular recurrence of similar items are to be
noticed. Thus *The Daily Gleaner* for January 11, 1933 gives
considerable display to one such case: "*Claims to Be Spiritualist,
Fined £10 on Obeah Charge.* Mrs. Beatrice Hanson Brought Before R. M.
For Kingston Yesterday. The Defence Set Up. Magistrate's Decision.
Defendant Is Given Time to Pay The Fine." The defence was made by Mrs.
Hanson that she was a certified Spiritualist. "She was a clairvoyant
medium, which meant one could hear something without seeing the object
before him or her. It meant also auto-suggestion. She was taught by a
pupil of Sir Conan Doyle. She acted on the principle of 'mind over
matter.'" His Honour

{p. 131}

Mr. Bertram B. Burrowes, the presiding Magistrate, in giving the
decision in the case, replied "that whatever obeah was originally, what
he knew was that it was well defined in the Jamaica Laws. In that case,
the particular section which struck him was that which was defined as
follows: 'Any person who pretends to use occult powers or means to
gain.'" He claimed that since "she said she used clairvoyancy, which
meant to see clearly, her ability to see certain things, admitted the
offence. He had found that what she did came within the meaning of the
Law, and he found her guilty of the offence."

The following further examples are all taken from *The Daily Gleaner*.

September 1, 1933:--*Costs Woman £26 17/ to Take 'Ghosts' Off Man.*
Spirit of 'Coolie' Variety, 'Was Keeping Back A Husband From Doing
Business.'" In the Kingston Police Court, Ambrosene Allen was convicted
of imposing on Ada Bogle. "The process of ghost-ridding included
drinking some rum neat, giving an alleged and invisible ghost some to
drink, anointing the face with oils, sundry blowing of powders, lighting
of candles, etc."

November 10, 1933:--"Held on Charge of Practising Obeah." Clifford
Johnson is arraigned before the Kingston R. M. Court, accused of having
"told a woman that another member of the gentler sex had set a 'ghost'
on her to take away her lover who would soon transfer his affections,
Johnson, it is further alleged, told the woman that he could help her to
stave off the 'evil spirit' which was going to torture her and would
eventually cause her death."

{p. 132}

November 24, 1933:--Here appears the same heading "*Held on Charge of
Practising Obeah.*" But this time it is Vitelleus Brown who is before
the Resident Magistrate of Kingston. He has attributed a swollen knee to
obeah by saying that some one "had set hand" on the victim whom he
offers to cure for the sum of three pounds.

November 25, 1933:--"*Man Charged with Practising Obeah.*" Alexander
Brown had been approached by a man and woman who claimed to be sick.
After examining them, he "informed the woman that a ghost was on her and
that it was a policeman who had put the evil spirit on her. He demanded,
it is further stated, a fee of three pounds to 'take off the duppy.'"

December 4, 1933:--"*Arrested on Charge of Practising Obeah: Alleged
Consultant.*" At Bog Walk it is alleged that Henry Francis "was caught
red handed to-day practising obeah."

December 6, 1933:--"*Mysterious Slips of Paper Found on Men Held by
Police.* 'I Breathe Upon Thee The Drops Of Blood I Took From Thy Soul'
Etc. They Say." These mysterious slips of paper it is recorded have been
"found by the police in the pockets of at least three men arrested in
recent times. It is evident that some Charmer is at work distributing
these bits of manuscript to afford protection to his clients." Now James
Adolphus Turner is caught as a thief and on his person is found a slip
bearing this inscription: "I, James Adolphus Turner breathe upon thee
the drops of blood I took from thy Soul; the first out of thine heart;
the

{p. 133}

second out of thy liver; and the third out of thy vital powers. And with
this I deprive thee of the strength of thy manliness. Amen."

December 9, 1933:--"*No Deception Practised by Faith Healer.*" Florence
Sur, a faith healer, was arraigned for practising medicine, and
acquitted by the Resident Magistrate who implies in his decision that
she might be successfully prosecuted under the Obeah Law.

December 14, 1933:--Here we find three distinct cases of obeah in
different parts of the island. "*2 Held on Charge of Practising Obeah*"
introduces a case at Llandewey against Timothy Jackson, alias Stanley
Reynolds, who has proposed to a woman that "he would so 'fix' her, that
she would not fall out with her employer." "*Held on Charge Under Obeah
Law*" regards Henrietta Wiles of Kingston where she offers to restore to
a client a lost-job. But the principal case of the day bears the
headlines: "*Six Months for Obeahman: Case Tried at Spanish Tn*. Man Who
Pretended To Be Able To Keep Away Ghosts From A Woman." David Simon of
Thompson Pen district is convicted of contracting to remove the duppies
who are supposed to be annoying Ada Bogle, her "house was being stoned,
the windows scratched, and the doors pushed by ghosts." It was to be his
task to "drive away the ghosts."

December 15, 1933:--"*To Serve 6 Months for Practising Obeah.*" This is
the trial of Timothy Jackson, at Llandewey, referred to yesterday.

December 17, 1933:--Two separate cases.

{p. 134}

"*Arrested on Charge of Practising Obeah*" refers to Sophie Wallace who
has offered to remove a ghost from Maud Wilson, which it is asserted has
been put on her by the wife of the "friend" who accompanies her. "*Woman
Given Six Months for Working Obeah*" relates how Viola Phillips for a
consideration undertook to give help in a Court case.

December 2 1, 1933:--"*12 Months Hard and 12 Lashes with 'Cat' for Obeah
Worker.*" Michael Ferguson, in the Half-Way Tree Court House is
convicted of another "Get-Back-job" imposture with the usual
implications of the removal of ghosts or duppies which have been "set."

January 5, 1934:--"*Faces Court on Obeah Charge.*" Ivan O. Baker of
Berryvale district, is before the R. M. Court at May Pen on a charge of
practising obeah.

January 9, 1934:--"*Mechanic Fined £12 10/ on Charge of Practising
Obeah.* 'Used His Brains To Exploit On Ignorant People.'" George
Washington Pitt who was convicted of practising obeah had boasted: "He
could cure, he could kill, and he could give jobs."

January 12, 1934:--"*Obeah Charge Fails.*" Henrietta Wiles who was
referred to on December 14th when brought to trial was acquitted.

January 13, 1934:--"*Held on Charge of Practising Obeah.*" Oscar
McFarlane is always having trouble with his motor car and professes to
believe that "someone had done something to 'keep him down.'" And
accordingly Agatha Connell, the defendant, "told McFarlane that she
would be able to

{p. 135}

'fix him up.'" Her attempt to do so leads to her arrest.

January 30, 1934:--This time three cases are reported. "*Four Months
Term for Hanover Obeahman.*" At Lucea, Ebernezer Clarke is convicted of
imposing on Newton Brown, a shoemaker at Mount Pleasant, who reports
having been informed by Clarke that "Duppy is on me and on my shop." He
is to receive a "dealing stick" that is to be kept in his shop "to keep
away the duppy." "*Six Months for Man Who Practised the Black Art.*" In
the Sandy Bay R. M. Court, Leonard Weakley, of Cold Spring is convicted.
What is of particular interest here is that the following books were
found in his house: "*The Sixth and Seventh Books of Moses; The Albertus
Magnus or the White and Black Arts for Men and Beasts; The Great Book of
Black Magic; The Book of Magical Art Hindoo Magic and Indian
Occultism*"; a fact that would indicate that we are not here dealing
with obeah in any sense of the word but a practice of magic similar to
that found in St. Lucia in the case of the Monchy Murder.

Meanwhile "*One Conviction in Obeah Case Is Quashed*" regards the appeal
from the conviction of Viola Phillips which was recorded under date of
December 17, 1933. The Appeal prevailed on the ground that the evidence
on which the conviction had been secured was insufficient. In connexion
with this case it would be well to notice an argument advanced by Mr. N.
W. Manley, K.C., in behalf of the appellant, to the effect "that it was
necessary,

{p. 136}

in order to constitute obeah, not merely that a person should do
something utterly foolish and futile on a pretence that it would
accomplish something, but that they should definitely use occult means
or pretend to supernatural powers. The use of the word 'pretend' was, he
supposed, that the framers of the statute did not believe that there was
any such thing. Obeah was connected with a pretence to invoke occult or
supernatural powers. It bore, he supposed, some resemblance to what used
to be considered witchcraft or necromancy. Necromancy was a branch of
occult power, but in his submission many cases that might be considered
a mere obtaining of money by false pretences were being treated as
obeah. If the powers one professed were considered to arise from oneself
and not from any supernatural thing one was not practising obeah. There
was no representation that the process was supernatural."

Mr. Manley would have been interested in the discussion on witchcraft
which took place at the recent Congrès International des Sciences
Anthropologiques et Ethnologiques in London. Frank Hulme Melland,
speaking from an experience of more than a quarter of a century in
Northern Rhodesia where he had held many positions as Native
Commissioner and Magistrate, called attention to the fact that the law
relating to witchcraft in British African colonies and dependencies
started with the fundamental idea that witchcraft being an
"impossibility" was non-existent, and despite this basic assumption,
enactment after enactment was promulgated against "what does not

{p. 137}

exist" to the endless confusion of the native mind. It was Mr. Melland's
contention regarding witchcraft in general: "It is necessary to study
this subject from the point of view of those who live in fear of
witchcraft, because only in this way can we hope effectively to
eradicate the belief and the fear which it engenders. Even if witchcraft
be nonexistent the belief in it is real. Moreover, while African
primitive religions are local, centred in the home-district, witchcraft,
in native eyes, is universal, and its terrors follow the native when
away from his home, deprived of such help as he feels his ancestral
spirits might afford him, which affords exceptional opportunities for
the 'quack' witchdoctor. Our present official attitude and our law seem
to the African unjustified and unjust, incomprehensible and
unreasonable. This must necessarily detrimentally affect relations
between governors and governed and, apart from the legal aspect, it is
not in accordance with the equitable idea that laws should be in the
interests and by the consent of the governed. Africans feel that they
must have some protection against this power of evil. We do not provide
it, and we therefore drive them to have recourse to the men whom we
prescribe as criminals: the witchdoctors." By witchdoctor here is meant
not the sorcerer but his official antagonist, what we technically
understand to be the myal-man as distinct from the obeah-man.

According to Mr. Melland: "Penal legislation in witchcraft matters is
ethically unsound and politically has proved demonstrably harmful. In
effect

{p. 138}

we have said to the African: 'You are a foolish people, and we know
better.' It is rather smug, and has proved singularly ineffective.
Practically the whole population believes that every one can be, and at
any moment may be, bewitched." After citing a typical case, he added:
"Many who used to believe that this sort of thing was dying out now
admit they were wrong."

Professor L. S. B. Leakey of Cambridge University who represented Kenya
in the discussion was equally outspoken, and outlined his observations
in the Official Program as follows: "Wherever the white man goes in
Africa he finds himself sooner or later up against some aspect of
witchcraft, and whether he is missionary or Government official or
trader he cannot avoid giving expression to his views on the subject.
The reactions of the African native to the various European attitudes to
witchcraft are full of interest, and can teach us a lot, and the best
way to find out what the African thinks about the white man's attitude
is to listen to conversations between Africans upon the subject. This I
have often had opportunity to do. What has always struck me most is that
the African considers us to be the most illogical people living, and I
must say he is not unreasonable in thinking so, for when the statements
and actions of white men concerning witchcraft are looked at from the
black man's point of view, nothing could be more absurd and illogical.
To the African the European (a) on the one hand himself practises
witchcraft in many forms; (b) attacks witchcraft where he finds it

{p. 139}

being practised by black men; (c) says it is wrong for Africans to
punish members of their community whom they find practising black magic;
(d) refuses to punish people who are accused of having killed people by
witchcraft, on the ground that this is not possible and therefore cannot
have been done; (e) denies the existence or possibility of doing things
by means of witchcraft, and yet does them himself; (f) not only attacks
black man's witchcraft, but also tries to prevent Africans from using
white man's witchcraft. In short, to the African the attitude of white
men to witchcraft is incomprehensible, illogical and selfish, besides
being unutterably foolish."

According to Doctor Leakey, the native's statement of mind is summed up
in the statement: "They tell us that there is no need to be frightened
and yet they use their own magic all the time." The clinical
thermometer, the taking of blood tests and fingerprints, gramophones,
wireless and the camera are all regarded by the native as white man's
magic, and it is the general conclusion of the Africans that the whites
are seeking a monopoly of magic for themselves.

Among educated Jamaicans, I fear, there is also just a little lack of
appreciation regarding the real attitude of the "bush" towards
witchcraft. The law may assume the impossibility of the fact and stress
the *pretense at supernatural power*, as constituting the offence, as
Mr. Manley states. But it is the conviction of the practitioners of
obeah that the obeah-man can and does control a super-human influence

{p. 140}

that may destroy life itself without any physical contacts, and further
that this projection of power does not arise, as Mr. Manley suggests,
from the obeah-man himself. For the obeah-man is merely an agent of the
Evil One who really produces the effect desired in virtue of the
incantation of the devotee and the acceptance of the client, both of
whom are placing themselves in communication with him with full reliance
on his co-operation. The obeah. man only directs the necessary power or
force which ultimately comes from the Author of Evil.

After this lengthy digression, let us return to the files of *The Daily
Gleaner*.

February 1, 1934:--"*Held on Charge of Practising Medicine as Well as
Obeah.*" This regards Robert Giscombe in Kingston.

February 5, 1934:--"*Convicted in May Pen Court on Charge of Practising
Obeah.*" Ivanhoe Baker had sold a ring to Ada Bogle to keep a ghost off
her. More will be said shortly about this type of ring, but it should be
remarked that in this case again we find mention of a book entitled,
*6th. and 7th. Books of Moses* with other works on Astrology and
Personal Magnetism.

February 6, 1934:--"*Held on Obeah Charge, Annotto Bay.*" Alexander
Decton is accused of offering for seven pounds, two shillings, to remove
an obnoxious party. He "would either kill or run him away from the
property." This savours of real obeah.

February 15, 1934:--"Held by Police on Obeah

{p. 141}

Charge." Peter Robinson is accused of offering to protect a woman from
her enemies.

March 2, 1934:--"*Alleged Revivalist and Healer Before Court on 2
Charges.* Annie Harvey And Her Husband Charged With Practising Obeah And
Medicine For Gain." In this case the Island Chemist is called in to give
evidence regarding the forty articles exhibited.

March 16, 1934:--"*Alexander Brown to Serve 12 Months for Practising
Obeah. Acting R. M. for City Says He Proposes to Deal Severely with
Those Found Guilty.*"--"Alexander Brown entered a plea of guilty to an
information charging him with practising obeah." In passing sentence,
His Honour said: "Brown your solicitor has made a very eloquent plea for
you, but I cannot lose sight of the fact that there is far too much
belief in obeah in this country, and this has been the cause of its
insistent practise by you and others like you. So far as I am concerned,
I intend to treat anyone found guilty by me with the utmost severity. In
spite of all that has been urged on your behalf by Mr. Wynter I cannot
be lenient with you, and so you will have to go and serve a term of
twelve months with hard labour and you will also receive twelve lashes
of the cat-o-nine."

March 31, 1934:--"*Man and Wife Are Convicted on Charge of Working
Obeah.*" This is the sequel of the case of Annie Harvey and her husband
mentioned on March 2, 1934.

April 6, 1934:--"*Obeah Case Dismissed by Kingston R. M.* Accomplice
Testifies How Peter

{p. 142}

Robinson Said He Could Assist Her. '*Ghost Set on Her*' Position Of Bed
Changed To Confuse Spirit: Cuttings of Nails, Hair And Garments." The
account states: "The ground for Robinson's dismissal, before the
prosecution closed, was no doubt that the person chiefly concerned in
the matter, a woman named Operline Dwyer, was admittedly an accomplice
whose testimony was. not corroborated, but in vital issues, contradicted
by a man, Phillibert Dunkley, who set up the police to lay a trap for
Robinson." In the course of the examination His Honour asked a witness:
"Then you believe in obeah?" which immediately caused laughter only to
draw from His Honour the remark: "And so do 70 or 80 per cent of those
laughing at the back of the Court." Which goes to confirm the
wide-spread belief in the superstition.

April 9, 1934:--"*Father and Daughter Held as Obeah Workers in the
Metropolis.*" James Lee and his daughter Olive are accused of having
told a client "that another woman had taken away her 'gentleman' and was
trying to injure her. The woman said that she would like to get back the
'gentleman' and to prevent the other woman from injuring her. The
defendants agreed to do the 'job' and it is alleged bargained with her."

One of the features in many of these cases is that the practitioner of
obeah is reported as "speaking in an unknown tongue," which is
supposedly a regular characteristic of the practice. It should further
be remarked how the great majority of the citations refer to legal
proceedings in Kingston or the principal

{p. 143}

towns of the island. There are comparatively few trials for what is
going on in the "bush."

One of the latest institutions of applied magic is known as the
obi-ring, to which reference was made in the case of Ivanhoe Baker as
cited in *The Daily Gleaner* of February 5, 1934. I can find no mention
of it in any book to which I have had access which leads me to the
conclusion that it is of comparatively recent origin. During my own stay
on Jamaica I was never able to trace the ring itself, but since my
return a captured obi-ring was sent to me. In appearance it is an
ordinary signet ring made of brass, or at best cheaply plated, such as
usually sells for a few shillings. On the inside a hole has been drilled
and this serves as a receptacle for a little charm that looks like the
head of a very tiny rivet, in which the "medicine" is contained.

In the particular case connected with the ring sent to me, a woman had
been ailing for some time when she was approached by an obeah-man who
offered to cure her by means of this ring which was to cost one pound.
The terms were accepted and the patient rapidly recovered her health.
However, circumstances in the case lead me to believe that the same
obeah-man had already administered poison with the connivance of the
woman's cook and the receptacle in the ring contained the antidote which
was absorbed through the skin and counteracted against the poison. In
this supposition the ring should be called not an obi-ring but a
myal-ring. But as has been said so often, the two functions are now
included in the practice of the obeah-man.

{p. 144}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER IV](ppj004.md)  
