[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](soa00)  [Next](soa02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Story of Atlantis

### A Geographical, Historical and Ethnological Sketch

THE GENERAL scope of the subject before us will best be realized by
considering the amount of information that is obtainable about the
various nations who compose our great Fifth or Aryan Race.

From the time of the Greeks and the Romans onwards volumes have been
written about every people who in their turn have filled the stage of
history. The political institutions, the religious beliefs, the social
and domestic manners and customs have all been analyzed and catalogued,
and countless works in many tongues record for our benefit the march of
progress.

Further, it must be remembered that of the history of this Fifth Race we
possess but a fragment--the record merely of the last family races of
the Celtic sub-race, and the first family races of our own Teutonic
stock.

But the hundreds of thousands of years which elapsed from the time when
the earliest Aryans left their home on the shores of the central Asian
Sea to the time of the Greeks and Romans, bore witness to the rise and
fall of innumerable civilizations. Of the 1st sub-race of our Aryan Race
who inhabited India and colonized Egypt in prehistoric times we know
practically nothing, and the same may be said of the Chaldean,
Babylonian, and Assyrian nations who composed the 2nd sub-race--for the
fragments of knowledge obtained from the recently deciphered hieroglyphs
or cuneiform inscriptions on Egyptian tombs or Babylonian tablets can
scarcely be said to constitute history. The Persians who belonged to the
3rd or Iranian sub-race have, it is true, left a few more traces, but of
the earlier civilizations of the Celtic or 4th sub-race we have no
records at all. It is only with the rise of the last family shoots of
this Celtic stock, *viz*., the Greek and Roman peoples, that we come
upon historic times.

In addition also to the blank period in the past, there is the blank
period in the future. For of the seven sub-races required to complete
the history of a great Root Race, five only have so far come into
existence. Our own Teutonic or 5th sub-race has already developed many
nations, but has not yet run its course, while the 6th and 7th
sub-races, who will be developed on the continents of North and South
America, respectively, will have thousands of years of history to give
to the world.

In attempting, therefore, to summarize in a few pages information about
the world's progress during a period which must have occupied at least
as great a stretch of years as that above referred to, it should be
realized how slight a sketch this must inevitably be.

A record of the world's progress during the period of the Fourth or
Atlantean Race must embrace the history of many nations, and register
the rise and fall of many civilizations.

Catastrophes, too, on a scale such as has not yet been experienced
during the life of our present Fifth Race, took place on more than one
occasion during the progress of the Fourth. The destruction of Atlantis
was accomplished by a series of catastrophes varying in character from
great cataclysms in which whole territories and populations perished, to
comparatively unimportant landslips such as occur on our own coasts
to-day. When the destruction was once inaugurated by the first great
catastrophe there was no intermission in the minor landslips which
continued slowly but steadily to eat away the continent. Four of the
great catastrophes stand out above the rest in magnitude. The first took
place in the Miocene age, about 800,000 years ago. The second, which was
of minor importance, occurred about 200,000 years ago. The third--about
80,000 years ago--was a very great one. It destroyed all that remained
of the Atlantean continent, with the exception of the island to which
Plato gave the name of Poseidonis, which in its turn was submerged in
the fourth and final great catastrophe of 9564 B.C.

Now the testimony of the oldest writers and of modern scientific
research alike bear witness to the existence of an ancient continent
occupying the site of the lost Atlantis.

Before proceeding to the consideration of the subject itself, it is
proposed cursorily to glance at the generally known sources which supply
corroborative evidence. These may be grouped into the five following
classes:

First, the testimony of the deep-sea surroundings.

Second, the distribution of fauna and flora.

Third, the similarity of language and of ethnological type.

Fourth, the similarity of religious belief, ritual, and architecture.

Fifth, the testimony of ancient writers, of early race traditions, and
of archaic flood-legends.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deep-Sea Soundings](soa02)
