[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](soamap)  [Next](soa01) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Preface to the First Edition

by A. P. SINNETT

For readers unacquainted with the progress that has been made in recent
years by earnest students of occultism attached to the Theosophical
Society, the significance of the statement embodied in the following
pages would be misapprehended without some preliminary explanation.
Historical research has depended for western civilization hitherto, on
written records of one kind or another. When literary memoranda have
fallen short, stone monuments have sometimes been available, and fossil
remains have given us a few unequivocal, though inarticulate assurances
concerning the antiquity of the human race; but modern culture has lost
sight of or has overlooked possibilities connected with the
investigation of past events, which are independent of fallible evidence
transmitted to us by ancient writers. The world at large is thus at
present so imperfectly alive to the resources of human faculty, that by
most people as yet, the very existence, even as a potentiality, of
psychic powers, which some of us all the while are consciously
exercising every day, is scornfully denied and derided. The situation is
sadly ludicrous from the point of view of those who appreciate the
prospects of evolution, because mankind is thus wilfully holding at
arm's length, the knowledge that is essential to its own ulterior
progress. The maximum cultivation of which the human intellect is
susceptible while it denies itself all the resources of its higher
spiritual consciousness, can never be more than a preparatory process as
compared with that which may set in when the faculties are sufficiently
enlarged to enter into conscious relationship with the super-physical
planes or aspects of Nature.

For anyone who will have the patience to study the published results of
psychic investigation during the last fifty years, the reality of
clairvoyance as an occasional phenomenon of human intelligence must
establish itself on an immovable foundation. For those who, without
being occultists--students that is to say of Nature's loftier aspects,
in a position to obtain better teaching than that which any written
books can give--for those who merely avail themselves of recorded
evidence, a declaration on the part of others of a disbelief in the
possibility of clairvoyance, is on a level with the proverbial African's
disbelief in ice. But the experiences of clairvoyance that have
accumulated on the hands of those who have studied it in connection with
mesmerism, do no more than prove the existence in human nature of a
capacity for cognizing physical phenomena distant either in space or
time, in some way which has nothing to do with the physical senses.
Those who have studied the mysteries of clairvoyance in connection with
theosophic teaching have been enabled to realize that the ultimate
resources of that faculty range as far beyond its humbler
manifestations, dealt with by unassisted enquirers, as the resources of
the higher mathematics exceed those of the abacus. Clairvoyance, indeed,
is of many kinds, all of which fall easily into their places when we
appreciate the manner in which human consciousness functions on
different planes of Nature. The faculty of reading the pages of a closed
book, or of discerning objects blindfold, or at a distance from the
observer, is quite a different faculty from that employed on the
cognition of past events. That last is the kind of which it is necessary
to say something here, in order that the true character of the present
treatise on Atlantis may be understood, but I allude to the others
merely that the explanation I have to give may not be mistaken for a
complete theory of clairvoyance in all its varieties.

We may best be helped to a comprehension of clairvoyance as related to
past events, by considering in the first instance the phenomena of
memory. The theory of memory which relates it to an imaginary
rearrangement of physical molecules of brain matter, going on at every
instant of our lives, is one that presents itself as plausible to no one
who can ascend one degree above the thinking level of the uncompromising
atheistical materialist. To every one who accepts, even as a reasonable
hypothesis, the idea that a man is something more than a carcase in a
state of animation, it must be a reasonable hypothesis that memory has
to do with that principle in man which is super-physical. His memory in
short, is a function of some other than the physical plane. The pictures
of memory are imprinted, it is clear, on some nonphysical medium, and
are accessible to the embodied thinker in ordinary cases by virtue of
some effort he makes in as much unconsciousness as to its precise
character, as he is unconscious of the brain impulse which actuates the
muscles of his heart. The events with which he has had to do in the past
are photographed by Nature on some imperishable page of super-physical
matter, and by making an appropriate interior effort, he is capable of
bringing them again, when he requires them, within the area of some
interior sense which reflects its perception on the physical brain. We
are not all of us able to make this effort equally well, so that memory
is sometimes dim, but even in the experience of mesmeric research, the
occasional super-excitation of memory under mesmerism is a familiar
fact. The circumstances plainly show that the record of Nature is
accessible if we know how to recover it, or even if our own capacity to
make an effort for its recovery is somehow improved without our having
an improved knowledge of the method employed. And from this thought we
may arrive by an easy transition at the idea, that in truth the records
of Nature are not separate collections of individual property, but
constitute the all-embracing memory of Nature herself, on which
different people are in a position to make drafts according to their
several capacities.

I do not say that the one thought necessarily ensues as a logical
consequence of the other. Occultists know that what I have stated is the
fact, but my present purpose is to show the reader who is not an
Occultist, how the accomplished Occultist arrives at his results,
without hoping to epitomize all the stages of his mental progress in
this brief explanation. Theosophical literature at large must be
consulted by those who would seek a fuller elucidation of the
magnificent prospects and practical demonstrations of its teaching in
many directions, which, in the course of the Theosophical development,
have been laid before the world for the benefit of all who are competent
to profit by them.

The memory of Nature is in reality a stupendous unity, just as in
another way all mankind is found to constitute a spiritual unity if we
ascend to a sufficiently elevated plane of Nature in search of the
wonderful convergence where unity is reached without the loss of
individuality. For ordinary humanity, however, at the early stage of its
evolution represented at present by the majority, the interior spiritual
capacities ranging beyond those which the brain is an instrument for
expressing, are as yet too imperfectly developed to enable them to get
into touch with any other records in the vast archives of Nature's
memory, except those with which they have individually been in contact
at their creation. The blindfold interior effort they are competent to
make, will not as a rule, call up any others. But in a flickering
fashion we have experience in ordinary life of efforts that are a little
more effectual. "Thought Transference" is a humble example. In that case
"impressions on the mind" of one person--Nature's memory pictures, with
which he is in normal relationship, are caught up by someone else who is
just able, however unconscious of the method he uses, to range Nature's
memory under favourable conditions, a little beyond the area with which
he himself is in normal relationship. Such a person has begun, however
slightly, to exercise the faculty of astral clairvoyance. That term may
be conveniently used to denote the kind of clairvoyance I am now
endeavoring to elucidate, the kind which, in some of its more
magnificent developments, has been employed to carry out the
investigations on the basis of which the present account of Atlantis has
been compiled.

There is no limit really to the resources of astral clairvoyance in
investigations concerning the past history of the earth, whether we are
concerned with the events that have befallen the human race in
prehistoric epochs, or with the growth of the planet itself through
geological periods which antedated the advent of man, or with more
recent events, current narrations of which have been distorted by
careless or perverse historians. The memory of Nature is infallibly
accurate and inexhaustibly minute. A time will come as certainly as the
precession of the equinoxes, when the literary method of historical
research will be laid aside as out of date, in the case of all original
work. People among us who are capable of exercising astral clairvoyance
in full perfection--but have not yet been called away to higher
functions in connection with the promotion of human progress, of which
ordinary humanity at present knows even less than an Indian ryot knows
of cabinet councils--are still very few. Those who know what the few can
do, and through what processes of training and self-discipline they have
passed in pursuit of interior ideals, of which when attained astral
clairvoyance is but an individual circumstance, are many, but still a
small minority as compared with the modern cultivated world. But as time
goes on, and within a measurable future, some of us have reason to feel
sure that the numbers of those who are competent to exercise astral
clairvoyance will increase sufficiently to extend the circle of those
who are aware of their capacities, till it comes to embrace all the
intelligence and culture of civilized mankind only a few generations
hence. Meanwhile the present volume is the first that has been put
forward as the pioneer essay of the new method of historical research.
It is amusing to all who are concerned with it, to think how inevitably
it will be mistaken--for some little while as yet, by materialistic
readers, unable to accept the frank explanation here given of the
principle on which it has been prepared--for a work of imagination.

For the benefit of others who may be more intuitive it may be well to
say a word or two that may guard them from supposing that because
historical research by means of astral clairvoyance is not impeded by
having to deal with periods removed from our own by hundreds of
thousands of years, it is on that account a process which involves no
trouble. Every fact stated In the present volume has been picked up bit
by bit with watchful and attentive care, in the course of an
investigation on which more than one qualified person has been engaged,
in the intervals of other activity, for some years past. And to promote
the success of their work they have been allowed access to some maps and
other records physically preserved from the remote periods
concerned--though in safer keeping than in that of the turbulent races
occupied in Europe with the development of civilization in brief
intervals of leisure from warfare, and hard pressed by the fanaticism
that so long treated science as sacrilegious during the middle ages of
Europe.

Laborious as the task has been however, it will be recognized as amply
repaying the trouble taken, by everyone who is able to perceive how
absolutely necessary to a proper comprehension of the world as we find
it, is a proper comprehension of its preceding Atlantean phase. Without
this knowledge all speculations concerning ethnology are futile and
misleading. The course of race development is chaos and confusion
without the key furnished by the character of Atlantean civilization and
the configuration of the earth at Atlantean periods. Geologists know
that land and ocean surfaces must have repeatedly changed places during
the period at which they also know-from the situation of human remains
in the various strata-that the lands were inhabited. And yet for want of
accurate knowledge as to the dates at which the changes took place, they
discard the whole theory from their practical thinking, and, except for
certain hypotheses started by naturalists dealing with the southern
hemisphere, have generally endeavoured to harmonize race migrations with
the configuration of the earth in existence at the present time.

In this way nonsense is made of the whole retrospect; and the
ethnological scheme remains so vague and shadowy that it fails to
displace crude conceptions of mankind's beginning, which still dominate
religious thinking and keep back the spiritual progress of the age. The
decadence and ultimate disappearance of Atlantean civilization is in
turn as instructive as its rise and glory; but I have now accomplished
the main purpose with which I sought leave to introduce the work now
before the world, with a brief prefatory explanation, and if its
contents fail to convey a sense of its importance to any readers I am
now addressing, that result could hardly be accomplished by further
recommendations of mine.

1896

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story of Atlantis](soa01)
