[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](soa26)  [Next](soa28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Arts and Sciences

It must primarily be recognized that our own Aryan race has naturally
achieved far greater results in almost every direction than did the
Atlanteans, but even where they failed to reach our level, the records
of what they accomplished are of interest as representing the high water
mark which their tide of

\[1. Since the above was written the Russo-Japanese war has taken
place.\]

civilization reached. On the other hand, the character of the scientific
achievements in which they did outstrip us are of so dazzling a nature,
that bewilderment at such unequal development is apt to be the feeling
left.

The arts and sciences, as practised by the first two races, were, of
course, crude in the extreme, but we do not propose to follow the
progress achieved by each sub-race separately. The history of the
Atlantean, as of the Aryan race, was interspersed with periods of
progress and of decay. Eras of culture were followed by times of
lawlessness, during which all artistic and scientific development was
lost, these again being succeeded by civilizations reaching to still
higher levels. It must naturally be with the periods of culture that the
following remarks will deal, chief among which stands out the great
Toltec era.

Architecture and sculpture, painting and music were all practised in
Atlantis. The music even at the best of times was crude, and the
instruments of the most primitive type. All the Atlantean races were
fond of colour, and brilliant hues decorated both the insides and the
outsides of their houses, but painting as a fine art was never well
established, though in the later days some kind of drawing and painting
was taught in the schools. Sculpture, on the other hand, which was also
taught in the schools, was widely practised, and reached great
excellence. As we shall see later on under the head of "Religion" it
became customary for every man who could afford it to place in one of
the temples an image of himself. These were sometimes carved in wood or
in hard black stone like basalt, but among the wealthy it became the
fashion to have their statues cast in one of the precious metals,
aurichalcum, gold or silver. A very fair resemblance of the individual
usually resulted, while in some cases a striking likeness was achieved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Architecture](soa28)
