<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/048) 
[Pickthall](../pick/048)  [Palmer Part II (SBE09)](../sbe09/048)  [Yusuf
Ali/Arabic](../quran/04801)  [Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq048)   
[Previous](022)  [Next](066) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'ân, Rodwell edition \[1876\]; at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SURA XLVIII.--THE VICTORY \[CVIII.\]

MEDINA.--29 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

Verily, We have won for thee an undoubted VICTORY <span
id="fr_1177"></span>[1](#fn_1177)--

In token that God forgiveth thy earlier and later faults, and fulfilleth
His goodness to thee, and guideth thee on the right way,

And that God succoureth thee with a mighty succour.

He it is who sendeth down a spirit of secure repose into the hearts of
the faithful that they might add faith to their faith; (for God's are
the armies of the Heavens and of the Earth: and God is Knowing, Wise:)

And that He may bring the believing men and the believing women into
gardens 'neath whose trees the rivers flow, to dwell therein for ever,
and that He may cancel their evil deeds: for this is the great bliss
with God:

And that He may punish the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women,
and the men and women who join other gods with God, and think evil
thoughts of Him. Theirs shall be a round of evil; and God is angry with
them and curseth them, and hath prepared Hell for them: and, an evil
journey thither!

The armies of the Heavens and of the Earth are God's, and God is Mighty,
Wise!

Verily, we have sent thee to be a witness and a herald of good (an
announcer), and a warner,

That ye may believe on God and on His Apostle; and may assist Him, and
honour Him, and praise him, morning and evening.

In truth, they who plighted fealty to thee, really plighted that fealty
to God: the hand of God was over their hands! Whoever, therefore, shall
break his oath shall only break it to his own hurt; but whoever shall be
true to his engagement with God, He will give him a great reward.

The Arabs who took not the field with you, <span
id="fr_1178"></span>[2](#fn_1178) will say to thee, <span
id="fr_1179"></span>[3](#fn_1179) "We were engaged with our property and
our families; therefore ask thou pardon for us." They speak with their
tongues what is not in their hearts. SAY: And who can have any power
over God in your behalf, whether he will you some loss, or whether he
will you an advantage? Yes, God is acquainted with your doings.

But ye thought that the Apostle and the faithful could never more come
back to their families; and your hearts were pleased at this; and ye
thought an evil thought of this expedition, and ye became an undone
people:

For, whoso believeth not in God, and His Apostle. . . . Verily, we have
got ready the flame for the Infidels!

And God's is the kingdom of the Heavens and of the Earth: Whom He will
He forgiveth, and whom He will He punisheth: and God is Gracious,
Merciful!

They who took not the field with you will say, when ye go forth to the
spoil to take it, "Let us follow you." Fain would they change the word
of God. <span id="fr_1180"></span>[4](#fn_1180) SAY: Ye shall by no
means follow us: thus hath God said already. They will say, "Nay, ye are
jealous of us." Nay! they are men of little understanding.

SAY to those Arabs of the desert, who took not the field, ye shall be
called forth against a people of mighty valour. Ye shall do battle with
them, or they shall profess Islam. If ye obey, a goodly recompense will
God give you; but if ye turn back, as ye turned back aforetime, He will
chastise you with a sore chastisement.

It shall be no crime on the part of the blind, the lame, or the sick, if
they go not to the fight. But whoso shall obey God and His Apostle, he
shall bring him into the gardens 'neath which the rivers flow: but whoso
shall turn back, He will punish him with a sore punishment.

Well pleased now hath God been with the believers when they plighted
fealty to thee under the tree; <span id="fr_1181"></span>[5](#fn_1181)
and He knew what was in their hearts: therefore did He send down upon
them a spirit of secure repose, and rewarded them with a speedy victory,

And with the rich booty which they took: for God is Mighty, Wise!

God promised you the taking of a rich booty <span
id="fr_1182"></span>[6](#fn_1182) and sped it to you; and He withheld
men's hands from you, for a sign to the faithful, and that He might
guide you along the right way:--

And other booty, over which ye have not yet had power: but now hath God
compassed them for you; for God is over all things Potent.

If the Infidels shall fight against you, they shall assuredly turn their
backs; then, neither protector nor helper shall they find!

Such is God's method carried into effect of old; no change canst thou
find in God's mode of dealing.

And He it was who held their hands from you and your hands from them in
the valley of Mecca, <span id="fr_1183"></span>[7](#fn_1183) after that
He had given you the victory over them: for God saw what ye did.

These are they who believed not, and kept you away from the sacred
Mosque, as well as the offering which was prevented from reaching the
place of sacrifice. And had it not been that ye would have trodden down
believers, both men and women, whom ye knew not, so that a crime might
have lighted on you without your knowledge on their account, and that
God would bring whom He will within His mercy, this would have been
otherwise ordered. Had they been apart, <span
id="fr_1184"></span>[8](#fn_1184) we had surely punished such of them as
believed not, with a sore punishment.

When the unbelievers had fostered rage in their hearts--the rage of
ignorance (of heathens)--God sent down His peace on His Apostle and on
the faithful, and stablished in them the word of piety, for they were
most worthy and deserving of it: and God knoweth all things.

Now hath God in truth made good to His Apostle the dream <span
id="fr_1185"></span>[9](#fn_1185) in which he said, "Ye shall surely
enter the sacred Mosque, if God will, in full security, having your
heads shaved and your hair cut: ye shall not fear; for He knoweth what
ye know not; and He hath ordained you, beside this, a speedy victory."

It is He who hath sent His Apostle with "the Guidance," and the religion
of truth, that He may exalt it above every religion. And enough for thee
is this testimony on the part of God.

Muhammad is the Apostle of God; and his comrades are vehement against
the infidels, but full of tenderness among themselves. Thou mayst see
them bowing down, prostrating themselves, imploring favours from God,
and His acceptance. Their tokens <span
id="fr_1186"></span>[10](#fn_1186) are on their faces, the marks of
their prostrations. This is their picture in the Law, and their picture
in the Evangel: <span id="fr_1187"></span>[11](#fn_1187) they are as the
seed which putteth forth its stalk; then strengtheneth it, and it
groweth stout, and riseth upon its stem, <span
id="fr_1188"></span>[12](#fn_1188) rejoicing the husbandman--that the
infidels may be wrathful at them. To such of them as believe and do the
things that are right, hath God promised forgiveness and a noble
recompense.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1177"></span>[1](048.htm#fr_1177) This Sura was probably
revealed shortly after the peace of Hudaibiya. Ann. Hej. 6. Some
commentators, however, understand the Victory of the taking of Mecca two
years--later the preterite being used in the prophetic style for the
future--others of the taking of Chaibar, or Muta (?), a town of the
Roman empire.

<span id="fn_1178"></span>[2](048.htm#fr_1178) Lit. were left behind.

<span id="fn_1179"></span>[3](048.htm#fr_1179) On the return to Medina.
See Weil's Leben M. p. 173 (n.).

<span id="fn_1180"></span>[4](048.htm#fr_1180) The law relative to
booty, viz. that those who were not at Hudaibiya should have no share in
the booty to be obtained from the Jews at Chaibar. Muhammad marched
against them in Hej. 7.

<span id="fn_1181"></span>[5](048.htm#fr_1181) When the rumour reached
Muhammad at Hudaibiya that Othman Ibn Affan, whom he had sent to inform
the Meccans that he was merely coming to visit their temple, and with
peaceable intentions, had been slain by them.

<span id="fn_1182"></span>[6](048.htm#fr_1182) At Chaibar.

<span id="fn_1183"></span>[7](048.htm#fr_1183) The valley of Mecca may
mean Hudaibiya. But the commentators explain this verse of different
events. It probably, however, refers to the 50 (according to Djalalein
80) prisoners whom Muhammad dismissed freely at Hudaibiya.

<span id="fn_1184"></span>[8](048.htm#fr_1184) Had the believers been
separate from the infidels.

<span id="fn_1185"></span>[9](048.htm#fr_1185) This dream Muhammad had
at Medina, before he set out for al Hudaibiya. His followers expected
its fulfilment within the year, but when the truce frustrated their
hopes, this verse was revealed to pacify them.

<span id="fn_1186"></span>[10](048.htm#fr_1186) Dust from the pavement.
The Muhammadans who say their prayers on carpets often place little
bricks before them which they touch in prostration with their forehead.

<span id="fn_1187"></span>[11](048.htm#fr_1187) Comp. Mark iv. 28.

<span id="fn_1188"></span>[12](048.htm#fr_1188) Lit. legs.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sura LXVI.--The Forbidding \[CIX.\]](066)

</div>
