<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/057) 
[Pickthall](../pick/057)  [Palmer Part II (SBE09)](../sbe09/057)  [Yusuf
Ali/Arabic](../quran/05701)  [Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq057)   
[Previous](061)  [Next](004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'ân, Rodwell edition \[1876\]; at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SURA LVII.--IRON \[XCIX.\]

MEDINA. <span id="fr_1059"></span>[1](#fn_1059)--29 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

ALL that is in the Heavens and in the Earth praiseth God, and He is the
Mighty, the Wise!

His the Kingdom of the Heavens and of the Earth; He maketh alive and
killeth; and He hath power over all things!

He is the first and the last; the Seen and the Hidden; <span
id="fr_1060"></span>[2](#fn_1060) and He knoweth all things!

It is He who in six days created the Heavens and the Earth, then
ascended His throne. He knoweth that which entereth the earth, and that
which goeth forth from it, and what cometh down from Heaven, and what
mounteth up to it; and wherever ye are, He is with you; and God
beholdeth all your actions!

His the kingdom of the Heavens and the Earth; and to God shall all
things return!

He causeth the night to pass into the day, and He causeth the day to
pass into the night: and He knoweth the very secrets of the bosom!

Believe in God and his apostle, and bestow in alms of that whereof God
hath made you heirs: for whoever among you believe and give
alms--their's shall be a great recompense.

What hath come to you that ye believe not in God, although the apostle
exhorteth you to believe in your Lord, and He hath accepted your
alliance--if ye are true believers?

He it is who hath sent down clear tokens upon His servant, that He may
bring you out of darkness into light; and truly, Kind, Merciful to you
is God.

And what hath come to you that ye expend not for the cause of God? since
the heritage of the Heavens and of the Earth is God's only! Those among
you who contributed before the victory, and fought, shall be differently
treated from certain others among you! Such shall have a nobler grade
than those who contributed and fought after it. But a goodly recompense
hath God promised to all; and God is fully informed of your actions.

Who is he that will lend a generous loan to God? So will He double it to
him, and he shall have a noble reward.

One day thou shalt see the believers, men and women, with their light
running before them, and on their right hand. <span
id="fr_1061"></span>[3](#fn_1061) The angels shall say to them, "Good
tidings for you this day of gardens beneath whose shades the rivers
flow, in which ye shall abide for ever!" This the great bliss!

On that day the hypocrites, both men and women, shall say to those who
believe, "Tarry for us, that we may kindle our light at yours." It shall
be said, "Return ye back, and seek light for yourselves." But between
them shall be set a wall with a gateway, within which shall be the
Mercy, and in front, without it, the Torment. They shall cry to them,
"Were we not with you?" They shall say, "Yes! but ye led yourselves into
temptation, and ye delayed, and ye doubted, and the good things ye
craved deceived you, till the doom of God arrived:--and the deceiver
deceived you in regard to God."

On that day, therefore, no ransom shall be taken from you or from those
who believe not:--your abode the fire!--This shall be your master! <span
id="fr_1062"></span>[4](#fn_1062) and wretched the journey thither!

Hath not the time come, for those who believe, to humble their hearts at
the warning of God and at the truth which he hath sent down? and that
they be not as those to whom the Scriptures were given heretofore, whose
lifetime was prolonged, but whose hearts were hardened, and many of them
were perverse?

Know that God quickeneth the earth after its death! Now have we made
these signs clear to you, that ye may understand.

Verily, they who give alms, both men and women, and they who lend a
generous loan to God,--doubled shall it be to them--and they shall have
a noble recompense.

And they who believed in God and his apostle are the men of truth, and
the witnesses in the presence of their Lord; <span
id="fr_1063"></span>[5](#fn_1063) They shall have their recompense and
their light: But as for the infidels, and those who give the lie to our
signs, these shall be the inmates of Hell.

Know ye that this world's life is only a sport, and pastime, and show,
and a cause of vainglory among you! And the multiplying of riches and
children is like the plants which spring up after rain--Their growth
rejoiceth the husband-man; then they wither away, and thou seest them
all yellow; then they become stubble. And in the next life is a severe
chastisement,

Or else pardon from God and His satisfaction: and this world's life is
but a cheating fruition. <span id="fr_1064"></span>[6](#fn_1064)

Vie in hasting after pardon from your Lord, and Paradise--whose
outspread is as the outspread of the Heaven and of the Earth: Prepared
is it for those who believe in God and His apostles: Such is the bounty
of God: to whom He will He giveth it: and of immense bounty is God!

No mischance chanceth either on earth or in your own persons, but ere we
created them, it was in the Book; <span
id="fr_1065"></span>[7](#fn_1065)--for easy is this to God--

Lest ye distress yourselves if good things escape you, and be over
joyous for what falleth to your share. God loveth not the presumptuous,
the boaster,

Who are covetous themselves and incite others to covetousness. But whose
turneth away from almsgiving--Ah! God is the Rich, the Praiseworthy.

We have sent our apostles with the clear tokens, and we have caused the
Book and the balance <span id="fr_1066"></span>[8](#fn_1066) to descend
with them, that men might observe fairness. And we have sent down IRON.
Dire evil <span id="fr_1067"></span>[9](#fn_1067) resideth in it, as
well as advantage, to mankind! God would know who will assist Him and
his apostle in secret. Verily, God is Powerful, Strong.

And of old sent we Noah and Abraham, and on their seed conferred the
gift of prophecy, and the Book; and some of them we guided aright; but
many were evil doers.

Then we caused our apostles to follow in their footsteps; and we caused
Jesus the son of Mary to follow them; and we gave him the Evangel, <span
id="fr_1068"></span>[10](#fn_1068) and we put into the hearts of those
who followed him kindness and compassion: but as to the monastic life,
they invented it themselves. The desire only of pleasing God did we
prescribe to them, and this they observed not as it ought to have been
observed: but to such of them as believed gave we their reward, though
many of them were perverse.

O ye who believe! fear God and believe in his apostle: two portions of
his mercy will He give you. He will bestow on you light to walk in, and
He will forgive you: for God is Forgiving, Merciful;

That the people of the Book may know that they have no control over
aught of the favours of God, and that these gifts of grace <span
id="fr_1069"></span>[11](#fn_1069) are in the hands of God, and that He
vouchsafeth them to whom he will; for God is of immense bounty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1059"></span>[1](057.htm#fr_1059) The general tone of this
Sura shews it to have been revealed at Medina, and from verse 22 it may
be inferred that its true date lies between the battle of Ohod and the
battle of the Ditch.

<span id="fn_1060"></span>[2](057.htm#fr_1060) Lit. the exterior and the
interior.

<span id="fn_1061"></span>[3](057.htm#fr_1061) To guide them on their
route to paradise.

<span id="fn_1062"></span>[4](057.htm#fr_1062) Patronus. Mar.
Beschutzer. Ullm. Or, what ye have deserved.

<span id="fn_1063"></span>[5](057.htm#fr_1063) Against the infidels.

<span id="fn_1064"></span>[6](057.htm#fr_1064) Supellex deceptionis.
Mar.

<span id="fn_1065"></span>[7](057.htm#fr_1065) Of our eternal decrees.

<span id="fn_1066"></span>[8](057.htm#fr_1066) Brought by Gabriel to
Noah, who imparted its use to his posterity. So say the commentators.
But the expression seems rather to be figurative. Comp. Sura lv. 6, p.
74.

<span id="fn_1067"></span>[9](057.htm#fr_1067) Or, mighty warlike
strength, but the antithesis requires the rendering given in the text.
Comp. Gen. iv. 22, and Michna Tr. Aboth, 5, 9.

<span id="fn_1068"></span>[10](057.htm#fr_1068) We are not to understand
by the word Evangel the actual volume of the New Testament, or any one
of its component parts, but rather the revelation made to Jesus by God
himself, which Muhammad may have imagined to have been committed to
writing subsequently, in the same way as his own Koran.

<span id="fn_1069"></span>[11](057.htm#fr_1069) The word in the original
is the same for favours, gifts of grace, bounty. The reference is to the
gift of prophecy (Beidh.) mentioned verse 27.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sura IV.--Women \[C.\]](004)

</div>
