<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/066) 
[Pickthall](../pick/066)  [Palmer Part II (SBE09)](../sbe09/066)  [Yusuf
Ali/Arabic](../quran/06601)  [Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq066)   
[Previous](048)  [Next](060) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'ân, Rodwell edition \[1876\]; at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SURA LXVI.--THE FORBIDDING \[CIX.\]

MEDINA.--12 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

WHY, <span id="fr_1189"></span>[1](#fn_1189) O Prophet! dost thou hold
that to be FORBIDDEN which God hath made lawful to thee, from a desire
to please thy wives, since God is Lenient, Merciful?

God hath allowed you release from your oaths; and God is your master:
and He is the Knowing, Wise.

When the prophet told a recent occurrence as a secret to one of his
wives, and when she divulged it and God informed him of this, he
acquainted her with part and withheld part. <span
id="fr_1190"></span>[2](#fn_1190) And when he had told her of it, she
said, "Who told thee this?" He said, "The Knowing, the Sage hath told it
me.

"If ye both be turned to God in penitence, for now have your hearts gone
astray . . . . <span id="fr_1191"></span>[3](#fn_1191) but if ye
conspire against the Prophet, then know that God is his Protector, and
Gabriel, and every just man among the faithful; and the angels are his
helpers besides.

"Haply if he put you both away, his Lord will give him in exchange other
wives better than you, Muslims, believers, devout, penitent, obedient,
observant of fasting, both known of men and virgins."

O Believers! save yourselves and your families from the fire whose fuel
is men and stones, over which are set angels fierce and mighty: they
disobey not God in what He hath commanded them, but execute His behests.

O ye Infidels! make no excuses for yourselves this day; ye shall surely
be recompensed according to your works.

O Believers! turn to God with the turning of true penitence; haply your
Lord will cancel your evil deeds, and will bring you into the gardens
'neath which the rivers flow, on the day when God will not shame the
Prophet, nor those who have shared his faith: their light shall run
before them, and on their right hands! they shall say, "Lord perfect our
light, and pardon us: for thou hast power over all things."

O Prophet! make war on the infidels and hypocrites, and deal rigorously
with them. Hell shall be their abode! and wretched the passage to it!

God setteth forth as an example to unbelievers the wife of Noah and the
wife of Lot; they were under two of our righteous servants, both of whom
they deceived: but their husbands availed them nought against God: and
it shall be said "Enter ye into the fire with those who enter."

God also holdeth forth to those who believe the example of the wife of
Pharaoh, <span id="fr_1192"></span>[4](#fn_1192) when she said, "Lord,
build me an house with thee in Paradise, and deliver me from Pharaoh and
his doings; and deliver me from the wicked:"

And Mary, the daughter of Imran, who kept her maidenhood, and into whose
womb <span id="fr_1193"></span>[5](#fn_1193) we breathed of our spirit,
and who believed in the words of her Lord and His Scriptures, and was
one of the devout.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1189"></span>[1](066.htm#fr_1189) The first verses of this
Sura were revealed (Hej. 7.) on occasion of Muhammad's reviving
affection for Mary, a Copt slave sent him by the governor of Egypt, from
whom he had recently (verse 3) sworn to his wife Hafsa to separate
entirely. Hafsa, who had been greatly incensed at their amour, of which
Muhammad had himself informed her, communicated the matter in confidence
to Ayesha, from whose altered manner, probably, the prophet found that
his secret had been betrayed. To free Muhammad from his obligation to
Hafsa was the object of this chapter.

<span id="fn_1190"></span>[2](066.htm#fr_1190) Muhammad withheld the
fact that Ayesha, as well as God, was his informant, but taxed Hafsa
with not having kept his secret.

<span id="fn_1191"></span>[3](066.htm#fr_1191) Supply God will pardon
you.

<span id="fn_1192"></span>[4](066.htm#fr_1192) Asia, a name, perhaps,
corrupted from that of Pharaoh's daughter Bithiah. 1 Chron. iv.18.

<span id="fn_1193"></span>[5](066.htm#fr_1193) See Sura xxi. 91. Lit.
quae rimam suam tuita est, in quam (rimam) inflavimus Spiritus nostri
partem. Thus Beidh.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sura LX.--She Who Is Tried \[CX.\]](060)

</div>
