[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Egypt](../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](stle07.md) 
[Next](stle09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0865433623/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Stolen Legacy*, by George G. M. James, \[1954\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

### CHAPTER IV:

### The Egyptians Educated the Greeks.

#### 1. The Effects of the Persian Conquest.

A. *Immigration restrictions against the Greeks are removed and Egypt is
thrown open to Greek research*.

Owing to the practice of piracy, in which the Ionians and Carians were
active, the Egyptians were forced to make immigration laws restricting
the immigration of the Greeks and punishing their infringement by
capital punishment, i.e., the sacrifice of the victim. Before the time
of Psammitichus, the Greeks were not allowed to go beyond the coast of
Lower Egypt, but during his reign and that of Amasis, those conditions
were modified. For the first time in Egyptian history Ionians and
Carians were employed as Mercenaries in the Egyptian Army (670 B.C.),
interpretation was organized through a body of interpreters, and the
Greeks began to gain useful information concerning the culture of the
Egyptians.

In addition to these changes, King Amasis removed the restrictions
against the Greeks and permitted them to enter Egypt and settle in
Naucratis. About this same time, i.e., the reign of Amasis, the
Persians, through Cambyses invaded Egypt, and the whole country was
thrown open to the researches of the Greeks.

B. *The Genesis of Greek Enlightenment*.

The Persian invasion, did not only provide the Greeks with ample
research, but stimulated the creation of prose history in Ionia.
Heretofore, the Greeks had little or no accurate knowledge of Egyptian
culture: but their contact with Egypt resulted in the genesis of their
enlightenment. (Ovid Fasti III 338; Herodotus Bk. II p. 113; Plutarch p.
380; Eratosthenes ap Strabo 801–802; Diogenes Bk. IX 49).

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

C. *Students from Ionia and the Islands of the Aegean visit Egypt for
their Education*.

Just as in our modern times, countries like the United States, England,
and France are attracting students from all parts of the world, on
account of their leadership in culture; so was it in ancient times,
Egypt was supreme in the leadership of civilization, and students from
all parts, flocked to that land, seeking admission into her mysteries or
wisdom system.

The immigration of Greeks to Egypt for the purpose of their education,
began as a result of the Persian invasion (525 B.C.), and continued
until the Greeks gained possession of that land and access to the Royal
Library, through the conquest of Alexander the Great. Alexandria was
converted into a Greek city, a centre of research and the capital of the
newly created Greek empire, under the rule of Ptolemies. Egyptian
culture survived and flourished, under the name and control of the
Greeks, until the edicts of Theodosius in the 4th century A.D., and that
of Justinian in the 6th century A.D., which closed the Mystery Temples
and Schools, as elsewhere mentioned. (Ancient Egypt by John Kendrick Bk.
II p. 55; Sandford's Mediterranean World p. 562; 570).

Concerning the fact that Egypt was the greatest education centre of the
ancient world which was also visited by the Greeks, reference must again
be made to Plato in the Timaeus who tells us that Greek aspirants to
wisdom visited Egypt for initiation, and that the priests of Sais used
to refer to them as children in the Mysteries.

As regards the visit of Greek students to Egypt for the purpose of their
education, the following are mentioned simply to establish the fact that
Egypt was regarded as the educational centre of the ancient world and
that like the Jews, the Greeks also visited Egypt and received their
education. (1) It is said that during the reign of Amasis, Thales who is
said to have been born about 585 B.C., visited Egypt and was initiated
by the Egyptian Priests into the Mystery System and science of the
Egyptians. We are also told that during his residence

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

in Egypt, he learnt astronomy, land surveying, mensuration, engineering
and Egyptian Theology. (See Thales in Blackwell's source book of
Philosophy; Zeller's Hist. of Phil.; Diogenes Laertius and Kendrick's
Ancient Egypt).

\(2\) It is said that Pythagoras, a native of Samos, travelled
frequently to Egypt for the purpose of his education. Like every
aspirant, he had to secure the consent and favour of the Priests, and we
are informed by Diogenes that a friendship existed between Polycrates of
Samos and Amasis King of Egypt, that Polycrates gave Pythagoras letters
of introduction to the King, who secured for him an introduction to the
Priests; first to the Priest of Heliopolis, then to the Priest of
Memphis, and lastly to the Priests of Thebes, to each of whom Pythagoras
gave a silver goblet. (Herodotus Bk. III 124; Diogenes VIII 3; Pliny N.
H., 36, 9; Antipho recorded by Porphyry).

We are also further informed through Herodotus, Jablonsk and Pliny, that
after severe trials, including circumcision, had been imposed upon him
by the Egyptian Priests, he was finally initiated into all their
secrets. That he learnt the doctrine of metempsychosis; of which there
was no trace before in the Greek religion; that his knowledge of
medicine and strict system of dietetic rules, distinguished him as a
product of Egypt, where medicine had attained its highest perfection;
and that his attainments in geometry corresponded with the ascertained
fact that Egypt was the birth place of that Science. In addition we have
the statements of Plutarch, Demetrius and Antisthenes that Pythagoras
founded the Science of Mathematics among the Greeks, and that he
sacrificed to the Muses, when the Priests explained to him the
properties of the right angled triangle. (Philarch de Repugn. Stoic 2 p.
1089; Demetrius; Antisthenes; Cicero de Natura Deorum III, 36).
Pythagoras was also trained in music by the Egyptian priests.
(Kendrick's Hist. of Ancient Egypt vol. I. p. 234).

\(3\) According to Diogenes Laertius and Herodotus, Democritus is said
to have been born about 400 B.C. and to

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

have been a native of Abdera in Miletus. We are also told by Demetrius
in his treatise on "People of the Same Name", and by Antisthenes in his
treatise on "Succession", that Democritus travelled to Egypt for the
purpose of his education and received the instruction of the Priests. We
also learn from Diogenes and Herodotus that he spent five years under
the instruction of the Egyptian Priests and that after the completion of
his education, he wrote a treatise on the sacred characters of Meroe.

In this respect we further learn from Origen, that circumcision was
compulsory, and one of the necessary conditions of initiation to a
knowledge of the hieroglyphics and sciences of the Egyptians, and it is
obvious that Democritus, in order to obtain such knowledge, must have
submitted also to that rite. Origen, who was a native of Egypt wrote as
follows:—

"Apud Aegyptios nullus aut geometrica studebat, aut astronomiae secreta
remabatur, nisi circumcisione suscepta." (No one among the Egyptians,
either studied geometry, or investigated the secrets of Astronomy,
unless circumcision had been undertaken).

\(4\) Concerning Plato's travels we are told by Hermodorus that at the
age of 28 Plato visited Euclid at Megara in company with other pupils of
Socrates; and that for the next ten years he visited Cyrene, Italy and
finally Egypt, where he received instruction from the Egyptian Priests.

\(5\) With regards to Socrates and Aristotle and the majority of
pre-Socratic philosophers, history seems to be silent on the question of
their travelling to Egypt like the few other students here mentioned,
for the purpose of their education. It is enough to say, that in this
case the exceptions have proved the rule, that ail students, who had the
means, went to Egypt to complete their education. The fact that history
fails to supply a fuller account of this type of immigration, might be
due to some or all of the following reasons:

\(a\) The immigration laws against the Greeks up to the time of King
Amasis and the Persian Invasion, (b) Prose

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

history was undeveloped among the Greeks during the period of their
educational immigration to Egypt. (c) The Greek authorities persecuted
and drove students of philosophy into hiding and consequently, (d)
Students of the Mystery System concealed their movements.

Let us remember that Anaxagoras was indicted and imprisoned; that he
escaped and fled to his home in Ionia, that Socrates was indicted,
imprisoned and condemned to death; and that both Plato and Aristotle
fled from Athens under great suspicion (William Turner's Hist. of Phil.
p. 62; Plato's Phaedo; Zeller's Hist. of Phil. p. 84; 127; Roger's Hist.
of Phil. p. 76; William Turner's Hist. of Phil. p. 126).

#### 2. The Effects of the Conquest of Egypt by Alexander the Great.

A. *The Royal Library and Museum together with Temples and other
Libraries are Looted*.

As elsewhere mentioned, it was an ancient custom of invading armies to
loot libraries and temples in order to capture books and manuscripts,
which were regarded as great treasures. A few instances would be enough
to verify this custom: (a) we are informed that during the Persian
Invasion beginning with Cambyses, the temples of Egypt were not only
stripped of their gold and silver, but rifled for their ancient records.
Every Egyptian Temple carried a secret library with secret manuscripts
and books. (b) We are also informed that when Athens was captured by the
Romans in 84 B.C. the library of books said to have belonged to
Aristotle was also captured and taken to Rome. (William Turner's Hist.
of Phil. p. 128; John Kendrick's Ancient Egypt vol. II p. 432).

Just as in the invasion of Egypt by the Persians, the invading armies
stripped the temples of their gold, silver and sacred books; and just as
in the capture of Athens by the Romans Sulla carried off the only
library of books which he found; so it is to be expected of Alexander
the Great, in his invasion of Egypt. One of the first things that he and
his companions

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

and armies would do, would be to search for the treasures of the land
and capture them. These were kept in temples and libraries and consisted
of gold and silver out of which the gods and ceremonial vessels were
made, and sacred books and, manuscripts kept both in libraries and in
the "Holy of Holies" of Temples.

It is my firm belief that this indeed was the great opportunity which
Alexander gave Aristotle and enabled him and his pupils to carry off as
many books as they wanted from the Royal Library and to convert it into
a research centre. Apart from the Royal Library at Alexandria, there was
also another famous library near by: The "Royal Library of Thebes"; "The
Menephtheion", which was founded by Pharaoh, Setei. The Menephtheion was
completed by Rameses II; but little occurs in history about this
greatest of Egyptian Royal Libraries.

However, any invading army would first loot the Royal Library of
Alexandria and then would turn their attention to the Menephtheion at
Thebes. They would also visit the cities of Memphis and Heliopolis and
likewise loot their libraries and temples. This was the ancient custom
and certainly one of the ways in which the Greeks received their
education from Egyptians. (Egyptian Mythology by Max Muller p. 187–189;
205; Diodorus 16, 51; Bunsen I p. 27; Ancient Egypt by John Kendrick
vol. II 56; 432–433).

It is therefore an erroneous belief that the Greeks, on Egyptian soil,
and through their own native ability, set up a great university at
Alexandria and turned out great scholars. On the other hand, since it is
a well known fact that Egypt was the land of temples and libraries, we
can see how comparatively easy it was for the Greeks to strip other
Egyptian libraries of their books in order to maintain the new Library
at Alexandria, after it had been already looted by Aristotle and his
pupils. The Greeks (i.e., Alexander the Great, Aristotle's school and
the succeeding Ptolemies) converted the Royal Library of Alexandria into
a research centre, by transferring

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Aristotle's school
and pupils from Athens to this great Egyptian Library, and therefore the
students who studied there received instructions from Egyptian priests
and teachers, until they died out. The difficulty of language and
interpretation made it imperative for the Greeks to use Egyptian
teachers.

The Greeks did not carry culture and learning to Egypt, but found it
already there, and wisely settled in that country, in order to absorb as
much as possible of its culture.

B. *The Royal Library of Thebes: The Menephtheion is described. It was
also looted by invading armies*.

But when we read a brief sketch of the magnificence of the Theban Royal
Library; The Menephtheion, we even see a better picture and are bound to
admit that Egypt was the store house of ancient culture and that that
culture was preserved in the form of literature stored away in her great
libraries and temples. Great as the Royal Library of Alexandria might
have been, we see in the Theban Royal Library something far more
magnificent and far more representative of the true greatness of our
Ancient Egypt.

On the left of the steps leading to the second court, there is still
seen the pedestal of the enormous granite statue of Rameses; the
largest, that ever existed in Egypt, according to Diodorus. Its height
has been calculated at fifty-four feet, and its weight, at 887¼ tons; a
marvel to the modern mind. The interior face of the wall of the pylon
represents the wars of Rameses III. The Osiride pillars of the second
court, are the monolithal figures, sixteen cubits in height, supplying
the place of columns, and at the foot of the steps leading from the
court to the next hall beyond, there were two sitting statues of the
King. The head of one of these was of red granite, known by the name of
"Young Memon", was taken away by Belzoni, and is now a principal
ornament of the British Museum.

Beyond this are the remains of a hall 133 feet broad by 100 feet long,
supported by 48 columns, twelve of which are

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

thirty-two feet in height and 21 feet in circumference. On different
parts of the columns, and the walls are represented acts of homage by
the king to the principal Deities of the Theban Pantheon, and the
gracious promises which they make him in return.

In another sculpture the two chief Divinities of Egypt invest him with
the emblems of military and civil dominion, i.e., the Scimitar, the
Scourge and the Pedum. Beneath, the twenty-three sons of Rameses appear
in procession, bearing the emblems of their respective high offices in
the state, their names being inscribed above them. Nine smaller
apartments, two of them still preserved, and supported by columns, lay
behind the hall. On the jambs of the first of these apartments are
sculptured Thoth: the Inventor of Letters, and the Goddess Saf, with the
title of 'Lady of Letters'; and 'President of the Hall of Books',
accompanied the former with an emblem of the sense of sight, and the
latter of hearing.

There is no doubt that this is the "Sacred Library" which Diodorus
describes as the inscribed "Dispensary of the Mind". It had an
astronomical ceiling, in which the twelve Egyptian months are
represented, with an inscription from which important inferences have
been drawn respecting the chronology of the reign of Rameses III.

On the walls is a procession of priests, carrying the Sacred Arts, and
in the next apartment, the last that now remains, the king is presenting
offerings to the various Divinities. (Ancient Egypt by J. Kendrick Bk. I
p. 128–131. Report of French Commission).

C. *Museum and the Library of Alexander were used as a University*.

The Museum and Library of Alexandria were so famous in ancient times,
that we wonder why more information concerning this centre of learning,
has not come down to us. A few references to authoritative sources might
no doubt help to enlighten us on this matter.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

From Sedgwick's and Tyler's History of Science, chapter 5 pages 87–119,
we learn that the subjugation of Egypt by Alexander the Great in 330
B.C. had checked the further development of Greek civilization on its
native soil.

That after the death of Alexander the Great in 323 B.C., his vast empire
was divided among his generals, and that Alexandria, the new Egyptian
capital fell to Ptolemy. That the city, barely ten years old, soon
became the centre of the learned world, and that by 300 B.C., the Museum
(i.e., the seat of the Muses), was founded, and became a veritable
university of Greek learning.

That to the Museum was attached a great library, with a dining hall and
lecture rooms for professors, and this became a school of philosophers,
mathematicians and astronomers. Here for the next 700 years, science had
its chief abiding place.

Here however, it should be remembered that the above statement of
Sedgwick and Tyler is misleading, since the Greeks did not carry a
civilization of their own to Egypt, but on the contrary found a very
highly developed Egyptian culture, the survival of which was maintained
by the use of Egyptian Priests and Scholars as teachers.

D. *A Military Policy of the Greeks to Commandeer Information From the
Egyptians was put in operation*.

One of the military policies adopted by the Greek military authorities
at Alexandria was the issue of commands to the leading Egyptian Priests
for information concerning the Egyptian history, philosophy and
religion. As a custom this is no less ancient than modern, since it is
also a custom in modern times for victorious armies to confer with the
men of science of an invaded country, in order to discover whether or
not, there is anything new in the field of science, which they might
possess. We would recall how at the end of World War II, the American
scientists conferred with the Japanese scientists at Tokio. Accordingly,
we are told that Ptolemy I Soter, in

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

order to elicit the secrets of Egyptian wisdom or mystery system,
ordered Manetho, the High Priest of the temple of Isis at Sebennytus in
Lower Egypt, to write the philosophy, and the history of the religion of
the Egyptians.

Accordingly, Manetho published several volumes concerning these
respective fields, and Ptolemy issued an order prohibiting the
translation of these books which had to be kept on reserve in the
Library, for instruction of the Greeks by the Egyptian Priests. Here it
becomes quite clear that the first professors of the Alexandrine School
were the Egyptian Priests, and that the Scholarchs and pupils of
Aristotle's transferred school, received their training directly from
the Egyptian Priests. It is also well to note that the chief text books
of the Alexandrine School were Manetho's books.

We are told by Apollodorus from whom Syncellus drew his information,
that Ptolemy II ordered Eratosthenes, the Cyrenean (i.e., a black man
and native of Cyrene) and librarian of the Alexandrine Library, to write
a chronology of the Theban Kings, and that Eratosthenes did so with the
aid of the Egyptian Hierophants at Thebes (Ancient Egypt by John
Kendrick vol. II p. 81; Apollodorus; Syncellus; Clinton, Fasti
Hellenici, sub anno).

Furthermore, it became the custom during the Greek and Roman occupation
to use the services of Egyptian Priests and Scholars, as professors at
the Alexandrine School. We are told that during the reign of Theodosius
(378–395 A.D.), the Egyptian Professor Horapollo wrote a system of the
Egyptian hieroglyphics: The Hieroglyphica of Horapollo, which has been
regarded as the best that has come down to modern times. We are also
told that this professor taught not only at the Alexandrine School, but
also at that of Constantinople.

(John Kendrick's Ancient Egypt Bk. I p. 242; Leeman's Amstelod, 1935
translated by Cory).

#### 3. The Egyptians Were the First to Civilize the Greeks.

Greece was first civilized by colonies from Egypt, then from

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Phoenicia and
Thrace. These were under the government of wise men, who not only
subdued the ferocity of an ignorant populace by civil institutions, but
also cast about them the strong chain of religion and the fear of the
gods. Whatever dogmas they had been taught in their respective
countries, concerning things divine and human, they delivered to these
newly formed societies, with the object of bringing them under the
restraint of virtuous discipline. Phoroneus and Cecrops were Egyptians,
Cadmus a Phoenician and Orpheus a Thracian, and each of them, through
their colonies carried into Greece the religious and philosophical
tenets of his respective country.

The practice of teaching the doctrines of religion to people under the
guise of myths originated from the Egyptians and was adopted by the
Phoenicians and Thracians, and subsequently introduced to the Greeks.

According to Strabo, it was not possible in ancient times to lead a
promiscuous multitude to religion and virtue by philosophical harangues.
This could be effected only by the aid of superstition, by prodigies and
fables. The thunder bolt, the aegis, the trident, the spear, torches and
snakes were the instruments made use of by the founders of States, to
terrify the ignorant and vulgar into subjection. These references must
speak for themselves.

Cheops and Cecrops were the names which the Greeks used for the Egyptian
Khufu, who belonged to the 4th Dynasty of the Egyptians or the pyramid
age, i.e., 2800 B.C.

(Strabo Bk. I; Brucker's Historia Critica Philosophiae with translation
by Wm. Enfield: Bk. II p. 62).

#### 4. Alexander Visits the Oracle of Ammon in the Oasis of Siwah.

No discussion on Alexander's invasion of Egypt would be complete without
reference to his famous visit to the Oracle of Ammon, situated in the
Oasis of Siwah. Alexander had placed a garrison in Pelusium, whence he
marched through

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

the desert along the eastern bank of the Nile to Heliopolis where he
crossed the river to Memphis, where his fleet had been awaiting him, and
where he was welcomed by the Egyptians and crowned as Pharaoh. Having
sacrificed to Apis and other Gods, Alexander descended the Nile by the
Canopic branch and set out on his journey to the Oracle of Ammon in the
Oasis of Siwah. His route was along the coast of Libya, as far as
Paraetonium, whence he marched through the desert to the Oasis of Siwah.
What do we suppose was Alexander's motive for visiting the Temple of
Ammon? Perhaps a brief description of the religious and economic
importance of Heliopolis, Memphis, Thebes and Ammonium might help us to
determine what it was.

In the first place these cities were strongholds of the Egyptian
religion, where there were many rich temples, schools and Priests, and
therefore were representative of the Egyptian religious life. In the
second place these cities were centres of education, and after the
Persian invasion, Greek students who travelled to Egypt for the purpose
of their education, received their training from the Priests of one or
all of these cities, as elsewhere mentioned.

When Pythagoras went to Egypt, he carried a letter of introduction from
Polycrates of Samos to King Amasis, who in turn gave him letters of
introduction to the Priests of Heliopolis, Memphis, and Thebes. As
centres of education, the temples and libraries of these cities
contained very valuable books; and in the third place, these regions had
previously been captured by the Persians for the very fact of their
wealth. This should explain why they included these districts in their
Satrapy which paid them an enormous annual tribute amounting to 700
talents of gold, together with the produce of the fisheries of Lake
Moeris which amounted to a talent a day, during the six months that the
water flowed in from the Nile; and a third part of that sum, during the
afflux. In addition Egypt furnished 120 thousand medicini of corn as
rations for the Persian troops who were stationed in the White Fort of
Memphis.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The equivalent of
this tribute was 170 thousand pounds sterling, and shows the underlying
motive not only of the Persian invading armies, but also of all invading
armies of antiquity. In the case of Alexander there is no exception.

According to history, the Persians were in occupation of Egypt, and
Alexander having mustered superior forces, went there and drove them out
and took possession himself. May I ask this question: was this a joke,
or was there a motive? And if there was a motive, what else could it
have been but that Alexander wanted the wealth in books, gold, silver,
ivory, slaves, and tribute which the Persians were extorting from the
unfortunate Egyptians?

In ancient times, the Oracle of Ammon at Siwah was the most celebrated,
and Heliopolis, Memphis and Thebes were representatives of the best of
Egyptian culture.

(John Kendrick's Ancient Egypt Book II P. 433–435; Diodorus 15, 16.
Herodotus Book III P. 124; Diogenes Laertius Book VIII; Timaeus of
Plato; Pliny N. H. XXXVI 9; Antiphon recorded by Porphyry).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V: The Pre-Socratic Philosophers and the Teachings
Ascribed to Them](stle09.md)
