[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Egypt](../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](stle03.md) 
[Next](stle05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0865433623/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Stolen Legacy*, by George G. M. James, \[1954\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">The Aims of the Book</span>

The aim of the book is to establish better race relations in the world,
by revealing a fundamental truth concerning the contribution of the
African Continent to civilization. It must be borne in mind that the
first lesson in the Humanities is to make a people aware of their
contribution to civilization; and the second lesson is to teach them
about other civilizations. By this dissemination of the truth about the
civilization of individual peoples, a better understanding among them,
and a proper appraisal of each other should follow. This notion is based
upon the notion of the Great Master Mind: Ye shall know the truth, and
the truth shall make you free. Consequently, the book is an attempt to
show that the true authors of Greek philosophy were not the Greeks; but
the people of North Africa, commonly called the Egyptians; and the
praise and honour falsely given to the Greeks for centuries belong to
the people of North Africa, and therefore to the African Continent.
Consequently this theft of the African legacy by the Greeks led to the
erroneous world opinion that the African Continent has made no
contribution to civilization, and that its people are naturally
backward. This is the misrepresentation that has become the basis of
race prejudice, which has affected all people of color.

For centuries the world has been misled about the original source of the
Arts and Sciences; for centuries Socrates, Plato and Aristotle have been
falsely idolized as models of intellectual greatness; and for centuries
the African continent has been called the Dark Continent, because Europe
coveted the honor of transmitting to the world, the Arts and Sciences.

I am happy to be able to bring this information to the attention of the
world, so that on the one hand, all races and creeds

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

might know the truth and free themselves from those prejudices which
have corrupted human relations; and on the other hand, that the people
of African origin might be emancipated from their serfdom of inferiority
complex, and enter upon a new era of freedom, in which they would feel
like free men, with full human rights and privileges.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I: Greek Philosophy is Stolen Egyptian
Philosophy](stle05.md)
