[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Egypt](../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](stle12.md) 
[Next](stle14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0865433623/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Stolen Legacy*, by George G. M. James, \[1954\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

# PART II

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

### CHAPTER IX:

### Social Reformation through the New Philosophy of African Redemption.

Now that it has been shown that philosophy, and the arts and sciences
were bequeathed to civilization by the people of North Africa and not by
the people of Greece; the pendulum of praise and honour is due to shift
from the people of Greece to the people of the African continent who are
the rightful heirs of such praise and honour.

This is going to mean a tremendous change in world opinion, and
attitude, for all people and races who accept the new philosophy of
African redemption, [i.e.](errata.htm#13.md) the truth that the Greeks were
not the authors of Greek philosophy; but the people of North Africa;
would change their opinion from one of disrespect to one of respect for
the Black people throughout the world and treat them accordingly.

It is also going to mean a most important change in the mentality of the
Black people: a change from an inferiority complex, to the realization
and consciousness of their equality with all the other great peoples of
the world, who have built great civilizations. With this change in the
mentality of the Black and White people, great changes are also expected
in their respective attitudes towards each other, and in society as a
whole.

In the drama of Greek philosophy there are three actors, who have played
distinct parts, namely Alexander the Great, who by an act of
[aggression](errata.htm#14.md) invaded Egypt in 333 B.C., and ransacked and
looted the Royal Library at Alexandria and together with his companions
carried off a booty of scientific, philosophic and religious books.
Egypt was then stolen and annexed as a portion of Alexander's empire;
but the invasion

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

plan included far more than mere territorial expansion; for it prepared
the way and made it possible for the capture of the culture of the
African Continent. This brings us to the second actor, that is the
School of Aristotle whose students moved from Athens to Egypt and
converted the royal library, first into a research centre, and secondly
into a University and thirdly compiled that vast body of scientific
knowledge which they had gained from research, together with the oral
instructions which Greek students had received from the Egyptian
priests, into what they have called the history of Greek Philosophy.

In this way, the Greeks stole the Legacy of the African Continent and
called it their own. And as has already been pointed out, the result of
this dishonesty has been the creation of an erroneous world opinion;
that the African continent has made no contribution to civilization,
because her people are backward and low in intelligence and culture.

This erroneous opinion about the Black people has seriously injured them
through the centuries up to modern times in which it appears to have
reached a climax in the history of human relations. And now we come to
the third actor, and that is Ancient Rome, who through the edicts of her
Emperors Theodosius in the 4th century A.D. and Justinian in the 6th
century A.D. abolished the Mysteries of the African Continent; that is
the ancient culture system of the world. The higher metaphysical
doctrines of those Mysteries could not be comprehended; the spiritual
powers of the priests were unsurpassed; the magic of the rites and
ceremonies filled the people with awe; Egypt was the holy land of the
ancient world and the Mysteries were the one, ancient and holy Catholic
religion, whose power was supreme. This lofty culture system of the
Black people filled Rome with envy, and consequently she legalized
Christianity which she had persecuted for five long centuries, and set
it up as a state religion and as a rival of Mysteries, its own mother.
This is why the Mysteries have been despised; this is why other ancient
religions of the Black

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

people are despised; because they are all offspring of the African
Mysteries, which have never been clearly understood by Europeans, and
consequently have provoked their prejudice and condemnation. In keeping
with the plan of Emperors Theodosius and Justinian to exterminate and
forever suppress the culture system of the African continents the
Christian church established its missionary enterprise to fight against
what it has called paganism. Consequently missionaries and educators
have gone to the mission field with a superiority complex, born of
miseducation and disrespect: a prejudice which has made it impossible
for them to accomplish the blessings which missionary enterprise might
otherwise have accomplished. For this reason Missionary enterprise has
been responsible for a positive injury against the African people, which
consists of the perpetual caricature of African culture in literature
and exhibitions which provoke laughter and disrespect. This then is only
a brief summary of the parts played by the persons of the drama of Greek
philosophy and the resultant effects upon the Black people. This drama
might be called the Causa Causarum of the social plight of the peoples
of African descent, because it has made the White and Black races not
only common victims of a false racial tradition about the African
Continent but also partners in the solution of the problem of racial
reformation.

I believe that a reformation of this kind is possible, if the best minds
of both racial groups co-operate in its accomplishment. Both groups have
been the common victims of miseducation arising from a false tradition
about the African Continent and it has caused them to develop attitudes
according to their common belief: The White people, a superiority
complex; and the Black people, the corresponding inferiority complex;
and if we are to accomplish a reformation in race relations it is
obvious that both racial groups must combine their efforts in the
abandonment and destruction of that mentality which has plunged the
Black people into their social plight.

This I suggest should be done by a world wide dissemination

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

of the truth, through a system of re-education, in order to stimulate
and encourage a change in the attitude of races toward each other In
combining their efforts, both races must not only preach and teach the
truth that the Mystery system of the African Continent gave the world
philosophy and religion, and the arts and sciences, but they must see to
it that all false praise of the Greeks be removed from the textbooks of
our schools and colleges: for this is the practice that has blind-folded
the world, and has laid the foundations for the deplorable race
relations of the modern world. (a) The name of Pythagoras, for instance,
should be deleted from our mathematical textbooks: in Geometry, where
the theorem of the square on the hypotenuse of a right angled triangle
is called the Pythagorean theorem, because this is not true. (b) we must
point out to the world the deception in attaching the authorship of
Socrates to the precept 'man know thyself'; and in attaching the
authorship of Plato to the four cardinal virtues; since Socrates
obtained the self-knowledge precept from the Egyptian temples where it
was used as an inscription; and Plato reduced the ten virtues of the
North African Mystery system to four (c) we must also prove to the world
that the doctrines of the so-called Greek philosophers originated from
the ancient Mystery System of North Africa.

This proof has been set forth in chapters five to eight of 'Stolen
Legacy,' and in order to carry out our world-wide crusade we must
recommend 'Stolen Legacy,' for adoption and study in the schools and
colleges of both racial groups and in our fraternities, sororities and
inter-racial groups, in order that young and old of our present
generation might all get to know the truth and be able to pass it on to
future generations.

This I believe would be a very helpful method by which this process of
re-education would become universal and effective in the creation of a
much needed racial reformation. The White people of 'our modern age
cannot be regarded as [wholly](errata.htm#15.md) responsible for social
conditions which are the result

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

of false racial tradition. It is this that makes race relations a
challenge to the best minds of both racial groups to combine their
efforts in its solution.

But our disturbed race relations have also another cause. This I would
say is both supplementary and intensive; for the false tradition about
the backwardness of the African Continent, created by Alexander the
Great and Aristotle's School has been dramatized by missionary
literature and exhibitions, as the will of Roman Emperors and as a
source of laughter and disrespect. There is no doubt that this policy
has created bitterness and dissatisfaction in the minds of natives, who
have been compelled to question the sincerity of the missionary. In the
meantime missionary enterprise gains the sympathy and support of a
miseducated world, in order to carry on its programme.

What can we do to eradicate this second and more subtle evil: the
dramatization of a false tradition so as to make it appear as true? I
suggest that since the missionary dramatizes false tradition because he
himself also believes it, we should combine our efforts, first of all in
re-educating him so that he might know the truth and change his
superiority complex which is responsible for his mistaken policy. His
re-education should not only consist of a thorough study of the ideas
and arguments contained in my book 'Stolen Legacy'; but he must also be
given special training in the language, customs and ideals of Africans,
in order to make him cultivate an attitude of respect for the culture of
the African Continent, seemingly the oldest specimen to have been
developed by mankind; because that continent is the birth place and the
cradle of the Ancient Mysteries. With a world enlightened as to the real
truth about the place of the African Continent in the history of
civilization, false tradition and belief should cease to be effective,
disrespect and prejudice should tend to disappear, and race relations
should tend to be normal and peaceful. This brings us to the final
problem, the problem of African redemption. The aims of 'Stolen Legacy'
are not only to stimulate a reformation

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

in race relations and scientific research; but also to cultivate race
pride in the Black people themselves and to offer them a New Philosophy
of African Redemption as the Modus Operandi of achieving racial
reformation.

This New Philosophy of Redemption consists of a simple proposition as
follows:

'The Greeks were not the authors of Greek philosophy, but the Black
people of North Africa, The Egyptians.'

Now, in order to explain the value of this proposition, three questions
must be asked and answered.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

\(a\) *As a simple proposition, what is its significance?*

Its significance lies in the fact that it is a statement of an important
truth, which is the exposure of Greek dishonesty.

\(b\) *Why is this proposition called a philosophy?*

A philosophy is an accepted belief, and this proposition is a philosophy
because it is offered as a belief, worthy of acceptance.

\(c\) *What is a philosophy of redemption?*

A philosophy of redemption is not merely an accepted belief; but a
belief that is also lived in order to enjoy the benefits of its
teaching.

</div>

This proposition will become a philosophy of redemption to all Black
people, when they accept it as a belief and live up to it. This brings
us to our final question and that is, how to live up to this philosophy
of redemption? In other words, *how shall the Black people work out
their own salvation?*

From the outset my readers and co-workers in the solution of a common
problem, must be reminded that our philosophy of redemption is a
psychological process, involving a change in belief or mentality to be
followed by a corresponding change in behaviour. *It really signifies a
mental emancipation, in which the Black people will be liberated from
the chain of traditional falsehood*, which for centuries has
incarcerated them in the prison of inferiority complex and world
humiliation and insult. This mental emancipation or redemption, it must
be remembered,

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

has two functions. It is general, when, on the one hand, the phenomenon
of our unwholesome race relations is regarded as a general problem
needing a general emancipation of both races in order to effect a
solution. In this general sense emancipation transcends the limitations
and boundaries of race, and therefore includes the whole world, White
and Black people, since we are all victims of the same chain of the
traditional falsehood, that has incarcerated the modern world. On the
other hand, emancipation or redemption is specific, when we refer to the
effects of the phenomenon of unwholesome race relations upon the Black
people. It is freedom from such conditions that constitutes the specific
function of emancipation or redemption.

We digressed somewhat in order to explain the terms
[philosophy](errata.htm#16.md) and philosophy of redemption, believing it
to be necessary before proceeding to answer the next question: how to
live up to this New Philosophy of Redemption? How must it be worked out?

Being liberated from inferiority complex by their New Philosophy of
Redemption, which is destined to destroy the chain of false tradition
which has incarcerated them, the Black people must face and interpret
the world according to their new vision and philosophy. Throughout the
centuries up to our modern times, world conditions have been influenced
by two phenomena which have affected human relations.

\(i\) The giving of false praise to the Greeks: a custom which appears
to be an educational policy conducted by educational institutions. This
has led to the false worship of Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, as
intellectual gods in all the leading universities of the world, and in
support of this intellectual worship, these institutions have also
organized what are known as Greek lettered fraternities and sororities,
as the symbols of the superiority of Greek intellect and culture.

\(ii\) The second phenomenon is Missionary enterprise whereby the Black
people's culture has been caricatured in literature and exhibitions, in
such specimens as provoke disrespect

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

and laughter. Never let us forget that the Roman Emperors Theodosius and
Justinian were responsible for the abolition of the Egyptian Mysteries
that is the culture system of the Black people, and also for the
establishment of Christianity for its perpetual suppression.

Likewise, never let us forget when we are reviewing this bit of history
that the Greeks called the Egyptians Hoi Aiguptoi which meant Black
people.

In living up to their New Philosophy of Redemption, the life of the
Black people will have to be one of counteraction against these two sets
of conditions. In the first place the Black people must adopt a negative
attitude towards this type of phenomena, because they have become fully
aware that these phenomena are the result of a false tradition, and
therefore also partake of the nature of falsehood and insincerity.

In this negative attitude the Black people of the world must shun the
false tradition and must teach the truth, which is their New Philosophy
of Redemption. This must be done in the home to young children; in the
colleges and schools to students; from the pulpits and platforms to
audiences; and in the fraternities and sororities to young men and
women. This New Philosophy of Redemption, being a revelation of truth in
the history of Black people's civilization must become a necessary
portion of their education, and must be taught for generations and
centuries to come; in order to fill them with inspiration and pride and
liberate them from mental servitude.

In the second place, in this negative attitude the Black people must
demonstrate their disbelief in the false worship of Greek intellect.
This should be done in the following three ways:—

\(i\) They must discontinue the practice of quoting Socrates, Plato and
Aristotle in their speeches as intellectual models; because we know that
their philosophy was stolen (ii) They must relinquish membership from
all Greek lettered fraternities and sororities and (iii) They must
abolish all Greek lettered fraternities and sororities from all colored
colleges because

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

they have been a source of the promotion of inferiority complex and of
educating the Black people against themselves. We come now to the
counteraction of the second set of phenomena, the missionary activities
in defamatory literature and exhibitions which provoke disrespect for
and laughter at the Black people.

Just as in the first set of phenomena, so is it in the second, the Black
people must adopt a negative attitude in their attempt to live up to
their philosophy of redemption. Of course, they are perfectly well aware
that the activities of missionaries are the result of their own
miseducation through the medium of a false tradition about Black people;
but since their problem is also one of emancipation from certain social
evils, the Black people feel that they are entitled to a change in
Missionary policy. For these reasons I suggest that the negative
attitude of the Black people should consist first of a boycott of
missionary literature and exhibitions, and secondly, of a perpetual
protest against these forms of missionary policy, until a change is
brought about. For as long as Missionary enterprise maintains its policy
of militancy against African culture, the Black people will be
disrespected. This is the least that the Black people are entitled to:
respectful treatment, because they are the representatives of the oldest
civilization in the world, from which all other cultures have borrowed.
I have frequently seen in the parish magazines of some European
churches, pictures of the following description:—An African Chief,
dressed in a new silk hat, a long shirt, but no trousers, a frock coat
and barefeet; probably to provide amusement for the parishioners and to
excite their pity. This is what the Black people must protest against
and this is how they must live up to their philosophy of redemption and
work it out.

In conclusion, let us remember that the unfortunate position of the
modern church in being associated with the drama of Greek philosophy is
excusable; because her missionary function has been due to the erroneous
mandates and edicts of secular Princes and Emperors, who ruled the
church, when it was only

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

a department of state. This bit of ecclesiastical history should be well
known to the early branches of the Christian church and consequently,
they are the ones whom our enlightened age expects to initiate a change
in missionary policy, which would free themselves from the error and
superstition of human relations.

This lead of the various branches of Catholicism should be followed by
Protestantism, so that the entire church of Christ on earth should be
united in this racial reformation, and carry to the mission field a
practical gospel of happiness; that is happiness that must begin while
we are here on earth; a gospel that is interested in the total welfare
of the people. A gospel which ignores the social and economic rights of
natives and emphasizes only happiness in an unknown world is onesided,
misleading, and contrary to Christian tenets and practice. It was early
Christianity that established a diaconate for the express purpose of
solving the economic problems of its adherents; so that they might begin
in their earthly life to experience what happiness
[really](errata.htm#17.md) meant.

It is evident that the benefits of religion are intended to be
coextensive with human needs and unless the Christian religion changes
its missionary policy with respect to the Culture of the Black people,
it would be difficult for them to obtain complete emancipation from the
social injuries created by Ancient Rome.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix](stle14.md)
