[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bw20)  [Next](bw22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE SINGING SWORD

WEIRD! WEIRD! WEIRD! EVER WEIRD! Listen to Sarvik of the woolly white
hair, and lolling red tongue!

In the ancient days of Wizards and Witches there lived, in Estonia, a
giant Hero named Kalevide. His back was like an oak, his shoulders were
gnarled and knotted, his arms like thick trees, his fingers spreading
like branches, and his fingernails as tough as boxwood.

As for his huge Sword, he could whirl it around like a fiery wheel. It
whistled through the air like a tempest. When he struck downward its
keen edge was as lightning. A splendid sword worthy of the great Hero!
It was wrought with the aid of powerful charms and tempered in seven
different waters.

And for the Sword, he had paid a heroÕs price, four pairs of good pack
horses, twenty milch kine, ten pairs of yoke oxen, and wheat, barley,
rye, bracelets, gold coins, silver brooches, the third of a kingdom, and
the dowries of three Maidens.

Now it once chanced that Kalevide with a load of heavy planks on his
back, was travelling over the land. He reached the margin of Lake
Peipis. Without waiting for a boat, he plunged into the water to his
middle, and strode across to the other shore.

On the other shore an evil Wizard was hiding in the bushes. He saw the
Giant Kalevide drawing nearer, looking huger and huger at each stride.
The Wizard swelled his bristly body--bristly as a wild boar--stretched
his wide mouth, and blinked his small upturned eyes, and muttered a
Spell.

Instantly a Storm Wind swept over Lake Peipis. But Kalevide laughed a
loud laugh at the wind, and said to the lake:

"You miserable little puddle, you are wetting belt!"

Then he stepped on land, and laid down his burden of planks, and trimmed
off their edges with his Sword. After which he stretched himself out to
rest.

The evil Wizard saw the gleam of the sharp Sword, and determined to
steal it. So he slunk deeper into the forest to wait.

Kalevide refreshed himself with bread and milk from his wallet, loosened
his belt, laid his Sword by his side, and soon fell asleep. Presently
the ground shook with his snoring, the billows of the lake arose, and
the forest echoed his snores.

Then the Wizard stole softly from the forest, and like a cat crept up to
the sleeping Giant. He began to mutter Magic Spells and call the Sword
to leave its master's side. But it would not move. Then he uttered
stronger and stronger Spells. He scattered rowan-leaves, thyme, fern,
and other Magic Herbs over the Sword. At last it moved and turned itself
toward the Wizard. He grasped it in his arms.

But its great weight almost bore him to the ground. He struggled
painfully along, step by step, dragging the Sword. By and by he reached
a stream, and jumped over it. Splash! The Sword slipped from his arms
and sank into the stream in its deepest place.

Then the Wizard began his Magic Spells again, and sang and muttered, and
sang again. But the Sword would not return. Day dawned, and the Wizard
fled into the forest.

When Kalevide awoke, he rubbed the sleep out of his eyes with his huge
fists. He felt for his Sword. It was not there! He saw the marks where
the Wizard had dragged the Sword along, so Kalevide rose up and followed
them. And as he went along he called on his Sword to come back to its
brother; he begged it to return, but there was no answer. Then he sang
Magic Spells, but there was no reply. When he reached the stream, he saw
the Sword gleaming at the bottom of the water.

Then Kalevide cried out to the Sword. asking who had stolen it and sunk
it in the stream. And the Sword sang in reply that the Wizard had taken
it, and that it had slipped from his grasp and fallen into the water,

"And now," sang the Sword, "I lie in the arms of the most beautiful of
all Water Nymphs!"

"And does my Sword," sang Kalevide, "prefer the arms of a beautiful
Water Nymph to the grasp of a Hero in battle?"

But the Sword refused to return, and Kalevide began his Incantations. He
sang and sang, and he laid it on the Sword, that if any Heroes came to
the stream, it must answer them; and if a singer came, it must sing; and
if a Giant Hero came as great as Kalevide, it must rise up and be his
Sword; but if the evil Wizard came, it must cut off both his legs.

Then Kalevide took up his load of planks, and went on his way. And where
a waterfall came foaming over high rocks, the Three Sons of the Wizard
met him. Two of them carried long whips with a big millstone fastened to
each lash. There in deadly combat Kalevide overcame the Three Sons of
the Wizard. Then he passed on.

Coming to a swamp, he felt tired, laid down his planks, and stretched
himself out to sleep. And while he slept the evil Wizard crept to his
side, and with Spells and Incantations threw him into a magic slumber.

And Kalevide dreamed of a better Sword than the first one, a Sword
forged in the work shop of Ilmarinen, Finland's Wizard, forged in that
wondrous workshop in the interior of a great mountain at the middle
point of the earth. Seven strong smiths wrought it with seven copper
hammers, and Ilmarinen, Finland's Wizard, watched every stroke of every
hammer.

And so Kalevide dreamed on before he set out on other and greater
adventures.

Many were his strange adventures;  
Many Witches he outwitted;  
Many Wizards fought and conquered;  
Kalevide fair Estland's Hero!

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Maiden of the Milky Way](bw22)
