[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bw40)  [Next](bw42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE VANISHMENT!

BOOM! BOOM! BOOM! BEAT! BEAT! BEAT! Boom! Boom! Boom!

And Jakamas of the golden bushy head, pointed eyes, and apple-red
cheeks, from Lithuania of the fragrant amber, thus ended his Wonder
Stories.

And the Four Ancient Wizards were silent!

See! The Great Nischergurgje with a rolling and a roaring struck his
Magic Drum. The tent door-flap lifted of itself. The glaring sun looked
in, hot air filled the tent, and clouds of mosquitoes and gnats darted
in buzzing and biting.

The Lapp children laughed and sang. They ran shouting out into the green
valley, to gather strawberries and flowers, and hear the cuckoos
calling. Birds twittered in the boughs, and streams and rivers sang
sweet music.

And the Lapp tent grew higher and higher, and Nischergurgje, that
tree-tall, tree-straight one, rose up. His white reindeer robe fell from
his shoulders, and he was clad all in bright silk embroidered with
variegated colors. He lifted his golden drum-hammer and again struck his
Magic Drum with a rolling and a roaring.

Boom! Boom! Boom! Boom-i-ty boom!

A clap like thunder! The living speaking Kantele began to play of
itself. The Four Ancient Wizards each struck his own Magic
Drum--thump!--and vanished in smoke.

Then Nischergurgje, chanting Magic Spells--beat! beat! beat! and
striking his Magic Drum, departed. Through the green flowering valley he
strode, over mossy tundra, over shaking, quaking bogs, across flowing
rivers, gurgling streams, and still lakes. The hot hot sun burned night
and day in the Arctic summer sky. And all green things grew, grew, grew,
night and day.

Onward and ever onward marched Nischergurgje toward the mountains,
beating! beating! beating! chanting! chanting! chanting! whistling!
whistling! whistling! Higher yet he climbed to the mountain-peaks from
which he came.

And there Nischergurgje, the Great Lapland Wizard, sat him down to wait
till the autumn with its gold-brown birch leaves was passed-to wait till
the hot summer was gone and the Long Night was returning to Lapland--to
wait till the Polar storms threw a veil of smooth white snow over valley
and tundra--to wait till the Northern Lights were shooting once more
across the dark night sky--flickering, wavering, darting here, darting
there, amber-colored, red, orange, yellow, green, blue, violet
flashings!

Boom! Boom! Boom! Beat! Beat! Beat!

In Lapland when the Arctic Storm Wind roars down from the mountains and
through the valleys and blows over the plains do you hear the Call of
the Magic Drum?

Calling! Calling! Calling!

Boom! Boom! Boom! Boom! Boom! Boom!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Tiny History of East Baltic Lands](bw42)
