[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mcb05)  [Next](mcb07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

# IV.

### Living in the Light of Eternity

### I

ETERNITY is, as a philosopher defines it, "an infinite extent of time,
in which every event is future at one time, present at another, past at
another." <span id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_98.md)

This is an interesting definition no doubt, but what is "infinity"? "No
beginning and no end?" What is time that has no beginning and no end?
Time cannot be defined without eternity nor eternity without time? Is
eternity time going on forever in two directions, past-ward and
future-ward? Is time eternity chopped to pieces or numbers?

Let us see whether a symbolic representation of eternity is more
amenable to our understanding or imagination. What would a poet, for
instance, say about it?

I saw Eternity the other night,  
Like a great ring of pure and endless light,  
  All calm, as it was bright,  
  And round beneath it, Time, in hours, days, years  
Driven by the spheres, <span id="page_94">p. 94</span>  
  Like a vast shadow moved, in which the world  
And all her train were hurled. <span id="fr_99"></span>[2](#fn_99.md)

Henry Vaughan's lines, as Bertrand Russell points out, <span
id="fr_100"></span>[3](#fn_100.md) are evidently suggested by Plato's
*Timaeus* in which Plato states:

Now the nature of the ideal being was everlasting, but to bestow this
attribute in its fulness upon a creature was impossible. Wherefore he
\[God\] resolved to have a moving image of eternity, and when he set in
order the heaven, he made this image eternal but moving according to
number, while eternity itself rests in unity; and this image we call
time, For there were no days and nights and months and years before the
heaven was created, but when he constructed the heaven he created them
also. <span id="fr_101"></span>[4](#fn_101.md)

Further, Plato goes on to say that the heaven and time are so closely
knit together that if one should dissolve the other might also be
dissolved:

Time, then, and the heaven came into being at the same instant in order
that, having been created together, if ever there was to be a
dissolution of them, they might be dissolved together. It was framed
after the pattern of the eternal nature, that it might remember this as
far as was possible; for the pattern exists from eternity, and the
created heaven has been, and is, and will be, in all time.

The heaven is eternity; and "the sun and moon and the five stars" are
"the forms of time, which imitate eternity and

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

revolve according to a law of number," and the moving images of the
eternal essence which alone "is" and not subject to becoming. What we
see with our sense is not the heaven itself, the original eternal being
itself, which is only in God's mind. If we wish, therefore, "to live in
the light of eternity" we must get into God's mind. "Is this possible?"
one may ask. But the question is not the possibility of achieving this
end, but its necessity; for otherwise we cannot go on living even this
life of ours though bound in time and measurable in days and nights, in
months and years. What is necessary, then, must be possible. When the
Eternal negated itself to manifest itself in "the forms of time," it
assuredly did not leave the forms helpless all by themselves; it must
have entered into them though negated. When the Eternal negated itself
into the moving, changing, sensible forms of time, it hid itself in
them. When we pick them up, we must see "the shoots of everlastingness"
in them. "Was" and "will be" must be in "is." What is finite must be
carrying in it, with it, everything belonging to infinity. We who are
becoming in time, therefore, must be able to see that which eternally
"is." This is seeing the world as God sees it, as Spinoza says, "*sub
specie aeternitatis*."

Eternity may be regarded as a negation as far as human finitude is
concerned, but inasmuch as this finitude is always changing, becoming,
that is, negating itself, what is really negative is the world itself
and not the eternal. The eternal must be an absolute affirmation which
our limited human understanding defines in negative terms. We must see
the world in this affirmation, which is God's way of seeing the world,
seeing everything as part of the whole. "Living in the light of
eternity" cannot be anything else.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

B. Jowett, translator of Plato, writes in his introduction to *Timaeus*:

Not only Buddhism, but Greek as well as Christian philosophy, show that
it is quite possible that the human mind should retain an enthusiasm for
mere negations. . . . Eternity or the eternal is not merely the
unlimited in time but the truest of all Being, the most real of all
realities, the most certain of all knowledge, which we nevertheless only
see through a glass darkly. <span id="fr_102"></span>[5](#fn_102.md)

The enthusiasm Jowett here refers to is not "for mere negations" or for
things which are "seen only through a glass darkly"; it cannot come out
of the human side of finitude; it must issue from eternity itself, which
is in the finitude, indeed, and which makes the finitude what it is.
What appears to be a mere negation from the logical point of view is
really the is-ness of things. As long as we cannot transcend the mere
logicality of our thinking, there will be no enthusiasm of any kind
whatever in any of us. What stirs us up to the very core of our being
must come from the great fact of affirmation and not from negation.

### II

Buddhism is generally considered negativistic by Western scholars. There
is something in it which tends to justify this view, as we observe in
Nāgārjuna's doctrine of "Eight No's":

There is no birth,  
Nor is there death;  
There is no beginning,  
Nor is there any ending;  
Nothing is identical with itself,  
Nor is there any diversification; <span id="page_97">p. 97</span>  
Nothing comes into existence,  
Nor does anything go out of existence. <span
id="fr_103"></span>[6](#fn_103.md)

What he aims at by negating everything that can be predicated of the
*Dharma* (Ultimate Reality) is to bring out thereby what he terms the
Middle Way. The Middle Way is not sheer nothingness, it is a something
that remains after every possible negation. Its other name is the
Unattainable, and the *Prajñā-pāramitā-sūtra* teach the doctrine of the
Unattainable. I will try to illustrate what it means in order to clarify
the deeper implications of this contradictory statement. I shall repeat
the story found in Chapter II.

There was once in the T’ang dynasty in the history of China, a great
scholar thoroughly versed in this doctrine. His name was Tokusan
(790-865, Tê-shan in Chinese). He was not at all satisfied with the Zen
form of Buddhist teaching which was rapidly gaining power, especially in
the south of China. Wishing to refute it he came out of Szŭ-ch’uan in
the southwestern part of China.

His objective was to visit a great Zen monastery in the district of
Li-yang. When he approached it he thought of refreshing himself with a
cup of tea. He entered a teahouse by the roadside and ordered some
refreshments. Seeing a bundle on his back, the old lady who happened to
be the teahouse keeper asked what it was.

Tokusan said, "This is Shoryo's \[Ch’ing-lung's\] great commentary on
the Diamond Sūtra \[a portion of the great *Prajñā-pāramitā-sūtra*\]-11

"I have a question and if you answer it I shall be glad to serve you the
refreshments free of charge. Otherwise, you will have to go elsewhere."

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

"What is your question?" the monk asked.

"According to the *Diamond Sūtra*, 'The past mind is unattainable, the
future mind is unattainable, and the present mind is unattainable.' If
so, what is the mind which you wish to punctuate?"

An explanation is needed here. In Chinese, "refreshments," *t’ien-hsin*,
literally means "punctuating the mind." I do not know how the term
originated. The teahouse keeper making use of "the mind" associated with
"refreshments" quoted the *Sūtra* in which the mind in terms of time is
said to be "unattainable" in any form, either past, present, or future.
If this is the case, the monk cannot have any "mind" which he wishes to
"punctuate." Hence her question.

Tokusan was nonplused, because he was never prepared to encounter such
questions while studying the Sūtra along the conventional line of
conceptual interpretation. He could not answer the question and was
obliged to go without his tea. Those who do not know how to transcend
time will naturally find it difficult to attain Nirvana which is
eternity.

The unattainability of Nirvana comes from seeking it on the other shore
of becoming as if it were something beyond time or birth-and-death
(*samsāra*). Nirvana is *samsāra* and *samsāra* is Nirvana. Therefore,
eternity, Nirvana, is to be grasped where time, *samsāra*, moves on. The
refreshments cannot be taken outside time. The taking is time. The
taking is something attainable, and yet it goes on in something
unattainable. For without this something unattainable all that is
attainable will cease to be attainable. This paradoxicality marks life.

Time is elusive, that is, unattainable. If we try to take hold of it by
looking at it from the outside, then we cannot even

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

have ordinary refreshments. When time is caught objectively in a
serialism of past, present, and future, it is like trying to catch one's
own shadow. This is negating eternity constantly. The unattainable must
be gasped from the inside. One has to live in it and with it. While
moving and changing, one must become the moving and changing. Emerson in
"Brahma" sings of the eternal as "one" in the changing and moving forms
of time:

They reckon ill who leave me out;  
  When me they fly, I am the wings;  
I am the doubter and the doubt,  
  And I the hymn the Brahmin sings.

\[paragraph continues\] Where "the doubter and the doubt" are one, there
is Brahma as "the pattern of the eternal nature," which is God himself.
When "the doubter and the doubt" are separated and placed in the
serialism of time, the dichotomy cuts into every moment of life
darkening forever the light of eternity.

"Living in the light of eternity" is to get into the oneness and allness
of things and to live with it. This is what the Japanese call "seeing
things *sono-mama*" <span id="fr_104"></span>[7](#fn_104.md) in their
suchness, which in William Blake's terms is to "hold infinity in the
palm of your hand, and eternity is an hour."

To see things as God sees them, according to Spinoza, is to see them
under the aspect of eternity. All human evaluation is, however,
conditioned by time and relativity. It is ordinarily difficult for us
humans "to see a world in a grain of sand, and a heaven in a wild
flower." To our senses, a grain of sand is not the whole world, nor is a
wild flower in a corner of the field a heaven. We live in a world of
discrimination and

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

our enthusiasm rises from the consideration of particulars. We fail to
see them "evenly" or "uniformly" as Meister Eckhart tells us to do,
which is also Spinoza's way, Blake's way, and other wise men's way, East
and West. Tennyson must have been in a similar frame of consciousness
when he plucked a wild flower out of the crannied wall and held it in
his hand and contemplated it. <span id="fr_105"></span>[8](#fn_105.md)

### III

However difficult this way of looking at the world is, the strange thing
to most of us, or rather the wonderful thing, is that once in a while we
transcend the temporal and relativistic point of view. It is then that
we realize that life is worth living, and that death is not the end of
all our strivings, and furthermore that what Buddhists call "thirst"
(*tṛiṣṇā*) is more deeply rooted than we imagine, as it grows straight
out of the root of *karuṇā*. <span id="fr_106"></span>[9](#fn_106.md)

Let me cite a Japanese Haiku poet of the eighteenth century, Bashō. One
of his seventeen-syllable poems reads:

When closely inspected,  
One notices a nazuna in bloom  
Under the hedge.

The nazuna is a small flowering wild plant. Even when flowering it is
hardly noticeable, having no special beauty. But when the time comes, it
blooms, fulfilling all that is needed of a living being as ordered at
the beginning of creation. It comes directly from God as does any other
form of being. There is nothing mean about it. Its humble glory
surpasses all human artificiality. But ordinarily we pass by it and

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

pay not the slightest attention. Bashō at the time must have been
strangely impressed by it blooming under a thickly growing hedge,
modestly lifting its tender head hardly discernible from the rest. The
poet does not at all express his emotions. He makes no allusions
whatever to "God and man," nor does he express his desire to understand
"What you are root, and all, and all in all." He simply looks at the
nazuna so insignificant and yet so full of heavenly splendor and goes on
absorbed in the contemplation of "the mystery of being," standing in the
midst of the light of eternity.

At this point it is important to note the difference between East and
West. When Tennyson noticed the flower in a crannied wall he "plucked"
it and held it in his hand and went on reflecting about it, pursuing his
abstract thought about God and man, about the totality of things and the
unfathomability of life. This is characteristic of Western man.

His mind works analytically. The direction of his thinking is toward the
externality or objectivity of things. Instead of leaving the flower as
it is blooming in the cranny, Tennyson must pluck it out and hold it in
his hand. If he were scientifically minded, he would surely bring it to
the laboratory, dissect it, and look at it under the microscope; or he
would dissolve it in a variety of chemical solutions and examine them in
the tubes, perhaps over a burning fire. He would go through all these
processes with anything, mineral or vegetable, animal or human. He would
treat the human body' dead or alive, with the same innocence or
indifference as he does a piece of stone. This is also a kind of seeing
the world in the aspect of eternity or rather in the aspect of perfect
"evenness."

When the scientist finishes (though the "when" of this is

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

unpredictable) his examination, experimentation, and observation, he
will indulge in all forms of abstract thinking; evolution, heredity,
genetics, cosmogeny. If he is still more abstract-minded, he may extend
his speculative mood to a metaphysical interpretation of existence.
Tennyson does not go so far as this. He is a poet who deals with
concrete images.

Compare all this with Bashō and we see how differently the Oriental poet
handles his experience. Above all, he does not "pluck" the flower, he
does not mutilate it, he leaves it where he has found it. He does not
detach it from the totality of its surroundings, he contemplates it in
its *sono-mama* state, not only in itself but in the situation as it
finds itself-the situation in its broadest and deepest possible sense.
Another Japanese poet refers to the wild flowers:

All these wild flowers of the fields  
Should I dare touch them?  
I offer them as they are  
To all the Buddhas in the  
Three thousand chiliocosms!

Here is the feeling of reverence, of mystery, of wonderment, which is
highly religious. But all this is not expressly given articulation.
Bashō simply refers first to his "close inspection" which is not
necessarily aroused by any purposeful direction of his intention to find
something among the bushes; he simply looks casually around and is
greeted unexpectedly by the modestly blooming plant which ordinarily
escapes one's detection. He bends down and "closely" inspects it to be
assured that it is a nazuna. He is deeply touched by its unadorned
simplicity, yet partaking in the glory of its unknown source. He does
not say a word about his inner feeling, every syllable

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

is objective except the last two syllables, "*kana*." <span
id="fr_107"></span>[10](#fn_107.md) "*Kana*" is untranslatable into
English, perhaps except by an exclamation mark, which is the only sign
betraying the poet's subjectivity. Of course, a Haiku being no more than
a poem of seventeen syllables cannot express everything that went on in
Bashō's mind at the time. But this very fact of the Haiku's being so
extremely epigrammatic and sparing of words gives every syllable used an
intensity of unexpressed inner feeling of the poet, though much is also
left to the reader to discover what is hidden between the syllables. The
poet alludes to a few significant points of reference in his
seventeen-syllable lines leaving the inner connection between those
points to be filled by the sympathetically or rather empathetically
vibrating imagination of the reader.

### IV

Western psychologists talk about the theory of empathy or transference
of feeling or participation, but I am rather inclined to propound the
doctrine of identity. Transference or participation is based upon the
dualistic interpretation of reality whereas the identity goes more
fundamentally into the root of existence where no dichotomy in any sense
has yet taken place. From this point of view, participation becomes
easier to understand and may be more reasonable or logical. For no
participation is possible where there is no underlying sense of
identity. When difference is spoken of, this presupposes oneness. The
idea of two is based on that of one. Two will never be understood
without one. To visualize this, read the following from Traherne's
*Centuries of Meditations*:

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

You never enjoy the world aright, till the Sea itself floweth in your
veins, till you are clothed with the heavens, and crowned with the
stars: and perceive yourself to be the sole heir of the whole world, and
more than so, because men are in it who are every one sole heirs as well
as you. <span id="fr_108"></span>[11](#fn_108.md)

Or this:

Your enjoyment of the world is never right, till every morning you awake
in Heaven; see yourself in your Father's Palace; and look upon the
skies, the earth, and the air as Celestial joys; having such a reverend
esteem of all, as if you were among the Angels. <span
id="fr_109"></span>[12](#fn_109.md)

Such feelings as these can never be comprehended so long as the sense of
opposites is dominating your consciousness. The idea of participation or
empathy is an intellectual interpretation of the primary experience,
while as far as the experience itself is concerned, there is no room for
any sort of dichotomy. The intellect, however, obtrudes itself and
breaks up the experience in order to make it amenable to intellectual
treatment, which means a discrimination or bifurcation. The original
feeling of identity is then lost and intellect is allowed to have its
characteristic way of breaking up reality into pieces. Participation or
empathy is the result of intellectualization. The philosopher who has no
original experience is apt to indulge in it.

According to John Hayward, who wrote an introduction to the 1950 edition
of Thomas Traherne's *Centuries of Meditations*, Traherne is "a
theosopher or visionary whose powerful imagination enabled him to see
through the veil of appearances

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

and rediscover the world in its original state of innocence." This is to
revisit the Garden of Eden, to regain Paradise, where the tree of
knowledge has not yet begun to bear fruit. The Wordsworthian
"Intimations" are no more than our longings for eternity that was left
behind. It is our eating the forbidden fruit of knowledge which has
resulted in our constant habit of intellectualizing. But we have never
forgotten, mythologically speaking, the original abode of innocence;
that is to say, even when we are given over to intellection and to the
abstract way of thinking, we are always conscious, however dimly, of
something left behind and not appearing on the chart of well-schematized
analysis. This "something" is no other than the primary experience of
reality in its suchness or is-ness, or in its *sono-mama* state of
existence. "Innocence" is a Biblical term and corresponds ontologically
to "being *sono-mama*" as the term is used in Buddhism.

Let me quote further from Traherne whose eternity-piercing eye seems to
survey the beginningless past as well as the endless future. His book of
"meditations" is filled with wonderful insights born of a profound
religious experience which is that of one who has discovered his primal
innocence.

Will you see the infancy of this sublime and celestial greatness? Those
pure and virgin apprehensions I had from the womb, and that divine light
wherewith I was born are the best unto this day, wherein I can see the
Universe. . . .

Certainly Adam in Paradise had not more sweet and curious apprehensions
of the world, than I when I was a child.

My very ignorance was advantageous. I seemed as one brought into the
Estate of Innocence. All things were spotless and pure and glorious:
yea, and infinitely mine, and joyful and precious. I knew not that there
were any sins, or complaints or laws. I

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

dreamed not of poverties, contentions or vices. All tears and quarrels
were hidden from mine eyes. Everything was at rest, free and immortal, I
knew nothing of sickness or death or rents or exaction, either tribute
or bread. . . .

All Time was Eternity, and a perpetual Sabbath. . . .

All things abided eternally as they were in their proper places.
Eternity was manifest in the Light of the Day, and something infinite
behind everything appeared: which talked with my expectation and moved
my desire. The city seemed to stand in Eden, or to be built in Heaven. .
. .

### V

Compared with these passages, how prosaic and emotionally indifferent
Zen is! When it sees a mountain it declares it to be a mountain; when it
comes to a river, it just tells us it is a river. When Chokei
(Chang-ching) after twenty hard years of study happened to lift the
curtain and saw the outside world, he lost all his previous
understanding of Zen and simply made this announcement:

How mistaken I was! How mistaken I was!  
Raise the screen and see the world!  
If anybody asks me what philosophy I understand,  
I'll straightway give him a blow across his mouth with my *hossu*.

Chokei does not say what he saw when the screen was lifted up. He simply
resents any question being asked about it. He even goes to the length of
keeping the questioner's mouth tightly closed. He knows that if one even
tried to utter a word and say "this" or "that," the very designation
misses the mark. It is like another master's bringing out before the
entire congregation a monk who asked him who Buddha was. The master

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

then made this remark, "Where does this monk want to find Buddha? Is
this not a silly question?" Indeed, we are all apt to forget that every
one of us is Buddha himself. In the Christian way of saying, this means
that we are all made in the likeness of God or, in Eckhart's words, that
"God's is-ness is my is-ness and neither more nor less." <span
id="fr_110"></span>[13](#fn_110.md)

It may not be altogether unprofitable in this connection to give another
Zen "case" where God's is-ness is made perceivable in the world of
particulars as well as in the world of

absolute oneness. To us the case illustrates the Eckhartian knowledge
"that I know God as He knows me, neither more nor less but always the
same." This is knowing things as they are, loving them in their
*sono-mama* state, or "loving justice for its own sake," <span
id="fr_111"></span>[14](#fn_111.md) that is to say, "loving God without any
reason for loving." Zen may look so remote and aloof from human affairs
that between it and Eckhart some may be persuaded to see nothing of
close relationship as I am trying to show here. But in reality Eckhart
uses in most cases psychological and personalistic terms whereas Zen is
steeped in metaphysics and in transcendentalism. But wherever the
identity of God and man is recognized the Zen statements as they are
given below will be intelligible enough.

Hakuin (1685-1768), a great Japanese Zen master of the Tokugawa era,
quotes in his famous book known as *Kwai-an-koku* 

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Go* (fas. 5) a story of Shun Rofu's interview
with a well-seasoned lay disciple of Zen. Shun (of the Sung dynasty) was
still a young man when this interview took place. It was the custom of
this lay disciple to ask a question of a new monk-visitor who wanted to
enjoy the hospitality of the devoted Zen Buddhist, and the following
once took place between him and a new caller:

Q. "How about the ancient mirror which has gone through a process of
thorough polishing?"

A. "Heaven and earth are illuminated."

Q. "How about before the polishing?"

A. "As dark as black lacquer."

The layman Buddhist was sorry to dismiss the monk as not fully deserving
his hospitality.

The monk now returned to his old master and asked:

Q. "How about the ancient mirror not yet polished?"

A. "Han-yang is not very far from here."

Q. "How about after the polish?"

A. "The Isle of Parrot \[Ying-wu\] lies before the Pavilion of Yellow
Stork \[Huang-huo\]."

This is said to have at once opened the monk's eye to the meaning of the
ancient mirror, which was the subject of discussion between him and
Shun. "The mirror" in its is-ness knows no polishing. It is the same old
mirror whether or not it goes through any form of polishing. "Justice is
even," says Eckhart. For "the just have no will at all: whatever God
wants, it is all one to them."

Now Hakuin introduces the following *mondo*: <span
id="fr_112"></span>[15](#fn_112.md)

A monk asked Ho-un of Rosozan, a disciple of Nangaku Yejo (died 744),
"How do we speak and not speak?" This is

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

the same as asking: How do we transcend the law of contradiction? When
the fundamental principle of thought is withheld, there will be no
thinking of God as Eckhart tells us, "God \[who\] is in his own
creature--not as he is conceived by anyone to be--nor yet as something
yet to be achieved--but more as an 'is-ness,' as God really is." <span
id="fr_113"></span>[16](#fn_113.md) What kind of God can this be?
Evidently, God transcends all our thought. If so, how have we ever come
to conceive of God? To say God is "this" or "that" is to deny God,
according to Eckhart. He is above all predicates, either positive or
negative. The monk's question here ultimately brings us to the same form
of quandary.

Ho-un of Rosozan, instead of directly answering the monk, retorted,
"Where is your mouth?"

The monk answered, "I have no mouth." Poor monk! He was aggressive
enough in his first questioning, for he definitely demanded to get an
answer to the puzzle: "How could reality be at once an affirmation and a
negation?" But when Ho-un counterquestioned him, "Where is your mouth?"
all that the monk could say was, "I have no mouth." Ho-un was an old
hand. Detecting at once where the monk was, that is, seeing that the
monk was still unable to transcend the dichotomy, Ho-un pursued with
"How do you eat your rice?"

The monk had no response. (The point is whether he had a real
understanding of the whole situation.)

Later Tozan, another master, hearing of this *mondo*, gave his own
answer: "He feels no hunger and has no need for rice."

"One who feels no hunger" is "the ancient mirror" that needs no
polishing, is he who "speaks and yet speaks not." He is "justice"
itself, the justice is the suchness of things. To be

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "just" means to be *sono-mama*, to follow the
path of "everyday consciousness," "to eat when hungry and to rest when
tired." In this spirit I interpret Eckhart's passage: "If I were
perpetually doing God's will, then I would be a virgin in reality, as
exempt from idea-handicaps as I was before I was born." <span
id="fr_114"></span>[17](#fn_114.md) "Virginity" consists in not being
burdened with any forms of intellection, in responding with "Yes, yes"
when I am addressed by name. I meet a friend in the street, he says,
"Good morning," and I respond, "Good morning." This will again
correspond to the Christian way of thinking: "If God told an angel to go
to a tree and pick off the caterpillar, the angel would be glad to do it
and it would be bliss to him because it is God's will." <span
id="fr_115"></span>[18](#fn_115.md)

A monk asked a Zen master, "I note an ancient wise man saying: 'I raise
the screen and face the broad daylight; I move the chair and am greeted
by the blue mountain.' What is meant by 'I raise the screen and face the
broad daylight'?"

The master said, "Please pass me the pitcher there."

"What is meant by 'I move the chair and am greeted by the blue
mountains'?"

"Please put the pitcher back where it was found." This was the answer
given by the master.

All these Zen mondo may sound nonsensical and the reader may come to the
conclusion that when the subject is "living in the light of eternity"
they are altogether irrelevant and have no place in a volume like this.
It is quite a natural criticism from the point of view of an ordinary
man of the world. But let us listen to what Eckhart, one of the greatest
mystics in the

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Christian world, states about the "now-moment"
which is no other than eternity itself:

The now-moment in which God made the first man, and the now-moment in
which the last man will disappear, and the now-moment in which I am
speaking are all one in God, in whom there is only one now. <span
id="fr_116"></span>[19](#fn_116.md)

I have been reading all day, confined to my room, and feel tired. I
raise the screen and face the broad daylight. I move the chair on the
veranda and look at the blue mountains. I draw a long breath, fill my
lungs with fresh air and feel entirely refreshed. I make tea and drink a
cup or two of it. Who would say that I am not living in the light of
eternity? We must, however, remember that all these are events of one's
inner life as it comes in touch with eternity or as it is awakened to
the meaning of "the now-moment" which is eternity, and further that
things or events making up one's outer life are no problems here.

### VI

I quote again from Eckhart's Sermon 18:

In eternity, the Father begets the Son in his own likeness. "The Word
was with God and the Word was God." Like God, it had his nature.
Furthermore, I say that God has begotten him in my soul. Not only is the
soul like him and he like it, but he is in it, for the Father begets his
Son in the soul exactly as he does in eternity and not otherwise. He
must do so whether he will or not. The Father ceaselessly begets his Son
and, what is more, he begets me not only as his Son but as himself and
himself as myself, begetting me in his own nature, his own being. At
that inmost Source, I spring from the Holy Spirit and there is one

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

life, one being, one action. All God's works are one and therefore He
begets me as he does his Son and without distinction. <span
id="fr_117"></span>[20](#fn_117.md)

Is this not a strong bold saying? But there is no denying its absolute
truth. Yet we must not forget that the truth of Eckhart's sermon comes
from setting ourselves in the light of eternity. As long as we are
creatures in time and seeking our own and not God's will, we shall never
find God in ourselves. When references are made to Christian symbolism
such as "God," "Father," "Son," "Holy Spirit," "begetting," and
"likeness," the reader may wonder in what sense Buddhists are using
these terms. But the truth is that symbols are after all symbols and
when this inner signification is grasped they can be utilized in any way
one may choose. First, we must see into the meaning and discard all the
historical or existential encumbrances attached to the symbols and then
we all, Christians as well as Buddhists, will be able to penetrate the
veil.

The Biblical God is said to have given his name to Moses on Mount Sinai
as "I am that I am." This is a most profound utterance, for all our
religious or spiritual or metaphysical experiences start from it. This
is the same as Christ's saying, "I am," that is, he is eternity itself,
while Abraham is in time, therefore, he "was" and not "is." Those who
live in the light of eternity always are and are never subjected to the
becoming of "was" and "will be."

Eternity is the absolute present and the absolute present is living a
*sono-mama* life, where life asserts itself in all its fullness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_98"></span>[93:1](mcb06.htm#fr_98.md) *The Dictionary of
Philosophy*, edited by Dagobert D. Runes (New York: Philosophical
Library), p. 97.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[94:2](mcb06.htm#fr_99.md) Henry Vaughan, "The
World."

<span id="fn_100"></span>[94:3](mcb06.htm#fr_100.md) *History of Western
Philosophy*, p. 144.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[94:4](mcb06.htm#fr_101.md) *Dialogues of Plato*,
translated by B. Jowett (London: Oxford University Press), Vol. III, p.
456. Published in the United States by Random House.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[96:5](mcb06.htm#fr_102.md) *Ibid*., p. 398.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[97:6](mcb06.htm#fr_103.md) The
*Mādhyamika-śāstra*, "Treatise on the Middle Way."

<span id="fn_104"></span>[99:7](mcb06.htm#fr_104.md) In the "as-it-is-ness"
of things.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[100:8](mcb06.htm#fr_105.md) "Flower in the
Crannied Wall."

<span id="fn_106"></span>[100:9](mcb06.htm#fr_106.md) "Compassion." One may
say it is the Buddhist equivalent of love.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[103:10](mcb06.htm#fr_107.md)

*Yoku mireba  
Nazuna hana saku  
Kakine kana*!

\[When\] carefully seen,  
Nazuna in bloom,  
The hedge!

<span id="fn_108"></span>[104:11](mcb06.htm#fr_108.md) *Centuries of
Meditations*, Thomas Traherne, 1636-1674 (London: P. J. & A. E. Dobell),
p. 19.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[104:12](mcb06.htm#fr_109.md) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[107:13](mcb06.htm#fr_110.md) Blakney, p. 180.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[107:14](mcb06.htm#fr_111.md) Eckhart's idea of
"justice" may be gleaned from the following passages from his "Sermon"
18 (Blakney, pp. 178-82):

"He is just who gives to each what belongs to him."

"They are just who take everything from God evenly, just as it comes,
great and small, desirable and undesirable, one thing like another, all
the same, and neither more nor less."

"The just live eternally with God, on a par with God, neither deeper nor
higher."

"God and I: we are one. By knowing God I take him to myself. By loving
God I penetrate him."

<span id="fn_112"></span>[108:15](mcb06.htm#fr_112.md) "Question and
answer."

<span id="fn_113"></span>[109:16](mcb06.htm#fr_113.md) Blakney, p. 204.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[110:17](mcb06.htm#fr_114.md) *Ibid*., p. 207.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[110:18](mcb06.htm#fr_115.md) *Ibid*., p. 205.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[111:19](mcb06.htm#fr_116.md) *Ibid*., p. 209.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[112:20](mcb06.htm#fr_117.md) *Ibid*., p. 181.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. Transmigration](mcb07.md)
