[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mcb03)  [Next](mcb05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

# II.

### The Basis of Buddhist Philosophy

### I

BUDDHIST philosophy is based on the experience Buddha had about
twenty-five centuries ago. To understand, therefore, what Buddhist
philosophy is, it is necessary to know what that experience was which
Buddha had after six years' hard thinking and ascetic austerities and
exercises in meditation.

We generally think that philosophy is a matter of pure intellect, and,
therefore, that the best philosophy comes out of a mind most richly
endowed with intellectual acumen and dialectical subtleties. But this is
not the case. It is true that those who are poorly equipped with
intellectual powers cannot be good philosophers. Intellect, however, is
not the whole thing. There must be a deep power of imagination, there
must be a strong, inflexible will-power, there must be a keen insight
into the nature of man, and finally there must be an actual seeing of
the truth as synthesized in the whole being of the man himself.

I wish to emphasize this idea of "seeing." It is not enough to "know" as
the term is ordinarily understood. Knowledge unless it is accompanied by
a personal experience is superficial and no kind of philosophy can be
built upon such a

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

shaky foundation. There are, however, I suppose many systems of thought
not backed by real experiences, but such are never inspiring. They may
be fine to look at but their power to move the readers is nil. Whatever
knowledge the philosopher may have, it must come out of his experience,
and this [experience](errata.htm#0) is seeing. Buddha has always
emphasized this. He couples knowing (*ñāṇa*, *jñāna*) with seeing
(*passa*, *paśya*), for without seeing, knowing has no depths, cannot
understand the realities of life. Therefore, the first item of the
Eightfold Noble Path is *sammādassana*, right seeing, and
*sammāsankappa*, right knowing, comes next. Seeing is experiencing,
seeing things in their state of suchness (*tathatā*) or is-ness.
Buddha's whole philosophy comes from this "seeing," this experiencing.

The experience which forms the basis of Buddhist philosophy is called
"enlightenment-experience," for it is this experience of enlightenment
which Buddha had after six years of hard thinking and profound
reflection, and everything he taught afterward is the unfolding of this
inner perception he then had.

What then was this enlightenment-experience?

### II

Roughly speaking, we can say that there are two ways of approaching this
question: What is the enlightenment-experience Buddha had? One is
objective and the other subjective. The objective approach is to find
out the first rationalized statements ascribed to Buddha after the
experience and understood as forming the basis of his teaching. That is,
what did he first teach? What was the main thesis he continued to preach
throughout his life? This will be to discover what characteristically
constitutes the Buddhist teaching as distinguished

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

from that of the rest of the Indian thinker The second approach, called
subjective, is to examine Buddha's utterances reflecting his immediate
feelings after the experience of enlightenment. The first approach is
metaphysical whereas the second is psychological or existential. Let us
start with the first.

What is universally recognized as Buddhist thought regardless of its
varieties of interpretation is the doctrine of *anattā* or *anātman*,
that is, the doctrine of non-ego. Its argument begins with the idea: (1)
that all things are transient as they are composites (*skandha* or
*khandha*) and go on disintegrating all the time, that there is nothing
permanent; and (2) that there is therefore nothing worth clinging to in
[this](errata.htm#1) world where every one of us is made to undergo all
kinds of sorrow and suffering. How do we escape from them? Or, how do we
conquer them? For we cannot go on like this. We must somehow find the
way out of this torture. It was this feeling of fear and insecurity
individually and collectively that made Buddha leave his home and wander
about for six long years seeking for a way out not only for himself but
for the whole world. He finally discovered it by hitting upon the idea
of non-ego (*anattā*). The formula runs thus: <span
id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35)

All composite things (*sankhāra*) are impermanent. When a man by wisdom
(*pañña*) realizes \[this,\], he heeds not \[this world of\] sorrow;
this is the path to purity.

All composite things are sorrowful. When a man by wisdom realizes
\[this\], he heeds not \[this world of\] sorrow; this is the path to
purity.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

All things (*dhammā*) are egoless. When a man by wisdom realizes
\[this\], he heeds not \[this world of\] sorrow; this is the path to
purity.

The one thing I wish to call to the readers' attention is the term
"wisdom," *paññā*, or *prajñā* in Sanskrit. This is a very important
term throughout Buddhist philosophy. There is no English equivalent for
it. "Transcendental wisdom" is too heavy, besides it does not exactly
hit the mark. But temporarily let "wisdom" do. We know that seeing is
very much emphasized in Buddhism, but we must not fail also to notice
that seeing is not just an ordinary seeing by means of relative
knowledge; it is the seeing by means of a *prajñā*-eye which is a
special kind of intuition enabling us to penetrate right into the
bedrock of Reality itself. I have elsewhere <span
id="fr_36"></span>[2](#fn_36) given a somewhat detailed account of
*prajñā* and its role in Buddhist teachings, especially in Zen Buddhism.

The doctrine of non-ego not only repudiates the idea of an ego-substance
but points out the illusiveness of the ego-idea itself. As long as we
are in this world of particular existences we cannot avoid cherishing
the idea of an individual ego. But this by no means warrants the
substantiality of the ego. Modern psychology has in fact done away with
an ego-entity. It is simply a workable hypothesis by which we carry on
our practical business. The problem of the ego must be carried on to the
field of metaphysics. To really understand what Buddha meant by saying
that there is no *ātman*, we must leave psychology behind. Because it is
not enough just to state that there is no *ātman* if we wish really to
reach the end of sorrow and to be thus at peace with ourselves and with
the world at large. We must have something positive in order to see
ourselves

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

safely in the harbor and securely anchored. Mere psychology cannot give
us this. We must go out to a broader field of Reality where
*prajñā*-intuition comes into play.

As long as we wander in the domain of the senses and intellect, the idea
of an individual ego besets us, and makes us eternally pursue the shadow
of the ego. But the ego is something always eluding our grasp; when we
think we have caught it, it is found to be no more than a slough left by
the snake while the real ego is somewhere else. The human ego-snake is
covered with an infinity of sloughs, the catcher will before long find
himself all exhausted. The ego must be caught not from outside but from
within. This is the work of *prajñā*. The wonder *prajñā* performs is to
catch the actor in the midst of his action, he is not made to stop
acting in order to be seen as actor. The actor is the acting, and the
acting is the actor, and out of this unification or identification
*prajñā* is awakened. The ego does not go out of himself in order to see
himself. He stays within himself and sees himself as reflected in
himself. But as soon as a split takes place between the ego as actor and
the ego as seer or spectator, *prajñā* is dichotomized, and all is lost.

Eckhart expresses the same experience in terms of Christian theology. He
talks about Father, Son, Holy Ghost, and love. They sound unfamiliar to
Buddhist ears but when they are read with a certain insight we will find
that "the love with which he \[God\] loves himself" is the same as the
*prajñā*-intuition that sees into the ego itself. Eckhart tells us: "In
giving us his love God has given us his Holy Ghost so that we can love
him with the love wherewith he loves himself. We love God with his own
love; awareness of it deifies us." <span id="fr_37"></span>[3](#fn_37)
The

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Father loving the Son and the Son loving the
Father--this mutual love, that is, love loving itself is, in Zen
terminology, one mirror reflecting another with no shadow between them.
Eckhart calls this "the play going on in the Father-nature. Play and
audience are the same." He continues:

This play was played eternally before all natures. As it is written in
the Book of Wisdom, "Prior to creatures, in the eternal now, I have
played before the Father in an eternal stillness." The Son has eternally
been playing before the Father as the Father has before his Son. The
playing of the twain is the Holy Ghost in whom they both disport
themselves and he disports himself in both. Sport and players are the
same. Their nature proceeding in itself. "God is a fountain flowing into
itself," as St. Dionysius says.

\[paragraph continues\] *Prajñā*-intuition comes out of itself and
returns to itself. The self or ego that has been constantly eluding our
rationalized scrutiny is at last caught when it comes under
*prajñā*-intuition which is no other than the self.

Buddhists generally talk about the egolessness (*anattā* or *anātmya*)
of all things, but they forget that the egolessness of things cannot
really be understood until they are seen with the eye of
*prajñā*-intuition. The psychological annihilation of an ego-substance
is not enough, for this still leaves the light of *prajñā*-eye under a
coverage. Eckhart says, "God is a light shining itself in silent
stillness." (Evans, p. 146.) As long as our intellectually analytic eye
is hotly pursuing the shadow of Reality by dichotomizing it, there will
be no silent stillness of absolute identity where *prajñā* sees itself
reflected in itself. Eckhart is in accord with the Buddhist experience
when he proceeds: "The Word of the Father is none, other than his
understanding of himself. The understanding of the Father

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

understands that he understands, and that his understanding understands
is the same as that he is who is understanding. That is, the light from
the light." (*Ibid*., p. 146.)

The psychological analysis that cannot go further or deeper than the
egolessness of the psychological ego fails to see into the egolessness
of all things (*dharma*), which appears to the eye of *prajñā*-intuition
not as something sheerly of privative value but as something filled with
infinite possibilities. It is only when the *prajñā*-eye surveys the
nature of all things (*sarvadharma* or *sabbe dhamma*), that their
egolessness displays positive constructive energies by first dispelling
the clouds of Māyā, by demolishing every structure of illusion, and thus
finally by creating a world of altogether new values based on *prajñā*
(wisdom) and *karuṇā* (love). The enlightenment-experience therefore
means going beyond the world of psychology, the opening of the
*prajñā*-eye, and seeing into the realm of Ultimate Reality, and landing
on the other shore of the stream of *samsāra*, where all things are
viewed in their state of suchness, in the way of purity. This is when a
man finds his mind freed from everything (*sabbattha
vimuttamānasa*), <span id="fr_38"></span>[4](#fn_38) not confounded by
the notions of birth-and-death, of constant change, of before, behind,
and middle. He is the "conqueror" to whom *The Dhammapada* (179) gives
this qualification:

He whose conquest nobody can conquer again,  
Into whose conquest nobody in this world can enter--  
By what track can you trace him,  
The awakened, of infinite range, the trackless?

Such an awakened one is an absolute conqueror and nobody

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

can follow his tracks as he leaves none. If he leaves some, this will be
turned into the means whereby he can be defeated. The realm where he
lives has no limiting boundaries, it is like a circle whose
circumference is infinite, therefore with no center to which a path can
lead. This is the one Zen describes as a man of *anābhogacaryā* ("an
effortless, purposeless, useless man"). <span
id="fr_39"></span>[5](#fn_39) This corresponds to Eckhart's man of
freedom who is defined as "one who clings to nothing and to whom nothing
clings" (Evans, p. 146). While these statements are apt to suggest the
doctrine of doing-nothing-ness we must remember that Buddhists are great
adherents of what is known as the teaching of *karuṇā* and *praṇidhāna*,
to which the reader is referred below.

### III

When "the egolessness of all things seen with *prajñā*, <span
id="fr_40"></span>[6](#fn_40) which makes us transcend sorrows and
sufferings and leads to "the path of purity," is understood in the sense
herein elucidated, we find the way to the understanding of the lines
known as "hymn of victory."

The hymn is traditionally ascribed to Buddha who uttered it at the time
of his enlightenment. It expresses more of the subjective aspect of his
experience which facilitates our examination of the content of the
enlightenment. While the egolessness of things is Buddha's metaphysical
interpretation of the experience as he reflected upon it, the hymn of
victory echoes his immediate reaction, and we are able to have a glimpse
into the inner aspect of Buddha's mind more directly than through the
conceptualization which came later. We can

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

now proceed to what I have called the second approach. The hymn runs as
follows:

Looking for the maker of this tabernacle  
I ran to no avail  
Through a round of many births;  
And wearisome is birth again and again.  
But now, maker of the tabernacle, thou hast been seen;  
Thou shalt not rear this tabernacle again.  
All thy rafters are broken,  
Thy ridge-pole is shattered;  
The mind approaching the Eternal,  
Has attained to the extinction of all desires. <span
id="fr_41"></span>[7](#fn_41)

This is Irving Babbitt's translation, the lines of which were rearranged
according to the original Pali. Incidentally, I wish to remark that
there is one point in it which is unsatisfactory from my point of view.
This is the phrase, "the mind approaching the Eternal." The original is
"*visankhāragataṃ cittaṃ*." This means "the mind released from its
binding conditions." "Approaching the Eternal" is the translator's own
idea read into the line. Henry Warren, author of *Buddhism in
Translations*, translates it "this mind has demolition reached," which
points to nihilism or negativism, while Babbitt's translation has
something of positive assertion. The difference so conspicuous in these
two translations shows that each interprets the meaning according to his
own philosophy. In this respect my understanding, which is given below,
also reflects my own thought as regards the significance of Buddhist
teaching generally.

The most essential thing here is the experience that Buddha had of being
released from the bondage in which he had been

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

kept so long. The utmost consciousness that filled his mind at the time
of enlightenment was that he was no longer the slave to what he calls
"the maker of the tabernacle," or "the builder of this house," that is,
*gahakāraka*. He now feels himself to be a free agent, master of
himself, not subject to anything external; he no longer submits himself
to dictation from whatever source it may come. The *gahakāraka* is
discovered, the one who was thought to be behind all his mental and
physical activities, and who, as long as he, that is, Buddha, was
ignorant, made him a slave to this autocrat, and employed Buddha--in
fact anybody who is ignorant of the *gahakāraka*--to achieve the
latter's egocentric impulses, desires, cravings. Buddha was an abject
creature utterly under the control of this tyrant, and it was this sense
of absolute helplessness that made Buddha most miserable, unhappy, and
given over to all kinds of fears, dejection, and moroseness. But Buddha
now discovers who this *gahakāraka* is; not only does he know him, but
he has actually seen him face to face, taken hold of him at work. The
monster, the house-builder, the constructor of the prison-house, being
known, being seen, being caught, ceases at last to weave his entrapping
network around Buddha. This means what the phrase "*visankhāragataṃ
cittaṃ*" means, the mind freed from the bondage of its conditioning
aggregates (*sankhāra*).

We must however remember that the *gahakāraka* is not dead, he is still
alive, for he will be living as long as this physical existence
continues. Only he has ceased to be my master; on the contrary, I am his
master, I can use him as I wish, he is ready now to obey my command.
"Being free from the tyranny of its binding conditions" does not mean
that the conditions no longer exist. As long as we are relative
existences

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

we are to that extent conditioned, but the knowledge that we are so
conditioned transcends the conditions and thus we are above them. The
sense of freedom arises from this, and freedom never means lawlessness,
wantonness, or libertinism. Those who understand freedom in this latter
sense and act accordingly are making themselves slaves to their
egotistic passions. They are no longer masters of themselves but most
despicable slaves of the *gahakāraka*.

The seeing of the *gahakāraka* therefore does not mean the "seeing of
the last of all desire," nor is it "the extinction of all desires." It
only means that all the desires and passions we are in possession of, as
human beings, are now under the control of one who has caught the
*gahakāraka* working out his own limited understanding of freedom. The
enlightenment-experience does not annihilate anything; it sees into the
working of the *gahakāraka* from a higher point of understanding, which
is to say, by means of *prajñā*, and arranges it where it properly
belongs. By enlightenment Buddha sees all things in their proper order,
as they should be, which means that Buddha's insight has reached the
deepest depths of Reality.

As I have said before, the seeing plays the most important role in
Buddhist epistemology, for seeing is at the basis of knowing. Knowing is
impossible without seeing; all knowledge has its origin in seeing.
Knowing and seeing are thus found generally united in Buddha's teaching.
Buddhist philosophy therefore ultimately points to seeing reality as it
is. Seeing is experiencing enlightenment. The *Dharma* <span
id="fr_42"></span>[8](#fn_42) is predicated as *ehipassika*, the
*Dharma* is something "you come and see." It is for this reason that
*sammādassana* (*sammādiṭṭhi* in Sanskrit) is placed at the beginning of
the Eightfold Noble Path.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

What is the *gahakāraka*?

The *gahakāraka* detected is our relative, empirical ego, and the mind
freed from its binding conditions (*sankhāra*) is the absolute ego,
*Atman*, as it is elucidated in the *Nirvāna Sūtra*. The denial of
*Atman* as maintained by earlier Buddhists refers to *Atman* as the
relative ego and not to the absolute ego, the ego after
enlightenment-experience.

Enlightenment consists in seeing into the meaning of life as the
relative ego and not as the absolute ego, the ego after
enlightenment-experience.

Enlightenment consists in seeing into the meaning of life as the
interplay of the relative ego with the absolute ego. In other words,
enlightenment is seeing the absolute ego as reflected in the relative
ego and acting through it.

Or we may express the idea in this way: the absolute ego creates the
relative ego in order to see itself reflected in it, that is, in the
relative ego. The absolute ego, as long as it remains absolute, has no
means whereby to assert itself, to manifest itself, to work out all its
possibilities. It requires a *gahakāraka* to execute its biddings. While
the *gahakāraka* is not to build his tabernacle according to his own
design, he is an efficient agent to actualize whatever lies quiescently
in the *Atman* in the sense of the *Nirvāna Sūtra*.

### IV

The question now is: Why does the absolute *Atman* want to see itself
reflected in the empirical *Atman*? Why does it want to work out its
infinite possibilities through the empirical *Atman*? Why does it not
remain content with itself instead of going out to a world of
multitudes, thereby risking itself to

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

come under the domination of *sankhāra*? This is making itself, as it
were, a willing slave of the *gahakāraka*.

This is a great mystery which cannot be solved on the plane of
intellection. The intellect raises the question, but fails to give it a
satisfactory solution. This is in the nature of the intellect. The
function of the intellect consists in leading the mind to a higher field
of consciousness by proposing all sorts of questions which are beyond
itself. The mystery is solved by living it, by seeing into its working,
by actually experiencing the significance of life, or by tasting the
value of living. <span id="fr_43"></span>[9](#fn_43)

Tasting, seeing, experiencing, living-all these demonstrate that there
is something common to enlightenment-experience and our
sense-experience; the one takes place in our innermost being, the other
on the periphery of our consciousness. Personal experience is thus seen
to be the foundation of Buddhist philosophy. In this sense Buddhism is
radical empiricism or experientialism, whatever dialectic later
developed to probe the meaning of enlightenment-experience.

Buddhist philosophy has long been wrongly regarded as nihilistic and not
offering anything constructive, But those who really try to understand
it and are not superficially led to misconstrue such terms as
demolition, annihilation, extinction, breaking up, cessation, or
quiescence, or without thirst, cutting off lust and hatred, will readily
see that Buddha never taught a religion of "eternal death."

"Eternal death," which is sometimes regarded as the outcome of the
Buddhist idea of egolessness, is a strange notion making no sense
whatever. "Death" can mean something only when it is contrasted to
birth, for it is a relative term. Eternal

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

death is squaring a circle. Death never takes place unless there is a
birth. Where there is birth there is death; where there is death there
is birth; birth and death go together. We can never have just one of
them, leaving out the other. Where there is eternal death there must be
continuous birth. Where eternal death is maintained there must be a
never-ceasing birth. Those who talk about total annihilation or
extinction as if such things were possible are those who have never
faced facts of experience.

Life is a never-ending concatenation of births and deaths. What Buddhist
philosophy teaches is to see into the meaning of life as it flows on.
When Buddhists declare that all things are impermanent, subject to
conditions, and that there is nothing in this world of *samsāra*
(birth-and-death) which can give us the hope for absolute security, they
mean that as long as we take this world of transiency as something worth
clinging to we are sure to lead a life of frustration. To transcend this
negativistic attitude toward life we must make use of *prajñā* which is
the way of purity. We must see things with the eye of *prajñā*, not to
deny them as rubbish but to understand them from an aspect closed to
ordinary observers. The latter see nothing but the impermanence or
transiency or changeability of things and are unable to see eternity
itself that goes along with time-serialism which can never be
demolished. The demolition is on our side and not on the side of time.
Buddha's enlightenment-experience clearly points to this. The ridgepole
smashed and the rafters torn down all belong to time-serialism and not
to eternity which suffers no kind of demolition. To imagine that when
serialism is transcended eternity goes out of sight as if it were
something relatively coexistent with time is altogether an erroneous way
to interpret Buddha's utterance.

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

\[paragraph continues\] It really requires the *prajñā*-eye to see into
the "*sankhāra*-freed mind," which is in fact no other than Eckhart's
eye: "The eye wherein I see God is the same eye wherein God sees me: my
eye and God's eye are one eye, one vision, one knowing, one love." Time
is eternity and eternity is time. In other words, zero is infinity and
infinity is zero. The way of purity opens when the eye sees inwardly as
well as outwardly-and this simultaneously. The *prajñā* seeing is one
act, one glimpse, one *cittaḳsāna* which is no *cittaḳsāna*. Unless this
truth is seen with *prajñā*-intuition, the "hymn of victory" will never
yield its full meaning. Those who read it otherwise cannot go beyond
negativism or nihilism.

The following from Eckhart will shed much light:

Renewal befalls all creatures under God; but for God there is no
renewal, only all eternity. What is eternity?--It is characteristic of
eternity that in it youth and being are the same, for eternity would not
be eternal could it newly become and were not always. <span
id="fr_44"></span>[10](#fn_44)

"Renewal" means "becoming" which is "transiency." What is eternal never
knows "renewal," never grows old, remains forever "youthful," and
transcends "demolition" or "annihilation" of all kinds. Enlightenment is
to know what this "eternity" is, and this knowing consists in "knowing
eternity-wise his \[God's\] is-ness free from becoming, and his nameless
nothingness" <span id="fr_45"></span>[11](#fn_45) Eckhart is quite
definite in giving us what kind of God he has in mind in this matter of
knowing and not knowing:

Know'st thou of him anything? He is no such thing, and in

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

that thou dost know of him anything at all thou art in ignorance, and
ignorance leads to the condition of the brute; for in creatures what is
ignorant is brutish, If thou wouldst not be brutish then, know nothing
of the unuttered God.--"What then shall I do?"--Thou shalt lose thy
thy-ness and dissolve in his his-ness; thy thine shall be his mine, so
utterly one mine that thou in him shalt know eternalwise his is-ness,
free from becoming: his nameless nothingness. <span
id="fr_46"></span>[12](#fn_46)

\[paragraph continues\] Eckhart's God of nameless nothingness is in
Buddhist terms no other than the egolessness of all things, the
*sankhāra*-free mind, and the cessation of all cravings.

### V

In this connection I think it is opportune to say a few words about the
negative statements liberally used in Buddhist and other texts dealing
with problems of ultimate reality. I may also touch a little on the
frequency of paradoxical propositions used to express a certain
experience popularly known as mystic.

Considering all in all, there are two sources of knowledge, or two kinds
of experience, or "two births of man" as Eckhart has it, or two forms of
truth (*satyā*) according to the upholders of the "Emptiness" doctrine
(*śūnyavāda*). Unless this is recognized we can never solve the problem
of logical contradiction which when expressed in words characterizes all
religious experiences. The contradiction so puzzling to the ordinary way
of thinking comes from the fact that we have to use language to
communicate our inner experience which in its very nature transcends
linguistics. But as we have so far no means of communication except the
one resorted to by followers of Zen Buddhism, the conflicts go on
between rationalists

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

and so-called mystics. Language developed first for the use of the first
kind of knowledge which was highly utilitarian, and for this reason it
came to assert itself over all human affairs and experiences. Its
overwhelming authority is such that we have almost come to accept
everything language commands. Our thoughts have now to be molded
according to its dictates, our acts are to be regulated by the rules it
came to formulate for its own effective operation. This is not all. What
is worse is that language has now come even to suppress the truth of new
experiences, and that when they actually take place, it will condemn
them as "illogical" or "unthinkable" and therefore as false, and finally
that as such it will try to put aside anything new as of no human value.

The Sūnyatā school distinguishes two forms of truth (*satyā*): (1)
*samvṛitti* of the relative world and (2) *paramārtha* of the
transcendental realm of *prajñā*-intuition. When Buddha speaks of his
enlightenment in the *Saddharmapuṇd\*arīka Sūtra* ("Lotus Gospel"), he
describes his experience as something which cannot be comprehended by
any of his followers because their understanding can never rise up to
the level of Buddha's. It is another Buddha who understands a Buddha,
Buddhas have their own world into which no beings of ordinary caliber of
mentality can have a glimpse. Language belongs to this world of
relativity, and when Buddha tries to express himself by this means his
hearers are naturally barred from entering his inner life. While in the
*Lankāvatāra Sūtra* we are told of many other Buddha-countries where
Buddha-activities are carried on by means other than mere language, for
instance, by moving hands or legs, by smiling, by coughing, by sneezing,
etc. Evidently Buddhas can understand one another by whatever means they
may employ in conveying

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

their inner acts, because they all know what they are through their
experience. But where there are no such corresponding experiences, no
amount of technique one may resort to will be possible to awaken them in
others.

In Aśvaghoṣa's *Awakening of Faith* reference is made to two aspects of
*Tathatā* ("Suchness") one of which is altogether beyond speaking or
writing, because it does not fall into the categories of
communicability. Language here has no use whatever. But Aśvaghoṣa
continues: if we did not appeal to language there is no way to make
others acquainted with the absolute; therefore language is resorted to
in order to serve as a wedge in getting out the one already in use; it
is like a poisonous medicine to counteract another. It is a most
dangerous weapon and its user has to be cautioned in every way not to
hurt himself. The *Lankāvatāra* is decisive in this respect:

. . . word-discrimination cannot express the highest reality, for
external objects with their multitudinous individual marks are
non-existent, and only appear before us as something revealed out of
Mind itself. Therefore, Mahāmati, you must try to keep yourself away
from the various forms of word-discrimination. <span
id="fr_47"></span>[13](#fn_47)

Word-discrimination belongs to the *samvṛitti*, to things of the
relative world, and is not meant for communicating anything that goes
beyond this world of numbers and multiplicities. For here language
ceases to be supreme and must realize that it has its limitations. Two
of the three kinds of knowledge distinguished by Eckhart are of the
*samvṛitti*, whereas the third corresponds to the *paramārtha*. To quote
Eckhart:

These, three things stand for three kinds of knowledge. The

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

first is sensible. The eye sees from afar what is outside it. The second
is rational and is a great deal higher. The third corresponds to an
exalted power of the soul, a power so high and noble it is able to see
God face to face in his own self. This power has naught in common with
naught, it knows no yesterday or day before, no morrow or day after (for
in eternity there is no yesterday or morrow): therein it is the present
now; the happenings of the thousand years ago, a thousand years to come,
are there in the present and the antipodes the same as here. <span
id="fr_48"></span>[14](#fn_48)

The first two kinds apply to the world of senses and the intellect where
language has its utmost usefulness. But when we try to use it in the
realm where "the exalted power of the soul" has its sway it miserably
fails to convey the activities going on there to those whose "power" has
never been "heightened" or enhanced to the level indicated by Eckhart.
But as we are forced to make use of language inasmuch as we are
creatures of the sense-intellect, we contradict ourselves, as we see in
Eckhart's statements just quoted. In this respect Eckhart and all other
thinkers of Eckhart's pattern go on disregarding rules of logic or
linguistics. The point is that linguists or logicians are to abandon
their limited way of studying facts of experience so that they can
analyze the facts themselves and make language amenable to what they
discover there. As long as they take up language first and try to adjust
all human experiences to the requirements of language instead of the
opposite, they will have their problems unsolved.

Eckhart further writes:

The just man serves neither God nor creature: he is free; and the more
he is just the more he is free and the more he is freedom itself.
Nothing created is free. While there is aught above

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

me, excepting God himself, it must constrain me, however \[great\]; even
love and knowledge, so far as it is creature and not actually God,
confines me with its limits. <span id="fr_49"></span>[15](#fn_49)

Let us first see what linguistics would say about this statement. Its
reasoning may run something, like this: "When Eckhart expresses himself
as 'a free man' he is irresistible and wonderful, but he still
recognizes God as he confesses 'excepting God.' Why, we may ask, has he
to make the exception of God instead of asserting his absolute freedom
above all things small and great? If he has to consider God, he cannot
be so free as he claims to be?" These objections hold good indeed so far
as our logical analysis does not extend beyond language and its values.
But one who has an Eckhartian experience will very well understand what
he really means. And what he means is this: a man is free only when he
is in God, with God, for God and this is not the condition of freedom,
for when he is in God he is freedom itself; he is free when he realizes
that he is actually himself by forswearing that he is in God and
absolutely free. Says Eckhart:

I was thinking lately: that *I am a man* belongs to other men in common
with myself; I see and hear and eat and drink like any other animal; but
that *I am* belongs to no one but myself, not to man nor angel, no, nor
yet to God excepting in so far as I am one with him. <span
id="fr_50"></span>[16](#fn_50)

In the latter part of the same sermon, Eckhart adds: "*Ego*, the word
'I,' is proper to none but to God himself in his sameness." This "I" is
evidently referred to in another sermon entitled "The Castle of the
Soul" as "a spark," "a spiritual light."

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

From time to time I tell of the one power in the soul which alone is
free. Sometimes I have called it the tabernacle of the soul; sometimes a
spiritual light, anon I say it is a spark. But now I say: it is neither
this nor that. Yet it is somewhat: somewhat more exalted over this and
that than the heavens are above the earth. . . . It is of all names
free, of all forms void: exempt and free as God is in himself. <span
id="fr_51"></span>[17](#fn_51)

Our language is the product of a world of numbers and individuals of
yesterdays and todays and tomorrows, and is most usefully applicable to
this world (*loka*). But our experiences have it that our world extends
beyond that (*loka*), that there is another called by Buddhists a
"transcendental world" (*lokauttara*) and that when language is forced
to be used for things of this world, *lokottara*, it becomes warped and
assumes all kinds of crookedness: oxymora, paradoxes, contradictions,
contortions, absurdities, oddities, ambiguities, and irrationalities.
Language itself is not to be blamed for it. It is we ourselves who,
ignorant of its proper functions, try to apply it to that for which it
was never intended. More than this, we make fools of ourselves by
denying the reality of a transcendental world (*lokottara*).

Let us see how impossible it is to bring a transcendental world or an
"inner power" onto the level of linguistic manageability.

There is something, transcending the soul's created nature, not
accessible to creature, non-existent; no angel has gotten it for his is
a clear <span id="fr_52"></span>[18](#fn_52) nature, and clear and overt
things have no concern with this. It is akin to Deity, intrinsically
one, having naught in

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

common with naught. Many a priest finds it a baffling thing. It is one;
rather unnamed than named, rather unknown than known. If thou couldst
naught thyself an instant, less than an instant, I should say, all that
this is in itself would belong to thee. But while thou dost mind thyself
at all thou knowest no more of God than my mouth does of colour or my
eye of taste: so little thou knowest, thou discernest, what God
is. <span id="fr_53"></span>[19](#fn_53)

What "a baffling thing" this "something" or "somewhat" is! But it is no
doubt a light and if you can get a glimpse into it even "less than an
instant" you will be master of yourself. Plato describes the light in
the following words: It is "a light which is not in this world; not in
the world and not out of the world; not in time nor in eternity; it has
neither in nor out." <span id="fr_54"></span>[20](#fn_54) Linguistically
considered, how could a thing be said to be "neither in the world nor in
out-of-the-world"? Nothing can be more absurd than this. But, as Eckhart
says (Evans, p. 227), when we transcend time (*zit*), body
(*liplicheit*), and multiplicity (*manicvaltikelt*), <span
id="fr_55"></span>[21](#fn_55) we reach God, and these three things are
the very principle of linguistics. No wonder that when things of the
*lokottara* try to find their expression through language, the latter
shows every trace of its shortcomings. This is the reason why Zen
Buddhism strives to avoid the use of language and quite frequently
denounces our shortsightedness in this respect. Zen does not object to
language just for the sake of opposition, it simply realizes that there
is a field in which our words fail to communicate events taking place
there. One of the statements Zen is always ready to make is: "No
depending on words." Yengo, commentator of

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

the *Hekigan-shu* ("Blue Rock Collection"), a work of the Sung dynasty,
thus remarks:

Bodhidharma observing that the Chinese minds are matured enough to
accept teachings of Mahāyāna Buddhism came over here \[China\] via the
southern route and started to prepare the people for "the transmission
of mind-seal." He said, "I am not going to build up a system of thought
which depends on letters or words. I want straightforwardly to direct
you to the Mind itself and thereby to see into the Buddha-nature and
attain Buddhahood. When Zen is understood in this way, we shall be able
to attain freedom. Let us not therefore follow the way of letters of any
kind, let us take hold of Reality in its nakedness. To the question of
Wu the Emperor of the Liang, Bodhidharma simply answered, "I do not
know, your Majesty!" When Eka, who became the second patriarch of Zen in
China, confessed that he could not locate the Mind, Bodhidharma
exclaimed, "There, I have your Mind pacified!" In all these situations
which confronted him, Bodhidharma just faced them without hesitation,
with no prepared answers concocted beforehand, he had nothing
premeditated or deliberately schematized in his concept-filled mind.
With one swing of the sword he cut asunder every obstacle that lay in
our way, thereby releasing us from the fetters of linguistic
discrimination. We are now no more to be troubled with right and wrong
gain and loss." <span id="fr_56"></span>[22](#fn_56)

The following *mondo* <span id="fr_57"></span>[23](#fn_57) will
demonstrate how free Zen is in dealing, for instance, with the ultimate
problem of being:

A monk asked Daizui Hoshin of the T’ang dynasty: "I am told that at the
end of the universe a great fire takes place and everything is
destroyed. May I ask you whether or not, 'this' also shares the fate?"

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

Daizui replied, "Yes, it does."

The monk went on, "If this is the case, it must be said that 'this'
follows others."

Daizui: "Yes, it does."

The same question was later asked of another master whose name was Shū.
Shū the master answered, "No, it does not." When he was asked "Why not?"
the master replied, "Because it identifies itself with the whole
universe."

From the logical linguistic point of view the two Zen masters defy each
other and there is no way to effect a reconciliation. One says "yes"
while the other says "no." As long as the "no" means an unqualified
negation and the "'yes" an unqualified affirmation, there is no bridge
between the two. And if this is the case, as apparently it is, how can
Zen permit the contradiction and continue the claim for its consistent
teaching, one may ask. But Zen would serenely go its own way without at
all heeding such a criticism. Because Zen's first concern is about its
experience and not its modes of expression. The latter allow a great
deal of variation, including paradoxes, contradictions, and ambiguities.
According to Zen, the question of "is-ness" (*isticheit*) is settled
only by innerly experiencing it and not by merely arguing about it or by
linguistically appealing to dialectical subtleties. Those who have a
genuine Zen experience will all at once recognize in spite of
superficial discrepancies what is true and what is not.

### VI

Before I come to another utterance to be ascribed to Buddha at the time
of his enlightenment-experience I cannot refrain from considering the
problem of time. This is also closely related to linguistics and the
Eckhartian treatment of the

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

creation-myth. As Augustine confesses, we can also say that God "mocks
at man" when the question of time confronts us. It is one of the
subjects of discourse we must "familiarly and knowingly" take up. "And
we understand when we speak of it, we understand also when we hear it
spoken of by another."

What then is time? If no one asks me, I know; if I wish to explain it to
one who asketh, I know not: yet I say boldly that if nothing passes
away, time past were not; and if nothing were coming, a time to come
were not; and if nothing were, time present were not. Those two times
then, past and to come, how are they, seeing the past now is not, and
that to come is not yet? But the present, should it always be present,
and never pass into time past, verily it should not be time, but
eternity. If time present (if it is not time) only cometh into
existence, because it passeth into time past, how can we say that either
this is, whose cause of being is, that it shall not be; so, namely, that
we cannot truly say that time is, but because it is tending not to
be? <span id="fr_58"></span>[24](#fn_58)

Time is really an eternally puzzling problem, especially when it is
handled at the level of linguistics. As far as linguistics is concerned,
the best way to approach the question will be as Eckhart suggests, to
consider human beings born "between one and two. The one is eternity,
ever alone and without variation. The two is time, changing and given to
multiplication." <span id="fr_59"></span>[25](#fn_59) Following this
line of thought, Eckhart goes on to say in another sermon on "poverty":

. . . therefore, I am my own first cause, both of my eternal being and
of my temporal being. To this end I was born, and by virtue of my birth
being eternal, I shall never die. It is of the nature of this eternal
birth that I have been eternally, that I am

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

now, and shall be forever. What I am as a temporal creature is to die
and come to nothingness, for it came with time and so with time it will
pass away. In my eternal birth, however, everything was begotten. I was
my own first cause as well as the first cause of everything else. If I
had willed it, neither I nor the world would have come to be! If I had
not been, there would have been no god. There is, however, no need to
understand this. <span id="fr_60"></span>[26](#fn_60)

Whatever Eckhart might have meant by the statement, "There is, however,
no need to understand this," it is impossible from the purely linguistic
point of view "to understand" the interpenetration or interfusion of
time and eternity as described here. Primarily the two concepts, time
and eternity, are irreconcilable, and however much dialectical skill one
may employ, they can never be brought peacefully together. Eckhart and
all other thinkers and non-thinkers may try all their arts to convince
us of "the truth," but as long as we are on this side of the stream, we
cannot be expected to understand it. This is perhaps what Eckhart means
when he says there is no necessity for achieving the impossible. What
then does he wish us to do? What he wishes is to turn away from
linguistics, to shake off the shackles of "time and matter and
multiplicity" and to plunge right into the abyss of nameless
nothingness. For it is at the very moment of the plunge that the
experience of enlightenment takes place and the understanding comes upon
us. "I am that I was and that I shall remain now and forever. Then I
receive an impulse which carries me above all angels. In this impulse I
conceive such passing riches that I am not content with God as being
God, as being all his godly works, for in this breaking-through I find
that God and I are both

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

the same. Then I am what I was, I neither wax nor wane, for I am the
motionless cause that is moving all things." <span
id="fr_61"></span>[27](#fn_61)

When this--regarding my self--is understood, we shall also be led to
understand what Augustine says about God: "God is doing today all that
shall be done in the thousands upon thousands of years of the future--if
the world is to last so long--and that God is still doing today all he
ever did in the many thousands of years of past." <span
id="fr_62"></span>[28](#fn_62)

Now, both Eckhart and Augustine ask, "What can I do about it if anyone
does not understand that?" or "If these words are misconstrued, what can
one who puts their right construction on them do about it?" <span
id="fr_63"></span>[29](#fn_63) To this, Eckhart answers consolingly: "If
anyone does not understand this discourse, let him not worry about that,
for if he does not find this truth in himself he cannot understand what
I have said--for it is a discovered truth <span
id="fr_64"></span>[30](#fn_64) which comes immediately from the heart of
God." <span id="fr_65"></span>[31](#fn_65) The only thing that is left
for us to do will be to follow Eckhart's advice and pray to God: "That
we all may so live as to experience it eternally, may God help us!
Amen."

 

The Zen way of treating the problem of time will be partly glimpsed from
the following story which contrasts significantly with the linguistic
analysis:

Tokusan (790-865), on his way to Taisan, felt hungry and tired and
stopped at a roadside teahouse and asked for refreshments. The old woman
who kept the house, finding that Tokusan was a great student of the
*Diamond Sūtra*, said: "I have

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

a question to ask you; if you can answer it I will serve you
refreshments for nothing, but if you fail you have to go somewhere else
for them." As Tokusan agreed, the woman proposed this: "In the *Diamond
Sūtra* we read that 'The past mind is unattainable; the present mind is
unattainable; the future mind is unattainable'; and so, what mind do you
wish to punctuate?" (Refreshments are known in Chinese as *t’ien-hsin*
or *ten-jin* in Japanese, meaning "punctuating the mind," hence the
question.) Tokusan was altogether nonplused and did not know how to
answer. He had to go without anything to eat. <span
id="fr_66"></span>[32](#fn_66)

Taking refreshments takes place in time. Out of time there is no taking
of anything. The old teahouse keeper now asks the traveling monk what
time he will use for recuperating from fatigue when, according to the
*Sūtra*, no time, past or future or present, is "obtainable." When there
is no time how can one accomplish anything? As far as thought is
concerned, that is, where language is supreme, no movement of any sort
is possible in this life, and yet the strangest fact is that we keep on
living in the fullest sense of the term. The old lady is not a
metaphysician, nor is she at all interested in metaphysics. But when she
saw how inextricably the young man was involved in verbalism and in its
intricate complexities she wanted to rescue him, hence the question. And
sure enough he never thought of this possibility. Finding himself in the
midst of contradiction, he knew not how to clear himself out of the trap
which was of his own construction. He had to go without his
refreshments.

Zen is very much interested in the problem of the absolute now-moment,
but its interest is more along the practical line

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

and not in its dialectics. Therefore, as in Ummon's "sermon" on "the
fifteenth day of the month," the Zen masters want to have us "say a
word" (*ikku* or *i-chü* in Chinese). The saying is not necessarily
uttering any sound, it is acting of some kind. In Eckhart's term, the
trick is to insert "the soul's day" into "God's day" (Blakney, p. 212).
God's day is characterized as containing all time in the present
now-moment \[*in eime gegenwürtigen nu*\]. <span
id="fr_67"></span>[33](#fn_67) To God, "a day, whether six thousand
years ago, is just as near to the present as yesterday." We, of another
kind of day where yesterday is yesterday and one thousand years is one
thousand times more than a year, either to the past or to the future,
cannot have God's day operative in our everyday living. But if we do not
somehow succeed in making "was" or "will be" turn into "is," we cannot
have peace of mind, we cannot escape from dread, which is a topic
current among existentially minded modern men. They must somehow have
"the refreshment" served. To have and yet not to have must really be the
cause for worry and anxiety.

I will quote a Zen sermon <span id="fr_68"></span>[34](#fn_68) to show
how it differs from those sermons given by Eckhart, though it treats the
same subject of time and eternity and the basic ideas do not differ so
widely as they superficially appear. The Zen sermon was given by Daitō
the national teacher (1282-1337) of the fourteenth century who was the
first abbot of the Daitoku monastery, Kyoto. A Zen sermon generally
begins with a *mondo* between the master and one of the disciples when
the sermon proper is very short consisting of about a dozen lines
rhetorically composed. The occasion was a New Year's Eve. When Daitō the

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

master appeared in the Dharma Hall, a disciple came forward and proposed
the following question:

"The new does not know that the old is already gone while the old does
not know that the new is already come, The new and the old have not made
acquaintance with each other. Thus they stand in opposition all over the
world. Is this the state of affairs we greet on all side?"

The master said, "All over the universe." <span
id="fr_69"></span>[35](#fn_69)

The monk continued, "When the world has not yet come into
existence, <span id="fr_70"></span>[36](#fn_70) how do we find a passage
to it?"

The master: "We fold the hands before the monastery gate."

The monk: "Anything further?"

The master: "We burn incense at the Buddha Hall."

The monk: "I understand that, anciently, Hokuzen roasted the big white
bullock <span id="fr_71"></span>[37](#fn_71) that used to roam at the
monastery courtyard and gave a feast to his monks to celebrate this
memorable occasion. I wonder what kind of feast we are going to get this
New Year's Eve?"

The master: "When you chew it fine, it tastes sweeter than honey."

The monk: "In this case we of the Brotherhood will appreciate your
generosity."

As the monk bowing began to step back the master said, "What a fine
golden-haired lion!" <span id="fr_72"></span>[38](#fn_72)

The master now gives his regular sermon: "The old year passes away this
evening. Let things go that are to go and

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

grow old. The new year is ushered in at this dawn. Let things come that
are to come and be renewed. The new and the old are intermingled in
every possible way, and each of us enjoys himself as he pleases. Causes
and effects go on in time-sequence, and everywhere activities in every
form manifest themselves freely and autonomously. Thus we observe the
peak of Mount Ryūho magnificently towering to the sky, while the
monastery gate opens to a field limitlessly expanding. This is not
altogether due to the peaceful time alone we now enjoy under the wisely
governing reign. It is in the order of things that the spirit of
universal friendliness pervade all around us. At this moment what lines
shall I quote for your edification?"

The master struck the seat with his *hossu* and said, "The December
snows filling up to the horizon make all things look white, while the
spring winds blowing against the doors are still severely cold."

According to the lunar calendar, the thirtieth day of the twelfth month
(December) is the end of winter and as soon as twelve o'clock is struck
spring is ushered in. Hence Daitō's reference to December snows and
spring winds. They are both there: the winter snows do not melt away
when spring starts. The spring breeze passes over the same old winter
snows. The old and the new are mingled. The past and the present are
fused. The imaginary line of season exists only in human language. We
for some practical purposes distinguish seasons. When this is once done
one season must definitely start in such and such time of the year.
While the snow lies white, it does not make haste to greet spring and
the wind does not wait for winter to make way for it. The old continues
on to the new and the new is ready to join the old. Zen's absolute
present is probably not so inaccessible as Eckhart's.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

### VII

It is now time, after these lengthy excursions, to come back to the
original topic and see if we cannot get once more into the subjective
approach to Buddha's experience of enlightenment. The experience cannot
merely be designated as a kind of feeling and thus done away with as if
this designation exhausted all the contents of enlightenment. For, as I
understand it, the enlightenment cannot be said to be devoid of any
noetic elements which yield to a certain extent to a linguistic and
intellectual treatment. The feeling of enlightenment has something
profoundly fundamental and gives one a sense of absolute certainty and
finality which is lacking in the ordinary kind of feeling we generally
have. A feeling may occasionally give one the sense of exaltation and
self-assurance, but this will after a while pass away and may leave no
permanent effect on the being of one who has the experience. The
enlightenment feeling on the other hand affects the whole personality,
influencing his attitude toward life and the world not only morally and
spiritually but in his metaphysical interpretation of existence as a
whole. Buddha's experience was not just a matter of feeling which moves
on the periphery of consciousness, but something awakened in the deepest
recesses of a human being. In this sense only is his utterance recorded
in the *Vinaya* and the *Majjhima Nikāya* and elsewhere to be
understood. In the *gāthā* already quoted above from *The Dhammapada*
(vv. 153, 154), something similar to the one below is noticeable, but
the positive and dynamic aspect comes forward more strongly and
conspicuously in the following: <span id="fr_73"></span>[39](#fn_73)

I have conquered and I know all, <span id="page_68">p. 68</span>  
I am enlightened quite by myself and have none as teacher.  
There is no one that is the same as I in the whole world where there are
many deities.  
I am the one who is really worth,  
I am the most supreme teacher.  
I am the only one who is fully enlightened.  
I am tranquillized.  
I am now in Nirvana. <span id="fr_74"></span>[40](#fn_74)

This victory song is expressive of the supreme moment of the
enlightenment-experience which Buddha had. In the first verse depicting
the discovery of the *gahakāraka* (house-builder) and the demolition of
his handiwork, we see the negative aspect of Buddha's experience, while
in the second one dealing with the exalted feeling of victory, the
realization of the highest knowledge (*prajñā*) and the consciousness of
one's own value as he is, we see its positive aspect coming out in full
view.

The consciousness of conquest such as was awakened in the mind of Buddha
at the time of enlightenment cannot be regarded as the product of a
self-conceit which is often cherished by minds tarnished with
schizophrenia and the wielders of political or military powers. With him
however whose ego-centered desires have been shattered to pieces the
consciousness of victory rises from the deepest sources of being. So the
feeling of conquest is not the outcome of a struggle of powers

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

belonging to the low level of existence. The enlightenment-experience is
the manifestation of a higher power, a higher insight, a higher
unification. It is beyond the sphere of relative consciousness which is
the battleground for forces belonging to the same order. One force may
temporarily proclaim its victory over another, but this kind of victory
is sure before long to be superseded by another. This is in the nature
of our relative consciousness. Enlightenment is the experience a man can
have only when a higher realm of unification is revealed, that is, when
the most fundamental basis of identification is reached.

The enlightenment-experience, therefore, is the one which we can have
only when we have climbed up to the highest peak from which we can
survey the whole field of Reality. Or we can say that it is the
experience which is attained only when we have touched the very bedrock
which sustains the entire system of multiple worlds. Here is the
consciousness of intensive quantity to which nothing more could be
added. All is fulfilled, satisfied; everything here appears to it such
as it is; in short, it is a state of absolute Suchness, of absolute
Emptiness which is absolute fullness.

Buddhist philosophy, therefore, is the philosophy of Suchness, or
philosophy of Emptiness, or philosophy of Self-identity. It starts from
the absolute present which is pure experience, an experience in which
there is yet no differentiation of subject and object, and yet which is
not a state of sheer nothingness. The experience is variously
designated: in Japanese it is *sono-mama*; in Chinese it is *chih mo*,
sometimes *tzu-jan fa-erh* (Japanese: *jinen hōni*); there are many
technical names for it, each denoting its specific features or
characters as it is viewed in various relationships.

In fact, this Suchness, or "is-ness" (*isticheit*) in Eckhart's

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

terminology, defies all characterization or denotation. No words can
express what it is, but as words are the only instrument given us human
beings to communicate our thought, we have to use words, with this
caution: Nothing is available for our purpose; to say "not available"
(*anupalabda* in Sanskrit and *pu k’o tê* in Chinese) is not to the
point either. Nothing is acceptable. To say it is, is already negating
itself. Suchness transcends everything, it has no moorings. No concepts
can reach it, no understanding can grasp it. Therefore, it is called
pure experience.

In pure experience there is no division between "ought" and "is,"
between form and matter or content, and therefore there is no judgment
in it yet. There is the Christ who says "I am before Abraham was," or
God who has not yet uttered his fiat. This is Buddha who, according to
*The Dhammapada* (179), is the *anantagocara* ("one whose limits are
infinite"), the *apada* ("the pathless"), whose conquest can never be
conquered again and into whose conquest nobody in this world can enter,
and who is where there is no track leading to it. If it were a Zen
master, he would demand that you show your face, however ugly it might
be, which you have even before your birth into this world of
multiplicities.

The Buddhist philosophy of Suchness thus starts with what is most
primarily given to our consciousness-which I have called pure
experience. But, in point of fact, to say "pure experience" is to commit
oneself to something already posited somewhere, and thus it ceases to be
pure. *The Dhammapada* reflects this thought when it designates the
starting point of Buddhist philosophy as trackless (*apada*),
unboundable (*anantagocara*), abodeless (*aniketa*), empty (*śūñña*),
formless (*animitta*), delivered (*vimokkha*). In psychological terms,
it

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

is described thus: sorrowless (*vippamutta*), released on all sides
(*sabbaganthappahīna*), fearless (*asantāsin*), without craving
(*vītataṇha*). These psychological terms are apt to be very much
misunderstood because they point to negativism when superficially and
linguistically interpreted. But I will not dwell upon this here.

One thing that must be noted in this connection is that pure experience
is not pure passivity. In fact there is nothing we can call pure
passivity. This does not make sense and does not lead us anywhere. As
long as passivity is also an experience, there must be one who
experiences passivity. This one, this experiencer, is an actor. Not only
is he an actor, but he is a knower, for he is conscious of experiencing.
Pure experience is not an abstraction or a state of passivity. It is
very much active, and creative. Eckhart voices this idea when he states:
"In this sense thy unknowing is not a defect but thy chief perfection,
and suffering thy highest activity. Kill thy activities and still thy
faculties if thou wouldst realize this birth in thee." <span
id="fr_75"></span>[41](#fn_75)

Another thing I should like to emphasize in this *gāthā* of conquest is
that Buddha calls himself "all-conqueror" and also "all-knower,"
showing, that his victory is absolute and that his knowledge is not at
all fragmentary. He is omniscient as well as omnipotent. His experience
has something noetic and at the same time something conative or
affective, reflecting the nature of Reality itself which consists in
*prajñā* and *karuṇā*. As regards *prajñā*, which is sometimes
translated as "transcendental wisdom," I have written about it
elsewhere. Therefore I shall speak here about *karuṇā*. *Karuṇā*
corresponds to love.

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

\[paragraph continues\] It is like the sands on the Ganges: they are
trampled by all kinds of beings: by elephants, by lions, by asses, by
human beings, but they do not make any complaints. They are again soiled
by all kinds of filth scattered by all kinds of animals, but they just
suffer them all and never utter a word of ill-will. Eckhart would
declare the sands on the Ganges to be "just" (*gerecht*), because "the
just have no will at all: whatever God wishes it is all one to them,
however great the discomfort may be." <span
id="fr_76"></span>[42](#fn_76)

The just are so firmly devoted to justice and so wholly selfless that
whatever they do, they regard neither the pains of hell nor the joys of
heaven. . . . To the Just person, nothing is so hard to bear or so
painful as anything opposed to justice, that is to say, as not feeling
impartially the same about everything that happens. <span
id="fr_77"></span>[43](#fn_77)

"Justice" savors a great deal of legalism contrary to the idea of love.
But when, as Eckhart interprets it, justice is considered from the
affective point of view as meaning "impartiality," "sameness,"
"universality," or "all-embracing," it begins to approach the Buddhist
idea of *karuṇā*. I may add that Mahāyāna Buddhism further developed the
idea of *karuṇā* into that of *praṇidhāna* or *pūrvapraṇidhāna* and made
each one of the Bodhisattvas an incarnation of a certain number of
*praṇidhāna*, for example, Amitābha has forty-eight *praṇidhāna*,
Samantabhadra has ten, and Kṣitigarbha also has ten. *Praṇidhāna* is
generally translated as "vow" or "fervent wish" or "prayer," or simply
"the will," but these English terms do not convey the full meaning of
the Sanskrit as it is used in the Mahāyāna. Roughly speaking, we may
interpret *praṇidhāna* 

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

as love specified or itemized or particularized and made applicable to
each practical situation in which we may find ourselves in the course of
an individual life. Amitābha has his Pure Land where he wants us to be
born; Mañjuśrī is the Bodhisattva of *prajñā* and whoever comes to him
will be rewarded with an amount of transcendental wisdom.

This being the case, we will see that "the destruction of desires or
cravings (*taṇhānam khayam*) so much emphasized in the teaching of
earlier Buddhism is not to be understood negativistically. The Buddhist
training consists in transforming *tṛiṣṇā* (*taṇhā*) into *karuṇā*,
ego-centered love into something universal, eros into agape.

When Jōshu (778-897) was asked, "Could Buddha cherish any desires
(*kleśa*)?" he answered, "Yes, he decidedly has." The questioner
demanded, "How could that be?" The master replied, "His desire is to
save the whole universe."

One day Jōshu had another visitor who asked, "I hear so much of the
stone bridge reputed to be on one of the sites in your monastery
grounds. But as I see it, it is no more than an old log. How is that?"

The master said, "You see the log and don't see the stone bridge."

"What is the stone bridge, then?" the visitor demanded.

The master's answer was, "It permits horses to pass and also asses to
pass."

Someone's *praṇidhāna* is too rickety for safe crossing whereas the
other's is strong and broad, allowing anything to pass over it safely.
Let *taṇhā* be destroyed but we must not forget that it has another root
which reaches the very ground of being. The enlightenment-experience
must realize that, though ordinarily Buddhists are more or less
neglectful in bringing out

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

the *karuṇā* aspect of the experience. This is due to their being too
anxious and therefore too much in a hurry to destroy all the obstacles
lying on the way to enlightenment, for they know that when this is
accomplished what is to come therefrom is left to itself as it knows
full well how to take care of it. When the devastating fire is
extinguished the forest will not wait for any external help but will
resume its biological functions by itself. When a man is shot by a
poisonous arrow the first thing to do is to remove it before it is
embedded too deeply into the flesh. When this is done the body will heal
the wound by its own power of vitality. So with human passions, the
first work is to destroy their root of ignorance and egoism. When this
is thoroughly accomplished, the Buddha-nature which consists in *prajñā*
and *karuṇā* will start its native operation. The principle of Suchness
is not static, it is full of dynamic forces.

 

Let me finish this study on Buddha's enlightenment-experience by quoting
another from Daitō Kokushi's *Sayings*. In Japan and China Buddha is
recorded to have attained his enlightenment on the morning of December
the eighth. After a period of deeply absorbed meditation he happened to
look skyward and there he noticed the morning star shining brightly.
This at once caused something like a flash of lightning to pass through
his consciousness, which put a final stop to his quest for the truth. He
felt as if all the burden which he had been carrying dropped off his
shoulders and a long sigh of relief came out of his being. The Zen
Buddhists are specially mindful of remembering this event and a
commemoration always takes place on December the eighth.

When Daitō the national teacher appeared in the Dharma

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Hall, a monk came out of the rank and started a
series of questions:

"The record has it that the Bodhisattva attained enlightenment today and
that since then he is known as Tathāgata. But what took place in his
mind when he saw the morning star? What did he understand?"

The teacher replied: "Thoroughly clean! Utterly blank!"

The monk: "Even when there is one speck of dust in your eye, does it not
make you see all kinds of imaginary flowers in the air?"

Teacher: "Don't be too talkative!"

Monk: "Would you approve my going on along this line?"

Teacher: "You ask my staff which knows better than I."

Monk: "Things are going on today just as they did in the past; why
refuse to approve my case?"

Teacher: "It's only because there still is a dualism."

Monk: "If not for this remark I should surely have missed your point."

Teacher: "You beat me with your argument."

Monk: "When one is genuinely sincere one has nothing to be ashamed of."

Teacher: "There are many like you." <span id="fr_78"></span>[44](#fn_78)

Daitō the national teacher then gave a short sermon:

The moon is clear and serene,  
The stars are shining bright.  
No Śākyamuni is here,  
And whose enlightenment are we talking about?

He now held his staff up straight and declared: "It is piling filth over
filth."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[38:1](mcb04.htm#fr_35) The *Dhammapada*,
translated by S. Radhakrishnan (Oxford University Press, 1951), verses
277-9, pp. 146-7. I do not, however, always follow him in my quotations
in this book.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[39:2](mcb04.htm#fr_36) *Studies in Zen*
(London: Rider and Company, 1955), pp. 85-128.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[40:3](mcb04.htm#fr_37) Evans, pp. 147 ff.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[42:4](mcb04.htm#fr_38) The Dhammapada, verse
348, p. 167.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[43:5](mcb04.htm#fr_39) Studies in the
*Lankāvatāra Sūtra*, pp. 223 ff.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[43:6](mcb04.htm#fr_40) "*Sabbe dhamma anattā’
ti yadā paññāya passati*."

<span id="fn_41"></span>[44:7](mcb04.htm#fr_41) *The Dhammapada*, pp.
153-4. (Published by Oxford University Press, 1936.)

<span id="fn_42"></span>[46:8](mcb04.htm#fr_42) *Dhamma* in Pali. It has
a multiple meaning and is difficult to render it uniformly. Here it
stands for Truth, Reality, Norm.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[48:9](mcb04.htm#fr_43) "O taste and see that
the Lord is good; blessed is the man that trusteth in him." (Psalms,
34:8.)

<span id="fn_44"></span>[50:10](mcb04.htm#fr_44) Evans, p. 246.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[50:11](mcb04.htm#fr_45) Pfeiffer, p. 319. "*Du
mit ime verstandest ewicliche sine ungewordene istikeit under sine
ungenanten nihtheit*."

<span id="fn_46"></span>[51:12](mcb04.htm#fr_46) Evans, p. 246.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[53:13](mcb04.htm#fr_47) *Lankāvatāra Sūtra*,
translated by D. T. Suzuki (London: George Routledge and Sons, Ltd.,
1932), p. 77.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[54:14](mcb04.htm#fr_48) Evans, p. 228.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[55:15](mcb04.htm#fr_49) *Ibid*., p. 204.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[55:16](mcb04.htm#fr_50) *Ibid*., p, 204,

<span id="fn_51"></span>[56:17](mcb04.htm#fr_51) *Ibid*., p. 37.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[56:18](mcb04.htm#fr_52) "*Ein luter wesen*" in
German. *Luter* means "intellectually or analytically clear and
distinct," opposed to what may be called "metaphysically indefinite."

<span id="fn_53"></span>[57:19](mcb04.htm#fr_53) Evans, pp. 204-5.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[57:20](mcb04.htm#fr_54) Quoted by Eckhart,
Evans, p. 205.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[57:21](mcb04.htm#fr_55) Pfeiffer, p. 296.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[58:22](mcb04.htm#fr_56) A more or less
modernized interpretation given to Yengo's terse and loosely knit
Chinese.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58:23](mcb04.htm#fr_57) Literally, "question
and answer."

<span id="fn_58"></span>[60:24](mcb04.htm#fr_58) St. Augustine,
*Confessions*, Book XI, 14.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60:25](mcb04.htm#fr_59) Evans, p. 134.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61:26](mcb04.htm#fr_60) Blakney, p. 231.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62:27](mcb04.htm#fr_61) Evans, p. 221.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[62:28](mcb04.htm#fr_62) Blakney, p. 72.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[62:29](mcb04.htm#fr_63) *Ibid*., pp. 72, 73.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[62:30](mcb04.htm#fr_64) "*Ein unbedahtiu
warheit*" (Pfeiffer, p. 284), that is, a truth not premeditated but
spontaneously coming to mind.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[62:31](mcb04.htm#fr_65) Blakney, p. 232.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[63:32](mcb04.htm#fr_66) *Studies in Zen*, p.
126.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[64:33](mcb04.htm#fr_67) Pfeiffer, p. 265.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[64:34](mcb04.htm#fr_68) From the *Sayings of
Daitō Kokushi*.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[65:35](mcb04.htm#fr_69) The original literally
has, "The thirty-three heavens and the twenty-eight constellations."

<span id="fn_70"></span>[65:36](mcb04.htm#fr_70) Literally, "When the
firework has not yet been cracked."

<span id="fn_71"></span>[65:37](mcb04.htm#fr_71) "The white bullock" is
the symbol for the Highest Reality.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[65:38](mcb04.htm#fr_72) This is a more or less
ironical remark on the part of the master.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[67:39](mcb04.htm#fr_73) *The Vinaya*, I, p. 8.
*The Majjhima Nikāya* (translated by Lord Chalmers, published by Oxford
University Press), 26, p. 12.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[68:40](mcb04.htm#fr_74) It will be interesting
to note that we have another *gāthā* in *The Dhammapada*, v. 353, which
also echoes the same sentiment as the one here quoted from another
source. It is possible that they are from one and the same original
source. *The Dhammapada* one runs thus:

I have conquered all, I know all, in all conditions of life I am free
from taint. I have left all, and through the destruction of thirst I am
free. Having by myself attained specific knowledge, to whom can I point
as my teacher?

<span id="fn_75"></span>[71:41](mcb04.htm#fr_75) Evans, p. 14. "This
birth" in this sermon means "the newborn Being" or "the child of man
turned into the child of God." It also means "hearing of the Word" which
is revealed to "one who knows aright in unknowing."

<span id="fn_76"></span>[72:42](mcb04.htm#fr_76) Blakney, p. 179.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[72:43](mcb04.htm#fr_77) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[75:44](mcb04.htm#fr_78) These questions and
answers may sound somewhat enigmatic to most of our readers. A full
explanation will be given elsewhere on a more opportune occasion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. ''A Little Point'' and Satori](mcb05)
