[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rom)  [Next](co2.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: 1 Corinthians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, a called apostle of Jesus Christ,
through the will of God, and Sosthenes the brother,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> to the assembly of God that is in Corinth,
to those sanctified in Christ Jesus, called saints, with all those
calling upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ in every place -- both
theirs and ours:

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Grace to you and peace from God our Father
and the Lord Jesus Christ!

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> I give thanks to my God always concerning
you for the grace of God that was given to you in Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> that in every thing ye were enriched in
him, in all discourse and all knowledge,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> according as the testimony of the Christ
was confirmed in you,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> so that ye are not behind in any gift,
waiting for the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> who also shall confirm you unto the end --
unblamable in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> faithful \[is\] God, through whom ye were
called to the fellowship of His Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And I call upon you, brethren, through
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that the same thing ye may all say,
and there may not be divisions among you, and ye may be perfected in the
same mind, and in the same judgment,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> for it was signified to me concerning
you, my brethren, by those of Chloe, that contentions are among you;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> and I say this, that each one of you
saith, \`I, indeed, am of Paul' -- \`and I of Apollos,' -- \`and I of
Cephas,' -- \`and I of Christ.'

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Hath the Christ been divided? was Paul
crucified for you? or to the name of Paul were ye baptized;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> I give thanks to God that no one of you
did I baptize, except Crispus and Gaius --

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> that no one may say that to my own name I
did baptize;

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> and I did baptize also Stephanas'
household -- further, I have not known if I did baptize any other.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For Christ did not send me to baptize,
but -- to proclaim good news; not in wisdom of discourse, that the cross
of the Christ may not be made of none effect;

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> for the word of the cross to those indeed
perishing is foolishness, and to us -- those being saved -- it is the
power of God,

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> for it hath been written, \`I will
destroy the wisdom of the wise, and the intelligence of the intelligent
I will bring to nought;'

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> where \[is\] the wise? where the scribe?
where a disputer of this age? did not God make foolish the wisdom of
this world?

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> for, seeing in the wisdom of God the
world through the wisdom knew not God, it did please God through the
foolishness of the preaching to save those believing.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Since also Jews ask a sign, and Greeks
seek wisdom,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> also we -- we preach Christ crucified, to
Jews, indeed, a stumbling-block, and to Greeks foolishness,

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> and to those called -- both Jews and
Greeks -- Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God,

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> because the foolishness of God is wiser
than men, and the weakness of God is stronger than men;

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> for see your calling, brethren, that not
many \[are\] wise according to the flesh, not many mighty, not many
noble;

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> but the foolish things of the world did
God choose, that the wise He may put to shame; and the weak things of
the world did God choose that He may put to shame the strong;

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> and the base things of the world, and the
things despised did God choose, and the things that are not, that the
things that are He may make useless --

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> that no flesh may glory before Him;

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> and of Him ye -- ye are in Christ Jesus,
who became to us from God wisdom, righteousness also, and
sanctification, and redemption,

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> that, according as it hath been written,
\`He who is glorying -- in the Lord let him glory.'

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And I, having come unto you, brethren, came
-- not in superiority of discourse or wisdom -- declaring to you the
testimony of God,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> for I decided not to know any thing among
you, except Jesus Christ, and him crucified;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> and I, in weakness, and in fear, and in
much trembling, was with you;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> and my word and my preaching was not in
persuasive words of human wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and
of power --

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> that your faith may not be in the wisdom of
men, but in the power of God.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And wisdom we speak among the perfect, and
wisdom not of this age, nor of the rulers of this age -- of those
becoming useless,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> but we speak the hidden wisdom of God in a
secret, that God foreordained before the ages to our glory,

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> which no one of the rulers of this age did
know, for if they had known, the Lord of the glory they would not have
crucified;

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> but, according as it hath been written,
\`What eye did not see, and ear did not hear, and upon the heart of man
came not up, what God did prepare for those loving Him --'

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> but to us did God reveal \[them\] through
His Spirit, for the Spirit all things doth search, even the depths of
God,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> for who of men hath known the things of
the man, except the spirit of the man that \[is\] in him? so also the
things of God no one hath known, except the Spirit of God.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And we the spirit of the world did not
receive, but the Spirit that \[is\] of God, that we may know the things
conferred by God on us,

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> which things also we speak, not in words
taught by human wisdom, but in those taught by the Holy Spirit, with
spiritual things spiritual things comparing,

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> and the natural man doth not receive the
things of the Spirit of God, for to him they are foolishness, and he is
not able to know \[them\], because spiritually they are discerned;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> and he who is spiritual, doth discern
indeed all things, and he himself is by no one discerned;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> for who did know the mind of the Lord
that he shall instruct Him? and we -- we have the mind of Christ.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And I, brethren, was not able to speak to
you as to spiritual, but as to fleshly -- as to babes in Christ;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> with milk I fed you, and not with meat, for
ye were not yet able, but not even yet are ye now able,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> for yet ye are fleshly, for where \[there
is\] among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not fleshly,
and in the manner of men do walk?

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> for when one may say, \`I, indeed, am of
Paul;' and another, \`I -- of Apollos;' are ye not fleshly?

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Who, then, is Paul, and who Apollos, but
ministrants through whom ye did believe, and to each as the Lord gave?

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> I planted, Apollos watered, but God was
giving growth;

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> so that neither is he who is planting
anything, nor he who is watering, but He who is giving growth -- God;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> and he who is planting and he who is
watering are one, and each his own reward shall receive, according to
his own labour,

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> for of God we are fellow-workmen; God's
tillage, God's building ye are.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> According to the grace of God that was
given to me, as a wise master-builder, a foundation I have laid, and
another doth build on \[it\],

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> for other foundation no one is able to
lay except that which is laid, which is Jesus the Christ;

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> and if any one doth build upon this
foundation gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, straw --

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> of each the work shall become manifest,
for the day shall declare \[it\], because in fire it is revealed, and
the work of each, what kind it is, the fire shall prove;

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> if of any one the work doth remain that
he built on \[it\], a wage he shall receive;

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> if of any the work is burned up, he shall
suffer loss; and himself shall be saved, but so as through fire.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> have ye not known that ye are a sanctuary
of God, and the Spirit of God doth dwell in you?

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> if any one the sanctuary of God doth
waste, him shall God waste; for the sanctuary of God is holy, the which
ye are.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Let no one deceive himself; if any one
doth seem to be wise among you in this age -- let him become a fool,
that he may become wise,

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> for the wisdom of this world is
foolishness with God, for it hath been written, \`Who is taking the wise
in their craftiness;'

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> and again, \`The Lord doth know the
reasonings of the wise, that they are vain.'

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> So then, let no one glory in men, for all
things are yours,

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or
the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things about to be
-- all are yours,

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> and ye \[are\] Christ's, and Christ
\[is\] God's.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Let a man so reckon us as officers of
Christ, and stewards of the secrets of God,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> and as to the rest, it is required in the
stewards that one may be found faithful,

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> and to me it is for a very little thing
that by you I may be judged, or by man's day, but not even myself do I
judge,

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> for of nothing to myself have I been
conscious, but not in this have I been declared right -- and he who is
discerning me is the Lord:

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> so, then, nothing before the time judge ye,
till the Lord may come, who will both bring to light the hidden things
of the darkness, and will manifest the counsels of the hearts, and then
the praise shall come to each from God.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And these things, brethren, I did transfer
to myself and to Apollos because of you, that in us ye may learn not to
think above that which hath been written, that ye may not be puffed up
one for one against the other,

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> for who doth make thee to differ? and what
hast thou, that thou didst not receive? and if thou didst also receive,
why dost thou glory as not having received?

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Already ye are having been filled, already
ye were rich, apart from us ye did reign, and I would also ye did reign,
that we also with you may reign together,

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> for I think that God did set forth us the
apostles last -- as appointed to death, because a spectacle we became to
the world, and messengers, and men;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> we \[are\] fools because of Christ, and
ye wise in Christ; we \[are\] ailing, and ye strong; ye glorious, and we
dishonoured;

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> unto the present hour we both hunger, and
thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and wander about,

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> and labour, working with \[our\] own
hands; being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer;

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> being spoken evil of, we entreat; as
filth of the world we did become -- of all things an offscouring -- till
now.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Not \[as\] putting you to shame do I
write these things, but as my beloved children I do admonish,

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> for if a myriad of child-conductors ye
may have in Christ, yet not many fathers; for in Christ Jesus, through
the good news, I -- I did beget you;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> I call upon you, therefore, become ye
followers of me;

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> because of this I sent to you Timotheus,
who is my child, beloved and faithful in the Lord, who shall remind you
of my ways in Christ, according as everywhere in every assembly I teach.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And as if I were not coming unto you
certain were puffed up;

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> but I will come quickly unto you, if the
Lord may will, and I will know not the word of those puffed up, but the
power;

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> for not in word is the reign of God, but
in power?

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> what do ye wish? with a rod shall I come
unto you, or in love, with a spirit also of meekness?

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Whoredom is actually heard of among you,
and such whoredom as is not even named among the nations -- as that one
hath the wife of the father! --

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> and ye are having been puffed up, and did
not rather mourn, that he may be removed out of the midst of you who did
this work,

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> for I indeed, as being absent as to the
body, and present as to the spirit, have already judged, as being
present, him who so wrought this thing:

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ -- ye
being gathered together, also my spirit -- with the power of our Lord
Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> to deliver up such a one to the Adversary
for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the
day of the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Not good \[is\] your glorying; have ye not
known that a little leaven the whole lump doth leaven?

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> cleanse out, therefore, the old leaven,
that ye may be a new lump, according as ye are unleavened, for also our
passover for us was sacrificed -- Christ,

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> so that we may keep the feast, not with old
leaven, nor with the leaven of evil and wickedness, but with unleavened
food of sincerity and truth.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> I did write to you in the epistle, not to
keep company with whoremongers --

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> and not certainly with the whoremongers
of this world, or with the covetous, or extortioners, or idolaters,
seeing ye ought then to go forth out of the world --

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> and now, I did write to you not to keep
company with \[him\], if any one, being named a brother, may be a
whoremonger, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or
an extortioner -- with such a one not even to eat together;

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> for what have I also those without to
judge? those within do ye not judge?

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> and those without God doth judge; and put
ye away the evil from among yourselves.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Dare any one of you, having a matter with
the other, go to be judged before the unrighteous, and not before the
saints?

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> have ye not known that the saints shall
judge the world? and if by you the world is judged, are ye unworthy of
the smaller judgments?

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> have ye not known that we shall judge
messengers? why not then the things of life?

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> of the things of life, indeed, then, if ye
may have judgment, those despised in the assembly -- these cause ye to
sit;

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> unto your shame I speak: so there is not
among you one wise man, not even one, who shall be able to discern in
the midst of his brethren!

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> but brother with brother doth go to be
judged, and this before unbelievers!

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Already, indeed, then, there is altogether
a fault among you, that ye have judgments with one another; wherefore do
ye not rather suffer injustice? wherefore be ye not rather defrauded?

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> but ye -- ye do injustice, and ye defraud,
and these -- brethren!

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> have ye not known that the unrighteous the
reign of God shall not inherit? be not led astray; neither whoremongers,
nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor sodomites,

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards,
nor revilers, nor extortioners, the reign of God shall inherit.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And certain of you were these! but ye
were washed, but ye were sanctified, but ye were declared righteous, in
the name of the Lord Jesus, and in the Spirit of our God.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> All things are lawful to me, but all
things are not profitable; all things are lawful to me, but I -- I will
not be under authority by any;

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> the meats \[are\] for the belly, and the
belly for the meats. And God both this and these shall make useless; and
the body \[is\] not for whoredom, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the
body;

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> and God both the Lord did raise, and us
will raise up through His power.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Have ye not known that your bodies are
members of Christ? having taken, then, the members of the Christ, shall
I make \[them\] members of an harlot? let it be not!

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> have ye not known that he who is joined
to the harlot is one body? \`for they shall be -- saith He -- the two
for one flesh.'

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And he who is joined to the Lord is one
spirit;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> flee the whoredom; every sin -- whatever
a man may commit -- is without the body, and he who is committing
whoredom, against his own body doth sin.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Have ye not known that your body is a
sanctuary of the Holy Spirit in you, which ye have from God? and ye are
not your own,

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> for ye were bought with a price; glorify,
then, God in your body and in your spirit, which are God's.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And concerning the things of which ye wrote
to me: good \[it is\] for a man not to touch a woman,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> and because of the whoredom let each man
have his own wife, and let each woman have her proper husband;

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> to the wife let the husband the due
benevolence render, and in like manner also the wife to the husband;

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> the wife over her own body hath not
authority, but the husband; and, in like manner also, the husband over
his own body hath not authority, but the wife.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Defraud not one another, except by consent
for a time, that ye may be free for fasting and prayer, and again may
come together, that the Adversary may not tempt you because of your
incontinence;

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> and this I say by way of concurrence -- not
of command,

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> for I wish all men to be even as I myself
\[am\]; but each his own gift hath of God, one indeed thus, and one
thus.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And I say to the unmarried and to the
widows: it is good for them if they may remain even as I \[am\];

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> and if they have not continence -- let them
marry, for it is better to marry than to burn;

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> and to the married I announce -- not I,
but the Lord -- let not a wife separate from a husband:

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> but and if she may separate, let her
remain unmarried, or to the husband let her be reconciled, and let not a
husband send away a wife.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And to the rest I speak -- not the Lord
-- if any brother hath a wife unbelieving, and she is pleased to dwell
with him, let him not send her away;

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> and a woman who hath a husband
unbelieving, and he is pleased to dwell with her, let her not send him
away;

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> for the unbelieving husband hath been
sanctified in the wife, and the unbelieving wife hath been sanctified in
the husband; otherwise your children are unclean, but now they are holy.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And, if the unbelieving doth separate
himself -- let him separate himself: the brother or the sister is not
under servitude in such \[cases\], and in peace hath God called us;

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> for what, hast thou known, O wife,
whether the husband thou shalt save? or what, hast thou known, O
husband, whether the wife thou shalt save?

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> if not, as God did distribute to each, as
the Lord hath called each -- so let him walk; and thus in all the
assemblies do I direct:

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> being circumcised -- was any one called?
let him not become uncircumcised; in uncircumcision was any one called?
let him not be circumcised;

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> the circumcision is nothing, and the
uncircumcision is nothing -- but a keeping of the commands of God.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Each in the calling in which he was
called -- in this let him remain;

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> a servant -- wast thou called? be not
anxious; but if also thou art able to become free -- use \[it\] rather;

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> for he who \[is\] in the Lord -- having
been called a servant -- is the Lord's freedman: in like manner also he
the freeman, having been called, is servant of Christ:

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> with a price ye were bought, become not
servants of men;

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> each, in that in which he was called,
brethren, in this let him remain with God.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And concerning the virgins, a command of
the Lord I have not; and I give judgment as having obtained kindness
from the Lord to be faithful:

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> I suppose, therefore, this to be good
because of the present necessity, that \[it is\] good for a man that the
matter be thus: --

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> Hast thou been bound to a wife? seek not
to be loosed; hast thou been loosed from a wife? seek not a wife.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> But and if thou mayest marry, thou didst
not sin; and if the virgin may marry, she did not sin; and such shall
have tribulation in the flesh: and I spare you.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> And this I say, brethren, the time
henceforth is having been shortened -- that both those having wives may
be as not having;

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> and those weeping, as not weeping; and
those rejoicing, as not rejoicing; and those buying, as not possessing;

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> and those using this world, as not using
\[it\] up; for passing away is the fashion of this world.

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> And I wish you to be without anxiety; the
unmarried is anxious for the things of the Lord, how he shall please the
Lord;

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> and the married is anxious for the things
of the world, how he shall please the wife.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> The wife and the virgin have been
distinguished: the unmarried is anxious for the things of the Lord, that
she may be holy both in body and in spirit, and the married is anxious
for the things of the world, how she shall please the husband.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> And this for your own profit I say: not
that I may cast a noose upon you, but for the seemliness and devotedness
to the Lord, undistractedly,

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> and if any one doth think \[it\] to be
unseemly to his virgin, if she may be beyond the bloom of age, and it
ought so to be, what he willeth let him do; he doth not sin -- let him
marry.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> And he who hath stood stedfast in the
heart -- not having necessity -- and hath authority over his own will,
and this he hath determined in his heart -- to keep his own virgin --
doth well;

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> so that both he who is giving in marriage
doth well, and he who is not giving in marriage doth better.

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> A wife hath been bound by law as long
time as her husband may live, and if her husband may sleep, she is free
to be married to whom she will -- only in the Lord;

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> and she is happier if she may so remain
-- according to my judgment; and I think I also have the Spirit of God.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And concerning the things sacrificed to
idols, we have known that we all have knowledge: knowledge puffeth up,
but love buildeth up;

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> and if any one doth think to know anything,
he hath not yet known anything according as it behoveth \[him\] to know;

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> and if any one doth love God, this one hath
been known by Him.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Concerning the eating then of the things
sacrificed to idols, we have known that an idol \[is\] nothing in the
world, and that there is no other God except one;

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> for even if there are those called gods,
whether in heaven, whether upon earth -- as there are gods many and
lords many --

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> yet to us \[is\] one God, the Father, of
whom \[are\] the all things, and we to Him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ,
through whom \[are\] the all things, and we through Him;

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> but not in all men \[is\] the knowledge,
and certain with conscience of the idol, till now, as a thing sacrificed
to an idol do eat \[it\], and their conscience, being weak, is defiled.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> But victuals do not commend us to God, for
neither if we may eat are we in advance; nor if we may not eat, are we
behind;

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> but see, lest this privilege of yours may
become a stumbling-block to the infirm,

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> for if any one may see thee that hast
knowledge in an idol's temple reclining at meat -- shall not his
conscience -- he being infirm -- be emboldened to eat the things
sacrificed to idols,

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> and the brother who is infirm shall
perish by thy knowledge, because of whom Christ died?

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> and thus sinning in regard to the
brethren, and smiting their weak conscience -- in regard to Christ ye
sin;

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> wherefore, if victuals cause my brother
to stumble, I may eat no flesh -- to the age -- that my brother I may
not cause to stumble.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Am not I an apostle? am not I free? Jesus
Christ our Lord have I not seen? my work are not ye in the Lord?

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> if to others I am not an apostle -- yet
doubtless to you I am; for the seal of my apostleship are ye in the
Lord.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> My defence to those who examine me in this;

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> have we not authority to eat and to drink?

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> have we not authority a sister -- a wife --
to lead about, as also the other apostles, and the brethren of the Lord,
and Cephas?

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> or only I and Barnabas, have we not
authority -- not to work?

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> who doth serve as a soldier at his own
charges at any time? who doth plant a vineyard, and of its fruit doth
not eat? or who doth feed a flock, and of the milk of the flock doth not
eat?

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> According to man do I speak these things?
or doth not also the law say these things?

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> for in the law of Moses it hath been
written, \`thou shalt not muzzle an ox treading out corn;' for the oxen
doth God care?

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> or because of us by all means doth He say
\[it\]? yes, because of us it was written, because in hope ought the
plower to plow, and he who is treading \[ought\] of his hope to partake
in hope.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> If we to you the spiritual things did sow
-- great \[is it\] if we your fleshly things do reap?

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> if others do partake of the authority
over you -- not we more? but we did not use this authority, but all
things we bear, that we may give no hindrance to the good news of the
Christ.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Have ye not known that those working
about the things of the temple -- of the temple do eat, and those
waiting at the altar -- with the altar are partakers?

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> so also did the Lord direct to those
proclaiming the good news: of the good news to live.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And I have used none of these things;
neither did I write these things that it may be so done in my case, for
\[it is\] good for me rather to die, than that any one may make my
glorying void;

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> for if I may proclaim good news, it is no
glorying for me, for necessity is laid upon me, and wo is to me if I may
not proclaim good news;

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> for if willing I do this, I have a
reward; and if unwillingly -- with a stewardship I have been entrusted!

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> What, then, is my reward? -- that
proclaiming good news, without charge I shall make the good news of the
Christ, not to abuse my authority in the good news;

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> for being free from all men, to all men I
made myself servant, that the more I might gain;

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> and I became to the Jews as a Jew, that
Jews I might gain; to those under law as under law, that those under law
I might gain;

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> to those without law, as without law --
(not being without law to God, but within law to Christ) -- that I might
gain those without law;

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> I became to the infirm as infirm, that
the infirm I might gain; to all men I have become all things, that by
all means I may save some.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And this I do because of the good news,
that a fellow-partaker of it I may become;

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> have ye not known that those running in a
race -- all indeed run, but one doth receive the prize? so run ye, that
ye may obtain;

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> and every one who is striving, is in all
things temperate; these, indeed, then, that a corruptible crown they may
receive, but we an incorruptible;

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> I, therefore, thus run, not as
uncertainly, thus I fight, as not beating air;

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> but I chastise my body, and bring \[it\]
into servitude, lest by any means, having preached to others -- I myself
may become disapproved.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And I do not wish you to be ignorant,
brethren, that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed
through the sea,

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> and all to Moses were baptized in the
cloud, and in the sea;

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> and all the same spiritual food did eat,

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> and all the same spiritual drink did
drink, for they were drinking of a spiritual rock following them, and
the rock was the Christ;

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> but in the most of them God was not well
pleased, for they were strewn in the wilderness,

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> and those things became types of us, for
our not passionately desiring evil things, as also these did desire.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Neither become ye idolaters, as certain
of them, as it hath been written, \`The people sat down to eat and to
drink, and stood up to play;'

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> neither may we commit whoredom, as
certain of them did commit whoredom, and there fell in one day
twenty-three thousand;

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> neither may we tempt the Christ, as also
certain of them did tempt, and by the serpents did perish;

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> neither murmur ye, as also some of them
did murmur, and did perish by the destroyer.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And all these things as types did
happen to those persons, and they were written for our admonition, to
whom the end of the ages did come,

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> so that he who is thinking to stand --
let him observe, lest he fall.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> No temptation hath taken you -- except
human; and God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above
what ye are able, but He will make, with the temptation, also the
outlet, for your being able to bear \[it\].

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Wherefore, my beloved, flee from the
idolatry;

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> as to wise men I speak -- judge ye what
I say:

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> The cup of the blessing that we bless
-- is it not the fellowship of the blood of the Christ? the bread that
we break -- is it not the fellowship of the body of the Christ?

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> because one bread, one body, are we the
many -- for we all of the one bread do partake.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> See Israel according to the flesh! are
not those eating the sacrifices in the fellowship of the altar?

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> what then do I say? that an idol is
anything? or that a sacrifice offered to an idol is anything? --

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> \[no,\] but that the things that the
nations sacrifice -- they sacrifice to demons and not to God; and I do
not wish you to come into the fellowship of the demons.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Ye are not able the cup of the Lord to
drink, and the cup of demons; ye are not able of the table of the Lord
to partake, and of the table of demons;

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> do we arouse the Lord to jealousy? are
we stronger than He?

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> All things to me are lawful, but all
things are not profitable; all things to me are lawful, but all things
do not build up;

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> let no one seek his own -- but each
another's.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> Whatever in the meat-market is sold eat
ye, not inquiring, because of the conscience,

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> for the Lord's \[is\] the earth, and
its fulness;

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> and if any one of the unbelieving do
call you, and ye wish to go, all that is set before you eat, nothing
inquiring, because of the conscience;

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> and if any one may say to you, \`This
is a thing sacrificed to an idol,' -- do not eat, because of that one
who shewed \[it\], and of the conscience, for the Lord's \[is\] the
earth and its fulness:

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> and conscience, I say, not of thyself,
but of the other, for why \[is it\] that my liberty is judged by
another's conscience?

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> and if I thankfully do partake, why am
I evil spoken of, for that for which I give thanks?

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> Whether, then, ye eat, or drink, or do
anything, do all to the glory of God;

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> become offenceless, both to Jews and
Greeks, and to the assembly of God;

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> as I also in all things do please all,
not seeking my own profit, but that of many -- that they may be saved.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Followers of me become ye, as I also
\[am\] of Christ.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And I praise you, brethren, that in all
things ye remember me, and according as I did deliver to you, the
deliverances ye keep,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> and I wish you to know that of every man
the head is the Christ, and the head of a woman is the husband, and the
head of Christ is God.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Every man praying or prophesying, having
the head covered, doth dishonour his head,

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> and every woman praying or prophesying
with the head uncovered, doth dishonour her own head, for it is one and
the same thing with her being shaven,

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> for if a woman is not covered -- then let
her be shorn, and if \[it is\] a shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven
-- let her be covered;

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> for a man, indeed, ought not to cover the
head, being the image and glory of God, and a woman is the glory of a
man,

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> for a man is not of a woman, but a woman
\[is\] of a man,

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> for a man also was not created because of
the woman, but a woman because of the man;

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> because of this the woman ought to have
\[a token of\] authority upon the head, because of the messengers;

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> but neither \[is\] a man apart from a
woman, nor a woman apart from a man, in the Lord,

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> for as the woman \[is\] of the man, so
also the man \[is\] through the woman, and the all things \[are\] of
God.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> In your own selves judge ye; is it
seemly for a woman uncovered to pray to God?

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> doth not even nature itself teach you,
that if a man indeed have long hair, a dishonour it is to him?

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> and a woman, if she have long hair, a
glory it is to her, because the hair instead of a covering hath been
given to her;

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> and if any one doth think to be
contentious, we have no such custom, neither the assemblies of God.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And this declaring, I give no praise,
because not for the better, but for the worse ye come together;

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> for first, indeed, ye coming together
in an assembly, I hear of divisions being among you, and partly I
believe \[it\],

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> for it behoveth sects also to be among
you, that those approved may become manifest among you;

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> ye, then, coming together at the same
place -- it is not to eat the Lord's supper;

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> for each his own supper doth take
before in the eating, and one is hungry, and another is drunk;

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> why, have ye not houses to eat and to
drink in? or the assembly of God do ye despise, and shame those not
having? what may I say to you? shall I praise you in this? I do not
praise!

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> For I -- I received from the Lord that
which also I did deliver to you, that the Lord Jesus in the night in
which he was delivered up, took bread,

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> and having given thanks, he brake, and
said, \`Take ye, eat ye, this is my body, that for you is being broken;
this do ye -- to the remembrance of me.'

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> In like manner also the cup after the
supping, saying, \`This cup is the new covenant in my blood; this do ye,
as often as ye may drink \[it\] -- to the remembrance of me;'

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> for as often as ye may eat this bread,
and this cup may drink, the death of the Lord ye do shew forth -- till
he may come;

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> so that whoever may eat this bread or
may drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, guilty he shall be of the body
and blood of the Lord:

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> and let a man be proving himself, and
so of the bread let him eat, and of the cup let him drink;

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> for he who is eating and drinking
unworthily, judgment to himself he doth eat and drink -- not discerning
the body of the Lord.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> Because of this, among you many \[are\]
weak and sickly, and sleep do many;

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> for if ourselves we were discerning, we
would not be being judged,

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> and being judged by the Lord, we are
chastened, that with the world we may not be condemned;

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> so then, my brethren, coming together
to eat, for one another wait ye;

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> and if any one is hungry, at home let
him eat, that to judgment ye may not come together; and the rest,
whenever I may come, I shall arrange.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And concerning the spiritual things,
brethren, I do not wish you to be ignorant;

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> ye have known that ye were nations, unto
the dumb idols -- as ye were led -- being carried away;

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> wherefore, I give you to understand that
no one, in the Spirit of God speaking, saith Jesus \[is\] anathema, and
no one is able to say Jesus \[is\] Lord, except in the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And there are diversities of gifts, and
the same Spirit;

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> and there are diversities of
ministrations, and the same Lord;

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> and there are diversities of workings,
and it is the same God -- who is working the all in all.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And to each hath been given the
manifestation of the Spirit for profit;

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> for to one through the Spirit hath been
given a word of wisdom, and to another a word of knowledge, according to
the same Spirit;

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> and to another faith in the same Spirit,
and to another gifts of healings in the same Spirit;

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> and to another in-workings of mighty
deeds; and to another prophecy; and to another discernings of spirits;
and to another \[divers\] kinds of tongues; and to another
interpretation of tongues:

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> and all these doth work the one and the
same Spirit, dividing to each severally as he intendeth.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> For, even as the body is one, and hath
many members, and all the members of the one body, being many, are one
body, so also \[is\] the Christ,

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> for also in one Spirit we all to one
body were baptized, whether Jews or Greeks, whether servants or freemen,
and all into one Spirit were made to drink,

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> for also the body is not one member,
but many;

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> if the foot may say, \`Because I am not
a hand, I am not of the body;' it is not, because of this, not of the
body;

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> and if the ear may say, \`Because I am
not an eye, I am not of the body;' it is not, because of this, not of
the body?

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> If the whole body \[were\] an eye,
where the hearing? if the whole hearing, where the smelling?

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> and now, God did set the members each
one of them in the body, according as He willed,

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> and if all were one member, where the
body?

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> and now, indeed, \[are\] many members,
and one body;

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> and an eye is not able to say to the
hand, \`I have no need of thee;' nor again the head to the feet, \`I
have no need of you.'

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> But much more the members of the body
which seem to be more infirm are necessary,

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> and those that we think to be less
honourable of the body, around these we put more abundant honour, and
our unseemly things have seemliness more abundant,

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> and our seemly things have no need; but
God did temper the body together, to the lacking part having given more
abundant honour,

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> that there may be no division in the
body, but that the members may have the same anxiety for one another,

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> and whether one member doth suffer,
suffer with \[it\] do all the members, or one member is glorified,
rejoice with \[it\] do all the members;

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> and ye are the body of Christ, and
members in particular.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> And some, indeed, did God set in the
assembly, first apostles, secondly prophets, thirdly teachers,
afterwards powers, afterwards gifts of healings, helpings, governings,
divers kinds of tongues;

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> \[are\] all apostles? \[are\] all
prophets? \[are\] all teachers? \[are\] all powers?

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> have all gifts of healings? do all
speak with tongues? do all interpret?

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> and desire earnestly the better gifts;
and yet a far excelling way do I shew to you:

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> If with the tongues of men and of
messengers I speak, and have not love, I have become brass sounding, or
a cymbal tinkling;

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> and if I have prophecy, and know all the
secrets, and all the knowledge, and if I have all the faith, so as to
remove mountains, and have not love, I am nothing;

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> and if I give away to feed others all my
goods, and if I give up my body that I may be burned, and have not love,
I am profited nothing.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> The love is long-suffering, it is kind,
the love doth not envy, the love doth not vaunt itself, is not puffed
up,

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> doth not act unseemly, doth not seek its
own things, is not provoked, doth not impute evil,

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> rejoiceth not over the unrighteousness,
and rejoiceth with the truth;

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> all things it beareth, all it believeth,
all it hopeth, all it endureth.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> The love doth never fail; and whether
\[there be\] prophecies, they shall become useless; whether tongues,
they shall cease; whether knowledge, it shall become useless;

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> for in part we know, and in part we
prophecy;

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> and when that which is perfect may
come, then that which \[is\] in part shall become useless.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> When I was a babe, as a babe I was
speaking, as a babe I was thinking, as a babe I was reasoning, and when
I have become a man, I have made useless the things of the babe;

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> for we see now through a mirror
obscurely, and then face to face; now I know in part, and then I shall
fully know, as also I was known;

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> and now there doth remain faith, hope,
love -- these three; and the greatest of these \[is\] love.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Pursue the love, and seek earnestly the
spiritual things, and rather that ye may prophecy,

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> for he who is speaking in an \[unknown\]
tongue -- to men he doth not speak, but to God, for no one doth hearken,
and in spirit he doth speak secrets;

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> and he who is prophesying to men doth
speak edification, and exhortation, and comfort;

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> he who is speaking in an \[unknown\]
tongue, himself doth edify, and he who is prophesying, an assembly doth
edify;

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> and I wish you all to speak with tongues,
and more that ye may prophecy, for greater is he who is prophesying than
he who is speaking with tongues, except one may interpret, that the
assembly may receive edification.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And now, brethren, if I may come unto you
speaking tongues, what shall I profit you, except I shall speak to you
either in revelation, or in knowledge, or in prophesying, or in
teaching?

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> yet the things without life giving sound
-- whether pipe or harp -- if a difference in the sounds they may not
give, how shall be known that which is piped or that which is harped?

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> for if also an uncertain sound a trumpet
may give, who shall prepare himself for battle?

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> so also ye, if through the tongue, speech
easily understood ye may not give -- how shall that which is spoken be
known? for ye shall be speaking to air.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> There are, it may be, so many kinds of
voices in the world, and none of them is unmeaning,

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> if, then, I do not know the power of
the voice, I shall be to him who is speaking a foreigner, and he who is
speaking, is to me a foreigner;

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> so also ye, since ye are earnestly
desirous of spiritual gifts, for the building up of the assembly seek
that ye may abound;

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> wherefore he who is speaking in an
\[unknown\] tongue -- let him pray that he may interpret;

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> for if I pray in an \[unknown\] tongue,
my spirit doth pray, and my understanding is unfruitful.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> What then is it? I will pray with the
spirit, and I will pray also with the understanding; I will sing psalms
with the spirit, and I will sing psalms also with the understanding;

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> since, if thou mayest bless with the
spirit, he who is filling the place of the unlearned, how shall he say
the Amen at thy giving of thanks, since what thou dost say he hath not
known?

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> for thou, indeed, dost give thanks
well, but the other is not built up!

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> I give thanks to my God -- more than
you all with tongues speaking --

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> but in an assembly I wish to speak five
words through my understanding, that others also I may instruct, rather
than myriads of words in an \[unknown\] tongue.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Brethren, become not children in the
understanding, but in the evil be ye babes, and in the understanding
become ye perfect;

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> in the law it hath been written, that,
\`With other tongues and with other lips I will speak to this people,
and not even so will they hear Me, saith the Lord;'

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> so that the tongues are for a sign, not
to the believing, but to the unbelieving; and the prophesy \[is\] not
for the unbelieving, but for the believing,

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> If, therefore, the whole assembly may
come together, to the same place, and all may speak with tongues, and
there may come in unlearned or unbelievers, will they not say that ye
are mad?

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> and if all may prophecy, and any one
may come in, an unbeliever or unlearned, he is convicted by all, he is
discerned by all,

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> and so the secrets of his heart become
manifest, and so having fallen upon \[his\] face, he will bow before
God, declaring that God really is among you.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> What then is it, brethren? whenever ye
may come together, each of you hath a psalm, hath a teaching, hath a
tongue, hath a revelation, hath an interpretation? let all things be for
building up;

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> if an \[unknown\] tongue any one do
speak, by two, or at the most, by three, and in turn, and let one
interpret;

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> and if there may be no interpreter, let
him be silent in an assembly, and to himself let him speak, and to God.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> And prophets -- let two or three speak,
and let the others discern,

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> and if to another sitting \[anything\]
may be revealed, let the first be silent;

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> for ye are able, one by one, all to
prophesy, that all may learn, and all may be exhorted,

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> and the spiritual gift of prophets to
prophets are subject,

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> for God is not \[a God\] of tumult, but
of peace, as in all the assemblies of the saints.

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> Your women in the assemblies let them
be silent, for it hath not been permitted to them to speak, but to be
subject, as also the law saith;

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> and if they wish to learn anything, at
home their own husbands let them question, for it is a shame to women to
speak in an assembly.

<span id="an_14:36">14:36</span> From you did the word of God come
forth? or to you alone did it come?

<span id="an_14:37">14:37</span> if any one doth think to be a prophet,
or spiritual, let him acknowledge the things that I write to you -- that
of the Lord they are commands;

<span id="an_14:38">14:38</span> and if any one is ignorant -- let him
be ignorant;

<span id="an_14:39">14:39</span> so that, brethren, earnestly desire to
prophesy, and to speak with tongues do not forbid;

<span id="an_14:40">14:40</span> let all things be done decently and in
order.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And I make known to you, brethren, the
good news that I proclaimed to you, which also ye did receive, in which
also ye have stood,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> through which also ye are being saved, in
what words I proclaimed good news to you, if ye hold fast, except ye did
believe in vain,

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> for I delivered to you first, what also I
did receive, that Christ died for our sins, according to the Writings,

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> and that he was buried, and that he hath
risen on the third day, according to the Writings,

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> and that he appeared to Cephas, then to
the twelve,

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> afterwards he appeared to above five
hundred brethren at once, of whom the greater part remain till now, and
certain also did fall asleep;

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> afterwards he appeared to James, then to
all the apostles.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And last of all -- as to the untimely
birth -- he appeared also to me,

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> for I am the least of the apostles, who
am not worthy to be called an apostle, because I did persecute the
assembly of God,

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> and by the grace of God I am what I am,
and His grace that \[is\] towards me came not in vain, but more
abundantly than they all did I labour, yet not I, but the grace of God
that \[is\] with me;

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> whether, then, I or they, so we preach,
and so ye did believe.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And if Christ is preached, that out of
the dead he hath risen, how say certain among you, that there is no
rising again of dead persons?

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> and if there be no rising again of dead
persons, neither hath Christ risen;

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> and if Christ hath not risen, then void
\[is\] our preaching, and void also your faith,

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> and we also are found false witnesses
of God, because we did testify of God that He raised up the Christ, whom
He did not raise if then dead persons do not rise;

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> for if dead persons do not rise,
neither hath Christ risen,

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> and if Christ hath not risen, vain is
your faith, ye are yet in your sins;

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> then, also, those having fallen asleep
in Christ did perish;

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> if in this life we have hope in Christ
only, of all men we are most to be pitied.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And now, Christ hath risen out of the
dead -- the first-fruits of those sleeping he became,

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> for since through man \[is\] the death,
also through man \[is\] a rising again of the dead,

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> for even as in Adam all die, so also in
the Christ all shall be made alive,

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> and each in his proper order, a
first-fruit Christ, afterwards those who are the Christ's, in his
presence,

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> then -- the end, when he may deliver up
the reign to God, even the Father, when he may have made useless all
rule, and all authority and power --

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> for it behoveth him to reign till he
may have put all the enemies under his feet --

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> the last enemy is done away -- death;

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> for all things He did put under his
feet, and, when one may say that all things have been subjected, \[it
is\] evident that He is excepted who did subject the all things to him,

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> and when the all things may be
subjected to him, then the Son also himself shall be subject to Him, who
did subject to him the all things, that God may be the all in all.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> Seeing what shall they do who are
baptized for the dead, if the dead do not rise at all? why also are they
baptized for the dead?

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> why also do we stand in peril every
hour?

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> Every day do I die, by the glorying of
you that I have in Christ Jesus our Lord:

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> if after the manner of a man with wild
beasts I fought in Ephesus, what the advantage to me if the dead do not
rise? let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die!

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> Be not led astray; evil communications
corrupt good manners;

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> awake up, as is right, and sin not; for
certain have an ignorance of God; for shame to you I say \[it\].

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> But some one will say, \`How do the
dead rise?

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> unwise! thou -- what thou dost sow is
not quickened except it may die;

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> and that which thou dost sow, not the
body that shall be dost thou sow, but bare grain, it may be of wheat, or
of some one of the others,

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> and God doth give to it a body
according as He willed, and to each of the seeds its proper body.

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> All flesh \[is\] not the same flesh,
but there is one flesh of men, and another flesh of beasts, and another
of fishes, and another of birds;

<span id="an_15:40">15:40</span> and \[there are\] heavenly bodies, and
earthly bodies; but one \[is\] the glory of the heavenly, and another
that of the earthly;

<span id="an_15:41">15:41</span> one glory of sun, and another glory of
moon, and another glory of stars, for star from star doth differ in
glory.

<span id="an_15:42">15:42</span> So also \[is\] the rising again of the
dead: it is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption;

<span id="an_15:43">15:43</span> it is sown in dishonour, it is raised
in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power;

<span id="an_15:44">15:44</span> it is sown a natural body, it is raised
a spiritual body; there is a natural body, and there is a spiritual
body;

<span id="an_15:45">15:45</span> so also it hath been written, \`The
first man Adam became a living creature,' the last Adam \[is\] for a
life-giving spirit,

<span id="an_15:46">15:46</span> but that which is spiritual \[is\] not
first, but that which \[was\] natural, afterwards that which \[is\]
spiritual.

<span id="an_15:47">15:47</span> The first man \[is\] out of the earth,
earthy; the second man \[is\] the Lord out of heaven;

<span id="an_15:48">15:48</span> as \[is\] the earthy, such \[are\] also
the earthy; and as \[is\] the heavenly, such \[are\] also the heavenly;

<span id="an_15:49">15:49</span> and, according as we did bear the image
of the earthy, we shall bear also the image of the heavenly.

<span id="an_15:50">15:50</span> And this I say, brethren, that flesh
and blood the reign of God is not able to inherit, nor doth the
corruption inherit the incorruption;

<span id="an_15:51">15:51</span> lo, I tell you a secret; we indeed
shall not all sleep, and we all shall be changed;

<span id="an_15:52">15:52</span> in a moment, in the twinkling of an
eye, in the last trumpet, for it shall sound, and the dead shall be
raised incorruptible, and we -- we shall be changed:

<span id="an_15:53">15:53</span> for it behoveth this corruptible to put
on incorruption, and this mortal to put on immortality;

<span id="an_15:54">15:54</span> and when this corruptible may have put
on incorruption, and this mortal may have put on immortality, then shall
be brought to pass the word that hath been written, \`The Death was
swallowed up -- to victory;

<span id="an_15:55">15:55</span> where, O Death, thy sting? where, O
Hades, thy victory?'

<span id="an_15:56">15:56</span> and the sting of the death \[is\] the
sin, and the power of the sin the law;

<span id="an_15:57">15:57</span> and to God -- thanks, to Him who is
giving us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_15:58">15:58</span> so that, my brethren beloved, become ye
stedfast, unmovable, abounding in the work of the Lord at all times,
knowing that your labour is not vain in the Lord.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And concerning the collection that \[is\]
for the saints, as I directed to the assemblies of Galatia, so also ye
-- do ye;

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> on every first \[day\] of the week, let
each one of you lay by him, treasuring up whatever he may have
prospered, that when I may come then collections may not be made;

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> and whenever I may come, whomsoever ye
may approve, through letters, these I will send to carry your favour to
Jerusalem;

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> and if it be meet for me also to go, with
me they shall go.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And I will come unto you, when I pass
through Macedonia -- for Macedonia I do pass through --

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> and with you, it may be, I will abide, or
even winter, that ye may send me forward whithersoever I go,

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> for I do not wish to see you now in the
passing, but I hope to remain a certain time with you, if the Lord may
permit;

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> and I will remain in Ephesus till the
Pentecost,

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> for a door to me hath been opened --
great and effectual -- and withstanders \[are\] many.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And if Timotheus may come, see that he
may become without fear with you, for the work of the Lord he doth work,
even as I,

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> no one, then, may despise him; and send
ye him forward in peace, that he may come to me, for I expect him with
the brethren;

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> and concerning Apollos our brother,
much I did entreat him that he may come unto you with the brethren, and
it was not at all \[his\] will that he may come now, and he will come
when he may find convenient.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Watch ye, stand in the faith; be men,
be strong;

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> let all your things be done in love.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And I entreat you, brethren, ye have
known the household of Stephanas, that it is the first-fruit of Achaia,
and to the ministration to the saints they did set themselves --

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> that ye also be subject to such, and to
every one who is working with \[us\] and labouring;

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> and I rejoice over the presence of
Stephanas, and Fortunatus, and Achaicus, because the lack of you did
these fill up;

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> for they did refresh my spirit and
yours; acknowledge ye, therefore, those who \[are\] such.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Salute you do the assemblies of Asia;
salute you much in the Lord do Aquilas and Priscilla, with the assembly
in their house;

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> salute you do all the brethren; salute
ye one another in an holy kiss.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> The salutation of \[me\] Paul with my
hand;

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> if any one doth not love the Lord Jesus
Christ -- let him be anathema! The Lord hath come!

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ
\[is\] with you;

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> my love \[is\] with you all in Christ
Jesus. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians](co2.md)
