[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eze)  [Next](hos) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Daniel

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim
king of Judah, come hath Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon to Jerusalem,
and layeth siege against it;

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> and the Lord giveth into his hand Jehoiakim
king of Judah, and some of the vessels of the house of God, and he
bringeth them in \[to\] the land of Shinar, \[to\] the house of his god,
and the vessels he hath brought in \[to\] the treasure-house of his god.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And the king saith, to Ashpenaz master of
his eunuchs, to bring in out of the sons of Israel, (even of the royal
seed, and of the chiefs,)

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> lads in whom there is no blemish, and of
good appearance, and skilful in all wisdom, and possessing knowledge,
and teaching thought, and who have ability to stand in the palace of the
king, and to teach them the literature and language of the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And the king doth appoint for them a rate,
day by day, of the king's portion of food, and of the wine of his
drinking, so as to nourish them three years, that at the end thereof
they may stand before the king.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And there are among them out of the sons of
Judah, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> and the chief of the eunuchs setteth names
on them, and he setteth on Daniel, Belteshazzar; and on Hananiah,
Shadrach; and on Mishael, Meshach; and on Azariah, Abed-Nego.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And Daniel purposeth in his heart that he
will not pollute himself with the king's portion of food, and with the
wine of his drinking, and he seeketh of the chief of the eunuchs that he
may not pollute himself.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And God giveth Daniel for kindness and for
mercies before the chief of the eunuchs;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> and the chief of the eunuchs saith to
Daniel, \`I am fearing my lord the king, who hath appointed your food
and your drink, for why doth he see your faces sadder than \[those of\]
the lads which \[are\] of your circle? then ye have made my head
indebted to the king,'

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And Daniel saith unto the Meltzar, whom
the chief of the eunuchs hath appointed over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael,
and Azariah,

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> \`Try, I pray thee, thy servants, ten
days; and they give to us of the vegetables, and we eat, and water, and
we drink;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> and our appearance is seen before thee,
and the appearance of the lads who are eating the king's portion of
food, and as thou seest -- deal with thy servants.'

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And he hearkeneth to them, to this word,
and trieth them ten days:

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> and at the end of ten days their
appearance hath appeared better and fatter in flesh then any of the lads
who are eating the king's portion of food.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And the Meltzar is taking away their
portion of food, and the wine of their drink, and is giving to them
vegetables.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> As to these four lads, God hath given to
them knowledge and understanding in every \[kind of\] literature, and
wisdom; and Daniel hath given instruction about every \[kind of\] vision
and dreams.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And at the end of the days that the king
had said to bring them in, bring them in doth the chief of the eunuchs
before Nebuchadnezzar.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And the king speaketh with them, and
there hath none been found among them all like Daniel, Hananiah,
Mishael, and Azariah, and they stand before the king;

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> and \[in\] any matter of wisdom \[and\]
understanding that the king hath sought of them, he findeth them ten
hands above all the scribes, the enchanters, who \[are\] in all his
kingdom.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And Daniel is unto the first year of
Cyrus the king.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And in the second year of the reign of
Nebuchadnezzar, dreamed hath Nebuchadnezzar dreams, and his spirit doth
move itself, and his sleep hath been against him;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> and the king saith to call for scribes, and
for enchanters, and for sorcerers, and for Chaldeans, to declare to the
king his dreams. And they come in and stand before the king;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> and the king saith to them, \`A dream I
have dreamed, and moved is my spirit to know the dream.'

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And the Chaldeans speak to the king \[in\]
Aramaean, \`O king, to the ages live, tell the dream to thy servants,
and the interpretation we do shew.'

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> The king hath answered and said to the
Chaldeans, \`The thing from me is gone; if ye do not cause me to know
the dream and its interpretation, pieces ye are made, and your houses
are made dunghills;

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> and if the dream and its interpretation ye
do shew, gifts, and fee, and great glory ye receive from before me,
therefore the dream and its interpretation shew ye me.'

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> They have answered a second time, and are
saying, \`Let the king tell the dream to his servants, and the
interpretation we do shew.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> The king hath answered and said, \`Of a
truth I know that time ye are gaining, because that ye have seen that
the thing is gone from me,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> \[so\] that, if the dream ye do not cause
me to know -- one is your sentence, seeing a word lying and corrupt ye
have prepared to speak before me, till that the time is changed,
therefore the dream tell ye to me, then do I know that its
interpretation ye do shew me.'

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> The Chaldeans have answered before the
king, and are saying, \`There is not a man on the earth who is able to
shew the king's matter; therefore, no king, chief, and ruler, hath asked
such a thing as this of any scribe, and enchanter, and Chaldean;

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> and the thing that the king is asking
\[is\] precious, and others are there not that do shew it before the
king, save the gods, whose dwelling is not with flesh.'

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Therefore the king hath been angry and
very wroth, and hath said to destroy all the wise men of Babylon;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And the sentence hath gone forth, and the
wise men are being slain, and they have sought Daniel and his companions
to be slain.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Then Daniel hath replied \[with\] counsel
and discretion to Arioch chief of the executioners of the king, who hath
gone forth to slay the wise men of Babylon.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> He hath answered and said to Arioch the
king's captain, \`Wherefore \[is\] the sentence so urgent from before
the king?' Then Arioch hath made the thing known to Daniel,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> and Daniel hath gone up, and sought of
the king that he would give him time to shew the interpretation to the
king.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Then Daniel to his house hath gone, and
to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, his companions, he hath made the
thing known,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> and to seek mercies from before the God
of the heavens concerning this secret, that they destroy not Daniel and
his companions with the rest of the wise men of Babylon.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Then to Daniel, in a vision of the night,
the secret hath been revealed. Then hath Daniel blessed the God of the
heavens.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Daniel hath answered and said, \`Let the
name of God be blessed from age even unto age, for wisdom and might --
for they are His.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And He is changing times and seasons, He
is causing kings to pass away, and He is raising up kings; He is giving
wisdom to the wise, and knowledge to those possessing understanding.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> He is revealing deep and hidden things;
He hath known what \[is\] in darkness, and light with Him hath dwelt.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Thee, O God of my fathers, I am thanking
and praising, for wisdom and might Thou hast given to me; and now, Thou
hast caused me to know that which we have sought from Thee, for the
king's matter Thou hast caused us to know.'

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> Therefore Daniel hath gone up unto
Arioch, whom the king hath appointed to destroy the wise men of Babylon;
he hath gone, and thus hath said to him, \`The wise men of Babylon thou
dost not destroy, bring me up before the king, and the interpretation to
the king I do shew.'

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> Then Arioch in haste hath brought up
Daniel before the king, and thus hath said to him -- \`I have found a
man of the sons of the Removed of Judah, who the interpretation to the
king doth make known.'

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> The king hath answered and said to
Daniel, whose name \[is\] Belteshazzar, \`Art thou able to cause me to
know the dream that I have seen, and its interpretation?'

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> Daniel hath answered before the king and
said, \`The secret that the king is asking, the wise men, the
enchanters, the scribes, the soothsayers, are not able to shew to the
king;

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> but there is a God in the heavens, a
revealer of secrets, and He hath made known to king Nebuchadnezzar that
which \[is\] to be in the latter end of the days. \`Thy dream and the
visions of thy head on thy bed are these:

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Thou, O king, thy thoughts on thy bed
have come up \[concerning\] that which \[is\] to be after this, and the
Revealer of secrets hath caused thee to know that which \[is\] to be.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> As to me -- not for \[any\] wisdom that
is in me above any living hath this secret been revealed to me; but for
the intent that the interpretation to the king they make known, and the
thoughts of thy heart thou dost know.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> \`Thou, O king, wast looking, and lo, a
certain great image. This image \[is\] mighty, and its brightness
excellent; it is standing over-against thee, and its appearance \[is\]
terrible.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> This image! its head \[is\] of good gold,
its breasts and its arms of silver, its belly and its thighs of brass;

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> its legs of iron, its feet, part of them
of iron, and part of them of clay.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> Thou wast looking till that a stone hath
been cut out without hands, and it hath smitten the image on its feet,
that \[are\] of iron and of clay, and it hath broken them small;

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> then broken small together have been the
iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold, and they have been
as chaff from the summer threshing-floor, and carried them away hath the
wind, and no place hath been found for them: and the stone that smote
the image hath become a great mountain, and hath filled all the land.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> This \[is\] the dream, and its
interpretation we do tell before the king.

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> \`Thou, O king, art a king of kings, for
the God of the heavens a kingdom, strength, and might, and glory, hath
given to thee;

<span id="an_2:38">2:38</span> and whithersoever sons of men are
dwelling, the beast of the field, and the fowl of the heavens, He hath
given into thy hand, and hath caused thee to rule over them all; thou
\[art\] this head of gold.

<span id="an_2:39">2:39</span> And after thee doth rise up another
kingdom lower than those, and another third kingdom of brass, that doth
rule overall the earth.

<span id="an_2:40">2:40</span> And the fourth kingdom is strong as iron,
because that iron is breaking small, and making feeble, all \[things\],
even as iron that is breaking all these, it beateth small and breaketh.

<span id="an_2:41">2:41</span> As to that which thou hast seen: the feet
and toes, part of them potter's clay, and part of them iron, the kingdom
is divided: and some of the standing of the iron \[is\] to be in it,
because that thou hast seen the iron mixed with miry clay.

<span id="an_2:42">2:42</span> As to the toes of the feet, part of them
iron, and part of them clay: some part of the kingdom is strong, and
some part of it is brittle.

<span id="an_2:43">2:43</span> Because thou hast seen iron mixed with
miry clay, they are mixing themselves with the seed of men: and they are
not adhering one with another, even as iron is not mixed with clay.

<span id="an_2:44">2:44</span> \`And in the days of these kings raise up
doth the God of the heavens a kingdom that is not destroyed -- to the
age, and its kingdom to another people is not left: it beateth small and
endeth all these kingdoms, and it standeth to the age.

<span id="an_2:45">2:45</span> Because that thou hast seen that out of
the mountain cut hath been a stone without hands, and it hath beaten
small the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold; the great
God hath made known to the king that which \[is\] to be after this; and
the dream \[is\] true, and its interpretation stedfast.

<span id="an_2:46">2:46</span> Then hath king Nebuchadnezzar fallen on
his face, and to Daniel he hath done obeisance, and present, and sweet
things, he hath said to pour out to him.

<span id="an_2:47">2:47</span> The king hath answered Daniel and said,
\`Of a truth \[it is\] that your God is a God of gods, and a Lord of
kings, and a revealer of secrets, since thou hast been able to reveal
this secret.'

<span id="an_2:48">2:48</span> Then the king hath made Daniel great, and
many great gifts he hath given to him, and hath caused him to rule over
all the province of Babylon, and chief of the perfects over all the wise
men of Babylon.

<span id="an_2:49">2:49</span> And Daniel hath sought from the king, and
he hath appointed over the work of the province of Babylon, Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abed-Nego, and Daniel \[is\] in the gate of the king.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Nebuchadnezzar the king hath made an image
of gold, its height sixty cubits, its breadth six cubits; he hath raised
it up in the valley of Dura, in the province of Babylon;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> and Nebuchadnezzar the king hath sent to
gather the satraps, the prefects, and the governors, the honourable
judges, the treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the
rulers of the province, to come to the dedication of the image that
Nebuchadnezzar the king hath raised up.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Then are gathered the satraps, the
prefects, and the governors, the honourable judges, the treasurers, the
counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the province, to the
dedication of the image that Nebuchadnezzar the king hath raised up: and
they are standing before the image that Nebuchadnezzar hath raised up.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And a crier is calling mightily: \`To you
they are saying: O peoples, nations, and languages!

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> at the time that ye hear the voice of the
cornet, the flute, the harp, the sackbut, the psaltery, the symphony,
and all kinds of music, ye fall down and do obeisance to the golden
image that Nebuchadnezzar the king hath raised up:

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> and whoso doth not fall down and do
obeisance, in that hour he is cast into the midst of a burning fiery
furnace.'

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Therefore at that time, when all the
peoples are hearing the voice of the cornet, the flute, the harp, the
sackbut, the psaltery, and all kinds of music, falling down are all the
peoples, nations and languages, doing obeisance to the golden image that
Nebuchadnezzar the king hath raised up.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Therefore at that time drawn near have
certain Chaldeans, and accused the Jews;

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> they have answered, yea, they are saying to
Nebuchadnezzar the king, \`O king, to the ages live!

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Thou, O king, hast made a decree that
every man who doth hear the voice of the cornet, the flute, the harp,
the sackbut, the psaltery, and the symphony, and all kinds of music,
doth fall down and do obeisance to the golden image;

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> and whoso doth not fall down and do
obeisance, is cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> There are certain Jews whom thou hast
appointed over the work of the province of Babylon -- Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abed-Nego, these men have not made of thee, O king, \[any\] regard;
thy gods they are not serving, and to the golden image thou hast raised
up -- are not making obeisance.'

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Then Nebuchadnezzar, in anger and fury,
hath said to bring in Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego. Then these men
have been brought in before the king.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Nebuchadnezzar hath answered and said to
them, \`Is \[it\] a laid plan, O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego -- my
gods ye are not serving, and to the golden image that I have raised up
ye are not doing obeisance?

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Now, lo, ye are ready, so that at the
time that ye hear the voice of the cornet, the flute, the harp, the
sackbut, the psaltery, and the symphony, and all kinds of music, ye fall
down and do obeisance to the image that I have made! -- and lo, ye do no
obeisance -- in that hour ye are cast into the midst of a burning fiery
furnace; who is that God who doth deliver you out of my hands?'

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego have
answered, yea, they are saying to the king Nebuchadnezzar, \`We have no
need concerning this matter to answer thee.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Lo, it is; our God whom we are serving,
is able to deliver us from a burning fiery furnace; and from thy hand, O
king, He doth deliver.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And lo -- not! be it known to thee, O
king, that thy gods we are not serving, and to the golden image thou
hast raised up we do no obeisance.'

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Then Nebuchadnezzar hath been full of
fury, and the expression of his face hath been changed concerning
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego; he answered and said to heat the
furnace seven times above that which it is seen to be heated;

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> and to certain mighty men who \[are\] in
his force he hath said to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego, to cast
into the burning fiery furnace.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Then these men have been bound in their
coats, their tunics, and their turbans, and their clothing, and have
been cast into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Therefore, because that the word of the
king is urgent, and the furnace heated exceedingly, those men who have
taken up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego -- killed them hath the spark
of the fire.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abed-Nego, have fallen down in the midst of the burning fiery
furnace -- bound.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> Then Nebuchadnezzar the king hath been
astonished, and hath risen in haste; he hath answered and said to his
counsellors, \`Have we not cast three men into the midst of the fire --
bound?' They have answered and are saying to the king, \`Certainly, O
king.'

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> He answered and hath said, \`Lo, I am
seeing four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have
no hurt; and the appearance of the fourth \[is\] like to a son of the
gods.'

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> Then Nebuchadnezzar hath drawn near to
the gate of the burning fiery furnace; he hath answered and said,
\`Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego, servants of God Most High come
forth, yea, come;' then come forth do Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego,
from the midst of the fire;

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> and gathered together, the satraps, the
prefects, and the governors, and the counsellors of the king, are seeing
these men, that the fire hath no power over their bodies, and the hair
of their head hath not been singed, and their coats have not changed,
and the smell of fire hath not passed on them.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> Nebuchadnezzar hath answered and hath
said, \`Blessed \[is\] the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego, who
hath sent His messenger, and hath delivered His servants who trusted on
Him, and the word of the king changed, and gave up their bodies that
they might not serve nor do obeisance to any god except to their own
God.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> And by me a decree is made, that any
people, nation, and language, that doth speak erroneously concerning the
God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego, pieces he is made, and its
house is made a dunghill, because that there is no other god who is able
thus to deliver.'

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> Then the king hath caused Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abed-Nego, to prosper in the province of Babylon.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> \`Nebuchadnezzar the king to all peoples,
nations, and languages, who are dwelling in all the earth: Your peace be
great!

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> The signs and wonders that God Most High
hath done with me, it is good before me to shew.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> His signs how great! and His wonders how
mighty! His kingdom \[is\] a kingdom age-during, and His rule \[is\]
with generation and generation.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> \`I, Nebuchadnezzar, have been at rest in
my house, and flourishing in my palace:

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> a dream I have seen, and it maketh me
afraid, and the conceptions on my bed, and the visions of my head, do
trouble me.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And by me a decree is made, to cause all
the wise men of Babylon to come up before me, that the interpretation of
the dream they may cause me to know.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Then coming up are the scribes, the
enchanters, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers, and the dream I have
told before them, and its interpretation they are not making known to
me.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And at last come up before me hath Daniel,
whose name \[is\] Belteshazzar -- according to the name of my god -- and
in whom \[is\] the spirit of the holy gods, and the dream before him I
have told:

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> \`O Belteshazzar, master of the scribes, as
I have known that the spirit of the holy gods \[is\] in thee, and no
secret doth press thee, the visions of my dream that I have seen, and
its interpretation, tell.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> As to the visions of my head on my bed, I
was looking, and lo, a tree in the midst of the earth, and its height
\[is\] great:

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> become great hath the tree, yea, strong,
and its height doth reach to the heavens, and its vision to the end of
the whole land;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> its leaves \[are\] fair, and its budding
great, and food for all \[is\] in it: under it take shade doth the beast
of the field, and in its boughs dwell do the birds of the heavens, and
of it fed are all flesh.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> \`I was looking, in the visions of my
head on my bed, and lo, a sifter, even a holy one, from the heavens is
coming down.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> He is calling mightily, and thus hath
said, Cut down the tree, and cut off its branches, shake off its leaves,
and scatter its budding, move away let the beast from under it, and the
birds from off its branches;

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> but the stump of its roots leave in the
earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the
field, and with the dew of the heavens is it wet, and with the beasts
\[is\] his portion in the herb of the earth;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> his heart from man's is changed, and the
heart of a beast is given to him, and seven times pass over him;

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> by the decree of the sifters \[is\] the
sentence, and by the saying of the holy ones the requirement, to the
intent that the living may know that the Most High is ruler in the
kingdom of men, and to whom He willeth He giveth it, and the lowest of
men He doth raise up over it.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> \`This dream I have seen, I king
Nebuchadnezzar; and thou, O Belteshazzar, the interpretation tell,
because that all the wise men of my kingdom are not able to cause me to
know the interpretation, and thou \[art\] able, for the spirit of the
holy gods \[is\] in thee.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> \`Then Daniel, whose name \[is\]
Belteshazzar, hath been astonished about one hour, and his thoughts do
trouble him; the king hath answered and said, O Belteshazzar, let not
the dream and its interpretation trouble thee. Belteshazzar hath
answered and said, My lord, the dream -- to those hating thee, and its
interpretation -- to thine enemies!

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> The tree that thou hast seen, that hath
become great and strong, and its height doth reach to the heavens, and
its vision to all the land,

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> and its leaves \[are\] fair, and its
budding great, and food for all \[is\] in it, under it dwell doth the
beast of the field, and on its boughs sit do the birds of the heavens.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> \`Thou it \[is\], O king, for thou hast
become great and mighty, and thy greatness hath become great, and hath
reached to the heavens, and thy dominion to the end of the earth;

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> and that which the king hath seen -- a
sifter, even a holy one, coming down from the heavens, and he hath said,
Cut down the tree, and destroy it; but the stump of its roots leave in
the earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of
the field, and with the dew of the heavens it is wet, and with the beast
of the field \[is\] his portion, till that seven times pass over him.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> \`This \[is\] the interpretation, O king,
and the decree of the Most High it \[is\] that hath come against my lord
the king:

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> and they are driving thee away from men,
and with the beast of the field is thy dwelling, and the herb as oxen
they do cause thee to eat, and by the dew of the heavens they are
wetting thee, and seven times do pass over thee, till that thou knowest
that the Most High is ruler in the kingdom of men, and to whom He
willeth He giveth it.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> And that which they said -- to leave the
stump of the roots of the tree; thy kingdom for thee abideth, after that
thou knowest that the heavens are ruling.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> \`Therefore, O king, let my counsel be
acceptable unto thee, and thy sins by righteousness break off, and thy
perversity by pitying the poor, lo, it is a lengthening of thine ease.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> \`All -- hath come on Nebuchadnezzar the
king.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> \`At the end of twelve months, on the
palace of the kingdom of Babylon he hath been walking;

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> the king hath answered and said, Is not
this that great Babylon that I have built, for the house of the kingdom,
in the might of my strength, and for the glory of mine honour?

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> \`While the word is \[in\] the king's
mouth a voice from the heavens hath fallen: To thee they are saying: O
Nebuchadnezzar the king, the kingdom hath passed from thee,

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> and from men they are driving thee away,
and with the beast of the field \[is\] thy dwelling, the herb as oxen
they do cause thee to eat, and seven times do pass over thee, till that
thou knowest that the Most High is ruler in the kingdom of men, and to
whom He willeth He giveth it.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> \`In that hour the thing hath been
fulfilled on Nebuchadnezzar, and from men he is driven, and the herb as
oxen he eateth, and by the dew of the heavens his body is wet, till that
his hair as eagles' hath become great, and his nails as birds.'

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> \`And at the end of the days I,
Nebuchadnezzar, mine eyes to the heavens have lifted up, and mine
understanding unto me returneth, and the Most High I have blessed, and
the Age-during Living One I have praised and honoured, whose dominion
\[is\] a dominion age-during, and His kingdom with generation and
generation;

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> and all who are dwelling on the earth as
nothing are reckoned, and according to his will He is doing among the
forces of the heavens and those dwelling on the earth, and there is none
that doth clap with his hand, and saith to Him, What hast Thou done?

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> \`At that time my understanding doth
return unto me, and for the glory of my kingdom, my honour and my
brightness doth return unto me, and to me my counsellors and my great
men do seek, and over my kingdom I have been made right, and abundant
greatness hath been added to me.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> \`Now, I, Nebuchadnezzar, am praising and
exalting and honouring the King of the heavens, for all His works
\[are\] truth, and His paths judgment, and those walking in pride He is
able to humble.'

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Belshazzar the king hath made a great feast
to a thousand of his great men, and before the thousand he is drinking
wine;

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Belshazzar hath said -- while tasting the
wine -- to bring in the vessels of gold and of silver that
Nebuchadnezzar his father had taken from the temple that \[is\] in
Jerusalem, that drink with them may the king, and his great men, his
wives, and his concubines.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Then they have brought in the vessels of
gold that had been taken out of the temple of the house of God that
\[is\] in Jerusalem, and drunk with them have the king and his great
men, his wives and his concubines;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> they have drunk wine, and have praised the
gods of gold, and of silver, of brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> In that hour come forth have fingers of a
man's hand, and they are writing over-against the candlestick, on the
plaster of the wall of the king's palace: and the king is seeing the
extremity of the hand that is writing;

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> then the king's countenance hath changed,
and his thoughts do trouble him, and the joints of his loins are loosed,
and his knees are smiting one against another.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Call doth the king mightily, to bring up
the enchanters, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers. Answered hath the
king, and said to the wise men of Babylon, that, \`Any man who doth read
this writing, and its interpretation doth shew me, purple he putteth on,
and a bracelet of gold \[is\] on his neck, and third in the kingdom he
doth rule.'

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Then coming up are all the wise men of the
king, and they are not able to read the writing, and the interpretation
to make known to the king;

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> then the king Belshazzar is greatly
troubled, and his countenance is changing in him, and his great men are
perplexed.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> The queen, on account of the words of the
king and his great men, to the banquet-house hath come up. Answered hath
the queen, and said, \`O king, to the ages live; let not thy thoughts
trouble thee, nor thy countenance be changed:

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> there is a man in thy kingdom in whom
\[is\] the spirit of the holy gods: and, in the days of thy father,
light, and understanding, and wisdom -- as the wisdom of the gods -- was
found in him; and king Nebuchadnezzar thy father, chief of the scribes,
enchanters, Chaldeans, soothsayers, established him -- thy father, O
king --

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> because that an excellent spirit, and
knowledge, and understanding, interpreting of dreams, and showing of
enigmas, and loosing of knots was found in him, in Daniel, whose name
the king made Belteshazzar: now let Daniel be called, and the
interpretation he doth show.'

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Then Daniel hath been caused to come up
before the king; answered hath the king, and said to Daniel, \`Thou art
that Daniel who \[art\] of the sons of the Removed of Judah, whom the
king my father brought in out of Judah?

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And I have heard of thee, that the spirit
of the gods \[is\] in thee, and light, and understanding, and excellent
wisdom have been found in thee.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> \`And now, caused to come up before me
have been the wise men, the enchanters, that this writing they may read,
and its interpretation to cause me to know: and they are not able to
shew the interpretation of the thing:

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> and I -- I have heard of thee, that thou
art able to give interpretations, and to loose knots: now, lo -- thou
art able to read the writing, and its interpretation to cause me to know
-- purple thou dost put on, and a bracelet of gold \[is\] on thy neck,
and third in the kingdom thou dost rule.'

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Then hath Daniel answered and said before
the king, \`Thy gifts be to thyself, and thy fee to another give;
nevertheless, the writing I do read to the king, and the interpretation
I cause him to know;

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> thou, O king, God Most High, a kingdom,
and greatness, and glory, and honour, gave to Nebuchadnezzar thy father:

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> and because of the greatness that He gave
to him, all peoples, nations, and languages were trembling and fearing
before him: whom he willed he was slaying, and whom he willed he was
keeping alive, and whom he willed he was raising up, and whom he willed
he was making low;

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> and when his heart was high, and his
spirit was strong to act proudly, he hath been caused to come down from
the throne of his kingdom, and his glory they have caused to pass away
from him,

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> and from the sons of men he is driven,
and his heart with the beasts hath been like, and with the wild asses
\[is\] his dwelling; the herb like oxen they cause him to eat, and by
the dew of the heavens is his body wet, till that he hath known that God
Most High is ruler in the kingdom of men, and whom He willeth He raiseth
up over it.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> \`And thou, his son, Belshazzar, hast not
humbled thy heart, though all this thou hast known;

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> and against the Lord of the heavens thou
hast lifted up thyself; and the vessels of His house they have brought
in before thee, and thou, and thy great men, thy wives, and thy
concubines, are drinking wine with them, and gods of silver, and of
gold, of brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone, that are not seeing, nor
hearing, nor knowing, thou hast praised: and the God in whose hand
\[is\] thy breath, and all thy ways, Him thou hast not honoured.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> \`Then from before Him sent is the
extremity of the hand, and the writing is noted down;

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> and this \[is\] the writing that is noted
down: Numbered, Numbered, Weighed, and Divided.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> This \[is\] the interpretation of the
thing: Numbered -- God hath numbered thy kingdom, and hath finished it.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> Weighed -- Thou art weighed in the
balances, and hast been found lacking.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> Divided -- Divided is thy kingdom, and it
hath been given to the Medes and Persians.'

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> Then hath Belshazzar said, and they have
clothed Daniel with purple, and a bracelet of gold \[is\] on his neck,
and they have proclaimed concerning him that he is the third ruler in
the kingdom.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> In that night Belshazzar king of the
Chaldeans is slain,

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> and Darius the Mede hath received the
kingdom, when a son of sixty and two years.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> It hath been good before Darius, and he
hath established over the kingdom satraps -- a hundred and twenty --
that they may be throughout the whole kingdom,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> and higher than they three presidents, of
whom Daniel \[is\] first, that these satraps may give to them an
account, and the king have no loss.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Then this Daniel hath been overseer over
the presidents and satraps, because that an excellent spirit \[is\] in
him, and the king hath thought to establish him over the whole kingdom.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Then the presidents and satraps have been
seeking to find a cause of complaint against Daniel concerning the
kingdom, and any cause of complaint and corruption they are not able to
find, because that he \[is\] faithful, and any error and corruption have
not been found in him.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Then these men are saying, \`We do not find
against this Daniel any cause of complaint, except we have found \[it\]
against him in the law of his God.'

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Then these presidents and satraps have
assembled near the king, and thus they are saying to him: \`O king
Darius, to the ages live!

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Taken counsel have all the presidents of
the kingdom, the prefects, and the satraps, the counsellors, and the
governors, to establish a royal statute, and to strengthen an interdict,
that any who seeketh a petition from any god and man until thirty days,
save of thee, O king, is cast into a den of lions.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Now, O king, thou dost establish the
interdict, and sign the writing, that it is not to be changed, as a law
of Media and Persia, that doth not pass away.'

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Therefore king Darius hath signed the
writing and interdict.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And Daniel, when he hath known that the
writing is signed, hath gone up to his house, and the window being
opened for him, in his upper chamber, over-against Jerusalem, three
times in a day he is kneeling on his knees, and praying, and confessing
before his God, because that he was doing \[it\] before this.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Then these men have assembled, and found
Daniel praying and entreating grace before his God;

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> then they have come near, yea, they are
saying before the king concerning the king's interdict: \`Hast thou not
signed an interdict, that any man who seeketh from any god and man until
thirty days, save of thee, O king, is cast into a den of lions?'
Answered hath the king, and said, \`The thing \[is\] certain as a law of
Media and Persia, that doth not pass away.'

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Then they have answered, yea, they are
saying before the king, that, \`Daniel, who \[is\] of the sons of the
Removed of Judah, hath not placed on thee, O king, \[any\] regard, nor
on the interdict that thou hast signed, and three times in a day he is
seeking his petition.'

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Then the king, when he hath heard the
matter, is greatly displeased at himself, and on Daniel he hath set the
heart to deliver him, and till the going up of the sun he was arranging
to deliver him.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Then these men have assembled near the
king, and are saying to the king, \`know, O king, that the law of Media
and Persia \[is\]: That any interdict and statute that the king doth
establish is not to be changed.'

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Then the king hath said, and they have
brought Daniel, and have cast \[him\] into a den of lions. The king hath
answered and said to Daniel, \`Thy God, whom thou art serving
continually, Himself doth deliver thee.'

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And a stone hath been brought and placed
at the mouth of the den, and the king hath sealed it with his signet,
and with the signet of his great men, that the purpose be not changed
concerning Daniel.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> Then hath the king gone to his palace,
and he hath passed the night fasting, and dahavan have not been brought
up before him, and his sleep hath fled \[from\] off him.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Then doth the king rise in the early
morning, at the light, and in haste to the den of lions he hath gone;

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> and at his coming near to the den, to
Daniel, with a grieved voice, he crieth. The king hath answered and said
to Daniel, O Daniel, servant of the living God, thy God, whom thou art
serving continually, is He able to deliver thee from the lions?'

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Then Daniel hath spoken with the king:
\`O king, to the ages live:

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> my God hath sent His messenger, and hath
shut the lions' mouths, and they have not injured me: because that
before Him purity hath been found in me; and also before thee, O king,
injury I have not done.'

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> Then was the king very glad for him, and
he hath commanded Daniel to be taken up out of the den, and Daniel hath
been taken up out of the den, and no injury hath been found in him,
because he hath believed in his God.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> And the king hath said, and they have
brought those men who had accused Daniel, and to the den of lions they
have cast them, they, their sons, and their wives; and they have not
come to the lower part of the den till that the lions have power over
them, and all their bones they have broken small.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Then Darius the king hath written to all
the peoples, nations, and languages, who are dwelling in all the land:
\`Your peace be great!

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> From before me is made a decree, that in
every dominion of my kingdom they are trembling and fearing before the
God of Daniel, for He \[is\] the living God, and abiding to the ages,
and His kingdom that which \[is\] not destroyed, and His dominion \[is\]
unto the end.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> A deliverer, and rescuer, and doer of
signs and wonders in the heavens and in earth \[is\] He who hath
delivered Daniel from the paw of the lions.'

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> And this Daniel hath prospered in the
reign of Darius, and in the reign of Cyrus the Persian.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> In the first year of Belshazzar king of
Babylon, Daniel hath seen a dream, and the visions of his head on his
bed, then the dream he hath written, the chief of the things he hath
said.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Answered hath Daniel and said, \`I was
seeing in my vision by night, and lo, the four winds of the heavens are
coming forth to the great sea;

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> and four great beasts are coming up from
the sea, diverse one from another.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> The first \[is\] like a lion, and it hath
an eagle's wings. I was seeing till that its wings have been plucked,
and it hath been lifted up from the earth, and on feet as a man it hath
been caused to stand, and a heart of man is given to it.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And lo, another beast, a second, like to a
bear, and to the same authority it hath been raised, and three ribs
\[are\] in its mouth, between its teeth, and thus they are saying to it,
Rise, consume much flesh.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> \`After this I was seeing, and lo, another
like a leopard, and it hath four wings of a fowl on its back, and four
heads hath the beast, and dominion is given to it.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> \`After this I was seeing in the visions of
the night, and lo, a fourth beast, terrible and fearful, and exceedingly
strong; and it hath iron teeth very great, it hath consumed, yea, it
doth break small, and the remnant with its feet it hath trampled; and it
\[is\] diverse from all the beasts that \[are\] before it; and it hath
ten horns.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> \`I was considering about the horns, and
lo, another horn, a little one, hath come up between them, and three of
the first horns have been eradicated from before it, and lo, eyes as the
eyes of man \[are\] in this horn, and a mouth speaking great things.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> \`I was seeing till that thrones have been
thrown down, and the Ancient of Days is seated, His garment as snow
\[is\] white, and the hair of his head \[is\] as pure wool, His throne
flames of fire, its wheels burning fire.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> A flood of fire is proceeding and coming
forth from before Him, a thousand thousands do serve Him, and a myriad
of myriads before Him do rise up, the Judge is seated, and the books
have been opened.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> \`I was seeing, then, because of the
voice of the great words that the horn is speaking, I was seeing till
that the beast is slain, and his body hath been destroyed, and given to
the burning fire;

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> and the rest of the beasts have caused
their dominion to pass away, and a prolongation in life is given to
them, till a season and a time.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> \`I was seeing in the visions of the
night, and lo, with the clouds of the heavens as a son of man was
\[one\] coming, and unto the Ancient of Days he hath come, and before
Him they have brought him near.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And to him is given dominion, and glory,
and a kingdom, and all peoples, nations, and languages do serve him, his
dominion \[is\] a dominion age-during, that passeth not away, and his
kingdom that which is not destroyed.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> \`Pierced hath been my spirit -- I,
Daniel -- in the midst of the sheath, and the visions of my head trouble
me;

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> I have drawn near unto one of those
standing, and the certainty I seek from him of all this; and he hath
said to me, yea, the interpretation of the things he hath caused me to
know:

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> \`These great beasts, that \[are\] four,
\[are\] four kings, they rise up from the earth;

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> and receive the kingdom do the saints of
the Most High, and they strengthen the kingdom unto the age, even unto
the age of the ages.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> \`Then I wished for certainty concerning
the fourth beast, that was diverse from them all, fearful exceedingly;
its teeth of iron, and its nails of brass, it hath devoured, it doth
break small, and the remnant with its feet it hath trampled;

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> and concerning the ten horns that \[are\]
in its heads, and of the other that came up, and before which three have
fallen, even of that horn that hath eyes, and a mouth speaking great
things, and whose appearance \[is\] great above its companions.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> \`I was seeing, and this horn is making
war with the saints, and hath prevailed over them,

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> till that the Ancient of Days hath come,
and judgment is given to the saints of the Most High, and the time hath
come, and the saints have strengthened the kingdom.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> \`Thus he said: The fourth beast is the
fourth kingdom in the earth, that is diverse from all kingdoms, and it
consumeth all the earth, and treadeth it down, and breaketh it small.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And the ten horns out of the kingdom
\[are\] ten kings, they rise, and another doth rise after them, and it
is diverse from the former, and three kings it humbleth;

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> and words as an adversary of the Most
High it doth speak, and the saints of the Most High it doth wear out,
and it hopeth to change seasons and law; and they are given into its
hand, till a time, and times, and a division of a time.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> \`And the Judge is seated, and its
dominion they cause to pass away, to cut off, and to destroy -- unto the
end;

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> and the kingdom, and the dominion, even
the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heavens, is given to the
people -- the saints of the Most High, His kingdom \[is\] a kingdom
age-during, and all dominions do serve and obey Him.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> \`Hitherto \[is\] the end of the matter.
I, Daniel, greatly do my thoughts trouble me, and my countenance is
changed on me, and the matter in my heart I have kept.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> \`In the third year of the reign of
Belshazzar the king, a vision hath appeared unto me -- I Daniel -- after
that which had appeared unto me at the beginning.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And I see in a vision, and it cometh to
pass, in my seeing, and I \[am\] in Shushan the palace that \[is\] in
Elam the province, and I see in a vision, and I have been by the stream
Ulai.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And I lift up mine eyes, and look, and lo,
a certain ram is standing before the stream, and it hath two horns, and
the two horns \[are\] high; and the one \[is\] higher than the other,
and the high one is coming up last.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> I have seen the ram pushing westward, and
northward, and southward, and no living creatures do stand before it,
and there is none delivering out of its hand, and it hath done according
to its pleasure, and hath exerted itself.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> \`And I have been considering, and lo, a
young he-goat hath come from the west, over the face of the whole earth,
whom none is touching in the earth; as to the young he-goat, a
conspicuous horn \[is\] between its eyes.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And it cometh unto the ram possessing the
two horns, that I had seen standing before the stream, and runneth unto
it in the fury of its power.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And I have seen it coming near the ram, and
it becometh embittered at it, and smiteth the ram, and breaketh its two
horns, and there hath been no power in the ram to stand before it, and
it casteth it to the earth, and trampleth it down, and there hath been
no deliverer to the ram out of its power.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> \`And the young he-goat hath exerted itself
very much, and when it is strong, broken hath been the great horn; and
come up doth a vision of four in its place, at the four winds of the
heavens.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And from the one of them come forth hath a
little horn, and it exerteth itself greatly toward the south, and toward
the east, and toward the beauteous \[land\];

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> yea, it exerteth unto the host of the
heavens, and causeth to fall to the earth of the host, and of the stars,
and trampleth them down.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And unto the prince of the host it
exerteth itself, and by it taken away hath been the continual
\[sacrifice\], and thrown down the base of his sanctuary.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And the host is given up, with the
continual \[sacrifice\], through transgression, and it throweth down
truth to the earth, and it hath worked, and prospered.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> \`And I hear a certain holy one speaking,
and a certain holy one saith to the wonderful numberer who is speaking:
Till when \[is\] the vision of the continual \[sacrifice\], and of the
transgression, an astonishment, to make both sanctuary and host a
treading down?

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And he saith unto me, Till evening --
morning two thousand and three hundred, then is the holy place declared
right.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> \`And it cometh to pass in my seeing --
I, Daniel -- the vision, that I require understanding, and lo, standing
over-against me \[is\] as the appearance of a mighty one.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And I hear a voice of man between \[the
banks of\] Ulai, and he calleth and saith: Gabriel, cause this \[one\]
to understand the appearance.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And he cometh in near my station, and at
his coming in I have been afraid, and I fall on my face, and he saith
unto me: Understand, son of man, for at the time of the end \[is\] the
vision.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And in his speaking with me, I have been
in a trance on my face, on the earth; and he cometh against me, and
causeth me to stand on my station,

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> and saith: Lo, I -- I am causing thee to
know that which is in the latter end of the indignation; for, at the
appointed time \[is\] the end.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> \`The ram that thou hast seen possessing
two horns, \[are\] the kings of Media and Persia.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And the young he-goat, the hairy one,
\[is\] the king of Javan; and the great horn that \[is\] between its
eyes is the first king;

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> and that being broken, stand up do four
in its place, four kingdoms from the nation do stand up, and not in its
power.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> \`And in the latter end of their kingdom,
about the perfecting of the transgressors, stand up doth a king, fierce
of face, and understanding hidden things;

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> and his power hath been mighty, and not
by his own power; and wonderful things he destroyeth, and he hath
prospered, and wrought, and destroyed mighty ones, and the people of the
Holy Ones.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> \`And by his understanding he hath also
caused deceit to prosper in his hand, and in his heart he exerteth
himself, and by ease he destroyeth many; and against the prince of
princes he standeth -- and without hand he is broken.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And the appearance of the evening and of
the morning, that is told, is true; and thou, hide thou the vision, for
\[it is\] after many days.'

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> And I, Daniel, have been, yea, I became
sick \[for\] days, and I rise, and do the king's work, and am astonished
at the appearance, and there is none understanding.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> In the first year of Darius, son of
Ahasuerus, of the seed of the Medes, who hath been made king over the
kingdom of the Chaldeans,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> in the first year of his reign, I, Daniel,
have understood by books the number of the years, (in that a word of
Jehovah hath been unto Jeremiah the prophet,) concerning the fulfilling
of the wastes of Jerusalem -- seventy years;

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> and I set my face unto the Lord God, to
seek \[by\] prayer and supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and
ashes.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And I pray to Jehovah my God, and confess,
and say: \`I beseech Thee, O Lord God, the great and the fearful,
keeping the covenant and the kindness to those loving Him, and to those
keeping His commands;

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> we have sinned, and done perversely, and
done wickedly, and rebelled, to turn aside from Thy commands, and from
Thy judgments:

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> and we have not hearkened unto Thy
servants, the prophets, who have spoken in Thy name unto our kings, our
heads, and our fathers, and to all the people of the land.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> \`To Thee, O Lord, \[is\] the
righteousness, and to us the shame of face, as \[at\] this day, to the
men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to all Israel,
who are near, and who are far off, in all the lands whither Thou hast
driven them, in their trespass that they have trespassed against Thee.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> \`O Lord, to us \[is\] the shame of face,
to our kings, to our heads, and to our fathers, in that we have sinned
against Thee.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> \`To the Lord our God \[are\] the mercies
and the forgivenesses, for we have rebelled against Him,

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> and have not hearkened to the voice of
Jehovah our God, to walk in His laws, that He hath set before us by the
hand of His servants the prophets;

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> and all Israel have transgressed Thy law,
to turn aside so as not to hearken to Thy voice; and poured on us is the
execration, and the oath, that is written in the law of Moses, servant
of God, because we have sinned against Him.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> \`And He confirmeth His words that He
hath spoken against us, and against our judges who have judged us, to
bring in upon us great evil, in that it hath not been done under the
whole heavens as it hath been done in Jerusalem,

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> as it is written in the law of Moses, all
this evil hath come upon us, and we have not appeased the face of
Jehovah our God to turn back from our iniquities, and to act wisely in
Thy truth.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And Jehovah doth watch for the evil, and
bringeth it upon us, for righteous \[is\] Jehovah our God concerning all
His works that He hath done, and we have not hearkened to His voice.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And now, O Lord our God, who hast brought
forth Thy people from the land of Egypt by a strong hand, and dost make
for Thee a name as at this day, we have sinned, we have done wickedly.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> \`O Lord, according to all Thy righteous
acts, let turn back, I pray Thee, Thine anger and Thy fury from Thy city
Jerusalem, Thy holy mount, for by our sins, and by the iniquities of our
fathers, Jerusalem and Thy people \[are\] for a reproach to all our
neighbours;

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> and now, hearken, O our God, unto the
prayer of Thy servant, and unto his supplication, and cause Thy face to
shine on Thy sanctuary that \[is\] desolate, for the Lord's sake.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> \`Incline, O my God, Thine ear, and hear,
open Thine eyes and see our desolations, and the city on which Thy name
is called; for not for our righteous acts are we causing our
supplications to fall before Thee, but for Thy mercies that \[are\]
many.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> O lord, hear, O Lord, forgive; O Lord,
attend and do; do not delay, for Thine own sake, O my God, for Thy name
is called on Thy city, and on Thy people.'

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And while I am speaking, and praying, and
confessing my sin, and the sin of my people Israel, and causing my
supplication to fall before Jehovah my God, for the holy mount of my
God,

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> yea, while I am speaking in prayer, then
that one Gabriel, whom I had seen in vision at the commencement, being
caused to fly swiftly, is coming unto me at the time of the evening
present.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And he giveth understanding, and speaketh
with me, and saith, \`O Daniel, now I have come forth to cause thee to
consider understanding wisely;

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> at the commencement of thy supplications
hath the word come forth, and I have come to declare \[it\], for thou
\[art\] greatly desired, and understand thou concerning the matter, and
consider concerning the appearance.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> \`Seventy weeks are determined for thy
people, and for thy holy city, to shut up the transgression, and to seal
up sins, and to cover iniquity, and to bring in righteousness
age-during, and to seal up vision and prophet, and to anoint the holy of
holies.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And thou dost know, and dost consider
wisely, from the going forth of the word to restore and to build
Jerusalem till Messiah the Leader \[is\] seven weeks, and sixty and two
weeks: the broad place hath been built again, and the rampart, even in
the distress of the times.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And after the sixty and two weeks, cut
off is Messiah, and the city and the holy place are not his, the Leader
who hath come doth destroy the people; and its end \[is\] with a flood,
and till the end \[is\] war, determined \[are\] desolations.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And he hath strengthened a covenant with
many -- one week, and \[in\] the midst of the week he causeth sacrifice
and present to cease, and by the wing of abominations he is making
desolate, even till the consummation, and that which is determined is
poured on the desolate one.'

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> In the third year of Cyrus king of
Persia, a thing is revealed to Daniel, whose name is called
Belteshazzar, and the thing \[is\] true, and the warfare \[is\] great:
and he hath understood the thing, and hath understanding about the
appearance.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> \`In those days, I, Daniel, have been
mourning three weeks of days;

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> desirable bread I have not eaten, and
flesh and wine hath not come in unto my mouth, and I have not anointed
myself at all, till the completion of three weeks of days.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> \`And in the twenty and fourth day of the
first month, I have been by the side of the great river, that \[is\]
Hiddekel:

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> and I lift up mine eyes, and look, and
lo, a certain one clothed in linen, and his loins girt with pure gold of
Uphaz,

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> and his body as a beryl, and his face as
the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire, and his arms
and his feet as the aspect of bright brass, and the voice of his words
as the voice of a multitude.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> \`And I have seen -- I, Daniel, by myself
-- the appearance: and the men who have been with me have not seen the
appearance, but a great trembling hath fallen on them, and they flee to
be hidden;

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> and I have been left by myself, and I see
this great appearance, and there hath been no power left in me, and my
honour hath been turned in me to corruption, yea, I have not retained
power.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> \`And I hear the voice of his words, and
when I hear the voice of his words, then I have been in a trance on my
face, and my face \[is\] to the earth;

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> and lo, a hand hath come against me,
and shaketh me on my knees and the palms of my hands.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> \`And he saith unto me: Daniel, man
greatly desired, attend to the words that I am speaking unto thee, and
stand on thy station, for now I have been sent unto thee. \`And when he
speaketh with me this word, I have stood trembling.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And he saith unto me: Do not fear,
Daniel, for from the first day that thou didst give thy heart to
understand, and to humble thyself before thy God, thy words have been
heard, and I have come because of thy words.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> \`And the head of the kingdom of Persia
is standing over-against me twenty and one days, and lo, Michael, first
of the chief heads, hath come in to help me, and I have remained there
near the kings of Persia;

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> and I have come to cause thee to
understand that which doth happen to thy people in the latter end of the
days, for yet the vision \[is\] after days.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> \`And when he speaketh with me about
these things, I have set my face toward the earth, and have been silent;

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> and lo, as the manner of the sons of
men, he is striking against my lips, and I open my mouth, and I speak,
and say unto him who is standing over-against me: My lord, by the
appearance turned have been my pangs against me, and I have retained no
power.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And how is the servant of this my lord
able to speak with this my lord? as for me, henceforth there remaineth
in me no power, yea, breath hath not been left in me.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> \`And he addeth, and striketh against
me, as the appearance of a man, and strengtheneth me,

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> and he saith: Do not fear, O man
greatly desired, peace to thee, be strong, yea, be strong; and when he
speaketh with me, I have strengthened myself, and I say, Let my lord
speak, for thou hast strengthened me.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> And he saith, Hast thou known why I
have come unto thee? and now I turn back to fight with the head of
Persia; yea, I am going forth, and lo, the head of Javan hath come;

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> but I declare to thee that which is
noted down in the Writing of Truth, and there is not one strengthening
himself with me, concerning these, except Michael your head.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> \`And I, in the first year of Darius the
Mede, my standing \[is\] for a strengthener, and for a stronghold to
him;

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> and, now, truth I declare to thee, Lo,
yet three kings are standing for Persia, and the fourth doth become far
richer than all, and according to his strength by his riches he stirreth
up the whole, with the kingdom of Javan.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And a mighty king hath stood, and he hath
ruled a great dominion, and hath done according to his will;

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> and according to his standing is his
kingdom broken, and divided to the four winds of the heavens, and not to
his posterity, nor according to his dominion that he ruled, for his
kingdom is plucked up -- and for others apart from these.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> \`And a king of the south -- even of his
princes -- doth become strong, and doth prevail against him, and hath
ruled; a great dominion \[is\] his dominion.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> \`And at the end of years they do join
themselves together, and a daughter of the king of the south doth come
in unto the king of the north to do upright things; and she doth not
retain the power of the arm; and he doth not stand, nor his arm; and she
is given up, she, and those bringing her in, and her child, and he who
is strengthening her in \[these\] times.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> \`And \[one\] hath stood up from a branch
of her roots, \[in\] his station, and he cometh in unto the bulwark,
yea, he cometh into a stronghold of the king of the south, and hath
wrought against them, and hath done mightily;

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> and also their gods, with their princes,
with their desirable vessels of silver and gold, into captivity he
bringeth \[into\] Egypt; and he doth stand more years than the king of
the north.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> \`And the king of the south hath come
into the kingdom, and turned back unto his own land;

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> and his sons stir themselves up, and
have gathered a multitude of great forces, and he hath certainly come
in, and overflowed, and passed through, and he turneth back, and they
stir themselves up unto his stronghold.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And the king of the south doth become
embittered, and hath gone forth and fought with him, with the king of
the north, and hath caused a great multitude to stand, and the multitude
hath been given into his hand,

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> and he hath carried away the multitude,
his heart is high, and he hath caused myriads to fall, and he doth not
become strong.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> \`And the king of the north hath turned
back, and hath caused a multitude to stand, greater than the first, and
at the end of the times a second time he doth certainly come in with a
great force, and with much substance;

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> and in those times many do stand up
against the king of the south, and sons of the destroyers of thy people
do lift themselves up to establish the vision -- and they have stumbled.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> \`And the king of the north cometh in,
and poureth out a mount, and hath captured fenced cities; and the arms
of the south do not stand, nor the people of his choice, yea, there is
no power to stand.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And he who is coming unto him doth
according to his will, and there is none standing before him; and he
standeth in the desirable land, and \[it is\] wholly in his hand.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And he setteth his face to go in with
the strength of his whole kingdom, and upright ones with him; and he
hath wrought, and the daughter of women he giveth to him, to corrupt
her; and she doth not stand, nor is for him.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> \`And he turneth back his face to the
isles, and hath captured many; and a prince hath caused his reproach of
himself to cease; without his reproach he turneth \[it\] back to him.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And he turneth back his face to the
strongholds of his land, and hath stumbled and fallen, and is not found.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> \`And stood up on his station hath
\[one\] causing an exactor to pass over the honour of the kingdom, and
in a few days he is destroyed, and not in anger, nor in battle.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> \`And stood up on his station hath a
despicable one, and they have not given unto him the honour of the
kingdom, and he hath come in quietly, and hath strengthened the kingdom
by flatteries.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> And the arms of the flood are
overflowed from before him, and are broken; and also the leader of the
covenant.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And after they join themselves unto
him, he worketh deceit, and hath increased, and hath been strong by a
few of the nation.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Peaceably even into the fertile places
of the province He cometh, and he hath done that which his fathers did
not, nor his fathers' fathers; prey, and spoil, and substance, to them
he scattereth, and against fenced places he deviseth his devices, even
for a time.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> \`And he stirreth up his power and his
heart against the king of the south with a great force, and the king of
the south stirreth himself up to battle with a very great and mighty
force, and standeth not, for they devise devices against him,

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> and those eating his portion of food
destroy him, and his force overfloweth, and fallen have many wounded.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> \`And both of the kings' hearts \[are\]
to do evil, and at one table they speak lies, and it doth not prosper,
for yet the end \[is\] at a time appointed.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> And he turneth back \[to\] his land
with great substance, and his heart \[is\] against the holy covenant,
and he hath wrought, and turned back to his land.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> At the appointed time he turneth back,
and hath come against the south, and it is not as the former, and as the
latter.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> And ships of Chittim have come in
against him, and he hath been pained, and hath turned back, and hath
been insolent toward the holy covenant, and hath wrought, and turned
back, and he understandeth concerning those forsaking the holy covenant.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> And strong ones out of him stand up,
and have polluted the sanctuary, the stronghold, and have turned aside
the continual \[sacrifice\], and appointed the desolating abomination.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> And those acting wickedly \[against\]
the covenant, he defileth by flatteries; and the people knowing their
God are strong, and have wrought.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> And the teachers of the people give
understanding to many; and they have stumbled by sword, and by flame, by
captivity, and by spoil -- days.

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> And in their stumbling, they are helped
-- a little help, and joined to them have been many with flatteries.

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> And some of the teachers do stumble for
refining by them, and for purifying, and for making white -- till the
end of the time, for \[it is\] yet for a time appointed.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> \`And the king hath done according to
his will, and exalteth himself, and magnifieth himself against every
god, and against the God of gods he speaketh wonderful things, and hath
prospered till the indignation hath been completed, for that which is
determined hath been done.

<span id="an_11:37">11:37</span> And unto the God of his fathers he doth
not attend, nor to the desire of women, yea, to any god he doth not
attend, for against all he magnifieth himself.

<span id="an_11:38">11:38</span> And to the god of strongholds, on his
station, he giveth honour; yea, to a god whom his fathers knew not he
giveth honour, with gold, and with silver, and with precious stone, and
with desirable things.

<span id="an_11:39">11:39</span> And he hath dealt in the fortresses of
the strongholds with a strange god whom he hath acknowledged; he
multiplieth honour, and hath caused them to rule over many, and the
ground he apportioneth at a price.

<span id="an_11:40">11:40</span> \`And at the time of the end, push
himself forward with him doth a king of the south, and storm against him
doth a king of the north, with chariot, and with horsemen, and with many
ships; and he hath come in to the lands, and hath overflowed, and passed
over,

<span id="an_11:41">11:41</span> and hath come into the desirable land,
and many do stumble, and these escape from his hand: Edom, and Moab, and
the chief of the sons of Ammon.

<span id="an_11:42">11:42</span> \`And he sendeth forth his hand upon
the lands, and the land of Egypt is not for an escape;

<span id="an_11:43">11:43</span> and he hath ruled over treasures of
gold and of silver, and over all the desirable things of Egypt, and
Lubim and Cushim \[are\] at his steps.

<span id="an_11:44">11:44</span> \`And reports trouble him out of the
east and out of the north, and he hath gone forth in great fury to
destroy, and to devote many to destruction;

<span id="an_11:45">11:45</span> and he planteth the tents of his palace
between the seas and the holy desirable mountain, and hath come unto his
end, and there is no helper to him.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> \`And at that time stand up doth Michael,
the great head, who is standing up for the sons of thy people, and there
hath been a time of distress, such as hath not been since there hath
been a nation till that time, and at that time do thy people escape,
every one who is found written in the book.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> \`And the multitude of those sleeping in
the dust of the ground do awake, some to life age-during, and some to
reproaches -- to abhorrence age-during.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And those teaching do shine as the
brightness of the expanse, and those justifying the multitude as stars
to the age and for ever.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And thou, O Daniel, hide the things, and
seal the book till the time of the end, many do go to and fro, and
knowledge is multiplied.'

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And I have looked -- I, Daniel -- and lo,
two others are standing, one here at the edge of the flood, and one
there at the edge of the flood,

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> and he saith to the one clothed in linen,
who \[is\] upon the waters of the flood, \`Till when \[is\] the end of
these wonders?'

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And I hear the one clothed in linen, who
\[is\] upon the waters of the flood, and he doth lift up his right hand
and his left unto the heavens, and sweareth by Him who is living to the
age, that, \`After a time, times, and a half, and at the completion of
the scattering of the power of the holy people, finished are all these.'

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And I have heard, and I do not
understand, and I say, \`O my lord, what \[is\] the latter end of
these?'

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And he saith, \`Go, Daniel; for hidden
and sealed \[are\] the things till the time of the end;

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Purify themselves, yea, make themselves
white, yea, refined are many: and the wicked have done wickedly, and
none of the wicked understand, and those acting wisely do understand;

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> and from the time of the turning aside
of the perpetual \[sacrifice\], and to the giving out of the desolating
abomination, \[are\] days a thousand, two hundred, and ninety.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> O the blessedness of him who is waiting
earnestly, and doth come to the days, a thousand, three hundred, thirty
and five.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And thou, go on to the end, then thou
dost rest, and dost stand in thy lot at the end of the days.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea](hos)
