[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](num)  [Next](jos) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Deuteronomy

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> These \[are\] the words which Moses hath
spoken unto all Israel, beyond the Jordan, in the wilderness, in the
plain over-against Suph, between Paran and Tophel, and Laban, and
Hazeroth, and Di-Zahab;

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> eleven days' from Horeb, the way of mount
Seir, unto Kadesh-Barnea.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And it cometh to pass in the fortieth year,
in the eleventh month, on the first of the month hath Moses spoken unto
the sons of Israel according to all that Jehovah hath commanded him
concerning them;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> after his smiting Sihon king of the Amorite
who is dwelling in Heshbon, and Og king of Bashan who is dwelling in
Ashtaroth in Edrei,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> beyond the Jordan, in the land of Moab,
hath Moses begun to explain this law, saying:

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> \`Jehovah our God hath spoken unto us in
Horeb, saying, Enough to you -- of dwelling in this mount;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> turn ye and journey for you, and enter the
mount of the Amorite, and unto all its neighbouring places, in the
plain, in the hill-country, and in the low country, and in the south,
and in the haven of the sea, the land of the Canaanite, and of Lebanon,
unto the great river, the river Phrat;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> see, I have set before you the land; go in
and possess the land which Jehovah hath sworn to your fathers, to
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give to them, and to their seed
after them.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> \`And I speak unto you at that time,
saying, I am not able by myself to bear you;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Jehovah your God hath multiplied you, and
lo, ye \[are\] to-day as the stars of the heavens for multitude;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Jehovah, God of your fathers, is adding
to you, as ye \[are\], a thousand times, and doth bless you as He hath
spoken to you.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> \`How do I bear by myself your pressure,
and your burden, and your strife?

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Give for yourselves men, wise and
intelligent, and known to your tribes, and I set them for your heads;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> and ye answer me and say, Good \[is\] the
thing which thou hast spoken -- to do.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> \`And I take the heads of your tribes,
men, wise and known, and I appoint them heads over you, princes of
thousands, and princes of hundreds, and princes of fifties, and princes
of tens, and authorities, for your tribes.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And I command your judges at that time,
saying, Hearkening between your brethren -- then ye have judged
righteousness between a man, and his brother, and his sojourner;

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> ye do not discern faces in judgment; as
the little so the great ye do hear; ye are not afraid of the face of
any, for the judgment is God's, and the thing which is too hard for you,
ye bring near unto me, and I have heard it;

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> and I command you, at that time, all the
things which ye do.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> \`And we journey from Horeb, and go
\[through\] all that great and fearful wilderness which ye have seen --
the way of the hill-country of the Amorite, as Jehovah our God hath
commanded us, and we come in unto Kadesh-Barnea.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> \`And I say unto you, Ye have come in
unto the hill-country of the Amorite, which Jehovah our God is giving to
us;

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> see, Jehovah thy God hath set before thee
the land; go up, possess, as Jehovah, God of thy fathers, hath spoken to
thee; fear not, nor be affrighted.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> \`And ye come near unto me, all of you,
and say, Let us send men before us, and they search for us the land, and
they bring us back word \[concerning\] the way in which we go up into
it, and the cities unto which we come in;

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> and the thing is good in mine eyes, and I
take of you twelve men, one man for a tribe.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> \`And they turn and go up to the
hill-country, and come in unto the valley of Eshcol, and spy it,

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> and they take with their hand of the
fruit of the land, and bring down unto us, and bring us back word, and
say, Good is the land which Jehovah our God is giving to us.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> \`And ye have not been willing to go up,
and ye provoke the mouth of Jehovah your God,

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> and murmur in your tents, and say, In
Jehovah's hating us He hath brought us out of the land of Egypt, to give
us into the hand of the Amorite -- to destroy us;

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> whither are we going up? our brethren
have melted our heart, saying, A people greater and taller than we,
cities great and fenced to heaven, and also sons of Anakim -- we have
seen there.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> \`And I say unto you, Be not terrified,
nor be afraid of them;

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> Jehovah your God, who is going before you
-- He doth fight for you, according to all that He hath done with you in
Egypt before your eyes,

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> and in the wilderness, where thou hast
seen that Jehovah thy God hath borne thee as a man beareth his son, in
all the way which ye have gone, till your coming in unto this place.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> \`And in this thing ye are not stedfast
in Jehovah your God,

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> who is going before you in the way to
search out to you a place for your encamping, in fire by night, to shew
you in the way in which ye go, and in a cloud by day.

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> \`And Jehovah heareth the voice of your
words, and is wroth, and sweareth, saying,

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> Not one of these men of this evil
generation doth see the good land which I have sworn to give to your
fathers,

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> save Caleb son of Jephunneh -- he doth
see it, and to him I give the land on which he hath trodden, and to his
sons, because that he hath been fully after Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> \`Also with me hath Jehovah been angry
for your sake, saying, Also, thou dost not go in thither;

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> Joshua son of Nun, who is standing before
thee, he goeth in thither; him strengthen thou; for he doth cause Israel
to inherit.

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> \`And your infants, of whom ye have said,
For a prey they are, and your sons who have not known to-day good and
evil, they go in thither, and to them I give it, and they possess it;

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> and ye, turn for yourselves, and journey
toward the wilderness, the way of the Red Sea.

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> \`And ye answer and say unto me, We have
sinned against Jehovah; we -- we go up, and we have fought, according to
all that which Jehovah our God hath commanded us; and ye gird on each
his weapons of war, and ye are ready to go up into the hill-country;

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> and Jehovah saith unto me, Say to them,
Ye do not go up, nor fight, for I am not in your midst, and ye are not
smitten before your enemies.

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> \`And I speak unto you, and ye have not
hearkened, and provoke the mouth of Jehovah, and act proudly, and go up
into the hill-country;

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> and the Amorite who is dwelling in that
hill-country cometh out to meet you, and they pursue you as the bees do,
and smite you in Seir -- unto Hormah.

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> \`And ye turn back and weep before
Jehovah, and Jehovah hath not hearkened to your voice, nor hath he given
ear unto you;

<span id="an_1:46">1:46</span> and ye dwell in Kadesh many days,
according to the days which ye had dwelt.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> \`And we turn, and journey into the
wilderness, the way of the Red Sea, as Jehovah hath spoken unto me, and
we go round the mount of Seir many days.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> \`And Jehovah speaketh unto me, saying,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Enough to you -- is the going round of this
mount; turn for yourselves northward.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> \`And the people command thou, saying, Ye
are passing over into the border of your brethren, sons of Esau, who are
dwelling in Seir, and they are afraid of you; and ye have been very
watchful,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> ye do not strive with them, for I do not
give to you of their land even the treading of the sole of a foot; for a
possession to Esau I have given mount Seir.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> \`Food ye buy from them with money, and
have eaten; and also water ye buy from them with money, and have drunk,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> for Jehovah thy God hath blessed thee in
all the work of thy hands; He hath known thy walking in this great
wilderness these forty years; Jehovah thy God \[is\] with thee; thou
hast not lacked anything.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> \`And we pass by from our brethren, sons of
Esau, who are dwelling in Seir, by the way of the plain, by Elath, and
by Ezion-Gaber; and we turn, and pass over the way of the wilderness of
Moab;

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> and Jehovah saith unto me, Do not distress
Moab, nor stir thyself up against them \[in\] battle, for I do not give
to thee of their land \[for\] a possession; for to the sons of Lot I
have given Ar \[for\] a possession.'

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> \`The Emim formerly have dwelt in it, a
people great, and numerous, and tall, as the Anakim;

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Rephaim they are reckoned, they also, as
the Anakim; and the Moabites call them Emim.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And in Seir have the Horim dwelt
formerly; and the sons of Esau dispossess them, and destroy them from
before them, and dwell in their stead, as Israel hath done to the land
of his possession, which Jehovah hath given to them;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> now, rise ye, and pass over for
yourselves the brook Zered; and we pass over the brook Zered.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> \`And the days which we have walked from
Kadesh-Barnea until that we have passed over the brook Zered, \[are\]
thirty and eight years, till the consumption of all the generation of
the men of battle from the midst of the camp, as Jehovah hath sworn to
them;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> and also the hand of Jehovah hath been
against them, to destroy them from the midst of the camp, till they are
consumed.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> \`And it cometh to pass, when all the men
of battle have finished dying from the midst of the people,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> that Jehovah speaketh unto me, saying,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Thou art passing over to-day the border
of Moab, even Ar,

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> and thou hast come near over-against the
sons of Ammon, thou dost not distress them, nor stir up thyself against
them, for I do not give \[any\] of the land of the sons of Ammon to thee
\[for\] a possession; for to the sons of Lot I have given it \[for\] a
possession.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> \`A land of Rephaim it is reckoned, even
it; Rephaim dwelt in it formerly, and the Ammonites call them Zamzummim;

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> a people great, and numerous, and tall,
as the Anakim, and Jehovah destroyeth them before them, and they
dispossess them, and dwell in their stead,

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> as He hath done for the sons of Esau, who
are dwelling in Seir, when He destroyed the Horim from before them, and
they dispossess them, and dwell in their stead, unto this day.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> \`As to the Avim who are dwelling in
Hazerim unto Azzah, the Caphtorim -- who are coming out from Caphtor --
have destroyed them, and dwell in their stead.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> \`Rise ye, journey and pass over the
brook Arnon; see, I have given into thy hand Sihon king of Heshbon, the
Amorite, and his land; begin to possess, and stir up thyself against him
\[in\] battle.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> This day I begin to put thy dread and thy
fear on the face of the peoples under the whole heavens, who hear thy
fame, and have trembled and been pained because of thee.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> \`And I send messengers from the
wilderness of Kedemoth, unto Sihon king of Heshbon, -- words of peace --
saying,

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> Let me pass over through thy land; in the
several ways I go; I turn not aside -- right or left --

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> food for money thou dost sell me, and I
have eaten; and water for money thou dost give to me, and I have drunk;
only, let me pass over on my feet, --

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> as the sons of Esau who are dwelling in
Seir, and the Moabites who are dwelling in Ar, have done to me -- till
that I pass over the Jordan, unto the land which Jehovah our God is
giving to us.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> \`And Sihon king of Heshbon hath not been
willing to let us pass over by him, for Jehovah thy God hath hardened
his spirit, and strengthened his heart, so as to give him into thy hand
as at this day.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> \`And Jehovah saith unto me, See, I have
begun to give before thee Sihon and his land; begin to possess -- to
possess his land.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> \`And Sihon cometh out to meet us, he and
all his people, to battle to Jahaz;

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> and Jehovah our God giveth him before us,
and we smite him, and his sons, and all his people;

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> and we capture all his cities at that
time, and devote the whole city, men, and the women, and the infants --
we have not left a remnant;

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> only, the cattle we have spoiled for
ourselves, and the spoil of the cities which we have captured.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> \`From Aroer, which \[is\] by the edge of
the brook Arnon, and the city which \[is\] by the brook, even unto
Gilead there hath not been a city which \[is\] too high for us; the
whole hath Jehovah our God given before us.

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> \`Only, unto the land of the sons of
Ammon thou hast not drawn near, any part of the brook Jabbok, and cities
of the hill-country, and anything which Jehovah our God hath \[not\]
commanded.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> \`And we turn, and go up the way to Bashan,
and Og king of Bashan cometh out to meet us, he and all his people, to
battle, \[to\] Edrei.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> \`And Jehovah saith unto me, Fear him not,
for into thy hand I have given him, and all his people, and his land,
and thou hast done to him as thou hast done to Sihon king of the Amorite
who is dwelling in Heshbon.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> \`And Jehovah our God giveth into our hands
also Og king of Bashan, and all his people, and we smite him till there
hath not been left to him a remnant;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> and we capture all his cities at that time,
there hath not been a city which we have not taken from them, sixty
cities, all the region of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> All these \[are\] cities fenced with high
walls, two-leaved doors and bar, apart from cities of villages very
many;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> and we devote them, as we have done to
Sihon king of Heshbon, devoting every city, men, the women, and the
infants;

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> and all the cattle, and the spoil of the
cities, we have spoiled for ourselves.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> \`And we take, at that time, the land out
of the hand of the two kings of the Amorite, which is beyond the Jordan,
from the brook Arnon unto mount Hermon;

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> (Sidonians call Hermon, Sirion; and the
Amorites call it Senir,)

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> all the cities of the plain, and all
Gilead, and all Bashan, unto Salchah and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of
Og in Bashan,

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> for only Og king of Bashan had been left
of the remnant of the Rephaim; lo, his bedstead \[is\] a bedstead of
iron; is it not in Rabbath of the sons of Ammon? nine cubits its length,
and four cubits its breadth, by the cubit of a man.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> \`And this land we have possessed, at
that time; from Aroer, which \[is\] by the brook Arnon, and the half of
mount Gilead, and its cities, I have given to the Reubenite, and to the
Gadite;

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> and the rest of Gilead and all Bashan,
the kingdom of Og, I have given to the half tribe of Manasseh; all the
region of Argob, to all that Bashan, called the land of Rephaim.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> \`Jair son of Manasseh hath taken all the
region of Argob, unto the border of Geshuri, and Maachathi, and calleth
them by his own name, Bashan-Havoth-Jair, unto this day.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And to Machir I have given Gilead.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> \`And to the Reubenite and to the Gadite
I have given from Gilead even unto the brook Arnon, the middle of the
valley and the border, even unto Jabbok the brook, the border of the
sons of Ammon,

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> and the plain, and the Jordan, and the
border, from Chinnereth even unto the sea of the plain, the salt sea,
under the springs of Pisgah, at the \[sun\]-rising.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> \`And I command you, at that time,
saying, Jehovah your God hath given to you this land to possess it;
armed ye pass over before your brethren the sons of Israel, all the sons
of might.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Only, your wives, and your infants, and
your cattle -- I have known that ye have much cattle -- do dwell in your
cities which I have given to you,

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> till that Jehovah give rest to your
brethren like yourselves, and they also have possessed the land which
Jehovah your God is giving to them beyond the Jordan, then ye have
turned back each to his possession, which I have given to you.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> \`And Jehoshua I have commanded at that
time, saying, Thine eyes are seeing all that which Jehovah your God hath
done to these two kings -- so doth Jehovah to all the kingdoms whither
thou are passing over;

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> fear them not, for Jehovah your God, He
is fighting for you.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> \`And I entreat for grace unto Jehovah,
at that time, saying,

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> Lord Jehovah, Thou -- Thou hast begun to
shew Thy servant Thy greatness, and Thy strong hand; for who \[is\] a
God in the heavens or in earth who doth according to Thy works, and
according to Thy might?

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Let me pass over, I pray Thee, and see
the good land which \[is\] beyond the Jordan, this good hill-country,
and Lebanon.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> \`And Jehovah sheweth himself wroth with
me, for your sake, and hath not hearkened unto me, and Jehovah saith
unto me, Enough for thee; add not to speak unto Me any more about this
thing:

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> go up \[to\] the top of Pisgah, and lift
up thine eyes westward, and northward, and southward, and eastward, and
see with thine eyes -- for thou dost not pass over this Jordan;

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> and charge Jehoshua, and strengthen him,
and harden him, for he doth pass over before this people, and he doth
cause them to inherit the land which thou seest.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> \`And we dwell in a valley over-against
Beth-Peor.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> \`And now, Israel, hearken unto the
statutes, and unto the judgments which I am teaching you to do, so that
ye live, and have gone in, and possessed the land which Jehovah God of
your fathers is giving to you.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Ye do not add to the word which I am
commanding you, nor diminish from it, to keep the commands of Jehovah
your God which I am commanding you.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> \`Your eyes are seeing that which Jehovah
hath done in Baal-Peor, for every man who hath gone after Baal-Peor,
Jehovah thy God hath destroyed him from thy midst;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> and ye who are cleaving to Jehovah your
God, \[are\] alive, all of you, to-day.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> \`See, I have taught you statutes and
judgments, as Jehovah my God hath commanded me -- to do so, in the midst
of the land whither ye are going in to possess it;

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> and ye have kept and done \[them\] (for it
\[is\] your wisdom and your understanding) before the eyes of the
peoples who hear all these statutes, and they have said, Only, a people
wise and understanding \[is\] this great nation.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> \`For which \[is\] the great nation that
hath God near unto it, as Jehovah our God, in all we have called unto
him?

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> and which \[is\] the great nation which
hath righteous statutes and judgments according to all this law which I
am setting before you to-day?

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> \`Only, take heed to thyself, and watch thy
soul exceedingly, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have
seen, and lest they turn aside from thy heart, all days of thy life; and
thou hast made them known to thy sons, and to thy sons' sons.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> \`The day when thou hast stood before
Jehovah thy God in Horeb -- in Jehovah's saying unto me, Assemble to Me
the people, and I cause them to hear My words, so that they learn to
fear Me all the days that they are alive on the ground, and their sons
they teach; --

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> and ye draw near and stand under the
mountain, and the mountain is burning with fire unto the heart of the
heavens -- darkness, cloud, yea, thick darkness:

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> \`And Jehovah speaketh unto you out of
the midst of the fire; a voice of words ye are hearing and a similitude
ye are not seeing, only a voice;

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> and He declareth to you His covenant,
which He hath commanded you to do, the Ten Matters, and He writeth them
upon two tables of stone.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> \`And me hath Jehovah commanded at that
time to teach you statutes and judgments, for your doing them in the
land whither ye are passing over to possess it;

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> and ye have been very watchful of your
souls, for ye have not seen any similitude in the day of Jehovah's
speaking unto you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire,

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> lest ye do corruptly, and have made to
you a graven image, a similitude of any figure, a form of male or female
--

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> a form of any beast which \[is\] in the
earth -- a form of any winged bird which flieth in the heavens --

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> a form of any creeping thing on the
ground -- a form of any fish which \[is\] in the waters under the earth;

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> \`And lest thou lift up thine eyes
towards the heavens, and hast seen the sun, and the moon, and the stars,
all the host of the heavens, and thou hast been forced, and hast bowed
thyself to them, and served them, which Jehovah thy God hath apportioned
to all the peoples under the whole heavens.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> \`And you hath Jehovah taken, and He is
bringing you out from the iron furnace, from Egypt, to be to Him for a
people -- an inheritance, as \[at\] this day.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> \`And Jehovah hath shewed himself wroth
with me because of your words, and sweareth to my not passing over the
Jordan, and to my not going in unto the good land which Jehovah thy God
is giving to thee -- an inheritance;

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> for I am dying in this land; I am not
passing over the Jordan, and ye are passing over, and have possessed
this good land.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> \`Take heed to yourselves, lest ye forget
the covenant of Jehovah your God, which He hath made with you, and have
made to yourselves a graven image, a similitude of anything
\[concerning\] which Jehovah thy God hath charged thee:

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> for Jehovah thy God is a fire consuming
-- a zealous God.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> \`When thou begettest sons and sons'
sons, and ye have become old in the land, and have done corruptly, and
have made a graven image, a similitude of anything, and have done the
evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, to provoke Him to anger: --

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> I have caused to testify against you this
day the heavens and the earth, that ye do perish utterly hastily from
off the land whither ye are passing over the Jordan to possess it; ye do
not prolong days upon it, but are utterly destroyed;

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> and Jehovah hath scattered you among the
peoples, and ye have been left few in number among the nations, whither
Jehovah leadeth you,

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> and ye have served there gods, work of
man's hands, wood and stone, which see not, nor hear, nor eat, nor
smell.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> \`And -- ye have sought from thence
Jehovah thy God, and hast found, when thou seekest Him with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul,

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> in distress \[being\] to thee, and all
these things have found thee, in the latter end of the days, and thou
hast turned back unto Jehovah thy God, and hast hearkened to His voice;

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> for a merciful God \[is\] Jehovah thy
God; He doth not fail thee, nor destroy thee, nor forget the covenant of
thy fathers, which He hath sworn to them.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> \`For, ask, I pray thee, at the former
days which have been before thee, from the day that God prepared man on
the earth, and from the \[one\] end of the heavens even unto the
\[other\] end of the heavens, whether there hath been as this great
thing -- or hath been heard like it?

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> Hath a people heard the voice of God
speaking out of the midst of the fire, as thou hast heard, thou -- and
doth live?

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> Or hath God tried to go in to take to
Himself, a nation from the midst of a nation, by trials, by signs, and
by wonders, and by war, and by a strong hand, and by a stretched-out
arm, and by great terrors -- according to all that Jehovah your God hath
done to you, in Egypt, before your eyes?

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> Thou, thou hast been shewn \[it\], to
know that Jehovah He \[is\] God; there is none else besides Him.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> \`From the heavens He hath caused thee to
hear His voice, to instruct thee, and on earth He hath shewed thee His
great fire, and His words thou hast heard out of the midst of the fire.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> \`And because that He hath loved thy
fathers, He doth also fix on their seed after them, and doth bring thee
out, in His presence, by His great power, from Egypt:

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> to dispossess nations greater and
stronger than thou, from thy presence, to bring thee in to give to thee
their land -- an inheritance, as \[at\] this day.

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> \`And thou hast known to-day, and hast
turned \[it\] back unto thy heart, that Jehovah He \[is\] God, in the
heavens above, and on the earth beneath -- there is none else;

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> and thou hast kept His statutes and His
commands which I am commanding thee to-day, so that it is well to thee,
and to thy sons after thee, and so that thou prolongest days on the
ground which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee -- all the days.'

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> Then Moses separateth three cities beyond
the Jordan, towards the sun-rising,

<span id="an_4:42">4:42</span> for the fleeing thither of the
man-slayer, who slayeth his neighbour unknowingly, and he is not hating
him heretofore, and he hath fled unto one of these cities, and he hath
lived:

<span id="an_4:43">4:43</span> Bezer, in the wilderness, in the land of
the plain, of the Reubenite; and Ramoth, in Gilead, of the Gadite; and
Golan, in Bashan, of the Manassahite.

<span id="an_4:44">4:44</span> And this \[is\] the law which Moses hath
set before the sons of Israel;

<span id="an_4:45">4:45</span> these \[are\] the testimonies, and the
statutes, and the judgments, which Moses hath spoken unto the sons of
Israel, in their coming out of Egypt,

<span id="an_4:46">4:46</span> beyond the Jordan, in the valley
over-against Beth-Peor, in the land of Sihon, king of the Amorite, who
is dwelling in Heshbon, whom Moses and the sons of Israel have smitten,
in their coming out of Egypt,

<span id="an_4:47">4:47</span> and they possess his land, and the land
of Og king of Bashan, two kings of the Amorite who \[are\] beyond the
Jordan, \[towards\] the sun-rising;

<span id="an_4:48">4:48</span> from Aroer, which \[is\] by the edge of
the brook Arnon, even unto mount Sion, which \[is\] Hermon --

<span id="an_4:49">4:49</span> and all the plain beyond the Jordan
eastward, even unto the sea of the plain, under the springs of Pisgah.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And Moses calleth unto all Israel, and
saith unto them, \`Hear, Israel, the statutes and the judgments which I
am speaking in your ears to-day, and ye have learned them, and have
observed to do them.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Jehovah our God made with us a covenant in
Horeb;

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> not with our fathers hath Jehovah made this
covenant, but with us; we -- these -- here to-day -- all of us alive.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Face to face hath Jehovah spoken with you,
in the mount, out of the midst of the fire;

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> I am standing between Jehovah and you, at
that time, to declare to you the word of Jehovah, for ye have been
afraid from the presence of the fire, and ye have not gone up into the
mount; saying:

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> \`I Jehovah \[am\] thy God, who hath
brought thee out from the land of Egypt, from a house of servants.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> \`Thou hast no other gods in My presence.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> \`Thou dost not make to thee a graven
image, any similitude which \[is\] in the heavens above, and which
\[is\] in the earth beneath, and which \[is\] in the waters under the
earth;

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> thou dost not bow thyself to them nor serve
them, for I Jehovah thy God \[am\] a zealous God, charging iniquity of
fathers on children, and on a third \[generation\], and on a fourth, to
those hating Me;

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> and doing kindness to thousands, to those
loving Me, and to those keeping My commands.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> \`Thou dost not take up the Name of
Jehovah thy God for a vain thing, for Jehovah doth not acquit him who
taketh up His Name for a vain thing.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> \`Observe the day of the sabbath -- to
sanctify it, as Jehovah thy God hath commanded thee;

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> six days thou dost labour, and hast done
all thy work,

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> and the seventh day \[is\] a sabbath to
Jehovah thy God; thou dost not do any work, thou, and thy son, and thy
daughter, and thy man-servant, and thy handmaid, and thine ox, and thine
ass, and all thy cattle, and thy sojourner who \[is\] within thy gates;
so that thy man-servant, and thy handmaid doth rest like thyself;

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> and thou hast remembered that a servant
thou hast been in the land of Egypt, and Jehovah thy God is bringing
thee out thence by a strong hand, and by a stretched-out arm; therefore
hath Jehovah thy God commanded thee to keep the day of the sabbath.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> \`Honour thy father and thy mother, as
Jehovah thy God hath commanded thee, so that thy days are prolonged, and
so that it is well with thee, on the ground which Jehovah thy God is
giving to thee.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> \`Thou dost not murder.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> \`Thou dost not commit adultery.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> \`Thou dost not steal.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> \`Thou dost not answer against thy
neighbour -- a false testimony.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> \`Thou dost not desire thy neighbour's
wife; nor dost thou covet thy neighbour's house, his field, and his
man-servant, and his handmaid, his ox, and his ass, and anything which
\[is\] thy neighbour's.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> \`These words hath Jehovah spoken unto
all your assembly, in the mount out of the midst of the fire, of the
cloud, and of the thick darkness -- a great voice; and He hath not
added, and He writeth them on two tables of stone, and giveth them unto
me.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> \`And it cometh to pass as ye hear the
voice out of the midst of the darkness, and of the mountain burning with
fire, that ye come near unto me, all the heads of your tribes, and your
elders,

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> and say, Lo, Jehovah our God hath shewed
us His honour, and His greatness; and His voice we have heard out of the
midst of the fire; this day we have seen that God doth speak with man --
and he hath lived.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> \`And, now, why do we die? for consume us
doth this great fire -- if we add to hear the voice of Jehovah our God
any more -- then we have died.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> For who of all flesh \[is\] he who hath
heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the midst of the fire
like us -- and doth live?

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> Draw near thou, and hear all that which
Jehovah our God saith, and thou, thou dost speak unto us all that which
Jehovah our God speaketh unto thee, and we have hearkened, and done it.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> \`And Jehovah heareth the voice of your
words, in your speaking unto me, and Jehovah saith unto me, I have heard
the voice of the words of this people which they have spoken unto thee;
they have done well \[in\] all that they have spoken.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> O that their heart had been thus to them,
to fear Me, and to keep My commands all the days, that it may be well
with them, and with their sons -- to the age!

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> \`Go, say to them, Turn back for
yourselves, to your tents;

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> and thou here stand thou with Me, and let
Me speak unto thee all the command, and the statutes, and the judgments
which thou dost teach them, and they have done in the land which I am
giving to them to possess it.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> \`And ye have observed to do as Jehovah
your God hath commanded you, ye turn not aside -- right or left;

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> in all the way which Jehovah your God
hath commanded you ye walk, so that ye live, and \[it is\] well with
you, and ye have prolonged days in the land which ye possess.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> \`And this \[is\] the command, the statutes
and the judgments which Jehovah your God hath commanded to teach you, to
do in the land which ye are passing over thither to possess it,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> so that thou dost fear Jehovah thy God, to
keep all His statutes and His commands, which I am commanding thee,
thou, and thy son, and thy son's son, all days of thy life, and so that
thy days are prolonged.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> \`And thou hast heard, O Israel, and
observed to do, that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest
multiply exceedingly, as Jehovah, God of thy fathers, hath spoken to
thee, \[in\] the land flowing with milk and honey.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> \`Hear, O Israel, Jehovah our God \[is\]
one Jehovah;

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> and thou hast loved Jehovah thy God with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might,

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> and these words which I am commanding thee
to-day have been on thine heart,

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> and thou hast repeated them to thy sons,
and spoken of them in thy sitting in thine house, and in thy walking in
the way, and in thy lying down, and in thy rising up,

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> and hast bound them for a sign upon thy
hand, and they have been for frontlets between thine eyes,

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> and thou hast written them on door-posts of
thy house, and on thy gates.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> \`And it hath been, when Jehovah thy God
doth bring thee in unto the land which He hath sworn to thy fathers, to
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give to thee -- cities great and
good, which thou hast not built,

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> and houses full of all good things which
thou hast not filled, and wells digged which thou hast not digged,
vineyards and olive-yards which thou hast not planted, and thou hast
eaten, and been satisfied;

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> \`Take heed to thyself lest thou forget
Jehovah who hath brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of a house
of servants;

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Jehovah thy God thou dost fear, and Him
thou dost serve, and by His name thou dost swear;

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> ye do not go after other gods, of the
gods of the peoples who \[are\] round about you;

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> for a zealous God \[is\] Jehovah thy God
in thy midst -- lest the anger of Jehovah thy God burn against thee, and
He hath destroyed thee from off the face of the ground.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> \`Ye do not try Jehovah your God as ye
tried in Massah;

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> ye do diligently keep the commands of
Jehovah your God, and His testimonies, and His statutes which He hath
commanded thee,

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> and thou hast done that which is right
and good in the eyes of Jehovah, so that it is well with thee, and thou
hast gone in and possessed the good land which Jehovah hath sworn to thy
fathers,

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> to drive away all thine enemies from thy
presence, as Jehovah hath spoken.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> \`When thy son asketh thee hereafter,
saying, What \[are\] the testimonies, and the statutes, and the
judgments, which Jehovah our God hath commanded you?

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> then thou hast said to thy son, Servants
we have been to Pharaoh in Egypt, and Jehovah bringeth us out of Egypt
by a high hand;

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> and Jehovah giveth signs and wonders,
great and sad, on Egypt, on Pharaoh, and on all his house, before our
eyes;

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> and us He hath brought out thence, in
order to bring us in, to give to us the land which He had sworn to our
fathers.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> And Jehovah commandeth us to do all these
statutes, to fear Jehovah our God, for good to ourselves all the days,
to keep us alive, as \[at\] this day;

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> and righteousness it is for us, when we
observe to do all this command before Jehovah our God, as He hath
commanded us.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> \`When Jehovah thy God doth bring thee in
unto the land whither thou art going in to possess it, and He hath cast
out many nations from thy presence, the Hittite, and the Girgashite, and
the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and
the Jebusite, seven nations more numerous and mighty than thou,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> and Jehovah thy God hath given them before
thee, and thou hast smitten them -- thou dost utterly devote them --
thou dost not make with them a covenant, nor dost thou favour them.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> \`And thou dost not join in marriage with
them; thy daughter thou dost not give to his son, and his daughter thou
dost not take to thy son,

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> for he doth turn aside thy son from after
Me, and they have served other gods, and the anger of Jehovah hath
burned against you, and hath destroyed thee hastily.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> \`But thus thou dost to them: their altars
ye break down, and their standing pillars ye shiver, and their shrines
ye cut down, and their graven images ye burn with fire;

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> for a holy people \[art\] thou to Jehovah
thy God; on thee hath Jehovah thy God fixed, to be to Him for a peculiar
people, out of all the peoples who \[are\] on the face of the ground.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> \`Not because of your being more numerous
than any of the peoples hath Jehovah delighted in you, and fixeth on
you, for ye \[are\] the least of all the peoples,

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> but because of Jehovah's loving you, and
because of His keeping the oath which He hath sworn to your fathers,
hath Jehovah brought you out by a strong hand, and doth ransom you from
a house of servants, from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> \`And thou hast known that Jehovah thy God
He \[is\] God, the faithful God, keeping the covenant, and the kindness,
to those loving Him, and to those keeping His commands -- to a thousand
generations,

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> and repaying to those hating Him, unto
their face, to destroy them; He delayeth not to him who is hating Him --
unto his face, He repayeth to him --

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> and thou hast kept the command, and the
statutes, and the judgments, which I am commanding thee to-day to do
them.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> \`And it hath been, because ye hear these
judgments, and have kept, and done them, that Jehovah thy God hath kept
to thee the covenant and the kindness which He hath sworn to thy
fathers,

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> and hath loved thee, and blessed thee,
and multiplied thee, and hath blessed the fruit of thy womb, and the
fruit of thy ground, thy corn, and thy new wine, and thine oil, the
increase of thine oxen, and the wealth of thy flock, on the ground which
He hath sworn to thy fathers to give to thee.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> \`Blessed art thou above all the peoples,
there is not in thee a barren man or a barren woman -- nor among your
cattle;

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> and Jehovah hath turned aside from thee
every sickness, and none of the evil diseases of Egypt (which thou hast
known) doth He put on thee, and He hath put them on all hating thee.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> \`And thou hast consumed all the peoples
whom Jehovah thy God is giving to thee; thine eye hath no pity on them,
and thou dost not serve their gods, for a snare it \[is\] to thee.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> \`When thou sayest in thine heart, These
nations \[are\] more numerous than I, how am I able to dispossess them?
--

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> thou art not afraid of them; thou dost
surely remember that which Jehovah thy God hath done to Pharaoh, and to
all Egypt,

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> the great trials which thine eyes have
seen, and the signs, and the wonders, and the strong hand, and the
stretched-out arm, with which Jehovah thy God hath brought thee out; so
doth Jehovah thy God to all the peoples of whose presence thou art
afraid.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> \`And also the locust doth Jehovah thy
God send among them, till the destruction of those who are left, and of
those who are hidden from thy presence;

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> thou art not terrified by their presence,
for Jehovah thy God \[is\] in thy midst, a God great and fearful.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> \`And Jehovah thy God hath cast out these
nations from thy presence little \[by\] little, (thou art not able to
consume them hastily, lest the beast of the field multiply against
thee),

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> and Jehovah thy God hath given them
before thee, and destroyed them -- a great destruction -- till their
destruction;

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> and He hath given their kings into thy
hand, and thou hast destroyed their name from under the heavens; no man
doth station himself in thy presence till thou hast destroyed them.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> \`The graven images of their gods ye do
burn with fire; thou dost not desire the silver and gold on them, nor
hast thou taken \[it\] to thyself, lest thou be snared by it, for the
abomination of Jehovah thy God it \[is\];

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> and thou dost not bring in an abomination
unto thy house -- or thou hast been devoted like it; -- thou dost
utterly detest it, and thou dost utterly abominate it; for it \[is\]
devoted.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> \`All the command which I am commanding
thee to-day ye observe to do, so that ye live, and have multiplied, and
gone in, and possessed the land which Jehovah hath sworn to your
fathers;

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> and thou hast remembered all the way which
Jehovah thy God hath caused thee to go these forty years in the
wilderness, in order to humble thee to try thee, to know that which
\[is\] in thy heart, whether thou dost keep His commands or not.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> \`And He doth humble thee, and cause thee
to hunger and doth cause thee to eat the manna (which thou hast not
known, even thy fathers have not known), in order to cause thee to know
that not by bread alone doth man live, but by every produce of the mouth
of Jehovah man doth live.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> \`Thy raiment hath not worn out from off
thee, and thy foot hath not swelled these forty years,

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> and thou hast known, with thy heart, that
as a man chastiseth his son Jehovah thy God is chastising thee,

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> and thou hast kept the commands of Jehovah
thy God, to walk in His ways, and to fear Him.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> \`For Jehovah thy God is bringing thee in
unto a good land, a land of brooks of waters, of fountains, and of
depths coming out in valley and in mountain:

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> a land of wheat, and barley, and vine, and
fig, and pomegranate; a land of oil olive and honey;

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> a land in which without scarcity thou dost
eat bread, thou dost not lack anything in it; a land whose stones
\[are\] iron, and out of its mountains thou dost dig brass;

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> and thou hast eaten, and been satisfied,
and hast blessed Jehovah thy God, on the good land which he hath given
to thee.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> \`Take heed to thyself, lest thou forget
Jehovah thy God so as not to keep His commands, and His judgments, and
His statutes which I am commanding thee to-day;

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> lest thou eat, and hast been satisfied,
and good houses dost build, and hast inhabited;

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> and thy herd and thy flock be multiplied,
and silver and gold be multiplied to thee; and all that is thine be
multiplied:

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> \`And thy heart hath been high, and thou
hast forgotten Jehovah thy God (who is bringing thee out of the land of
Egypt, out of a house of servants;

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> who is causing thee to go in the great
and the terrible wilderness -- burning serpent, and scorpion, and thirst
-- where there is no water; who is bringing out to thee waters from the
flinty rock;

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> who is causing thee to eat manna in the
wilderness, which thy fathers have not known, in order to humble thee,
and in order to try thee, to do thee good in thy latter end),

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> and thou hast said in thy heart, My
power, and the might of my hand, hath made for me this wealth:

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> \`And thou hast remembered Jehovah thy
God, for He it \[is\] who is giving to thee power to make wealth, in
order to establish His covenant which He hath sworn to thy fathers as
\[at\] this day.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> \`And it hath been -- if thou really
forget Jehovah thy God, and hast gone after other gods, and served them,
and bowed thyself to them, I have testified against you to-day that ye
do utterly perish;

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> as the nations whom Jehovah is destroying
from your presence, so ye perish; because ye hearken not to the voice of
Jehovah your God.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> \`Hear, Israel, thou art passing over
to-day the Jordan, to go in to possess nations greater and mightier than
thyself; cities great and fenced in the heavens;

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> a people great and tall, sons of Anakim,
whom thou -- thou hast known, (and thou -- thou hast heard: Who doth
station himself before sons of Anak?)

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> and thou hast known to-day, that Jehovah
thy God \[is\] He who is passing over before thee -- a fire consuming;
He doth destroy them, and He doth humble them before thee, and thou hast
dispossessed them, and destroyed them hastily, as Jehovah hath spoken to
thee.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> \`Thou dost not speak in thy heart (in
Jehovah thy God's driving them away from before thee), saying, For my
righteousness hath Jehovah brought me in to possess this land, seeing
for the wickedness of these nations is Jehovah dispossessing them from
thy presence;

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> not for thy righteousness, and for the
uprightness of thy heart, art thou going in to possess their land; but
for the wickedness of these nations is Jehovah thy God dispossessing
them from before thee; and in order to establish the word which Jehovah
hath sworn to thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob;

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> and thou hast known, that not for thy
righteousness is Jehovah thy God giving to thee this good land to
possess it, for a people stiff of neck thou \[art\].

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> \`Remember -- do not forget -- that
\[with\] which thou hast made Jehovah thy God wroth in the wilderness;
even from the day that thou hast come out of the land of Egypt till your
coming in unto this place rebels ye have been with Jehovah;

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> even in Horeb ye have made Jehovah wroth,
and Jehovah sheweth Himself angry against you -- to destroy you.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> \`In my going up into the mount to receive
the tables of stone (tables of the covenant which Jehovah hath made with
you), and I abide in the mount forty days and forty nights; bread I have
not eaten, and water I have not drunk;

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> and Jehovah giveth unto me the two tables
of stone written with the finger of God, and on them according to all
the words which Jehovah hath spoken with you in the mount, out of the
midst of the fire, in the day of the assembly.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> \`And it cometh to pass, at the end of
forty days and forty nights, Jehovah hath given unto me the two tables
of stone -- tables of the covenant,

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> and Jehovah saith unto me, Rise, go down,
hasten from this, for thy people hath done corruptly, whom thou hast
brought out of Egypt; they have turned aside hastily out of the way
which I have commanded them -- they have made to themselves a molten
thing!

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> \`And Jehovah speaketh unto me, saying, I
have seen this people, and lo, a people stiff of neck it \[is\];

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> desist from Me, and I destroy them, and
blot out their name from under the heavens, and I make thee become a
nation more mighty and numerous than it.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> \`And I turn, and come down from the
mount, and the mount is burning with fire, and the two tables of the
covenant on my two hands,

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> and I see, and lo, ye have sinned against
Jehovah your God; ye have made to yourselves a molten calf; ye have
turned aside hastily out of the way which Jehovah hath commanded you.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> \`And I lay hold on the two tables, and
cast them out of my two hands, and break them before your eyes,

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> and I throw myself before Jehovah, as at
first, forty days and forty nights; bread I have not eaten, and water I
have not drunk, because of all your sins which ye have sinned, by doing
the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, to make Him angry.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> \`For I have been afraid because of the
anger and the fury with which Jehovah hath been wroth against you, to
destroy you; and Jehovah doth hearken unto me also at this time.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> \`And with Aaron hath Jehovah shewed
himself very angry, to destroy him, and I pray also for Aaron at that
time;

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> and your sin, which ye have made -- the
calf -- I have taken, and I burn it with fire, and beat it, grinding
well till that it \[is\] small as dust, and I cast its dust unto the
brook which is going down out of the mount.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> \`And in Taberah, and in Massah, and in
Kibroth-Hattaavah, ye have been making Jehovah wroth:

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> and in Jehovah's sending you from
Kadesh-Barnea, saying, Go up, and possess the land which I have given to
you, then ye provoke the mouth of Jehovah your God, and have not given
credence to Him, nor hearkened to His voice;

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> rebels ye have been with Jehovah from the
day of my knowing you.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> \`And I throw myself before Jehovah, the
forty days and the forty nights, as I had thrown myself, for Jehovah
hath said -- to destroy you;

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> and I pray unto Jehovah, and say, Lord
Jehovah, destroy not Thy people, and Thine inheritance, whom Thou hast
ransomed in Thy greatness; whom Thou hast brought out of Egypt with a
strong hand;

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> be mindful of Thy servants, of Abraham,
of Isaac, and of Jacob, turn not unto the stiffness of this people, and
unto its wickedness, and unto its sin;

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> lest the land say from which Thou hast
brought us out, Because of Jehovah's want of ability to bring them in
unto the land of which He hath spoken to them, and because of His hating
them, He brought them out to put them to death in the wilderness;

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> and they \[are\] Thy people, and Thine
inheritance, whom Thou hast brought out by Thy great power, and by Thy
stretched-out arm!

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> \`At that time hath Jehovah said unto me,
Grave for thee two tables of stone, like the first, and come up unto Me,
into the mount, and thou hast made for thee an ark of wood,

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> and I write on the tables the words which
were on the first tables, which thou hast broken, and thou hast placed
them in the ark;

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> and I make an ark of shittim wood, and
grave two tables of stone like the first, and go up to the mount, and
the two tables in my hand.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> \`And He writeth on the tables, according
to the first writing, the Ten Matters, which Jehovah hath spoken unto
you in the mount, out of the midst of the fire, in the day of the
assembly, and Jehovah giveth them unto me,

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> and I turn and come down from the mount,
and put the tables in the ark which I had made, and they are there, as
Jehovah commanded me.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> \`And the sons of Israel have journeyed
from Beeroth of the sons of Jaakan to Mosera, there Aaron died, and he
is buried there, and Eleazar his son doth act as priest in his stead;

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> thence they journeyed to Gudgodah, and
from Gudgodah to Jotbathah, a land of brooks of water.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> \`At that time hath Jehovah separated the
tribe of Levi, to bear the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, to stand
before Jehovah, to serve Him, and to bless in His name, unto this day,

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> therefore there hath not been to Levi a
portion and inheritance with his brethren; Jehovah Himself \[is\] his
inheritance, as Jehovah thy God hath spoken to him.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> \`And I -- I have stood in the mount,
as the former days, forty days and forty nights, and Jehovah hearkeneth
unto me also at that time; Jehovah hath not willed to destroy thee.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> \`And Jehovah saith unto me, Rise, go
to journey before the people, and they go in and possess the land which
I have sworn to their fathers to give to them.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> \`And now, Israel, what is Jehovah thy
God asking from thee, except to fear Jehovah thy God, to walk in all His
ways, and to love Him, and to serve Jehovah thy God with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul,

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> to keep the commands of Jehovah, and
His statutes which I am commanding thee to-day, for good to thee?

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> \`Lo, to Jehovah thy God \[are\] the
heavens and the heavens of the heavens, the earth and all that \[is\] in
it;

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> only in thy fathers hath Jehovah
delighted -- to love them, and He doth fix on their seed after them --
on you, out of all the peoples as \[at\] this day;

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> and ye have circumcised the foreskin of
your heart, and your neck ye do not harden any more;

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> for Jehovah your God -- He \[is\] God
of the gods, and Lord of the lords; God, the great, the mighty, and the
fearful; who accepteth not persons, nor taketh a bribe;

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> He is doing the judgment of fatherless
and widow, and loving the sojourner, to give to him bread and raiment.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> \`And ye have loved the sojourner, for
sojourners ye were in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> \`Jehovah thy God thou dost fear, Him
thou dost serve, and to Him thou dost cleave, and by His name thou dost
swear.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> He \[is\] thy praise, and He \[is\] thy
God, who hath done with thee these great and fearful \[things\] which
thine eyes have seen:

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> with seventy persons did thy fathers go
down to Egypt, and now hath Jehovah thy God made thee as stars of the
heavens for multitude.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> \`And thou hast loved Jehovah thy God,
and kept His charge, and His statutes, and His judgments, and His
commands, all the days;

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> and ye have known to-day -- for it is not
your sons who have not known, and who have not seen the chastisement of
Jehovah your God, His greatness, His strong hand, and His stretched-out
arm,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> and His signs, and His doings, which He
hath done in the midst of Egypt, to Pharaoh king of Egypt, and to all
his land;

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> and that which He hath done to the force
of Egypt, to its horses, and to its chariot, when He hath caused the
waters of the Red Sea to flow against their faces in their pursuing
after them, and Jehovah destroyeth them, unto this day;

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> and that which He hath done to you in the
wilderness, till your coming in unto this place;

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> and that which He hath done to Dathan,
and to Abiram, sons of Eliab, sons of Reuben, when the earth hath opened
her mouth and swalloweth them, and their houses, and their tents, and
all that liveth, which is at their feet, in the midst of all Israel:

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> \`-- But \[it is\] your eyes which are
seeing all the great work of Jehovah, which He hath done;

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> and ye have kept all the command which I
am commanding thee to-day, so that ye are strong, and have gone in, and
possessed the land whither ye are passing over to possess it,

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> and so that ye prolong days on the ground
which Jehovah hath sworn to your fathers to give to them and to their
seed -- a land flowing with milk and honey.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> \`For the land whither thou art going
in to possess it, is not as the land of Egypt whence ye have come out,
where thou sowest thy seed, and hast watered with thy foot, as a garden
of the green herb;

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> but the land whither ye are passing
over to possess it, \[is\] a land of hills and valleys; of the rain of
the heavens it drinketh water;

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> a land which Jehovah thy God is
searching; continually \[are\] the eyes of Jehovah thy God upon it, from
the beginning of the year even unto the latter end of the year.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> \`And it hath been -- if thou hearken
diligently unto My commands which I am commanding you to-day, to love
Jehovah your God, and to serve Him with all your heart, and with all
your soul --

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> that I have given the rain of your land
in its season -- sprinkling and gathered -- and thou hast gathered thy
corn, and thy new wine, and thine oil,

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> and I have given herbs in thy field for
thy cattle, and thou hast eaten, and been satisfied.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> \`Take heed to yourselves, lest your
heart be enticed, and ye have turned aside, and served other gods, and
bowed yourselves to them,

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> and the anger of Jehovah hath burned
against you, and He hath restrained the heavens, and there is no rain,
and the ground doth not give her increase, and ye have perished hastily
from off the good land which Jehovah is giving to you.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> \`And ye have placed these my words on
your heart, and on your soul, and have bound them for a sign on your
hand, and they have been for frontlets between your eyes;

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> and ye have taught them to your sons,
by speaking of them in thy sitting in thy house, and in thy going in the
way, and in thy lying down, and in thy rising up,

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> and hast written them on the side-posts
of thy house, and on thy gates,

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> so that your days are multiplied, and
the days of your sons, on the ground which Jehovah hath sworn to your
fathers to give to them, as the days of the heavens on the earth.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> \`For, if ye diligently keep all this
command which I am commanding you -- to do it, to love Jehovah your God,
to walk in all His ways, and to cleave to Him,

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> then hath Jehovah dispossessed all
these nations from before you, and ye have possessed nations, greater
and mightier than you;

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> every place on which the sole of your
foot treadeth is yours; from the wilderness, and Lebanon, from the
river, the river Phrat, even unto the farther sea is your border;

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> no man doth station himself in your
presence; your dread and your fear doth Jehovah your God put on the face
of all the land on which ye tread, as He hath spoken to you.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> \`See, I am setting before you to-day a
blessing and a reviling:

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> the blessing, when ye hearken unto the
commands of Jehovah your God, which I am commanding you to-day;

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> and the reviling, if ye do not hearken
unto the commands of Jehovah your God, and have turned aside out of the
way which I am commanding you to-day, to go after other gods which ye
have not known.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> \`And it hath been, when Jehovah thy
God doth bring thee in unto the land whither thou art going in to
possess it, that thou hast given the blessing on mount Gerizim, and the
reviling on mount Ebal;

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> are they not beyond the Jordan, behind
the way of the going in of the sun, in the land of the Canaanite, who is
dwelling in the plain over-against Gilgal, near the oaks of Moreh?

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> for ye are passing over the Jordan to
go in to possess the land which Jehovah your God is giving to you; and
ye have possessed it, and dwelt in it,

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> and observed to do all the statutes and
the judgments which I am setting before you to day.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> \`These \[are\] the statutes and the
judgments which ye observe to do in the land which Jehovah, God of thy
fathers, hath given to thee to possess it, all the days that ye are
living on the ground:

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> ye do utterly destroy all the places
where the nations which ye are dispossessing served their gods, on the
high mountains, and on the heights, and under every green tree;

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> and ye have broken down their altars, and
shivered their standing pillars, and their shrines ye burn with fire,
and graven images of their gods ye cut down, and have destroyed their
name out of that place.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> \`Ye do not do so to Jehovah your God;

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> but unto the place which Jehovah your God
doth choose out of all your tribes to put His name there, to His
tabernacle ye seek, and thou hast entered thither,

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> and hast brought in thither your
burnt-offerings, and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and the
heave-offering of your hand, and your vows, and your free-will
offerings, and the firstlings of your herd and of your flock;

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> and ye have eaten there before Jehovah
your God, and have rejoiced in every putting forth of your hand, ye and
your households, with which Jehovah thy God hath blessed thee.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> \`Ye do not do according to all that we
are doing here to-day, each anything that is right in his own eyes,

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> for ye have not come in hitherto unto the
rest, and unto the inheritance, which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee;

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> and ye have passed over the Jordan, and
have dwelt in the land which Jehovah your God is causing you to inherit,
and He hath given rest to you from all your enemies round about, and ye
have dwelt confidently:

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> \`And it hath been, the place on which
Jehovah your God doth fix to cause His name to tabernacle there, thither
ye bring in all that which I am commanding you, your burnt-offerings,
and your sacrifices, your tithes, and the heave-offering of your hand,
and all the choice of your vows which ye vow to Jehovah;

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> and ye have rejoiced before Jehovah
your God, ye, and your sons, and your daughters, and your men-servants,
and your handmaids, and the Levite who \[is\] within your gates, for he
hath no part and inheritance with you.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> \`Take heed to thee, lest thou cause
thy burnt-offerings to ascend in any place which thou seest,

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> except in the place which Jehovah doth
choose in one of thy tribes, there thou dost cause thy burnt-offerings
to ascend, and there thou dost do all that which I am commanding thee.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> \`Only, with all the desire of thy soul
thou dost sacrifice, and hast eaten flesh according to the blessing of
Jehovah thy God which He hath given to thee, in all thy gates; the
unclean and the clean do eat it, as of the roe, and as of the hart.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> \`Only, the blood ye do not eat -- on
the earth thou dost pour it as water;

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> thou art not able to eat within thy
gates the tithe of thy corn, and of thy new wine, and thine oil, and the
firstlings of thy herd and of thy flock, and any of thy vows which thou
vowest, and thy free-will offerings, and heave-offering of thy hand;

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> but before Jehovah thy God thou dost
eat it, in the place which Jehovah thy God doth fix on, thou, and thy
son, and thy daughter, and thy man-servant, and thy handmaid, and the
Levite who \[is\] within thy gates, and thou hast rejoiced before
Jehovah thy God in every putting forth of thy hand;

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> take heed to thee lest thou forsake the
Levite all thy days on thy ground.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> \`When Jehovah thy God doth enlarge thy
border, as He hath spoken to thee, and thou hast said, Let me eat flesh
-- for thy soul desireth to eat flesh -- of all the desire of thy soul
thou dost eat flesh.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> \`When the place is far from thee which
Jehovah thy God doth choose to put His name there, then thou hast
sacrificed of thy herd and of thy flock which Jehovah hath given to
thee, as I have commanded thee, and hast eaten within thy gates, of all
the desire of thy soul;

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> only, as the roe and the hart is eaten,
so dost thou eat it; the unclean and the clean doth alike eat it.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> \`Only, be sure not to eat the blood,
for the blood \[is\] the life, and thou dost not eat the life with the
flesh;

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> thou dost not eat it, on the earth thou
dost pour it as water;

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> thou dost not eat it, in order that it
may be well with thee, and with thy sons after thee, when thou dost that
which \[is\] right in the eyes of Jehovah.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> \`Only, thy holy things which thou
hast, and thy vows, thou dost take up, and hast gone in unto the place
which Jehovah doth choose,

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> and thou hast made thy burnt-offerings
-- the flesh and the blood -- on the altar of Jehovah thy God; and the
blood of thy sacrifices is poured out by the altar of Jehovah thy God,
and the flesh thou dost eat.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> Observe, and thou hast obeyed all these
words which I am commanding thee, in order that it may be well with thee
and with thy sons after thee -- to the age, when thou dost that which
\[is\] good and right in the eyes of Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> \`When Jehovah thy God doth cut off the
nations -- whither thou art going in to possess them -- from thy
presence, and thou hast possessed them, and hast dwelt in their land --

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> take heed to thee, lest thou be snared
after them, after their being destroyed out of thy presence, and lest
thou enquire about their gods, saying, How do these nations serve their
gods, and I do so -- even I?

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> \`Thou dost not do so to Jehovah thy
God; for every abomination of Jehovah which He is hating they have done
to their gods, for even their sons and their daughters they burn with
fire to their gods.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> The whole thing which I am commanding
you -- it ye observe to do; thou dost not add unto it, nor diminish from
it.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> \`When there ariseth in your midst a
prophet, or a dreamer of a dream, and he hath given unto thee a sign or
wonder,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> and the sign and the wonder hath come
which he hath spoken of unto thee, saying, Let us go after other gods
(which thou hast not known), and serve them,

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> thou dost not hearken unto the words of
that prophet, or unto that dreamer of the dream, for Jehovah your God is
trying you, to know whether ye are loving Jehovah your God with all your
heart, and with all your soul;

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> after Jehovah your God ye walk, and Him
ye fear, and His commands ye keep, and to His voice ye hearken, and Him
ye serve, and to Him ye cleave.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> \`And that prophet, or that dreamer of
the dream, is put to death, for he hath spoken apostacy against Jehovah
your God (who is bringing you out of the land of Egypt, and hath
ransomed you out of a house of servants), to drive you out of the way in
which Jehovah thy God hath commanded thee to walk, and thou hast put
away the evil thing from thy midst.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> \`When thy brother -- son of thy mother,
or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend who
\[is\] as thine own soul -- doth move thee, in secret, saying, Let us go
and serve other gods -- (which thou hast not known, thou and thy
fathers,

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> of the gods of the peoples who \[are\]
round about you, who are near unto thee, or who are far off from thee,
from the end of the earth even unto the end of the earth) --

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> thou dost not consent to him, nor hearken
unto him, nor doth thine eye have pity on him, nor dost thou spare, nor
dost thou cover him over.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> \`But thou dost surely kill him; thy hand
is on him, in the first place, to put him to death, and the hand of all
the people last;

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> and thou hast stoned him with stones,
and he hath died, for he hath sought to drive thee away from Jehovah thy
God, who is bringing thee out of the land of Egypt, out of a house of
servants;

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> and all Israel do hear and fear, and
add not to do like this evil thing in thy midst.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> \`When thou hearest, in one of thy
cities which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee to dwell there, \[one\]
saying,

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Men, sons of worthlessness, have gone
out of thy midst, and they force away the inhabitants of their city,
saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which ye have not known --

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> and thou hast enquired, and searched,
and asked diligently, and lo, truth; the thing is established; this
abomination hath been done in thy midst:

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> \`Thou dost surely smite the
inhabitants of that city by the mouth of the sword; devoting it, and all
that \[is\] in it, even its cattle, by the mouth of the sword;

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> and all its spoil thou dost gather unto
the midst of its broad place, and hast burned with fire the city and all
its spoil completely, before Jehovah thy God, and it hath been a heap
age-during, it is not built any more;

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> and there doth not cleave to thy hand
any of the devoted thing, so that Jehovah doth turn back from the
fierceness of His anger, and hath given to thee mercies, and loved thee,
and multiplied thee, as He hath sworn to thy fathers,

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> when thou dost hearken to the voice of
Jehovah thy God, to keep all his commands which I am commanding thee
to-day, to do that which \[is\] right in the eyes of Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> \`Sons ye \[are\] to Jehovah your God; ye
do not cut yourselves, nor make baldness between your eyes for the dead;

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> for a holy people \[art\] thou to Jehovah
thy God, and on thee hath Jehovah fixed to be to Him for a people, a
peculiar treasure, out of all the peoples who \[are\] on the face of the
ground.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> \`Thou dost not eat any abominable thing;

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> \`this \[is\] the beast which ye do eat:
ox, lamb of the sheep, or kid of the goats,

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> hart, and roe, and fallow deer, and wild
goat, and pygarg, and wild ox, and chamois;

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> and every beast dividing the hoof, and
cleaving the cleft into two hoofs, bringing up the cud, among the beasts
-- it ye do eat.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> \`Only, this ye do not eat, of those
bringing up the cud, and of those dividing the cloven hoof: the camel,
and the hare, and the rabbit, for they are bringing up the cud but the
hoof have not divided; unclean they \[are\] to you;

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> and the sow, for it is dividing the hoof,
and not \[bringing\] up the cud, unclean it \[is\] to you; of their
flesh ye do not eat, and against their carcase ye do not come.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> \`This ye do eat of all that \[are\] in
the waters; all that hath fins and scales ye do eat;

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> and anything which hath not fins and
scales ye do not eat; unclean it \[is\] to you.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> \`Any clean bird ye do eat;

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> and these \[are\] they of which ye do
not eat: the eagle, and the ossifrage, and the ospray,

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> and the glede, and the kite, and the
vulture after its kind,

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> and every raven after its kind;

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> and the owl, and the night-hawk, and
the cuckoo, and the hawk after its kind;

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> the \[little\] owl, and the \[great\]
owl, and the swan,

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> and the pelican, and the gier-eagle,
and the cormorant,

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> and the stork, and the heron after its
kind, and the lapwing, and the bat;

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> and every teeming thing which is
flying, unclean it \[is\] to you; they are not eaten;

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> any clean fowl ye do eat.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> \`Ye do not eat of any carcase; to the
sojourner who \[is\] within thy gates thou dost give it, and he hath
eaten it; or sell \[it\] to a stranger; for a holy people thou \[art\]
to Jehovah thy God; thou dost not boil a kid in its mother's milk.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> \`Thou dost certainly tithe all the
increase of thy seed which the field is bringing forth year by year;

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> and thou hast eaten before Jehovah thy
God, in the place where He doth choose to cause His name to tabernacle,
the tithe of thy corn, of thy new wine, and of thine oil, and the
firstlings of thy herd, and of thy flock, so that thou dost learn to
fear Jehovah thy God all the days.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> \`And when the way is too much for
thee, that thou art not able to carry it -- when the place is too far
off from thee which Jehovah thy God doth choose to put His name there,
when Jehovah thy God doth bless thee; --

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> then thou hast given \[it\] in money,
and hast bound up the money in thy hand, and gone unto the place on
which Jehovah thy God doth fix;

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> and thou hast given the money for any
thing which thy soul desireth, for oxen, and for sheep, and for wine,
and for strong drink, and for any thing which thy soul asketh, and thou
hast eaten there before Jehovah thy God, and thou hast rejoiced, thou
and thy house.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> As to the Levite who \[is\] within thy
gates, thou dost not forsake him, for he hath no portion and inheritance
with thee.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> \`At the end of three years thou dost
bring out all the tithe of thine increase in that year, and hast placed
\[it\] within thy gates;

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> and come in hath the Levite (for he
hath no part and inheritance with thee), and the sojourner, and the
fatherless, and the widow, who \[are\] within thy gates, and they have
eaten, and been satisfied, so that Jehovah thy God doth bless thee in
all the work of thy hand which thou dost.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> \`At the end of seven years thou dost
make a release,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> and this \[is\] the matter of the
release: Every owner of a loan \[is\] to release his hand which he doth
lift up against his neighbour, he doth not exact of his neighbour and of
his brother, but hath proclaimed a release to Jehovah;

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> of the stranger thou mayest exact, and
that which is thine with thy brother doth thy hand release;

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> only when there is no needy one with
thee, for Jehovah doth greatly bless thee in the land which Jehovah thy
God is giving to thee -- an inheritance to possess it.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> \`Only, if thou dost diligently hearken
to the voice of Jehovah thy God, to observe to do all this command which
I am commanding thee to-day,

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> for Jehovah thy God hath blessed thee as
He hath spoken to thee; and thou hast lent \[to\] many nations, and thou
hast not borrowed; and thou hast ruled over many nations, and over thee
they do not rule.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> \`When there is with thee any needy one
of one of thy brethren, in one of thy cities, in thy land which Jehovah
thy God is giving to thee, thou dost not harden thy heart, nor shut thy
hand from thy needy brother;

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> for thou dost certainly open thy hand to
him, and dost certainly lend him sufficient for his lack which he
lacketh.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> \`Take heed to thee lest there be a word
in thy heart -- worthless, saying, Near \[is\] the seventh year, the
year of release; and thine eye is evil against thy needy brother, and
thou dost not give to him, and he hath called concerning thee unto
Jehovah, and it hath been in thee sin;

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> thou dost certainly give to him, and
thy heart is not sad in thy giving to him, for because of this thing
doth Jehovah thy God bless thee in all thy works, and in every putting
forth of thy hand;

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> because the needy one doth not cease
out of the land, therefore I am commanding thee, saying, Thou dost
certainly open thy hand to thy brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy
one, in thy land.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> \`When thy brother is sold to thee, a
Hebrew or a Hebrewess, and he hath served thee six years -- then in the
seventh year thou dost send him away free from thee.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And when thou dost send him away free
from thee, thou dost not send him away empty;

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> thou dost certainly encircle him out of
thy flock, and out of thy threshing-floor, and out of thy wine-vat;
\[of\] that which Jehovah thy God hath blessed thee thou dost give to
him,

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> and thou hast remembered that a servant
thou hast been in the land of Egypt, and Jehovah thy God doth ransom
thee; therefore I am commanding thee this thing to-day.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> \`And it hath been, when he saith unto
thee, I go not out from thee -- because he hath loved thee, and thy
house, because \[it is\] good for him with thee --

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> then thou hast taken the awl, and hast
put \[it\] through his ear, and through the door, and he hath been to
thee a servant age-during; and also to thy handmaid thou dost do so.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> \`It is not hard in thine eyes, in thy
sending him away free from thee; for the double of the hire of an
hireling he hath served thee six years, and Jehovah thy God hath blessed
thee in all that thou dost.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> \`Every firstling that is born in thy
herd and in thy flock -- the male thou dost sanctify to Jehovah thy God;
thou dost not work with the firstling of thine ox, nor shear the
firstling of thy flock;

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> before Jehovah thy God thou dost eat it
year by year, in the place which Jehovah doth choose, thou and thy
house.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> \`And when there is in it a blemish,
lame, or blind, any evil blemish, thou dost not sacrifice it to Jehovah
thy God;

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> within thy gates thou dost eat it, the
unclean and the clean alike, as the roe, and as the hart.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> Only, its blood thou dost not eat; on
the earth thou dost pour it as water.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> \`Observe the month of Abib -- and thou
hast made a passover to Jehovah thy God, for in the month of Abib hath
Jehovah thy God brought thee out of Egypt by night;

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> and thou hast sacrificed a passover to
Jehovah thy God, of the flock, and of the herd, in the place which
Jehovah doth choose to cause His name to tabernacle there.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> \`Thou dost not eat with it any fermented
thing, seven days thou dost eat with it unleavened things, bread of
affliction; for in haste thou hast come out of the land of Egypt; so
that thou dost remember the day of thy coming out of the land of Egypt
all days of thy life;

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> and there is not seen with thee leaven in
all thy border seven days, and there doth not remain of the flesh which
thou dost sacrifice at evening on the first day till morning.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> \`Thou art not able to sacrifice the
passover within any of thy gates which Jehovah thy God is giving to
thee,

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> except at the place which Jehovah thy God
doth choose to cause His name to tabernacle -- there thou dost sacrifice
the passover in the evening, at the going in of the sun, the season of
thy coming out of Egypt;

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> and thou hast cooked and eaten in the
place on which Jehovah thy God doth fix, and hast turned in the morning,
and gone to thy tents;

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> six days thou dost eat unleavened things,
and on the seventh day \[is\] a restraint to Jehovah thy God; thou dost
do no work.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> \`Seven weeks thou dost number to thee;
from the beginning of the sickle among the standing corn thou dost begin
to number seven weeks,

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> and thou hast made the feast of weeks
to Jehovah thy God, a tribute of a free-will offering of thy hand, which
thou dost give, as Jehovah thy God doth bless thee.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And thou hast rejoiced before Jehovah
thy God, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy man-servant, and
thy handmaid, and the Levite who \[is\] within thy gates, and the
sojourner, and the fatherless, and the widow, who \[are\] in thy midst,
in the place which Jehovah thy God doth choose to cause His name to
tabernacle there,

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> and thou hast remembered that a servant
thou hast been in Egypt, and hast observed and done these statutes.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> \`The feast of booths thou dost make
for thee seven days, in thine in-gathering of thy threshing-floor, and
of thy wine-vat;

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> and thou hast rejoiced in thy feast,
thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy man-servant, and thy
handmaid, and the Levite, and the sojourner, and the fatherless, and the
widow, who \[are\] within thy gates.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> Seven days thou dost feast before
Jehovah thy God, in the place which Jehovah doth choose, for Jehovah thy
God doth bless thee in all thine increase, and in every work of thy
hands, and thou hast been only rejoicing.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> \`Three times in a year doth every one
of thy males appear before Jehovah thy God in the place which He doth
choose -- in the feast of unleavened things, and in the feast of weeks,
and in the feast of booths; and they do not appear before Jehovah empty;

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> each according to the gift of his hand,
according to the blessing of Jehovah thy God, which He hath given to
thee.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> \`Judges and authorities thou dost make
to thee within all thy gates which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee,
for thy tribes; and they have judged the people -- a righteous judgment.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Thou dost not turn aside judgment; thou
dost not discern faces, nor take a bribe, for the bribe blindeth the
eyes of the wise, and perverteth the words of the righteous.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Righteousness -- righteousness thou
dost pursue, so that thou livest, and hast possessed the land which
Jehovah thy God is giving to thee.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> \`Thou dost not plant for thee a shrine
of any trees near the altar of Jehovah thy God, which thou makest for
thyself,

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> and thou dost not raise up to thee any
standing image which Jehovah thy God is hating.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> \`Thou dost not sacrifice to Jehovah thy
God ox or sheep in which there is a blemish -- any evil thing; for it
\[is\] the abomination of Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> \`When there is found in thy midst, in
one of thy cities which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee, a man or a
woman who doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah thy God by
transgressing His covenant,

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> and he doth go and serve other gods, and
doth bow himself to them, and to the sun, or to the moon, or to any of
the host of the heavens, which I have not commanded --

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> and it hath been declared to thee, and
thou hast heard, and hast searched diligently, and lo, truth; the thing
is established; this abomination hath been done in Israel --

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> \`Then thou hast brought out that man, or
that woman, who hath done this evil thing, unto thy gates -- the man or
the woman -- and thou hast stoned them with stones, and they have died.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> By the mouth of two witnesses or of three
witnesses is he who is dead put to death; he is not put to death by the
mouth of one witness;

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> the hand of the witnesses is on him, in
the first place, to put him to death, and the hand of all the people
last; and thou hast put away the evil thing out of thy midst.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> \`When anything is too hard for thee for
judgment, between blood and blood, between plea and plea, and between
stroke and stroke -- matters of strife within thy gates -- then thou
hast risen, and gone up unto the place on which Jehovah thy God doth
fix,

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> and hast come in unto the priests, the
Levites, and unto the judge who is in those days, and hast inquired, and
they have declared to thee the word of judgment,

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> and thou hast done according to the
tenor of the word which they declare to thee (\[they\] of that place
which Jehovah doth choose; and thou hast observed to do according to all
that they direct thee.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> \`According to the tenor of the law
which they direct thee, and according to the judgment which they say to
thee thou dost do; thou dost not turn aside from the word which they
declare to thee, right or left.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> And the man who acteth with
presumption, so as not to hearken unto the priest (who is standing to
serve there Jehovah thy God), or unto the judge, even that man hath
died, and thou hast put away the evil thing from Israel,

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> and all the people do hear and fear,
and do not presume any more.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> \`When thou comest in unto the land
which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee, and hast possessed it, and
dwelt in it, and thou hast said, Let me set over me a king like all the
nations which \[are\] round about me, --

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> thou dost certainly set over thee a
king on whom Jehovah doth fix; from the midst of thy brethren thou dost
set over thee a king; thou art not able to set over thee a stranger, who
is not thy brother.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> \`Only, he doth not multiply to himself
horses, nor cause the people to turn back to Egypt, so as to multiply
horses, seeing Jehovah hath said to you, Ye do not add to turn back in
this way any more.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> And he doth not multiply to himself
wives, and his heart doth not turn aside, and silver and gold he doth
not multiply to himself -- exceedingly.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> \`And it hath been, when he sitteth on
the throne of his kingdom, that he hath written for himself the copy of
this law, on a book, from \[that\] before the priests the Levites,

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> and it hath been with him, and he hath
read in it all days of his life, so that he doth learn to fear Jehovah
his God, to keep all the words of this law, and these statutes, to do
them;

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> so that his heart is not high above his
brethren, and so as not to turn aside from the command, right or left,
so that he prolongeth days over his kingdom, he and his sons, in the
midst of Israel.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> \`There is not to the priests the Levites
-- all the tribe of Levi -- a portion and inheritance with Israel;
fire-offerings of Jehovah, even His inheritance, they eat,

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> and he hath no inheritance in the midst
of his brethren; Jehovah Himself \[is\] his inheritance, as He hath
spoken to him.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> \`And this is the priest's right from the
people, from those sacrificing a sacrifice, whether ox or sheep, he hath
even given to the priest the leg, and the two cheeks, and the stomach;

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> the first of thy corn, of thy new wine,
and of thine oil, and the first of the fleece of thy flock, thou dost
give to him;

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> for on him hath Jehovah thy God fixed,
out of all thy tribes, to stand to serve in the name of Jehovah, He and
his sons continually.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> \`And when the Levite cometh from one of
thy cities out of all Israel, where he hath sojourned, and hath come
with all the desire of his soul unto the place which Jehovah doth
choose,

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> then he hath ministered in the name of
Jehovah his God, like all his brethren, the Levites, who are standing
there before Jehovah,

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> portion as portion they do eat, apart
from his sold things, with the fathers.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> \`When thou art coming in unto the land
which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee, thou dost not learn to do
according to the abominations of those nations:

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> there is not found in thee one causing
his son and his daughter to pass over into fire, a user of divinations,
an observer of clouds, and an enchanter, and a sorcerer,

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> and a charmer, and one asking at a
familiar spirit, and a wizard, and one seeking unto the dead.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> \`For the abomination of Jehovah \[is\]
every one doing these, and because of these abominations is Jehovah thy
God dispossessing them from thy presence.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Perfect thou art with Jehovah thy God,

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> for these nations whom thou art
possessing, unto observers of clouds, and unto diviners, do hearken; and
thou -- not so hath Jehovah thy God suffered thee.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> \`A prophet out of thy midst, out of
thy brethren, like to me, doth Jehovah thy God raise up to thee -- unto
him ye hearken;

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> according to all that thou didst ask
from Jehovah thy God, in Horeb, in the day of the assembly, saying, Let
me not add to hear the voice of Jehovah my God, and this great fire let
me not see any more, and I die not;

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> and Jehovah saith unto me, They have
done well that they have spoken;

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> a prophet I raise up to them, out of
the midst of their brethren, like to thee; and I have given my words in
his mouth, and he hath spoken unto them all that which I command him;

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> and it hath been -- the man who doth
not hearken unto My words which he doth speak in My name, I require
\[it\] of him.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> \`Only, the prophet who presumeth to
speak a word in My name -- that which I have not commanded him to speak
-- and who speaketh in the name of other gods -- even that prophet hath
died.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> \`And when thou sayest in thy heart,
How do we know the word which Jehovah hath not spoken? --

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> that which the prophet speaketh in the
name of Jehovah, and the thing is not, and cometh not -- it \[is\] the
word which Jehovah hath not spoken; in presumption hath the prophet
spoken it; -- thou art not afraid of him.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> \`When Jehovah thy God doth cut off the
nations, whose land Jehovah thy God is giving to thee, and thou hast
succeeded them, and dwelt in their cities, and in their houses,

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> three cities thou dost separate for thee
in the midst of thy land which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee to
possess it.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> Thou dost prepare for thee the way, and
hast divided into three parts the border of thy land which Jehovah thy
God doth cause thee to inherit, and it hath been for the fleeing thither
of every man-slayer.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> \`And this \[is\] the matter of the
man-slayer who fleeth thither, and hath lived: He who smiteth his
neighbour unknowingly, and is not hating him heretofore,

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> even he who cometh in with his neighbour
into a forest to hew wood, and his hand hath driven with an axe to cut
the tree, and the iron hath slipped from the wood, and hath met his
neighbour, and he hath died -- he doth flee unto one of these cities,
and hath lived,

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> lest the redeemer of blood pursue after
the man-slayer when his heart is hot, and hath overtaken him (because
the way is great), and hath smitten him -- the life, and he hath no
sentence of death, for he is not hating him heretofore;

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> therefore I am commanding thee, saying,
Three cities thou dost separate to thee.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> \`And if Jehovah thy God doth enlarge thy
border, as He hath sworn to thy fathers, and hath given to thee all the
land which He hath spoken to give to thy fathers --

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> when thou keepest all this command to do
it, which I am commanding thee to-day, to love Jehovah thy God, and to
walk in His ways all the days -- then thou hast added to thee yet three
cities to these three;

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> and innocent blood is not shed in the
midst of thy land which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee -- an
inheritance, and there hath been upon thee blood.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> \`And when a man is hating his
neighbour, and hath lain in wait for him, and risen against him, and
smitten him -- the life, and he hath died, and he hath fled unto one of
these cities,

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> then the elders of his city have sent
and taken him from thence, and given him into the hand of the redeemer
of blood, and he hath died;

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> thine eye hath no pity on him, and thou
hast put away the innocent blood from Israel, and it is well with thee.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> \`Thou dost not remove a border of thy
neighbour, which they of former times have made, in thine inheritance,
which thou dost inherit in the land which Jehovah thy God is giving to
thee to possess it.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> \`One witness doth not rise against a
man for any iniquity, and for any sin, in any sin which he sinneth; by
the mouth of two witnesses, or by the mouth of three witnesses, is a
thing established.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> \`When a violent witness doth rise
against a man, to testify against him apostacy,

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> then have both the men who have the
strife stood before Jehovah, before the priests and the judges who are
in those days,

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> and the judges have searched
diligently, and lo, the witness \[is\] a false witness, a falsehood he
hath testified against his brother:

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> \`Then ye have done to him as he
devised to do to his brother, and thou hast put away the evil thing out
of thy midst,

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> and those who are left do hear and
fear, and add not to do any more according to this evil thing in thy
midst;

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> and thine eye doth not pity -- life for
life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> \`When thou goest out to battle against
thine enemy, and hast seen horse and chariot -- a people more numerous
than thou -- thou art not afraid of them, for Jehovah thy God \[is\]
with thee, who is bringing thee up out of the land of Egypt;

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> and it hath been, in your drawing near
unto the battle, that the priest hath come nigh, and spoken unto the
people,

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> and said unto them, Hear, Israel, ye are
drawing near to-day to battle against your enemies, let not your hearts
be tender, fear not, nor make haste, nor be terrified at their presence,

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> for Jehovah your God \[is\] He who is
going with you, to fight for you with your enemies -- to save you.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> \`And the authorities have spoken unto
the people, saying, Who \[is\] the man that hath built a new house, and
hath not dedicated it? -- let him go and turn back to his house, lest he
die in battle, and another man dedicate it.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> \`And who \[is\] the man that hath
planted a vineyard, and hath not made it common? -- let him go and turn
back to his house, lest he die in battle, and another man make it
common.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> \`And who \[is\] the man that hath
betrothed a woman, and hath not taken her? -- let him go and turn back
to his house, lest he die in battle, and another man take her.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> \`And the authorities have added to speak
unto the people, and said, Who \[is\] the man that is afraid and tender
of heart? -- let him go and turn back to his house, and the heart of his
brethren doth not melt like his heart;

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> and it hath come to pass as the
authorities finish to speak unto the people, that they have appointed
princes of the hosts at the head of the people.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> \`When thou drawest near unto a city to
fight against it, then thou hast called unto it for Peace,

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> and it hath been, if Peace it answer
thee, and hath opened to thee, then it hath come to pass -- all the
people who are found in it are to thee for tributaries, and have served
thee.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> \`And if it doth not make peace with
thee, and hath made with thee war, then thou hast laid siege against it,

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> and Jehovah thy God hath given it into
thy hand, and thou hast smitten every male of it by the mouth of the
sword.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Only, the women, and the infants, and
the cattle, and all that is in the city, all its spoil, thou dost seize
for thyself, and thou hast eaten the spoil of thine enemies which
Jehovah thy God hath given to thee.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> So thou dost do to all the cities which
are very far off from thee, which are not of the cities of these
nations.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> \`Only, of the cities of these peoples
which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee \[for\] an inheritance, thou
dost not keep alive any breathing;

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> for thou dost certainly devote the
Hittite, and the Amorite, the Canaanite, and the Perizzite, the Hivite,
and the Jebusite, as Jehovah thy God hath commanded thee,

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> so that they teach you not to do
according to all their abominations which they have done to their gods,
and ye have sinned against Jehovah your God.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> \`When thou layest siege unto a city
many days, to fight against it, to capture it, thou dost not destroy its
trees to force an axe against them, for of them thou dost eat, and them
thou dost not cut down -- for man's \[is\] the tree of the field -- to
go in at thy presence in the siege.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> Only, the tree, which thou knowest that
it \[is\] not a fruit-tree, it thou dost destroy, and hast cut down, and
hast built a bulwark against the city which is making with thee war till
thou hast subdued it.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> \`When one is found slain on the ground
which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee to possess it -- fallen in a
field -- it is not known who hath smitten him,

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> then have thine elders and thy judges
gone out and measured unto the cities which \[are\] round about the
slain one,

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> and it hath been, the city which \[is\]
near unto the slain one, even the elders of that city have taken a
heifer of the herd, which hath not been wrought with, which hath not
drawn in the yoke,

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> and the elders of that city have brought
down the heifer unto a hard valley, which is not tilled nor sown, and
have beheaded there the heifer in the valley.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> \`And the priests, sons of Levi, have
come nigh -- for on them hath Jehovah thy God fixed to serve Him, and to
bless in the name of Jehovah, and by their mouth is every strife, and
every stroke --

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> and all the elders of that city, who are
near unto the slain one, do wash their hands over the heifer which is
beheaded in the valley,

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> and they have answered and said, Our
hands have not shed this blood, and our eyes have not seen --

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> receive atonement for Thy people Israel,
whom Thou hast ransomed, O Jehovah, and suffer not innocent blood in the
midst of Thy people Israel; and the blood hath been pardoned to them,

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> and thou dost put away the innocent blood
out of thy midst, for thou dost that which \[is\] right in the eyes of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> \`When thou goest out to battle against
thine enemies, and Jehovah thy God hath given them into thy hand, and
thou hast taken captive its captivity,

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> and hast seen in the captivity a woman
of fair form, and hast delighted in her, and hast taken to thee for a
wife,

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> then thou hast brought her in unto the
midst of thy household, and she hath shaved her head, and prepared her
nails,

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> and turned aside the raiment of her
captivity from off her, and hath dwelt in thy house, and bewailed her
father and her mother a month of days, and afterwards thou dost go in
unto her and hast married her, and she hath been to thee for a wife:

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> \`And it hath been -- if thou hast not
delighted in her, that thou hast sent her away at her desire, and thou
dost not at all sell her for money; thou dost not tyrannize over her,
because that thou hast humbled her.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> \`When a man hath two wives, the one
loved and the other hated, and they have borne to him sons (the loved
one and the hated one), and the first-born son hath been to the hated
one;

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> then it hath been, in the day of his
causing his sons to inherit that which he hath, he is not able to
declare first-born the son of the loved one, in the face of the son of
the hated one -- the first-born.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> But the first-born, son of the hated
one, he doth acknowledge, to give to him a double portion of all that is
found with him, for he \[is\] the beginning of his strength; to him
\[is\] the right of the first-born.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> \`When a man hath a son apostatizing
and rebellious -- he is not hearkening to the voice of his father, and
to the voice of his mother, and they have chastised him, and he doth not
hearken unto them --

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> then laid hold on him have his father
and his mother, and they have brought him out unto the elders of his
city, and unto the gate of his place,

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> and have said unto the elders of his
city, Our son -- this one -- is apostatizing and rebellious; he is not
hearkening to our voice -- a glutton and drunkard;

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> and all the men of his city have stoned
him with stones, and he hath died, and thou hast put away the evil out
of thy midst, and all Israel do hear and fear.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> \`And when there is in a man a sin -- a
cause of death, and he hath been put to death, and thou hast hanged him
on a tree,

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> his corpse doth not remain on the tree,
for thou dost certainly bury him in that day -- for a thing lightly
esteemed of God \[is\] the hanged one -- and thou dost not defile thy
ground which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee -- an inheritance.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> \`Thou dost not see the ox of thy brother
or his sheep driven away, and hast hidden thyself from them, thou dost
certainly turn them back to thy brother;

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> and if thy brother \[is\] not near unto
thee, and thou hast not known him, then thou hast removed it unto the
midst of thy house, and it hath been with thee till thy brother seek it,
and thou hast given it back to him;

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> and so thou dost to his ass, and so thou
dost to his garment, and so thou dost to any lost thing of thy
brother's, which is lost by him, and thou hast found it; thou art not
able to hide thyself.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> \`Thou dost not see the ass of thy
brother, or his ox, falling in the way, and hast hid thyself from them;
thou dost certainly raise \[them\] up with him.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> \`The habiliments of a man are not on a
woman, nor doth a man put on the garment of a woman, for the abomination
of Jehovah thy God \[is\] any one doing these.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> \`When a bird's nest cometh before thee
in the way, in any tree, or on the earth, brood or eggs, and the mother
sitting on the brood or on the eggs, thou dost not take the mother with
the young ones;

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> thou dost certainly send away the mother,
and the young ones dost take to thyself, so that it is well with thee,
and thou hast prolonged days.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> \`When thou buildest a new house, then
thou hast made a parapet to thy roof, and thou dost not put blood on thy
house when one falleth from it.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> \`Thou dost not sow thy vineyard \[with\]
divers things, lest the fulness of the seed which thou dost sow, and the
increase of the vineyard, be separated.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> \`Thou dost not plow with an ox and
with an ass together.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> \`Thou dost not put on a mixed cloth,
wool and linen together.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> \`Fringes thou dost make to thee on the
four skirts of thy covering with which thou dost cover \[thyself\].

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> \`When a man taketh a wife, and hath
gone in unto her, and hated her,

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> and laid against her actions of words,
and brought out against her an evil name, and said, This woman I have
taken, and I draw near unto her, and I have not found in her tokens of
virginity:

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> \`Then hath the father of the damsel --
and her mother -- taken and brought out the tokens of virginity of the
damsel unto the elders of the city in the gate,

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> and the father of the damsel hath said
unto the elders, My daughter I have given to this man for a wife, and he
doth hate her;

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> and lo, he hath laid actions of words,
saying, I have not found to thy daughter tokens of virginity -- and
these \[are\] the tokens of the virginity of my daughter! and they have
spread out the garment before the elders of the city.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> \`And the elders of that city have
taken the man, and chastise him,

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> and fined him a hundred silverlings,
and given to the father of the damsel, because he hath brought out an
evil name on a virgin of Israel, and she is to him for a wife, he is not
able to send her away all his days.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> \`And if this thing hath been truth --
tokens of virginity have not been found for the damsel --

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> then they have brought out the damsel
unto the opening of her father's house, and stoned her have the men of
her city with stones, and she hath died, for she hath done folly in
Israel, to go a-whoring \[in\] her father's house; and thou hast put
away the evil thing out of thy midst.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> \`When a man is found lying with a
woman, married to a husband, then they have died even both of them, the
man who is lying with the woman, also the woman; and thou hast put away
the evil thing out of Israel.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> \`When there is a damsel, a virgin,
betrothed to a man, and a man hath found her in a city, and lain with
her;

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> then ye have brought them both out unto
the gate of that city, and stoned them with stones, and they have died:
-- the damsel, because that she hath not cried, \[being\] in a city; and
the man, because that he hath humbled his neighbour's wife; and thou
hast put away the evil thing out of thy midst.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> \`And if in a field the man find the
damsel who is betrothed, and the man hath laid hold on her, and lain
with her, then hath the man who hath lain with her died alone;

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> and to the damsel thou dost not do
anything, the damsel hath no deadly sin; for as a man riseth against his
neighbour and hath murdered him -- the life, so \[is\] this thing;

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> for in a field he found her, she hath
cried -- the damsel who is betrothed -- and she hath no saviour.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> \`When a man findeth a damsel, a virgin
who is not betrothed, and hath caught her, and lain with her, and they
have been found,

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> then hath the man who is lying with her
given to the father of the damsel fifty silverlings, and to him she is
for a wife; because that he hath humbled her, he is not able to send her
away all his days.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> \`A man doth not take his father's
wife, nor uncover his father's skirt.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> \`One wounded, bruised, or cut in the
member doth not enter into the assembly of Jehovah;

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> a bastard doth not enter into the
assembly of Jehovah; even a tenth generation of him doth not enter into
the assembly of Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> \`An Ammonite and a Moabite doth not
enter into the assembly of Jehovah; even a tenth generation of them doth
not enter into the assembly of Jehovah -- to the age;

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> because that they have not come before
you with bread and with water in the way, in your coming out from Egypt,
and because he hath hired against thee Balaam son of Beor, of Pethor of
Aram-Naharaim, to revile thee;

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> and Jehovah thy God hath not been willing
to hearken unto Balaam, and Jehovah thy God doth turn for thee the
reviling to a blessing, because Jehovah thy God hath loved thee;

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> thou dost not seek their peace and their
good all thy days -- to the age.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> \`Thou dost not abominate an Edomite, for
thy brother he \[is\]; thou dost not abominate an Egyptian, for a
sojourner thou hast been in his land;

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> sons who are begotten of them, a third
generation of them, doth enter into the assembly of Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> \`When a camp goeth out against thine
enemies, then thou hast kept from every evil thing.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> \`When there is in thee a man who is
not clean, from an accident at night -- then he hath gone out unto the
outside of the camp -- he doth not come in unto the midst of the camp --

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> and it hath been, at the turning of the
evening, he doth bathe with water, and at the going in of the sun he
doth come in unto the midst of the camp.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> \`And a station thou hast at the
outside of the camp, and thou hast gone out thither without,

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> and a nail thou hast on thy staff, and
it hath been, in thy sitting without, that thou hast digged with it, and
turned back, and covered thy filth;

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> for Jehovah thy God is walking up and
down in the midst of thy camp, to deliver thee, and to give thine
enemies before thee, and thy camp hath been holy, and He doth not see in
thee the nakedness of anything, and hath turned back from after thee.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> \`Thou dost not shut up a servant unto
his lord, who is delivered unto thee from his lord;

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> with thee he doth dwell, in thy midst,
in the place which he chooseth within one of thy gates, where it is
pleasing to him; thou dost not oppress him.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> \`There is not a whore among the
daughters of Israel, nor is there a whoremonger among the sons of
Israel;

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> thou dost not bring a gift of a whore,
or a price of a dog, into the house of Jehovah thy God, for any vow; for
the abomination of Jehovah thy God \[are\] even both of them.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> \`Thou dost not lend in usury to thy
brother; usury of money, usury of food, usury of anything which is lent
on usury.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> To a stranger thou mayest lend in
usury, and to thy brother thou dost not lend in usury, so that Jehovah
thy God doth bless thee in every putting forth of thy hand on the land
whither thou goest in to possess it.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> \`When thou vowest a vow to Jehovah thy
God, thou dost not delay to complete it; for Jehovah thy God doth
certainly require it from thee, and it hath been in thee -- sin.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> \`And when thou forbearest to vow, it
is not in thee a sin.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> The produce of thy lips thou dost keep,
and hast done \[it\], as thou hast vowed to Jehovah thy God; a
free-will-offering, which thou hast spoken with thy mouth.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> \`When thou comest in unto the vineyard
of thy neighbour, then thou hast eaten grapes, according to thy desire,
thy sufficiency; but into thy vessel thou dost not put \[any\].

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> When thou comest in among the
standing-corn of thy neighbour, then thou hast plucked the ears with thy
hand, but a sickle thou dost not wave over the standing-corn of thy
neighbour.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> \`When a man doth take a wife, and hath
married her, and it hath been, if she doth not find grace in his eyes
(for he hath found in her nakedness of anything), and he hath written
for her a writing of divorce, and given \[it\] into her hand, and sent
her out of his house,

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> and she hath gone out of his house, and
hath gone and been another man's,

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> and the latter man hath hated her, and
written for her a writing of divorce, and given \[it\] into her hand,
and sent her out of his house, or when the latter man dieth, who hath
taken her to himself for a wife:

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> \`Her former husband who sent her away is
not able to turn back to take her to be to him for a wife, after that
she hath become defiled; for an abomination it \[is\] before Jehovah,
and thou dost not cause the land to sin which Jehovah thy God is giving
to thee -- an inheritance.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> \`When a man taketh a new wife, he doth
not go out into the host, and \[one\] doth not pass over unto him for
anything; free he is at his own house one year, and hath rejoiced his
wife whom he hath taken.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> \`None doth take in pledge millstones,
and rider, for life it \[is\] he is taking in pledge.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> \`When a man is found stealing a person,
of his brethren, of the sons of Israel, and hath tyrannized over him,
and sold him, then hath that thief died, and thou hast put away the evil
thing out of thy midst.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> \`Take heed, in the plague of leprosy, to
watch greatly, and to do according to all that the priests, the Levites,
teach you; as I have commanded them ye observe to do;

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> remember that which Jehovah thy God hath
done to Miriam in the way, in your coming out of Egypt.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> \`When thou liftest up on thy brother a
debt of anything, thou dost not go in unto his house to obtain his
pledge;

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> at the outside thou dost stand, and the
man on whom thou art lifting \[it\] up is bringing out unto thee the
pledge at the outside.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> \`And if he is a poor man, thou dost
not lie down with his pledge;

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> thou dost certainly give back to him
the pledge at the going in of the sun, and he hath lain down in his own
raiment, and hath blessed thee; and to thee it is righteousness before
Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> \`Thou dost not oppress a hireling,
poor and needy, of thy brethren or of thy sojourner who is in thy land
within thy gates;

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> in his day thou dost give his hire, and
the sun doth not go in upon it, for he \[is\] poor, and unto it he is
lifting up his soul, and he doth not cry against thee unto Jehovah, and
it hath been in thee -- sin.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> \`Fathers are not put to death for
sons, and sons are not put to death for fathers -- each for his own sin,
they are put to death.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> \`Thou dost not turn aside the judgment
of a fatherless sojourner, nor take in pledge the garment of a widow;

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> and thou hast remembered that a servant
thou hast been in Egypt, and Jehovah thy God doth ransom thee from
thence; therefore I am commanding thee to do this thing.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> \`When thou reapest thy harvest in thy
field, and hast forgotten a sheaf in a field, thou dost not turn back to
take it; to the sojourner, to the fatherless, and to the widow, it is;
so that Jehovah thy God doth bless thee in all the work of thy hands.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> \`When thou beatest thine olive, thou
dost not examine the branch behind thee; to the sojourner, to the
fatherless, and to the widow, it is.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> \`When thou cuttest thy vineyard, thou
dost not glean behind thee; to the sojourner, to the fatherless, and to
the widow, it is;

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> and thou hast remembered that a servant
thou hast been in the land of Egypt; therefore I am commanding thee to
do this thing.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> \`When there is a strife between men, and
they have come nigh unto the judgment, and they have judged, and
declared righteous the righteous, and declared wrong the wrong-doer,

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> then it hath come to pass, if the
wrong-doer is to be smitten, that the judge hath caused him to fall
down, and \[one\] hath smitten him in his presence, according to the
sufficiency of his wrong-doing, by number;

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> forty \[times\] he doth smite him -- he
is not adding, lest, he is adding to smite him above these -- many
stripes, and thy brother is lightly esteemed in thine eyes.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> \`Thou dost not muzzle an ox in its
threshing.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> \`When brethren dwell together, and one
of them hath died, and hath no son, the wife of the dead is not without
to a strange man; her husband's brother doth go in unto her, and hath
taken her to him for a wife, and doth perform the duty of her husband's
brother;

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> and it hath been, the first-born which
she beareth doth rise for the name of his dead brother, and his name is
not wiped away out of Israel.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> \`And if the man doth not delight to take
his brother's wife, then hath his brother's wife gone up to the gate,
unto the elders, and said, My husband's brother is refusing to raise up
to his brother a name in Israel; he hath not been willing to perform the
duty of my husband's brother;

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> and the elders of his city have called
for him, and spoken unto him, and he hath stood and said, I have no
desire to take her;

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> \`Then hath his brother's wife drawn nigh
unto him, before the eyes of the elders, and drawn his shoe from off his
foot, and spat in his face, and answered and said, Thus it is done to
the man who doth not build up the house of his brother;

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> and his name hath been called in Israel
-- The house of him whose shoe is drawn off.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> \`When men strive together, one with
another, and the wife of the one hath drawn near to deliver her husband
out of the hand of his smiter, and hath put forth her hand, and laid
hold on his secrets,

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> then thou hast cut off her hand, thine
eye doth not spare.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> \`Thou hast not in thy bag a stone and
a stone, a great and a small.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> Thou hast not in thy house an ephah and
an ephah, a great and a small.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> Thou hast a stone complete and just,
thou hast an ephah complete and just, so that they prolong thy days on
the ground which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee;

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> for the abomination of Jehovah thy God
\[is\] any one doing these things, any one doing iniquity.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> \`Remember that which Amalek hath done
to thee in the way, in your going out from Egypt,

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> that he hath met thee in the way, and
smiteth in all those feeble behind thee (and thou wearied and fatigued),
and is not fearing God.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> And it hath been, in Jehovah thy God's
giving rest to thee, from all thine enemies round about, in the land
which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee -- an inheritance to possess it
-- thou dost blot out the rememberance of Amalek from under the heavens
-- thou dost not forget.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> \`And it hath been, when thou comest in
unto the land which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee -- an inheritance,
and thou hast possessed it, and dwelt in it,

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> that thou hast taken of the first of all
the fruits of the ground which thou dost bring in out of thy land which
Jehovah thy God is giving to thee, and hast put \[it\] in a basket, and
gone unto the place which Jehovah thy God doth choose to cause His name
to tabernacle there.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> \`And thou hast come in unto the priest
who is in those days, and hast said unto him, I have declared to-day to
Jehovah thy God, that I have come in unto the land which Jehovah hath
sworn to our fathers to give to us;

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> and the priest hath taken the basket out
of thy hand, and placed it before the altar of Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> \`And thou hast answered and said before
Jehovah thy God, A perishing Aramaean \[is\] my father! and he goeth
down to Egypt, and sojourneth there with few men, and becometh there a
nation, great, mighty, and numerous;

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> and the Egyptians do us evil, and afflict
us, and put on us hard service;

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> and we cry unto Jehovah, God of our
fathers, and Jehovah heareth our voice, and seeth our affliction, and
our labour, and our oppression;

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> and Jehovah bringeth us out from Egypt,
by a strong hand, and by a stretched-out arm, and by great fear, and by
signs, and by wonders,

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> and he bringeth us in unto this place,
and giveth to us this land -- a land flowing with milk and honey.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> \`And now, lo, I have brought in the
first of the fruits of the ground which thou hast given to me, O
Jehovah; -- and thou hast placed it before Jehovah thy God, and bowed
thyself before Jehovah thy God,

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> and rejoiced in all the good which
Jehovah thy God hath given to thee, and to thy house, thou, and the
Levite, and the sojourner who \[is\] in thy midst.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> \`When thou dost complete to tithe all
the tithe of thine increase in the third year, the year of the tithe,
then thou hast given to the Levite, to the sojourner, to the fatherless,
and to the widow, and they have eaten within thy gates, and been
satisfied,

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> and thou hast said before Jehovah thy
God, I have put away the separated thing out of the house, and also have
given it to the Levite, and to the sojourner, and to the orphan, and to
the widow, according to all Thy command which Thou hast commanded me; I
have not passed over from Thy commands, nor have I forgotten.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> I have not eaten in mine affliction of
it, nor have I put away of it for uncleanness, nor have I given of it
for the dead; I have hearkened to the voice of Jehovah my God; I have
done according to all that Thou hast commanded me;

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> look from Thy holy habitation, from the
heavens, and bless Thy people Israel, and the ground which Thou hast
given to us, as Thou hast sworn to our fathers -- a land flowing
\[with\] milk and honey.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> \`This day Jehovah thy God is
commanding thee to do these statutes and judgments; and thou hast
hearkened and done them with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> Jehovah thou hast caused to promise
to-day to become thy God, and to walk in His ways, and to keep His
statutes, and His commands, and His judgments, and to hearken to His
voice.

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> \`And Jehovah hath caused thee to
promise to-day to become His people, a peculiar treasure, as He hath
spoken to thee, and to keep all His commands;

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> so as to make thee uppermost above all
the nations whom He hath made for a praise, and for a name, and for
beauty, and for thy being a holy people to Jehovah thy God, as He hath
spoken.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> \`And Moses -- the elders of Israel also
-- commandeth the people, saying, Keep all the command which I am
commanding you to-day;

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> and it hath been, in the day that ye pass
over the Jordan unto the land which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee,
that thou hast raised up for thee great stones, and plaistered them with
plaister,

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> and written on them all the words of this
law in thy passing over, so that thou goest in unto the land which
Jehovah thy God is giving to thee -- a land flowing with milk and honey,
as Jehovah, God of thy fathers, hath spoken to thee.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> \`And it hath been, in your passing over
the Jordan, ye raise up these stones which I am commanding you to-day,
in mount Ebal, and thou hast plaistered them with plaister,

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> and built there an altar to Jehovah thy
God, an altar of stones, thou dost not wave over them iron.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> Of complete stones thou buildest the
altar of Jehovah thy God, and hast caused to ascend on it
burnt-offerings to Jehovah thy God,

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> and sacrificed peace-offerings, and eaten
there, and rejoiced before Jehovah thy God,

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> and written on the stones all the words
of this law, well engraved.'

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> And Moses speaketh -- the priests, the
Levites, also -- unto all Israel, saying, \`Keep silent, and hear, O
Israel, this day thou hast become a people to Jehovah thy God;

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> and thou hast hearkened to the voice of
Jehovah thy God, and done His commands, and His statutes, which I am
commanding thee to-day.'

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> And Moses commandeth the people on that
day, saying,

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> \`These do stand, to bless the people,
on mount Gerizzim, in your passing over the Jordan: Simeon, and Levi,
and Judah, and Issachar, and Joseph, and Benjamin.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> And these do stand, for the reviling,
on mount Ebal: Reuben, Gad, and Asher, and Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> \`And the Levites have answered and
said unto every man of Israel -- a loud voice:

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> \`Cursed \[is\] the man who maketh a
graven and molten image, the abomination of Jehovah, work of the hands
of an artificer, and hath put \[it\] in a secret place, -- and all the
people have answered and said, Amen.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> \`Cursed \[is\] He who is making light
of his father and his mother, -- and all the people have said, Amen.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> \`Cursed \[is\] he who is removing his
neighbour's border, -- and all the people have said, Amen.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> \`Cursed \[is\] he who is causing the
blind to err in the way, -- and all the people have said, Amen.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> \`Cursed \[is\] he who is turning aside
the judgment of fatherless, sojourner, and widow, -- and all the people
have said, Amen.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> \`Cursed \[is\] he who is lying with
his father's wife, for he hath uncovered his father's skirt, -- and all
the people have said, Amen.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> \`Cursed \[is\] he who is lying with
any beast, -- and all the people have said, Amen.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> \`Cursed \[is\] he who is lying with
his sister, daughter of his father, or daughter of his mother, -- and
all the people have said, Amen.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> \`Cursed \[is\] he who is lying with
his mother-in-law, -- and all the people have said, Amen.

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> \`Cursed \[is\] he who is smiting his
neighbour in secret, -- and all the people have said, Amen.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> \`Cursed \[is\] he who is taking a
bribe to smite a person, innocent blood, -- and all the people have
said, Amen.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> \`Cursed \[is\] he who doth not
establish the words of this law, to do them, -- and all the people have
said, Amen.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> \`And it hath been, if thou dost hearken
diligently to the voice of Jehovah thy God, to observe to do all His
commands which I am commanding thee to-day, that Jehovah thy God hath
made thee uppermost above all the nations of the earth,

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> and all these blessings have come upon
thee, and overtaken thee, because thou dost hearken to the voice of
Jehovah thy God:

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> \`Blessed \[art\] thou in the city, and
blessed \[art\] thou in the field.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> \`Blessed \[is\] the fruit of thy womb,
and the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy cattle, increase of
thine oxen, and wealth of thy flock.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> \`Blessed \[is\] thy basket and thy
kneading-trough.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> \`Blessed \[art\] thou in thy coming in,
and blessed \[art\] thou in thy going out.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> \`Jehovah giveth thine enemies, who are
rising up against thee -- smitten before thy face; in one way they come
out unto thee, and in seven ways they flee before thee.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> \`Jehovah commandeth with thee the
blessing in thy storehouses, and in every putting forth of thy hand, and
hath blessed thee in the land which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> \`Jehovah doth establish thee to Himself
for a holy people, as He hath sworn to thee, when thou keepest the
commands of Jehovah thy God, and hast walked in His ways;

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> and all the peoples of the land have
seen that the name of Jehovah is called upon thee, and they have been
afraid of thee.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> \`And Jehovah hath made thee abundant
in good, in the fruit of the womb, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and
in the fruit of thy ground, on the ground which Jehovah hath sworn to
thy fathers to give to thee.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> \`Jehovah doth open to thee his good
treasure -- the heavens -- to give the rain of thy land in its season,
and to bless all the work of thy hand, and thou hast lent to many
nations, and thou -- thou dost not borrow.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> \`And Jehovah hath given thee for head,
and not for tail; and thou hast been only above, and art not beneath,
for thou dost hearken unto the commands of Jehovah thy God, which I am
commanding thee to-day, to keep and to do,

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> and thou dost not turn aside from all
the words which I am commanding you to-day -- right or left -- to go
after other gods, to serve them.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> \`And it hath been, if thou dost not
hearken unto the voice of Jehovah thy God to observe to do all His
commands, and His statutes, which I am commanding thee to-day, that all
these revilings have come upon thee, and overtaken thee:

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> \`Cursed \[art\] thou in the city, and
cursed \[art\] thou in the field.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> \`Cursed \[is\] thy basket and thy
kneading-trough.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> \`Cursed \[is\] the fruit of thy body,
and the fruit of thy land, increase of thine oxen, and wealth of thy
flock.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> \`Cursed \[art\] thou in thy coming in,
and cursed \[art\] thou in thy going out.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> \`Jehovah doth send on thee the curse,
the trouble, and the rebuke, in every putting forth of thy hand which
thou dost, till thou art destroyed, and till thou perish hastily,
because of the evil of thy doings \[by\] which thou hast forsaken Me.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> \`Jehovah doth cause to cleave to thee
the pestilence, till He consume thee from off the ground whither thou
art going in to possess it.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> \`Jehovah doth smite thee with
consumption, and with fever, and with inflammation, and with extreme
burning, and with sword, and with blasting, and with mildew, and they
have pursued thee till thou perish

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> \`And thy heavens which \[are\] over
thy head have been brass, and the earth which \[is\] under thee iron;

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> Jehovah giveth the rain of thy land --
dust and ashes; from the heavens it cometh down on thee till thou art
destroyed.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> \`Jehovah giveth thee smitten before
thine enemies; in one way thou goest out unto them, and in seven ways
dost flee before them, and thou hast been for a trembling to all
kingdoms of the earth;

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> and thy carcase hath been for food to
every fowl of the heavens, and to the beast of the earth, and there is
none causing trembling.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> \`Jehovah doth smite thee with the
ulcer of Egypt, and with emerods, and with scurvy, and with itch, of
which thou art not able to be healed.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> \`Jehovah doth smite thee with madness,
and with blindness, and with astonishment of heart;

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> and thou hast been gropling at noon, as
the blind gropeth in darkness; and thou dost not cause thy ways to
prosper; and thou hast been only oppressed and plundered all the days,
and there is no saviour.

<span id="an_28:30">28:30</span> \`A woman thou dost betroth, and
another man doth lie with her; a house thou dost build, and dost not
dwell in it; a vineyard thou dost plant, and dost not make it common;

<span id="an_28:31">28:31</span> thine ox \[is\] slaughtered before
thine eyes, and thou dost not eat of it; thine ass \[is\] taken
violently away from before thee, and it is not given back to thee; thy
sheep \[are\] given to thine enemies, and there is no saviour for thee.

<span id="an_28:32">28:32</span> \`Thy sons and thy daughters \[are\]
given to another people, and thine eyes are looking and consuming for
them all the day, and thy hand is not to God!

<span id="an_28:33">28:33</span> The fruit of thy ground, and all thy
labour, eat up doth a people whom thou hast not known; and thou hast
been only oppressed and bruised all the days;

<span id="an_28:34">28:34</span> and thou hast been mad, because of the
sight of thine eyes which thou dost see.

<span id="an_28:35">28:35</span> \`Jehovah doth smite thee with an evil
ulcer, on the knees, and on the legs (of which thou art not able to be
healed), from the sole of thy foot even unto thy crown.

<span id="an_28:36">28:36</span> \`Jehovah doth cause thee to go, and
thy king whom thou raisest up over thee, unto a nation which thou hast
not known, thou and thy fathers, and thou hast served there other gods,
wood and stone;

<span id="an_28:37">28:37</span> and thou hast been for an astonishment,
for a simile, and for a byword among all the peoples whither Jehovah
doth lead thee.

<span id="an_28:38">28:38</span> \`Much seed thou dost take out into the
field, and little thou dost gather in, for the locust doth consume it;

<span id="an_28:39">28:39</span> vineyards thou dost plant, and hast
laboured, and wine thou dost not drink nor gather, for the worm doth
consume it;

<span id="an_28:40">28:40</span> olives are to thee in all thy border,
and oil thou dost not pour out, for thine olive doth fall off.

<span id="an_28:41">28:41</span> \`Sons and daughters thou dost beget,
and they are not with thee, for they go into captivity;

<span id="an_28:42">28:42</span> all thy trees and the fruit of thy
ground doth the locust possess;

<span id="an_28:43">28:43</span> the sojourner who \[is\] in thy midst
goeth up above thee very high, and thou goest down very low;

<span id="an_28:44">28:44</span> he doth lend \[to\] thee, and thou dost
not lend \[to\] him; he is for head, and thou art for tail.

<span id="an_28:45">28:45</span> \`And come upon thee have all these
curses, and they have pursued thee, and overtaken thee, till thou art
destroyed, because thou hast not hearkened to the voice of Jehovah thy
God, to keep His commands, and His statutes, which he hath commanded
thee;

<span id="an_28:46">28:46</span> and they have been on thee for a sign
and for a wonder, also on thy seed -- to the age.

<span id="an_28:47">28:47</span> \`Because that thou hast not served
Jehovah thy God with joy, and with gladness of heart, because of the
abundance of all things --

<span id="an_28:48">28:48</span> thou hast served thine enemies, whom
Jehovah sendeth against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in
nakedness, and in lack of all things; and he hath put a yoke of iron on
thy neck, till He hath destroyed thee.

<span id="an_28:49">28:49</span> \`Jehovah doth lift up against thee a
nation, from afar, from the end of the earth, as the eagle it flieth; a
nation whose tongue thou hast not heard,

<span id="an_28:50">28:50</span> a nation -- fierce of countenance --
which accepteth not the face of the aged, and the young doth not favour;

<span id="an_28:51">28:51</span> and it hath eaten the fruit of thy
cattle, and the fruit of thy ground, till thou art destroyed; which
leaveth not to thee corn, new wine, and oil, increase of thine oxen, and
wealth of thy flock, till it hath destroyed thee.

<span id="an_28:52">28:52</span> \`And it hath laid siege to thee in all
thy gates, till thy walls come down, the high and the fenced ones in
which thou art trusting, in all thy land; yea, it hath laid siege to
thee in all thy gates, in all thy land, which Jehovah thy God hath given
to thee;

<span id="an_28:53">28:53</span> and thou hast eaten the fruit of thy
body, flesh of thy sons and thy daughters (whom Jehovah thy God hath
given to thee), in the siege, and in the straitness with which thine
enemies do straiten thee.

<span id="an_28:54">28:54</span> \`The man who is tender in thee, and
who \[is\] very delicate -- his eye is evil against his brother, and
against the wife of his bosom, and against the remnant of his sons whom
he leaveth,

<span id="an_28:55">28:55</span> against giving to one of them of the
flesh of his sons whom he eateth, because he hath nothing left to him,
in the siege, and in the straitness with which thine enemy doth straiten
thee in all thy gates.

<span id="an_28:56">28:56</span> \`The tender woman in thee, and the
delicate, who hath not tried the sole of her foot to place on the ground
because of delicateness and because of tenderness -- her eye is evil
against the husband of her bosom, and against her son, and against her
daughter,

<span id="an_28:57">28:57</span> and against her seed which cometh out
from between her feet, even against her sons whom she doth bear, for she
doth eat them for the lacking of all things in secret, in the siege and
in the straitness with which thine enemy doth straiten thee within thy
gates.

<span id="an_28:58">28:58</span> \`If thou dost not observe to do all
the words of this law which are written in this book, to fear this
honoured and fearful name -- Jehovah thy God --

<span id="an_28:59">28:59</span> then hath Jehovah made wonderful thy
strokes, and the strokes of thy seed -- great strokes, and stedfast, and
evil sicknesses, and stedfast.

<span id="an_28:60">28:60</span> \`And He hath brought back on thee all
the diseases of Egypt, of the presence of which thou hast been afraid,
and they have cleaved to thee;

<span id="an_28:61">28:61</span> also every sickness and every stroke
which is not written in the book of this law; Jehovah doth cause them to
go up upon thee till thou art destroyed,

<span id="an_28:62">28:62</span> and ye have been left with few men,
instead of which ye have been as stars of the heavens for multitude,
because thou hast not hearkened to the voice of Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_28:63">28:63</span> \`And it hath been, as Jehovah hath
rejoiced over you to do you good, and to multiply you, so doth Jehovah
rejoice over you to destroy you, and to lay you waste; and ye have been
pulled away from off the ground whither thou art going in to possess it;

<span id="an_28:64">28:64</span> and Jehovah hath scattered thee among
all the peoples, from the end of the earth even unto the end of the
earth; and thou hast served there other gods which thou hast not known,
thou and thy fathers -- wood and stone.

<span id="an_28:65">28:65</span> \`And among those nations thou dost not
rest, yea, there is no resting-place for the sole of thy foot, and
Jehovah hath given to thee there a trembling heart, and failing of eyes,
and grief of soul;

<span id="an_28:66">28:66</span> and thy life hath been hanging in
suspense before thee, and thou hast been afraid by night and by day, and
dost not believe in thy life;

<span id="an_28:67">28:67</span> in the morning thou sayest, O that it
were evening! and in the evening thou sayest, O that it were morning!
from the fear of thy heart, with which thou art afraid, and from the
sight of thine eyes which thou seest.

<span id="an_28:68">28:68</span> \`And Jehovah hath brought thee back to
Egypt with ships, by a way of which I said to thee, Thou dost not add
any more to see it, and ye have sold yourselves there to thine enemies,
for men-servants and for maid-servants, and there is no buyer.'

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> These \[are\] the words of the covenant
which Jehovah hath commanded Moses to make with the sons of Israel in
the land of Moab, apart from the covenant which He made with them in
Horeb.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> And Moses calleth unto all Israel, and
saith unto them, \`Ye -- ye have seen all that which Jehovah hath done
before your eyes in the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh, and to all his
servants, and to all his land;

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> the great trials which thine eyes have
seen, the signs, and those great wonders;

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> and Jehovah hath not given to you a heart
to know, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, till this day,

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> and I cause you to go forty years in a
wilderness; your garments have not been consumed from off you, and thy
shoe hath not worn away from off thy foot;

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> bread ye have not eaten, and wine and
strong drink ye have not drunk, so that ye know that I \[am\] Jehovah
your God.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> \`And ye come in unto this place, and
Sihon king of Heshbon -- also Og king of Bashan -- doth come out to meet
us, to battle, and we smite them,

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> and take their land, and give it for an
inheritance to the Reubenite, and to the Gadite, and to the half of the
tribe of Manasseh;

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> and ye have kept the words of this
covenant, and done them, so that ye cause all that ye do to prosper.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> \`Ye are standing to-day, all of you,
before Jehovah your God -- your heads, your tribes, your elders, and
your authorities -- every man of Israel;

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> your infants, your wives, and thy
sojourner who \[is\] in the midst of thy camps, from the hewer of thy
wood unto the drawer of thy water --

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> for thy passing over into the covenant
of Jehovah thy God, and into His oath which Jehovah thy God is making
with thee to-day;

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> in order to establish thee to-day to
Him for a people, and He Himself is thy God, as He hath spoken to thee,
and as He hath sworn to thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> \`And not with you alone am I making
this covenant and this oath;

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> but with him who is here with us,
standing to-day before Jehovah our God, and with him who is not here
with us to-day,

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> for ye have known how ye dwelt in the
land of Egypt, and how we passed by through the midst of the nations
which ye have passed by;

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> and ye see their abominations, and
their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold, which \[are\] with them,

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> lest there be among you a man or woman,
or family or tribe, whose heart is turning to-day from Jehovah our God,
to go to serve the gods of those nations, lest there be in you a root
fruitful of gall and wormwood:

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> \`And it hath been, in his hearing the
words of this oath, and he hath blessed himself in his heart, saying, I
have peace, though in the stubbornness of my heart I go on, in order to
end the fulness with the thirst.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> Jehovah is not willing to be propitious
to him, for then doth the anger of Jehovah smoke, also His zeal, against
that man, and lain down on him hath all the oath which is written in
this book, and Jehovah hath blotted out his name from under the heavens,

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> and Jehovah hath separated him for
evil, out of all the tribes of Israel, according to all the oaths of the
covenant which is written in this book of the law.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> \`And the latter generation of your
sons who rise after you, and the stranger who cometh in from a land afar
off, have said when they have seen the strokes of that land, and its
sicknesses which Jehovah hath sent into it, --

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> (\[with\] brimstone and salt is the
whole land burnt, it is not sown, nor doth it shoot up, nor doth there
go up on it any herb, like the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah
and Zeboim, which Jehovah overturned in His anger, and in His fury,) --

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> yea, all the nations have said,
Wherefore hath Jehovah done thus to this land? what the heat of this
great anger?

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> \`And they have said, Because that they
have forsaken the covenant of Jehovah, God of their fathers, which He
made with them in His bringing them out of the land of Egypt,

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> and they go and serve other gods, and
bow themselves to them -- gods which they have not known, and which He
hath not apportioned to them;

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> and the anger of Jehovah burneth
against that land, to bring in on it all the reviling that is written in
this book,

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> and Jehovah doth pluck them from off
their ground in anger, and in fury, and in great wrath, and doth cast
them unto another land, as \[at\] this day.

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> \`The things hidden \[are\] to Jehovah
our God, and the things revealed \[are\] to us and to our sons -- to the
age, to do all the words of this law.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> \`And it hath been, when all these things
come upon thee, the blessing and the reviling, which I have set before
thee, and thou hast brought \[them\] back unto thy heart, among all the
nations whither Jehovah thy God hath driven thee away,

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> and hast turned back unto Jehovah thy
God, and hearkened to His voice, according to all that I am commanding
thee to-day, thou and thy sons, with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul --

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> then hath Jehovah thy God turned back
\[to\] thy captivity, and pitied thee, yea, He hath turned back and
gathered thee out of all the peoples whither Jehovah thy God hath
scattered thee.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> \`If thine outcast is in the extremity of
the heavens, thence doth Jehovah thy God gather thee, and thence He doth
take thee;

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> and Jehovah thy God hath brought thee in
unto the land which thy fathers have possessed, and thou hast inherited
it, and He hath done thee good, and multiplied thee above thy fathers.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> \`And Jehovah thy God hath circumcised
thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love Jehovah thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul, for the sake of thy life;

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> and Jehovah thy God hath put all this
oath on thine enemies, and on those hating thee, who have pursued thee.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> \`And thou dost turn back, and hast
hearkened to the voice of Jehovah, and hast done all His commands which
I am commanding thee to-day;

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> and Jehovah thy God hath made thee
abundant in every work of thy hand, in the fruit of thy body, and in the
fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy ground, for good; for
Jehovah turneth back to rejoice over thee for good, as He rejoiced over
thy fathers,

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> for thou dost hearken to the voice of
Jehovah thy God, to keep His commands, and His statutes, which are
written in the book of this law, for thou turnest back unto Jehovah thy
God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> \`For this command which I am
commanding thee to-day, it is not too wonderful for thee, nor \[is\] it
far off.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> It is not in the heavens, -- saying,
Who doth go up for us into the heavens, and doth take it for us, and
doth cause us to hear it -- that we may do it.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> And it \[is\] not beyond the sea, --
saying, Who doth pass over for us beyond the sea, and doth take it for
us, and doth cause us to hear it -- that we may do it?

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> For very near unto thee is the word, in
thy mouth, and in thy heart -- to do it.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> \`See, I have set before thee to-day
life and good, and death and evil,

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> in that I am commanding thee to-day to
love Jehovah thy God, to walk in His ways, and to keep His commands, and
His statutes, and His judgments; and thou hast lived and multiplied, and
Jehovah thy God hath blessed thee in the land whither thou art going in
to possess it.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> \`And if thy heart doth turn, and thou
dost not hearken, and hast been driven away, and hast bowed thyself to
other gods, and served them,

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> I have declared to you this day, that
ye do certainly perish, ye do not prolong days on the ground which thou
art passing over the Jordan to go in thither to possess it.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> \`I have caused to testify against you
to-day the heavens and the earth; life and death I have set before thee,
the blessing and the reviling; and thou hast fixed on life, so that thou
dost live, thou and thy seed,

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> to love Jehovah thy God, to hearken to
His voice, and to cleave to Him (for He \[is\] thy life, and the length
of thy days), to dwell on the ground which Jehovah hath sworn to thy
fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give to them.'

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> And Moses goeth and speaketh these words
unto all Israel,

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> and he saith unto them, \`A son of a
hundred and twenty years \[am\] I to-day; I am not able any more to go
out and to come in, and Jehovah hath said unto me, Thou dost not pass
over this Jordan,

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> \`Jehovah thy God He is passing over
before thee, He doth destroy these nations from before thee, and thou
hast possessed them; Joshua -- he is passing over before thee as Jehovah
hath spoken,

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> and Jehovah hath done to them as he hath
done to Sihon and to Og, kings of the Amorite, and to their land, whom
He destroyed.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> And Jehovah hath given them before your
face, and ye have done to them according to all the command which I have
commanded you;

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> be strong and courageous, fear not, nor
be terrified because of them, for Jehovah thy God \[is\] He who is going
with thee; He doth not fail thee nor forsake thee.'

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> And Moses calleth for Joshua, and saith
unto him before the eyes of all Israel, \`Be strong and courageous, for
thou -- thou dost go in with this people unto the land which Jehovah
hath sworn to their fathers to give to them, and thou -- thou dost cause
them to inherit it;

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> and Jehovah \[is\] He who is going before
thee, He himself is with thee; He doth not fail thee nor forsake thee;
fear not, nor be affrighted.'

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> And Moses writeth this law, and giveth it
unto the priests (sons of Levi, those bearing the ark of the covenant of
Jehovah), and unto all the elders of Israel,

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> and Moses commandeth them, saying, \`At
the end of seven years, in the appointed time, the year of release, in
the feast of booths,

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> in the coming in of all Israel to see
the face of Jehovah in the place which He chooseth, thou dost proclaim
this law before all Israel, in their ears.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> \`Assemble the people, the men, and the
women, and the infants, and thy sojourner who \[is\] within thy gates,
so that they hear, and so that they learn, and have feared Jehovah your
God, and observed to do all the words of this law;

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> and their sons, who have not known, do
hear, and have learned to fear Jehovah your God all the days which ye
are living on the ground whither ye are passing over the Jordan to
possess it.'

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Lo, thy
days have drawn near to die; call Joshua, and station yourselves in the
tent of meeting, and I charge him;' and Moses goeth -- Joshua also --
and they station themselves in the tent of meeting,

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> and Jehovah is seen in the tent, in a
pillar of a cloud; and the pillar of the cloud standeth at the opening
of the tent.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Lo,
thou art lying down with thy fathers, and this people hath risen, and
gone a-whoring after the gods of the stranger of the land into the midst
of which it hath entered, and forsaken Me, and broken My covenant which
I made with it;

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> and Mine anger hath burned against it
in that day, and I have forsaken them, and hidden My face from them, and
it hath been for consumption, and many evils and distresses have found
it, and it hath said in that day, Is it not because that my God is not
in my midst -- these evils have found me?

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> and I certainly hide My face in that
day for all the evil which it hath done, for it hath turned unto other
gods.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> \`And now, write for you this song, and
teach it the sons of Israel; put it in their mouths, so that this song
is to Me for a witness against the sons of Israel,

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> and I bring them in unto the ground
which I have sworn to their fathers -- flowing with milk and honey, and
they have eaten, and been satisfied, and been fat, and have turned unto
other gods, and they have served them, and despised Me, and broken My
covenant.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> \`And it hath been, when many evils and
distresses do meet it, that this song hath testified to its face for a
witness; for it is not forgotten out of the mouth of its seed, for I
have known its imagining which it is doing to-day, before I bring them
in unto the land of which I have sworn.'

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> And Moses writeth this song on that
day, and doth teach it the sons of Israel,

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> and He commandeth Joshua son of Nun,
and saith, \`Be strong and courageous, for thou dost bring in the sons
of Israel unto the land which I have sworn to them, and I -- I am with
thee.'

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> And it cometh to pass, when Moses
finisheth to write the words of this law on a book till their
completion,

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> that Moses commandeth the Levites
bearing the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, saying,

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> \`Take this Book of the Law, and thou
hast set it on the side of the ark of the covenant of Jehovah your God,
and it hath been there against thee for a witness;

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> for I -- I have known thy rebellion,
and thy stiff neck; lo, in my being yet alive with you to-day,
rebellious ye have been with Jehovah, and also surely after my death.

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> \`Assemble unto me all the elders of
your tribes, and your authorities, and I speak in their ears these
words, and cause to testify against them the heavens and the earth,

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> for I have known that after my death ye
do very corruptly, and have turned aside out of the way which I
commanded you, and evil hath met you in the latter end of the days,
because ye do the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, to make Him angry
with the work of your hands.'

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> And Moses speaketh in the ears of all
the assembly of Israel the words of this song, till their completion: --

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> \`Give ear, O heavens, and I speak; And
thou dost hear, O earth, sayings of my mouth!

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> Drop as rain doth My doctrine; Flow as
dew doth My sayings; As storms on the tender grass, And as showers on
the herb,

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> For the Name of Jehovah I proclaim,
Ascribe ye greatness to our God!

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> The Rock! -- perfect \[is\] His work, For
all His ways \[are\] just; God of stedfastness, and without iniquity:
Righteous and upright \[is\] He.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> It hath done corruptly to Him; Their
blemish is not His sons', A generation perverse and crooked!

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> To Jehovah do ye act thus, O people
foolish and not wise? Is not He thy father -- thy possessor? He made
thee, and doth establish thee.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> Remember days of old -- Understand the
years of many generations -- Ask thy father, and he doth tell thee;
Thine elders, and they say to thee:

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> In the Most High causing nations to
inherit, In His separating sons of Adam -- He setteth up the borders of
the peoples By the number of the sons of Israel.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> For Jehovah's portion \[is\] His people,
Jacob \[is\] the line of His inheritance.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> He findeth him in a land -- a desert,
And in a void -- a howling wilderness, He turneth him round -- He
causeth him to understand -- He keepeth him as the apple of His eye.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> As an eagle waketh up its nest, Over
its young ones fluttereth, Spreadeth its wings -- taketh them, Beareth
them on its pinions; --

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> Jehovah alone doth lead him, And there
is no strange god with him.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> He maketh him ride on high places of
earth, And he eateth increase of the fields, And He maketh him suck
honey from a rock, And oil out of the flint of a rock;

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> Butter of the herd, and milk of the
flock, With fat of lambs, and rams, sons of Bashan, And he-goats, with
fat of kidneys of wheat; And of the blood of the grape thou dost drink
wine!

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> And Jeshurun waxeth fat, and doth kick:
Thou hast been fat -- thou hast been thick, Thou hast been covered. And
he leaveth God who made him, And dishonoureth the Rock of his salvation.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> They make Him zealous with strangers,
With abominations they make Him angry.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> They sacrifice to demons -- no god!
Gods they have not known -- New ones -- from the vicinity they came; Not
feared them have your fathers!

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> The Rock that begat thee thou
forgettest, And neglectest God who formeth thee.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> And Jehovah seeth and despiseth -- For
the provocation of His sons and His daughters.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> And He saith: I hide My face from them,
I see what \[is\] their latter end; For a froward generation \[are\]
they, Sons in whom is no stedfastness.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> They have made Me zealous by \`no-god,'
They made Me angry by their vanities; And I make them zealous by
\`no-people,' By a foolish nation I make them angry.

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> For a fire hath been kindled in Mine
anger, And it burneth unto Sheol -- the lowest, And consumeth earth and
its increase, And setteth on fire foundations of mountains.

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> I gather upon them evils, Mine arrows I
consume upon them.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> Exhausted by famine, And consumed by
heat, and bitter destruction. And the teeth of beasts I send upon them,
With poison of fearful things of the dust.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> Without bereave doth the sword, And at
the inner-chambers -- fear, Both youth and virgin, Suckling with man of
grey hair.

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> I have said: I blow them away, I cause
their remembrance to cease from man;

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> If not -- the anger of an enemy I fear,
Lest their adversaries know -- Lest they say, Our hand is high, And
Jehovah hath not wrought all this.

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> For a nation lost to counsels \[are\]
they, And there is no understanding in them.

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> If they were wise -- They deal wisely
\[with\] this; They attend to their latter end:

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> How doth one pursue a thousand, And two
cause a myriad to flee! If not -- that their rock hath sold them, And
Jehovah hath shut them up?

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> For not as our Rock \[is\] their rock,
(And our enemies \[are\] judges!)

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> For of the vine of Sodom their vine
\[is\], And of the fields of Gomorrah; Their grapes \[are\] grapes of
gall -- They have bitter clusters;

<span id="an_32:33">32:33</span> The poison of dragons \[is\] their wine
And the fierce venom of asps.

<span id="an_32:34">32:34</span> Is it not laid up with Me? Sealed among
My treasures?

<span id="an_32:35">32:35</span> Mine \[are\] vengeance and recompense,
At the due time -- doth their foot slide; For near is a day of their
calamity, And haste do things prepared for them.

<span id="an_32:36">32:36</span> For Jehovah doth judge His people, And
for His servants doth repent Himself. For He seeth -- the going away of
power, And none is restrained and left.

<span id="an_32:37">32:37</span> And He hath said, Where \[are\] their
gods -- The rock in which they trusted;

<span id="an_32:38">32:38</span> Which the fat of their sacrifices do
eat, They drink the wine of their libation! Let them arise and help you,
Let it be for you a hiding-place!

<span id="an_32:39">32:39</span> See ye, now, that I -- I \[am\] He, And
there is no god with Me: I put to death, and I keep alive; I have
smitten, and I heal; And there is not from My hand a deliverer,

<span id="an_32:40">32:40</span> For I lift up unto the heavens My hand,
And have said, I live -- to the age!

<span id="an_32:41">32:41</span> If I have sharpened the brightness of
My sword, And My hand doth lay hold on judgment, I turn back vengeance
to Mine adversaries, And to those hating Me -- I repay!

<span id="an_32:42">32:42</span> I make drunk Mine arrows with blood,
And My sword devoureth flesh, From the blood of the pierced and captive,
From the head of the freemen of the enemy.

<span id="an_32:43">32:43</span> Sing ye nations -- \[with\] his people,
For the blood of His servants He avengeth, And vengeance He turneth back
on His adversaries, And hath pardoned His land -- His people.'

<span id="an_32:44">32:44</span> And Moses cometh and speaketh all the
words of this song in the ears of the people, he and Hoshea son of Nun;

<span id="an_32:45">32:45</span> and Moses finisheth to speak all these
words unto all Israel,

<span id="an_32:46">32:46</span> and saith unto them, \`Set your heart
to all the words which I am testifying against you to-day, that ye
command your sons to observe to do all the words of this law,

<span id="an_32:47">32:47</span> for it \[is\] not a vain thing for you,
for it \[is\] your life, and by this thing ye prolong days on the ground
whither ye are passing over the Jordan to possess it.'

<span id="an_32:48">32:48</span> And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, in
this self-same day, saying,

<span id="an_32:49">32:49</span> \`Go up unto this mount Abarim, mount
Nebo, which \[is\] in the land of Moab, which \[is\] on the front of
Jericho, and see the land of Canaan which I am giving to the sons of
Israel for a possession;

<span id="an_32:50">32:50</span> and die in the mount whither thou art
going up, and be gathered unto thy people, as Aaron thy brother hath
died in the mount Hor, and is gathered unto his people:

<span id="an_32:51">32:51</span> \`Because ye trespassed against me in
the midst of the sons of Israel at the waters of Meribath-Kadesh, the
wilderness of Zin -- because ye sanctified Me not in the midst of the
sons of Israel;

<span id="an_32:52">32:52</span> but over-against thou seest the land,
and thither thou dost not go in, unto the land which I am giving to the
sons of Israel.'

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> And this \[is\] the blessing \[with\]
which Moses the man of God blessed the sons of Israel before his death,

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> and he saith: -- \`Jehovah from Sinai
hath come, And hath risen from Seir for them; He hath shone from mount
Paran, And hath come \[with\] myriads of holy ones; At His right hand
\[are\] springs for them.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> Also He \[is\] loving the peoples; All
His holy ones \[are\] in thy hand, And they -- they sat down at thy
foot, \[Each\] He lifteth up at thy words.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> A law hath Moses commanded us, A
possession of the assembly of Jacob.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> And he is in Jeshurun king, In the heads
of the people gathering together, The tribes of Israel!

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> Let Reuben live, and not die, And let his
men be a number.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> And this \[is\] for Judah; and he saith:
-- Hear, O Jehovah, the voice of Judah, And unto his people do Thou
bring him in; His hand hath striven for him, And an help from his
adversaries art Thou.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> And of Levi he said: -- Thy Thummim and
thy Urim \[are\] for thy pious one, Whom Thou hast tried in Massah, Thou
dost strive with Him at the waters of Meribah;

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> Who is saying of his father and his
mother, I have not seen him; And his brethren he hath not discerned, And
his sons he hath not known; For they have observed Thy saying, And Thy
covenant they keep.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> They teach Thy judgments to Jacob, And
Thy law to Israel; They put perfume in Thy nose, And whole
burnt-offering on Thine altar.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> Bless, O Jehovah, his strength, And the
work of his hands Thou acceptest, Smite the loins of his withstanders,
And of those hating him -- that they rise not!

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> Of Benjamin he said: -- The beloved of
Jehovah doth tabernacle confidently by him, Covering him over all the
day; Yea, between his shoulders He doth tabernacle.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> And of Joseph he said: -- Blessed of
Jehovah \[is\] his land, By precious things of the heavens, By dew, and
by the deep crouching beneath,

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> And by precious things -- fruits of the
sun, And by precious things -- cast forth by the moons,

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> And by chief things -- of the ancient
mountains, And by precious things -- of the age-during heights,

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> And by precious things -- of earth and
its fulness, And the good pleasure Of Him who is dwelling in the bush,
-- Let it come for the head of Joseph, And for the crown of him Who is
separate from his brethren.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> His honour \[is\] a firstling of his
ox, And his horns \[are\] horns of a reem; By them peoples he doth push
together To the ends of earth; And they \[are\] the myriads of Ephraim,
And they \[are\] the thousands of Manasseh.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> And of Zebulun he said: -- Rejoice, O
Zebulun, in thy going out, And, O Issachar, in thy tents;

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> Peoples \[to\] the mountain they call,
There they sacrifice righteous sacrifices; For the abundance of the seas
they suck, And hidden things hidden in the sand.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> And of Gad he said: -- Blessed of the
Enlarger \[is\] Gad, As a lioness he doth tabernacle, And hath torn the
arm -- also the crown!

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> And he provideth the first part for
himself, For there the portion of the lawgiver is covered, And he cometh
\[with\] the heads of the people; The righteousness of Jehovah he hath
done, And His judgments with Israel.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> And of Dan he said: -- Dan \[is\] a
lion's whelp; he doth leap from Bashan.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> And of Naphtali he said: -- O Naphtali,
satisfied with pleasure, And full of the blessing of Jehovah, West and
south possess thou.

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> And of Asher he said: -- Blessed with
sons \[is\] Asher, Let him be accepted by his brethren, And dipping in
oil his foot.

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> Iron and brass \[are\] thy shoes, And
as thy days -- thy strength.

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> There is none like the God of Jeshurun,
Riding the heavens in thy help, And in His excellency the skies.

<span id="an_33:27">33:27</span> A habitation \[is\] the eternal God,
And beneath \[are\] arms age-during. And He casteth out from thy
presence the enemy, and saith, \`Destroy!'

<span id="an_33:28">33:28</span> And Israel doth tabernacle \[in\]
confidence alone; The eye of Jacob \[is\] unto a land of corn and wine;
Also His heavens drop down dew.

<span id="an_33:29">33:29</span> O thy happiness, O Israel! who is like
thee? A people saved by Jehovah, The shield of thy help, And He who
\[is\] the sword of thine excellency: And thine enemies are subdued for
thee, And thou on their high places dost tread.'

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> And Moses goeth up from the plains of
Moab unto mount Nebo, the top of Pisgah, which \[is\] on the front of
Jericho, and Jehovah sheweth him all the land -- Gilead unto Dan,

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> and all Naphtali, and the land of
Ephraim, and Manasseh, and all the land of Judah unto the further sea,

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> and the south, and the circuit of the
valley of Jericho, the city of palms, unto Zoar.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> And Jehovah saith unto him, \`This \[is\]
the land which I have sworn to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying,
To thy seed I give it; I have caused thee to see with thine eyes, and
thither thou dost not pass over.'

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> And Moses, servant of the Lord, dieth
there, in the land of Moab, according to the command of Jehovah;

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> and He burieth him in a valley in the
land of Moab, over-against Beth-Peor, and no man hath known his burying
place unto this day.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> And Moses \[is\] a son of a hundred and
twenty years when he dieth; his eye hath not become dim, nor hath his
moisture fled.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> And the sons of Israel bewail Moses in
the plains of Moab thirty days; and the days of weeping \[and\] mourning
for Moses are completed.

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> And Joshua son of Nun is full of the
spirit of wisdom, for Moses had laid his hands upon him, and the sons of
Israel hearken unto him, and do as Jehovah commanded Moses.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> And there hath not arisen a prophet any
more in Israel like Moses, whom Jehovah hath known face unto face,

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> in reference to all the signs and the
wonders which Jehovah sent him to do in the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh,
and to all his servants, and to all his land,

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> and in reference to all the strong
hand, and to all the great fear which Moses did before the eyes of all
Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua](jos)
