[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pro)  [Next](sol) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Ecclesiastes

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Words of a preacher, son of David, king in
Jerusalem:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Vanity of vanities, said the Preacher,
Vanity of vanities: the whole \[is\] vanity.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> What advantage \[is\] to man by all his
labour that he laboureth at under the sun?

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> A generation is going, and a generation is
coming, and the earth to the age is standing.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Also, the sun hath risen, and the sun hath
gone in, and unto its place panting it is rising there.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Going unto the south, and turning round
unto the north, turning round, turning round, the wind is going, and by
its circuits the wind hath returned.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> All the streams are going unto the sea, and
the sea is not full; unto a place whither the streams are going, thither
they are turning back to go.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> All these things are wearying; a man is not
able to speak, the eye is not satisfied by seeing, nor filled is the ear
from hearing.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> What \[is\] that which hath been? it \[is\]
that which is, and what \[is\] that which hath been done? it \[is\] that
which is done, and there is not an entirely new thing under the sun.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> There is a thing of which \[one\] saith:
\`See this, it \[is\] new!' already it hath been in the ages that were
before us!

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> There is not a remembrance of former
\[generations\]; and also of the latter that are, there is no
remembrance of them with those that are at the last.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> I, a preacher, have been king over Israel
in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And I have given my heart to seek and to
search out by wisdom concerning all that hath been done under the
heavens. It \[is\] a sad travail God hath given to the sons of man to be
humbled by it.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> I have seen all the works that have been
done under the sun, and lo, the whole \[is\] vanity and vexation of
spirit!

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> A crooked thing \[one\] is not able to
make straight, and a lacking thing is not able to be numbered.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> I -- I spake with my heart, saying, \`I,
lo, I have magnified and added wisdom above every one who hath been
before me at Jerusalem, and my heart hath seen abundantly wisdom and
knowledge.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And I give my heart to know wisdom, and
to know madness and folly: I have known that even this \[is\] vexation
of spirit;

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> for, in abundance of wisdom \[is\]
abundance of sadness, and he who addeth knowledge addeth pain.'

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> I said in my heart, \`Pray, come, I try
thee with mirth, and look thou on gladness;' and lo, even it \[is\]
vanity.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Of laughter I said, \`Foolish!' and of
mirth, \`What \[is\] this it is doing?'

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> I have sought in my heart to draw out with
wine my appetite, (and my heart leading in wisdom), and to take hold on
folly till that I see where \[is\] this -- the good to the sons of man
of that which they do under the heavens, the number of the days of their
lives.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> I made great my works, I builded for me
houses, I planted for me vineyards.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> I made for me gardens and paradises, and I
planted in them trees of every fruit.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> I made for me pools of water, to water from
them a forest shooting forth trees.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> I got men-servants, and maid-servants, and
sons of the house were to me; also, I had much substance -- herd and
flock -- above all who had been before me in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> I gathered for me also silver and gold, and
the peculiar treasure of kings and of the provinces. I prepared for me
men-singers and women-singers, and the luxuries of the sons of man -- a
wife and wives.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And I became great, and increased above
every one who had been before me in Jerusalem; also, my wisdom stood
with me.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And all that mine eyes asked I kept not
back from them; I withheld not my heart from any joy, for my heart
rejoiced because of all my labour, and this hath been my portion, from
all my labour,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> and I have looked on all my works that my
hands have done, and on the labour that I have laboured to do, and lo,
the whole \[is\] vanity and vexation of spirit, and there is no
advantage under the sun!

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And I turned to see wisdom, and madness,
and folly, but what \[is\] the man who cometh after the king? that which
\[is\] already -- they have done it!

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And I saw that there is an advantage to
wisdom above folly, like the advantage of the light above the darkness.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> The wise! -- his eyes \[are\] in his
head, and the fool in darkness is walking, and I also knew that one
event happeneth with them all;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> and I said in my heart, \`As it happeneth
with the fool, it happeneth also with me, and why am I then more wise?'
And I spake in my heart, that also this \[is\] vanity:

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> That there is no remembrance to the wise
-- with the fool -- to the age, for that which \[is\] already, \[in\]
the days that are coming is all forgotten, and how dieth the wise? with
the fool!

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And I have hated life, for sad to me
\[is\] the work that hath been done under the sun, for the whole \[is\]
vanity and vexation of spirit.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And I have hated all my labour that I
labour at under the sun, because I leave it to a man who is after me.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And who knoweth whether he is wise or
foolish? yet he doth rule over all my labour that I have laboured at,
and that I have done wisely under the sun! this also \[is\] vanity.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And I turned round to cause my heart to
despair concerning all the labour that I laboured at under the sun.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For there is a man whose labour \[is\] in
wisdom, and in knowledge, and in equity, and to a man who hath not
laboured therein he giveth it -- his portion! Even this \[is\] vanity
and a great evil.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> For what hath been to a man by all his
labour, and by the thought of his heart that he laboured at under the
sun?

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> For all his days are sorrows, and his
travail sadness; even at night his heart hath not lain down; this also
\[is\] vanity.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> There is nothing good in a man who
eateth, and hath drunk, and hath shewn his soul good in his labour. This
also I have seen that it \[is\] from the hand of God.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> For who eateth and who hasteth out more
than I?

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> For to a man who \[is\] good before Him,
He hath given wisdom, and knowledge, and joy; and to a sinner He hath
given travail, to gather and to heap up, to give to the good before God.
Even this \[is\] vanity and vexation of spirit.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> To everything -- a season, and a time to
every delight under the heavens:

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> A time to bring forth, And a time to die. A
time to plant, And a time to eradicate the planted.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> A time to slay, And a time to heal, A time
to break down, And a time to build up.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> A time to weep, And a time to laugh. A time
to mourn, And a time to skip.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> A time to cast away stones, And a time to
heap up stones. A time to embrace, And a time to be far from embracing.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> A time to seek, And a time to destroy. A
time to keep, And a time to cast away.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> A time to rend, And a time to sew. A time
to be silent, And a time to speak.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> A time to love, And a time to hate. A time
of war, And a time of peace.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> What advantage hath the doer in that which
he is labouring at?

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> I have seen the travail that God hath
given to the sons of man to be humbled by it.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> The whole He hath made beautiful in its
season; also, that knowledge He hath put in their heart without which
man findeth not out the work that God hath done from the beginning even
unto the end.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> I have known that there is no good for
them except to rejoice and to do good during their life,

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> yea, even every man who eateth and hath
drunk and seen good by all his labour, it \[is\] a gift of God.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> I have known that all that God doth is to
the age, to it nothing is to be added, and from it nothing is to be
withdrawn; and God hath wrought that they do fear before Him.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> What is that which hath been? already it
is, and that which \[is\] to be hath already been, and God requireth
that which is pursued.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And again, I have seen under the sun the
place of judgment -- there \[is\] the wicked; and the place of
righteousness -- there \[is\] the wicked.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> I said in my heart, \`The righteous and
the wicked doth God judge, for a time \[is\] to every matter and for
every work there.'

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> I said in my heart concerning the matter
of the sons of man that God might cleanse them, so as to see that they
themselves \[are\] beasts.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> For an event \[is to\] the sons of man,
and an event \[is to\] the beasts, even one event \[is\] to them; as the
death of this, so \[is\] the death of that; and one spirit \[is\] to
all, and the advantage of man above the beast is nothing, for the whole
\[is\] vanity.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> The whole are going unto one place, the
whole have been from the dust, and the whole are turning back unto the
dust.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Who knoweth the spirit of the sons of man
that is going up on high, and the spirit of the beast that is going down
below to the earth?

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And I have seen that there is nothing
better than that man rejoice in his works, for it \[is\] his portion;
for who doth bring him in to look on that which is after him?

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And I have turned, and I see all the
oppressions that are done under the sun, and lo, the tear of the
oppressed, and they have no comforter; and at the hand of their
oppressors \[is\] power, and they have no comforter.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And I am praising the dead who have already
died above the living who are yet alive.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And better than both of them \[is\] he who
hath not yet been, in that he hath not seen the evil work that hath been
done under the sun.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And I have seen all the labour, and all the
benefit of the work, because for it a man is the envy of his neighbour.
Even this \[is\] vanity and vexation of spirit.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> The fool is clasping his hands, and eating
his own flesh:

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> \`Better \[is\] a handful \[with\]
quietness, than two handfuls \[with\] labour and vexation of spirit.'

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And I have turned, and I see a vain thing
under the sun:

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> There is one, and there is not a second;
even son or brother he hath not, and there is no end to all his labour!
His eye also is not satisfied with riches, and \[he saith not\], \`For
whom am I labouring and bereaving my soul of good?' This also is vanity,
it is a sad travail.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> The two \[are\] better than the one, in
that they have a good reward by their labour.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> For if they fall, the one raiseth up his
companion, but wo to the one who falleth and there is not a second to
raise him up!

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Also, if two lie down, then they have
heat, but how hath one heat?

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And if the one strengthen himself, the
two stand against him; and the threefold cord is not hastily broken.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Better is a poor and wise youth than an
old and foolish king, who hath not known to be warned any more.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> For from a house of prisoners he hath
come out to reign, for even in his own kingdom he hath been poor.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> I have seen all the living, who are
walking under the sun, with the second youth who doth stand in his
place;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> there is no end to all the people, to all
who were before them; also, the latter rejoice not in him. Surely this
also is vanity and vexation of spirit.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Keep thy feet when thou goest unto a house
of God, and draw near to hear rather than to give of fools the
sacrifice, for they do not know they do evil.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Cause not thy mouth to hasten, and let not
thy heart hasten to bring out a word before God, for God is in the
heavens, and thou on the earth, therefore let thy words be few.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For the dream hath come by abundance of
business, and the voice of a fool by abundance of words.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> When thou vowest a vow to God, delay not to
complete it, for there is no pleasure in fools; that which thou vowest
-- complete.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Better that thou do not vow, than that thou
dost vow and dost not complete.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to
sin, nor say before the messenger, that \`it \[is\] an error,' why is
God wroth because of thy voice, and hath destroyed the work of thy
hands?

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For, in the abundance of dreams both
vanities and words abound; but fear thou God.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> If oppression of the poor, and violent
taking away of judgment and righteousness thou seest in a province, do
not marvel at the matter, for a higher than the high is observing, and
high ones \[are\] over them.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And the abundance of a land is for all. A
king for a field is served.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Whoso is loving silver is not satisfied
\[with\] silver, nor he who is in love with stores \[with\] increase.
Even this \[is\] vanity.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> In the multiplying of good have its
consumers been multiplied, and what benefit \[is\] to its possessor
except the sight of his eyes?

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Sweet \[is\] the sleep of the labourer
whether he eat little or much; and the sufficiency of the wealthy is not
suffering him to sleep.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> There is a painful evil I have seen under
the sun: wealth kept for its possessor, for his evil.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And that wealth hath been lost in an evil
business, and he hath begotten a son and there is nothing in his hand!

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> As he came out from the belly of his
mother, naked he turneth back to go as he came, and he taketh not away
anything of his labour, that doth go in his hand.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And this also \[is\] a painful evil, just
as he came, so he goeth, and what advantage \[is\] to him who laboureth
for wind?

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Also all his days in darkness he
consumeth, and sadness, and wrath, and sickness abound.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Lo, that which I have seen: \[It is\]
good, because beautiful, to eat, and to drink, and to see good in all
one's labour that he laboureth at under the sun, the number of the days
of his life that God hath given to him, for it \[is\] his portion.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Every man also to whom God hath given
wealth and riches, and hath given him power to eat of it, and to accept
his portion, and to rejoice in his labour, this is a gift of God.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> For he doth not much remember the days of
his life, for God is answering through the joy of his heart.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> There is an evil that I have seen under the
sun, and it \[is\] great on man:

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> A man to whom God giveth wealth, and
riches, and honour, and there is no lack to his soul of all that he
desireth, and God giveth him not power to eat of it, but a stranger
eateth it; this \[is\] vanity, and it \[is\] an evil disease.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> If a man doth beget a hundred, and live
many years, and is great, because they are the days of his years, and
his soul is not satisfied from the goodness, and also he hath not had a
grave, I have said, \`Better than he \[is\] the untimely birth.'

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> For in vanity he came in, and in darkness
he goeth, and in darkness his name is covered,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Even the sun he hath not seen nor known,
more rest hath this than that.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And though he had lived a thousand years
twice over, yet good he hath not seen; to the same place doth not every
one go?

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> All the labour of man \[is\] for his mouth,
and yet the soul is not filled.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> For what advantage \[is\] to the wise above
the fool? What to the poor who knoweth to walk before the living?

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Better \[is\] the sight of the eyes than
the going of the soul. This also \[is\] vanity and vexation of spirit.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> What \[is\] that which hath been? already
is its name called, and it is known that it \[is\] man, and he is not
able to contend with him who is stronger than he.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> For there are many things multiplying
vanity; what advantage \[is\] to man?

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> For who knoweth what \[is\] good for a
man in life, the number of the days of the life of his vanity, and he
maketh them as a shadow? for who declareth to man what is after him
under the sun?

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Better \[is\] a name than good perfume, And
the day of death than the day of birth.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Better to go unto a house of mourning, Than
to go unto a house of banqueting, For that is the end of all men, And
the living layeth \[it\] unto his heart.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Better \[is\] sorrow than laughter, For by
the sadness of the face the heart becometh better.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> The heart of the wise \[is\] in a house of
mourning, And the heart of fools in a house of mirth.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Better to hear a rebuke of a wise man, Than
\[for\] a man to hear a song of fools,

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For as the noise of thorns under the pot,
So \[is\] the laughter of a fool, even this \[is\] vanity.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Surely oppression maketh the wise mad, And
a gift destroyeth the heart.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Better \[is\] the latter end of a thing
than its beginning, Better \[is\] the patient of spirit, than the
haughty of spirit.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry, For
anger in the bosom of fools resteth.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Say not thou, \`What was it, That the
former days were better than these?' For thou hast not asked wisely of
this.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Wisdom \[is\] good with an inheritance,
And an advantage \[it is\] to those beholding the sun.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> For wisdom \[is\] a defense, money \[is\]
a defence, And the advantage of the knowledge of wisdom \[is\], She
reviveth her possessors.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> See the work of God, For who is able to
make straight that which He made crooked?

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> In a day of prosperity be in gladness,
And in a day of evil consider. Also this over-against that hath God
made, To the intent that man doth not find anything after him.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> The whole I have considered in the days
of my vanity. There is a righteous one perishing in his righteousness,
and there is a wrong-doer prolonging \[himself\] in his wrong.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> Be not over-righteous, nor show thyself
too wise, why art thou desolate?

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Do not much wrong, neither be thou a
fool, why dost thou die within thy time?

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> \[It is\] good that thou dost lay hold on
this, and also, from that withdrawest not thy hand, for whoso is fearing
God goeth out with them all.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> The wisdom giveth strength to a wise man,
more than wealth the rulers who have been in a city.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Because there is not a righteous man on
earth that doth good and sinneth not.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Also to all the words that they speak
give not thy heart, that thou hear not thy servant reviling thee.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> For many times also hath thy heart known
that thou thyself also hast reviled others.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> All this I have tried by wisdom; I have
said, \`I am wise,' and it \[is\] far from me.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Far off \[is\] that which hath been, and
deep, deep, who doth find it?

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> I have turned round, also my heart, to
know and to search, and to seek out wisdom, and reason, and to know the
wrong of folly, and of foolishness the madness.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And I am finding more bitter than death,
the woman whose heart \[is\] nets and snares, her hands \[are\] bands;
the good before God escapeth from her, but the sinner is captured by
her.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> See, this I have found, said the
Preacher, one to one, to find out the reason

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> (that still my soul had sought, and I had
not found), One man, a teacher, I have found, and a woman among all
these I have not found.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> See, this alone I have found, that God
made man upright, and they -- they have sought out many devices.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Who \[is\] as the wise? and who knoweth the
interpretation of a thing? The wisdom of man causeth his face to shine,
and the hardness of his face is changed.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> I pray thee, the commandment of a king
keep, even for the sake of the oath of God.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Be not troubled at his presence, thou
mayest go, stand not in an evil thing, for all that he pleaseth he doth.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Where the word of a king \[is\] power
\[is\], and who saith to him, \`What dost thou?'

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Whoso is keeping a command knoweth no evil
thing, and time and judgment the heart of the wise knoweth.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> For to every delight there is a time and a
judgment, for the misfortune of man is great upon him.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For he knoweth not that which shall be, for
when it shall be who declareth to him?

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> There is no man ruling over the spirit to
restrain the spirit, and there is no authority over the day of death,
and there is no discharge in battle, and wickedness delivereth not its
possessors.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> All this I have seen so as to give my heart
to every work that hath been done under the sun; a time that man hath
ruled over man to his own evil.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And so I have seen the wicked buried, and
they went in, even from the Holy Place they go, and they are forgotten
in the city whether they had so done. This also \[is\] vanity.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Because sentence hath not been done
\[on\] an evil work speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of man is
full within them to do evil.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Though a sinner is doing evil a hundred
\[times\], and prolonging \[himself\] for it, surely also I know that
there is good to those fearing God, who fear before Him.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And good is not to the wicked, and he
doth not prolong days as a shadow, because he is not fearing before God.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> There is a vanity that hath been done
upon the earth, that there are righteous ones unto whom it is coming
according to the work of the wicked, and there are wicked ones unto whom
it is coming according to the work of the righteous. I have said that
this also \[is\] vanity.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And I have praised mirth because there is
no good to man under the sun except to eat and to drink, and to rejoice,
and it remaineth with him of his labour the days of his life that God
hath given to him under the sun.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> When I gave my heart to know wisdom and
to see the business that hath been done on the earth, (for there is also
a spectator in whose eyes sleep is not by day and by night),

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> then I considered all the work of God,
that man is not able to find out the work that hath been done under the
sun, because though man labour to seek, yet he doth not find; and even
though the wise man speak of knowing he is not able to find.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> But all this I have laid unto my heart, so
as to clear up the whole of this, that the righteous and the wise, and
their works, \[are\] in the hand of God, neither love nor hatred doth
man know, the whole \[is\] before them.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> The whole \[is\] as to the whole; one event
is to the righteous and to the wicked, to the good, and to the clean,
and to the unclean, and to him who is sacrificing, and to him who is not
sacrificing; as \[is\] the good, so \[is\] the sinner, he who is
swearing as he who is fearing an oath.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> This \[is\] an evil among all that hath
been done under the sun, that one event \[is\] to all, and also the
heart of the sons of man is full of evil, and madness \[is\] in their
heart during their life, and after it -- unto the dead.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> But \[to\] him who is joined unto all the
living there is confidence, for to a living dog it \[is\] better than to
the dead lion.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> For the living know that they die, and the
dead know not anything, and there is no more to them a reward, for their
remembrance hath been forgotten.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Their love also, their hatred also, their
envy also, hath already perished, and they have no more a portion to the
age in all that hath been done under the sun.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Go, eat with joy thy bread, and drink with
a glad heart thy wine, for already hath God been pleased with thy works.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> At all times let thy garments be white, and
let not perfume be lacking on thy head.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> See life with the wife whom thou hast
loved, all the days of the life of thy vanity, that He hath given to
thee under the sun, all the days of thy vanity, for it \[is\] thy
portion in life, even of thy labour that thou art labouring at under the
sun.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> All that thy hand findeth to do, with thy
power do, for there is no work, and device, and knowledge, and wisdom in
Sheol whither thou art going.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> I have turned so as to see under the sun,
that not to the swift \[is\] the race, nor to the mighty the battle, nor
even to the wise bread, nor even to the intelligent wealth, nor even to
the skilful grace, for time and chance happen with them all.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> For even man knoweth not his time; as
fish that are taken hold of by an evil net, and as birds that are taken
hold of by a snare, like these \[are\] the sons of man snared at an evil
time, when it falleth upon them suddenly.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> This also I have seen: wisdom under the
sun, and it is great to me.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> A little city, and few men in it, and a
great king hath come unto it, and hath surrounded it, and hath built
against it great bulwarks;

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> and there hath been found in it a poor
wise man, and he hath delivered the city by his wisdom, and men have not
remembered that poor man!

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And I said, \`Better \[is\] wisdom than
might, and the wisdom of the poor is despised, and his words are not
heard.' --

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> The words of the wise in quiet are heard,
More than the cry of a ruler over fools.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> Better \[is\] wisdom than weapons of
conflict, And one sinner destroyeth much good!

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Dead flies cause a perfumer's perfume To
send forth a stink; The precious by reason of wisdom -- By reason of
honour -- a little folly!

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> The heart of the wise \[is\] at his right
hand, And the heart of a fool at his left.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And also, when he that is a fool Is
walking in the way, his heart is lacking, And he hath said to every one,
\`He \[is\] a fool.'

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> If the spirit of the ruler go up against
thee, Thy place leave not, For yielding quieteth great sinners.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> There is an evil I have seen under the
sun, As an error that goeth out from the ruler,

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> He hath set the fool in many high places,
And the rich in a low place do sit.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> I have seen servants on horses, And
princes walking as servants on the earth.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Whoso is digging a pit falleth into it,
And whoso is breaking a hedge, a serpent biteth him.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Whoso is removing stones is grieved by
them, Whoso is cleaving trees endangered by them.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> If the iron hath been blunt, And he the
face hath not sharpened, Then doth he increase strength, And wisdom
\[is\] advantageous to make right.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> If the serpent biteth without
enchantment, Then there is no advantage to a master of the tongue.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Words of the mouth of the wise \[are\]
gracious, And the lips of a fool swallow him up.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> The beginning of the words of his mouth
\[is\] folly, And the latter end of his mouth \[Is\] mischievous
madness.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And the fool multiplieth words: \`Man
knoweth not that which is, And that which is after him, who doth declare
to him?'

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> The labour of the foolish wearieth him,
In that he hath not known to go unto the city.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Wo to thee, O land, when thy king
\[is\] a youth, And thy princes do eat in the morning.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Happy art thou, O land, When thy king
\[is\] a son of freemen, And thy princes do eat in due season, For
might, and not for drunkenness.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> By slothfulness is the wall brought
low, And by idleness of the hands doth the house drop.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> For mirth they are making a feast, And
wine maketh life joyful, And the silver answereth with all.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Even in thy mind a king revile not, And
in the inner parts of thy bed-chamber Revile not the rich: For a fowl of
the heavens causeth the voice to go, And a possessor of wings declareth
the word.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Send forth thy bread on the face of the
waters, For in the multitude of the days thou dost find it.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Give a portion to seven, and even to
eight, For thou knowest not what evil is on the earth.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> If the thick clouds are full of rain, On
the earth they empty \[themselves\]; And if a tree doth fall in the
south or to the north, The place where the tree falleth, there it is.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Whoso is observing the wind soweth not,
And whoso is looking on the thick clouds reapeth not.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> As thou knowest not what \[is\] the way
of the spirit, How -- bones in the womb of the full one, So thou knowest
not the work of God who maketh the whole.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> In the morning sow thy seed, And at even
withdraw not thy hand, For thou knowest not which is right, this or
that, Or whether both of them alike \[are\] good.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Sweet also \[is\] the light, And good for
the eyes to see the sun.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> But, if man liveth many years, In all of
them let him rejoice, And remember the days of darkness, For they are
many! all that is coming \[is\] vanity.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Rejoice, O young man, in thy childhood,
And let thy heart gladden thee in days of thy youth, And walk in the
ways of thy heart, And in the sight of thine eyes, And know thou that
for all these, Doth God bring thee into judgment.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And turn aside anger from thy heart,
And cause evil to pass from thy flesh, For the childhood and the age
\[are\] vanity!

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Remember also thy Creators in days of thy
youth, While that the evil days come not, Nor the years have arrived,
that thou sayest, \`I have no pleasure in them.'

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> While that the sun is not darkened, and
the light, And the moon, and the stars, And the thick clouds returned
after the rain.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> In the day that keepers of the house
tremble, And men of strength have bowed themselves, And grinders have
ceased, because they have become few. And those looking out at the
windows have become dim,

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And doors have been shut in the street.
When the noise of the grinding is low, And \[one\] riseth at the voice
of the bird, And all daughters of song are bowed down.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Also of that which is high they are
afraid, And of the low places in the way, And the almond-tree is
despised, And the grasshopper is become a burden, And want is increased,
For man is going unto his home age-during, And the mourners have gone
round through the street.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> While that the silver cord is not
removed, And the golden bowl broken, And the pitcher broken by the
fountain, And the wheel broken at the well.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And the dust returneth to the earth as it
was, And the spirit returneth to God who gave it.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Vanity of vanities, said the preacher,
the whole \[is\] vanity.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And further, because the preacher was
wise, he still taught the people knowledge, and gave ear, and sought out
-- he made right many similes.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> The preacher sought to find out
pleasing words, and, written \[by\] the upright, words of truth.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Words of the wise \[are\] as goads, and
as fences planted \[by\] the masters of collections, they have been
given by one shepherd.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And further, from these, my son, be
warned; the making of many books hath no end, and much study \[is\] a
weariness of the flesh.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> The end of the whole matter let us
hear: -- \`Fear God, and keep His commands, for this \[is\] the whole of
man.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> For every work doth God bring into
judgment, with every hidden thing, whether good or bad.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon](sol)
