[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gen)  [Next](lev.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Exodus

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> And these \[are\] the names of the sons of
Israel who are coming into Egypt with Jacob; a man and his household
have they come;

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Dan, and Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And all the persons coming out of the thigh
of Jacob are seventy persons; as to Joseph, he was in Egypt.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And Joseph dieth, and all his brethren, and
all that generation;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> and the sons of Israel have been fruitful,
and they teem, and multiply, and are very very mighty, and the land is
filled with them.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And there riseth a new king over Egypt, who
hath not known Joseph,

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> and he saith unto his people, \`Lo, the
people of the sons of Israel \[is\] more numerous and mighty than we;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> give help! let us act wisely concerning
it, lest it multiply, and it hath come to pass, when war happeneth, that
it hath been joined, even it, unto those hating us, and hath fought
against us, and hath gone out up of the land.'

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And they set over it princes of tribute,
so as to afflict it with their burdens, and it buildeth store-cities for
Pharaoh, Pithom and Raamses;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> and as they afflict it, so it
multiplieth, and so it breaketh forth, and they are vexed because of the
sons of Israel;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> and the Egyptians cause the sons of
Israel to serve with rigour,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> and make their lives bitter in hard
service, in clay, and in brick, and in every \[kind\] of service in the
field; all their service in which they have served \[is\] with rigour.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And the king of Egypt speaketh to the
midwives, the Hebrewesses, (of whom the name of the one \[is\] Shiphrah,
and the name of the second Puah),

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> and saith, \`When ye cause the Hebrew
women to bear, and have looked on the children; if it \[is\] a son --
then ye have put him to death; and if it \[is\] a daughter -- then she
hath lived.'

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And the midwives fear God, and have not
done as the king of Egypt hath spoken unto them, and keep the lads
alive;

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> and the king of Egypt calleth for the
midwives, and saith to them, \`Wherefore have ye done this thing, and
keep the lads alive?'

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And the midwives say unto Pharaoh,
\`Because the Hebrew women \[are\] not as the Egyptian women, for they
\[are\] lively; before the midwife cometh in unto them -- they have
borne!'

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And God doth good to the midwives, and
the people multiply, and are very mighty;

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> and it cometh to pass, because the
midwives have feared God, that He maketh for them households;

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> and Pharaoh layeth a charge on all his
people, saying, \`Every son who is born -- into the River ye do cast
him, and every daughter ye do keep alive.'

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And there goeth a man of the house of Levi,
and he taketh the daughter of Levi,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> and the woman conceiveth, and beareth a
son, and she seeth him that he \[is\] fair, and she hideth him three
months,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> and she hath not been able any more to hide
him, and she taketh for him an ark of rushes, and daubeth it with
bitumen and with pitch, and putteth the lad in it, and putteth \[it\] in
the weeds by the edge of the River;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> and his sister stationeth herself afar off,
to know what is done to him.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And a daughter of Pharaoh cometh down to
bathe at the River, and her damsels are walking by the side of the
River, and she seeth the ark in the midst of the weeds, and sendeth her
handmaid, and she taketh it,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> and openeth, and seeth him -- the lad, and
lo, a child weeping! and she hath pity on him, and saith, \`This is
\[one\] of the Hebrews' children.'

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And his sister saith unto the daughter of
Pharaoh, \`Do I go? when I have called for thee a suckling woman of the
Hebrews, then she doth suckle the lad for thee;'

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> and the daughter of Pharaoh saith to her,
\`Go;' and the virgin goeth, and calleth the mother of the lad,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> and the daughter of Pharaoh saith to her,
\`Take this lad away, and suckle him for me, and I -- I give thy hire;'
and the woman taketh the lad, and suckleth him.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And the lad groweth, and she bringeth him
in to the daughter of Pharaoh, and he is to her for a son, and she
calleth his name Moses, and saith, \`Because -- from the water I have
drawn him.'

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And it cometh to pass, in those days,
that Moses is grown, and he goeth out unto his brethren, and looketh on
their burdens, and seeth a man, an Egyptian, smiting a man, a Hebrew,
\[one\] of his brethren,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> and he turneth hither and thither, and
seeth that there is no man, and smiteth the Egyptian, and hideth him in
the sand.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And he goeth out on the second day, and
lo, two men, Hebrews, striving! and he saith to the wrong-doer, \`Why
dost thou smite thy neighbour?'

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> and he saith, \`Who set thee for a head
and a judge over us? to slay me art thou saying \[it\], as thou hast
slain the Egyptian?' and Moses feareth, and saith, \`Surely the thing
hath been known.'

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And Pharaoh heareth of this thing, and
seeketh to slay Moses, and Moses fleeth from the face of Pharaoh, and
dwelleth in the land of Midian, and dwelleth by the well.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And to a priest of Midian \[are\] seven
daughters, and they come and draw, and fill the troughs, to water the
flock of their father,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> and the shepherds come and drive them
away, and Moses ariseth, and saveth them, and watereth their flock.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And they come in to Reuel their father,
and he saith, \`Wherefore have ye hastened to come in to-day?'

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> and they say, \`A man, an Egyptian, hath
delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds, and also hath diligently
drawn for us, and watereth the flock;'

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> and he saith unto his daughters, \`And
where \[is\] he? why \[is\] this? -- ye left the man! call for him, and
he doth eat bread.'

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And Moses is willing to dwell with the
man, and he giveth Zipporah his daughter to Moses,

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> and she beareth a son, and he calleth his
name Gershom, for he said, \`A sojourner I have been in a strange land.'

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And it cometh to pass during these many
days, that the king of Egypt dieth, and the sons of Israel sigh because
of the service, and cry, and their cry goeth up unto God, because of the
service;

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> and God heareth their groaning, and God
remembereth His covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob;

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> and God seeth the sons of Israel, and God
knoweth.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And Moses hath been feeding the flock of
Jethro his father-in-law, priest of Midian, and he leadeth the flock
behind the wilderness, and cometh in unto the mount of God, to Horeb;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> and there appeareth unto him a messenger of
Jehovah in a flame of fire, out of the midst of the bush, and he seeth,
and lo, the bush is burning with fire, and the bush is not consumed.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And Moses saith, \`Let me turn aside, I
pray thee, and I see this great appearance; wherefore is the bush not
burned?'

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> and Jehovah seeth that he hath turned aside
to see, and God calleth unto him out of the midst of the bush, and
saith, \`Moses, Moses;' and he saith, \`Here \[am\] I.'

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And He saith, \`Come not near hither: cast
thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place on which thou art standing is
holy ground.'

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> He saith also, \`I \[am\] the God of thy
father, God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob;' and Moses
hideth his face, for he is afraid to look towards God.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And Jehovah saith, \`I have certainly seen
the affliction of My people who \[are\] in Egypt, and their cry I have
heard, because of its exactors, for I have known its pains;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> and I go down to deliver it out of the hand
of the Egyptians, and to cause it to go up out of the land, unto a land
good and broad, unto a land flowing with milk and honey -- unto the
place of the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Amorite, and the
Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> \`And now, lo, the cry of the sons of
Israel hath come in unto Me, and I have also seen the oppression with
which the Egyptians are oppressing them,

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> and now, come, and I send thee unto
Pharaoh, and bring thou out My people, the sons of Israel, out of
Egypt.'

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And Moses saith unto God, \`Who \[am\] I,
that I go unto Pharaoh, and that I bring out the sons of Israel from
Egypt?'

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> and He saith, \`Because I am with thee,
and this \[is\] to thee the sign that I have sent thee: in thy bringing
out the people from Egypt -- ye do serve God on this mount.'

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And Moses saith unto God, \`Lo, I am
coming unto the sons of Israel, and have said to them, The God of your
fathers hath sent me unto you, and they have said to me, What \[is\] His
name? what do I say unto them?'

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And God saith unto Moses, \`I AM THAT
WHICH I AM;' He saith also, \`Thus dost thou say to the sons of Israel,
I AM hath sent me unto you.'

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And God saith again unto Moses, \`Thus
dost thou say unto the sons of Israel, Jehovah, God of your fathers, God
of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you; this
\[is\] My name -- to the age, and this My memorial, to generation --
generation.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> \`Go, and thou hast gathered the elders
of Israel, and hast said unto them: Jehovah, God of your fathers, hath
appeareth unto me, God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, saying, I have
certainly inspected you, and that which is done to you in Egypt;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> and I say, I bring you up out of the
affliction of Egypt, unto the land of the Canaanite, and the Hittite,
and the Amorite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite,
unto a land flowing \[with\] milk and honey.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> \`And they have hearkened to thy voice,
and thou hast entered, thou and the elders of Israel, unto the king of
Egypt, and ye have said unto him, Jehovah, God of the Hebrews, hath met
with us; and now, let us go, we pray thee, a journey of three days into
the wilderness, and we sacrifice to Jehovah our God.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> \`And I -- I have known that the king of
Egypt doth not permit you to go, unless by a strong hand,

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> and I have put forth My hand, and have
smitten Egypt with all My wonders, which I do in its midst -- and
afterwards he doth send you away.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> \`And I have given the grace of this
people in the eyes of the Egyptians, and it hath come to pass, when ye
go, ye go not empty;

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> and \[every\] woman hath asked from her
neighbour, and from her who is sojourning in her house, vessels of
silver, and vessels of gold, and garments, and ye have put \[them\] on
your sons and on your daughters, and have spoiled the Egyptians.'

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And Moses answereth and saith, \`And, if
they do not give credence to me, nor hearken to my voice, and say,
Jehovah hath not appeared unto thee?'

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And Jehovah saith unto him, \`What \[is\]
this in thy hand?' and he saith, \`A rod;'

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> and He saith, \`Cast it to the earth;' and
he casteth it to the earth, and it becometh a serpent -- and Moses
fleeth from its presence.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Put forth
thy hand, and lay hold on the tail of it;' and he putteth forth his
hand, and layeth hold on it, and it becometh a rod in his hand --

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> \`-- so that they believe that Jehovah, God
of their fathers, hath appeared unto thee, God of Abraham, God of Isaac,
and God of Jacob.'

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And Jehovah saith to him again, \`Put in, I
pray thee, thy hand into thy bosom;' and he putteth in his hand into his
bosom, and he bringeth it out, and lo, his hand \[is\] leprous as snow;

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> and He saith, \`Put back thy hand unto thy
bosom;' and he putteth back his hand unto his bosom, and he bringeth it
out from his bosom, and lo, it hath turned back as his flesh --

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> \`-- and it hath come to pass, if they do
not give credence to thee, and hearken not to the voice of the first
sign, that they have given credence to the voice of the latter sign.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> \`And it hath come to pass, if they do not
give credence even to these two signs, nor hearken to thy voice, that
thou hast taken of the waters of the River, and hast poured on the dry
land, and the waters which thou takest from the River have been, yea,
they have become -- blood on the dry land.'

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And Moses saith unto Jehovah, \`O, my
Lord, I \[am\] not a man of words, either yesterday, or before, or since
Thy speaking unto Thy servant, for I \[am\] slow of mouth, and slow of
tongue.'

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And Jehovah saith unto him, \`Who
appointed a mouth for man? or who appointeth the dumb, or deaf, or open,
or blind? is it not I, Jehovah?

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> and now, go, and I -- I am with thy
mouth, and have directed thee that which thou speakest;'

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> and he saith, \`O, my Lord, send, I pray
thee, by the hand Thou dost send.'

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And the anger of Jehovah burneth against
Moses, and He saith, \`Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I have known
that he speaketh well, and also, lo, he is coming out to meet thee; when
he hath seen thee, then he hath rejoiced in his heart,

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> and thou hast spoken unto him, and hast
set the words in his mouth, and I -- I am with thy mouth, and with his
mouth, and have directed you that which ye do;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> and he, he hath spoken for thee unto the
people, and it hath come to pass, he -- he is to thee for a mouth, and
thou -- thou art to him for God;

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> and this rod thou dost take in thy hand,
with which thou doest the signs.'

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And Moses goeth and turneth back unto
Jethro his father-in-law, and saith to him, \`Let me go, I pray thee,
and I turn back unto my brethren who \[are\] in Egypt, and I see whether
they are yet alive.' And Jethro saith to Moses, \`Go in peace.'

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses in Midian,
\`Go, turn back to Egypt, for all the men have died who seek thy life;'

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> and Moses taketh his wife, and his sons,
and causeth them to ride on the ass, and turneth back to the land of
Egypt, and Moses taketh the rod of God in his hand.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`In thy
going to turn back to Egypt, see -- all the wonders which I have put in
thy hand -- that thou hast done them before Pharaoh, and I -- I
strengthen his heart, and he doth not send the people away;

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> and thou hast said unto Pharaoh, Thus
said Jehovah, My son, My first-born \[is\] Israel,

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> and I say unto thee, Send away My son,
and he doth serve Me; and -- thou dost refuse to send him away -- lo, I
am slaying thy son, thy first-born.'

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> And it cometh to pass in the way, in a
lodging place, that Jehovah meeteth him, and seeketh to put him to
death;

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> and Zipporah taketh a flint, and cutteth
off the foreskin of her son, and causeth \[it\] to touch his feet, and
saith, \`Surely a bridegroom of blood \[art\] thou to me;'

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> and He desisteth from him: then she said,
\`A bridegroom of blood,' in reference to the circumcision.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> And Jehovah saith unto Aaron, \`Go to
meet Moses into the wilderness;' and he goeth, and meeteth him in the
mount of God, and kisseth him,

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> and Moses declareth to Aaron all the
words of Jehovah with which He hath sent him, and all the signs with
which He hath charged him.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> And Moses goeth -- Aaron also -- and they
gather all the elders of the sons of Israel,

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> and Aaron speaketh all the words which
Jehovah hath spoken unto Moses, and doth the signs before the eyes of
the people;

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> and the people believe when they hear
that Jehovah hath looked after the sons of Israel, and that He hath seen
their affliction; and they bow and do obeisance.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And afterwards have Moses and Aaron
entered, and they say unto Pharaoh, \`Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel,
Send My people away, and they keep a feast to Me in the wilderness;'

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> and Pharaoh saith, \`Who \[is\] Jehovah,
that I hearken to His voice, to send Israel away? I have not known
Jehovah, and Israel also I do not send away.'

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And they say, \`The God of the Hebrews hath
met with us, let us go, we pray thee, a journey of three days into the
wilderness, and we sacrifice to Jehovah our God, lest He meet us with
pestilence or with sword.'

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And the king of Egypt saith unto them,
\`Why, Moses and Aaron, do ye free the people from its works? go to your
burdens.'

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Pharaoh also saith, \`Lo, numerous now
\[is\] the people of the land, and ye have caused them to cease from
their burdens!'

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And Pharaoh commandeth, on that day, the
exactors among the people and its authorities, saying,

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> \`Ye do not add to give straw to the people
for the making of the bricks, as heretofore -- they go and have gathered
straw for themselves;

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> and the proper quantity of the bricks which
they are making heretofore ye do put on them, ye do not diminish from
it, for they are remiss, therefore they are crying, saying, Let us go,
let us sacrifice to our God;

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> let the service be heavy on the men, and
let them work at it, and not be dazzled by lying words.'

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And the exactors of the people, and its
authorities, go out, and speak unto the people, saying, \`Thus said
Pharaoh, I do not give you straw,

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> ye -- go ye, take for yourselves straw
where ye find \[it\], for there is nothing of your service diminished.'

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And the people is scattered over all the
land of Egypt, to gather stubble for straw,

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> and the exactors are making haste,
saying, \`Complete your works, the matter of a day in its day, as when
there is straw.'

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And the authorities of the sons of
Israel, whom the exactors of Pharaoh have placed over them, are beaten,
saying, \`Wherefore have ye not completed your portion in making brick
as heretofore, both yesterday and to-day?'

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And the authorities of the sons of Israel
come in and cry unto Pharaoh, saying, \`Why dost thou thus to thy
servants?

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Straw is not given to thy servants, and
they are saying to us, Make bricks, and lo, thy servants are smitten --
and thy people hath sinned.'

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And he saith, \`Remiss -- ye are remiss,
therefore ye are saying, Let us go, let us sacrifice to Jehovah;

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> and now, go, serve; and straw is not
given to you, and the measure of bricks ye do give.'

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And the authorities of the sons of Israel
see them in affliction, saying, \`Ye do not diminish from your bricks;
the matter of a day in its day.'

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And they meet Moses and Aaron standing to
meet them, in their coming out from Pharaoh,

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> and say unto them, \`Jehovah look upon
you, and judge, because ye have caused our fragrance to stink in the
eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants -- to give a sword into
their hand to slay us.'

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> And Moses turneth back unto Jehovah, and
saith, \`Lord, why hast Thou done evil to this people? why \[is\] this?
-- Thou hast sent me!

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> and since I have come unto Pharaoh, to
speak in Thy name, he hath done evil to this people, and Thou hast not
at all delivered Thy people.'

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Now dost
thou see that which I do to Pharaoh, for with a strong hand he doth send
them away, yea, with a strong hand he doth cast them out of his land.'

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And God speaketh unto Moses, and saith unto
him, \`I \[am\] Jehovah,

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> and I appear unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and
unto Jacob, as God Almighty; as to My name Jehovah, I have not been
known to them;

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> and also I have established My covenant
with them, to give to them the land of Canaan, the land of their
sojournings, wherein they have sojourned;

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> and also I have heard the groaning of the
sons of Israel, whom the Egyptians are causing to serve, and I remember
My covenant.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> \`Therefore say to the sons of Israel, I
\[am\] Jehovah, and I have brought you out from under the burdens of the
Egyptians, and have delivered you from their service, and have redeemed
you by a stretched-out arm, and by great judgments,

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> and have taken you to Me for a people, and
I have been to you for God, and ye have known that I \[am\] Jehovah your
God, who is bringing you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians;

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> and I have brought you in unto the land
which I have lifted up My hand to give it to Abraham, to Isaac, and to
Jacob, and have given it to you -- a possession; I \[am\] Jehovah.'

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And Moses speaketh so unto the sons of
Israel, and they hearkened not unto Moses, for anguish of spirit, and
for harsh service.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> \`Go in, speak unto Pharaoh king of
Egypt, and he doth send the sons of Israel out of his land;

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> and Moses speaketh before Jehovah,
saying, \`Lo, the sons of Israel have not hearkened unto me, and how
doth Pharaoh hear me, and I of uncircumcised lips?'

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, and unto
Aaron, and chargeth them for the sons of Israel, and for Pharaoh king of
Egypt, to bring out the sons of Israel from the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> These \[are\] heads of the house of their
fathers: Sons of Reuben first-born of Israel \[are\] Hanoch, and Phallu,
Hezron, and Carmi: these \[are\] families of Reuben.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And sons of Simeon \[are\] Jemuel, and
Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul, son of the
Canaanitess: these \[are\] families of Simeon.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And these \[are\] the names of the sons
of Levi, as to their births: Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari: and the
years of the life of Levi \[are\] a hundred and thirty and seven years.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> The sons of Gershon \[are\] Libni, and
Shimi, as to their families.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And the sons of Kohath \[are\] Amram, and
Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel: and the years of the life of Kohath
\[are\] a hundred and thirty and three years.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And the sons of Merari \[are\] Mahli and
Mushi: these \[are\] families of Levi, as to their births.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> And Amram taketh Jochebed his aunt to
himself for a wife, and she beareth to him Aaron and Moses: and the
years of the life of Amram \[are\] a hundred and thirty and seven years.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And sons of Izhar \[are\] Korah, and
Nepheg, and Zichri.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And sons of Uzziel \[are\] Mishael, and
Elzaphan, and Sithri.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> And Aaron taketh Elisheba daughter of
Amminadab, sister of Naashon, to himself for a wife, and she beareth to
him Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> And sons of Korah \[are\] Assir, and
Elkanah, and Abiasaph: these \[are\] families of the Korhite.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> And Eleazar, Aaron's son, hath taken to
him \[one\] of the daughters of Putiel for a wife to himself, and she
beareth to him Phinehas: these \[are\] heads of the fathers of the
Levites, as to their families.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> This \[is\] Aaron -- and Moses -- to whom
Jehovah said, \`Bring ye out the sons of Israel from the land of Egypt,
by their hosts;'

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> these are they who are speaking unto
Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring out the sons of Israel from Egypt, this
\[is\] Moses -- and Aaron.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> And it cometh to pass in the day of
Jehovah's speaking unto Moses in the land of Egypt,

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> that Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
\`I \[am\] Jehovah, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I am
speaking unto thee.'

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> And Moses saith before Jehovah, \`Lo, I
\[am\] of uncircumcised lips, and how doth Pharaoh hearken unto me?'

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`See, I have
given thee a god to Pharaoh, and Aaron thy brother is thy prophet;

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> thou -- thou dost speak all that I command
thee, and Aaron thy brother doth speak unto Pharaoh, and he hath sent
the sons of Israel out of his land.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> \`And I harden the heart of Pharaoh, and
have multiplied My signs and My wonders in the land of Egypt,

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> and Pharaoh doth not hearken, and I have
put My hand on Egypt, and have brought out My hosts, My people, the sons
of Israel, from the land of Egypt by great judgments;

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> and the Egyptians have known that I \[am\]
Jehovah, in My stretching out My hand against Egypt; and I have brought
out the sons of Israel from their midst.'

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And Moses doth -- Aaron also -- as Jehovah
commanded them; so have they done;

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> and Moses \[is\] a son of eighty years, and
Aaron \[is\] a son of eighty and three years, in their speaking unto
Pharaoh.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses and unto
Aaron, saying,

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> \`When Pharaoh speaketh unto you, saying,
Give for yourselves a wonder; then thou hast said unto Aaron, Take thy
rod, and cast before Pharaoh -- it becometh a monster.'

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And Moses goeth in -- Aaron also -- unto
Pharaoh, and they do so as Jehovah hath commanded; and Aaron casteth his
rod before Pharaoh, and before his servants, and it becometh a monster.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And Pharaoh also calleth for wise men,
and for sorcerers; and the scribes of Egypt, they also, with their
flashings, do so,

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> and they cast down each his rod, and they
become monsters, and the rod of Aaron swalloweth their rods;

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> and the heart of Pharaoh is strong, and
he hath not hearkened unto them, as Jehovah hath spoken.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`The heart
of Pharaoh hath been hard, he hath refused to send the people away;

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> go unto Pharaoh in the morning, lo, he is
going out to the water, and thou hast stood to meet him by the edge of
the River, and the rod which was turned to a serpent thou dost take in
thy hand,

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> and thou hast said unto him: Jehovah, God
of the Hebrews, hath sent me unto thee, saying, Send My people away, and
they serve Me in the wilderness; and lo, thou hast not hearkened
hitherto.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> \`Thus said Jehovah: By this thou knowest
that I \[am\] Jehovah; lo, I am smiting with the rod which \[is\] in my
hand, on the waters which \[are\] in the River, and they have been
turned to blood,

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> and the fish that \[are\] in the River
die, and the River hath stank, and the Egyptians have been wearied of
drinking waters from the River.'

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Say unto
Aaron, Take thy rod, and stretch out thy hand against the waters of
Egypt, against their streams, against their rivers, and against their
ponds, and against all their collections of waters; and they are blood
-- and there hath been blood in all the land of Egypt, both in \[vessels
of\] wood, and in \[those of\] stone.'

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And Moses and Aaron do so, as Jehovah
hath commanded, and he lifteth up \[his hand\] with the rod, and smiteth
the waters which \[are\] in the River, before the eyes of Pharaoh, and
before the eyes of his servants, and all the waters which \[are\] in the
River are turned to blood,

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> and the fish which \[is\] in the River
hath died, and the River stinketh, and the Egyptians have not been able
to drink water from the River; and the blood is in all the land of
Egypt.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And the scribes of Egypt do so with their
flashings, and the heart of Pharaoh is strong, and he hath not hearkened
unto them, as Jehovah hath spoken,

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> and Pharaoh turneth and goeth in unto his
house, and hath not set his heart even to this;

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> and all the Egyptians seek water round
about the river to drink, for they have not been able to drink of the
waters of the River.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And seven days are completed after
Jehovah's smiting the River,

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Go in unto
Pharaoh: and thou hast said unto him, Thus said Jehovah, Send My people
away, and they serve Me;

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> and if thou art refusing to send away, lo,
I am smiting all thy border with frogs;

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> and the River hath teemed \[with\] frogs,
and they have gone up and gone into thy house, and into the
inner-chamber of thy bed, and on thy couch, and into the house of thy
servants, and among thy people, and into thine ovens, and into thy
kneading-troughs;

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> yea, on thee, and on thy people, and on all
thy servants do the frogs go up.'

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Say unto
Aaron, Stretch out thy hand, with thy rod, against the streams, against
the rivers, and against the ponds, and cause the frogs to come up
against the land of Egypt.'

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And Aaron stretcheth out his hand against
the waters of Egypt, and the frog cometh up, and covereth the land of
Egypt;

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> and the scribes do so with their flashings,
and cause the frogs to come up against the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And Pharaoh calleth for Moses and for
Aaron, and saith, \`Make supplication unto Jehovah, that he turn aside
the frogs from me, and from my people, and I send the people away, and
they sacrifice to Jehovah.'

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And Moses saith to Pharaoh, \`Beautify
thyself over me; when do I make supplication for thee, and for thy
servants, and for thy people, to cut off the frogs from thee and from
thy houses -- only in the River they do remain?'

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> and he saith, \`To-morrow.' And he saith,
According to thy word \[it is\], so that thou knowest that there is none
like Jehovah our God,

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> and the frogs have turned aside from
thee, and from thy houses, and from thy servants, and from thy people;
only in the River they do remain.'

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And Moses -- Aaron also -- goeth out from
Pharaoh, and Moses crieth unto Jehovah, concerning the matter of the
frogs which He hath set on Pharaoh;

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> and Jehovah doth according to the word of
Moses, and the frogs die out of the houses, out of the courts, and out
of the fields,

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> and they heap them up together, and the
land stinketh.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And Pharaoh seeth that there hath been a
respite, and he hath hardened his heart, and hath not hearkened unto
them, as Jehovah hath spoken.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Say unto
Aaron, Stretch out thy rod, and smite the dust of the land, and it hath
become gnats in all the land of Egypt.'

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And they do so, and Aaron stretcheth out
his hand with his rod, and smiteth the dust of the land, and the gnats
are on man and on beast; all the dust of the land hath been gnats in all
the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And the scribes do so with their
flashings, to bring out the gnats, and they have not been able, and the
gnats are on man and on beast;

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> and the scribes say unto Pharaoh, \`It
\[is\] the finger of God;' and the heart of Pharaoh is strong, and he
hath not hearkened unto them, as Jehovah hath spoken.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Rise
early in the morning, and station thyself before Pharaoh, lo, he is
going out to the waters, and thou hast said unto him, Thus said Jehovah,
Send My people away, and they serve Me;

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> for, if thou art not sending My people
away, lo, I am sending against thee, and against thy servants, and
against thy people, and against thy houses, the beetle, and the houses
of the Egyptians have been full of the beetle, and also the ground on
which they are.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> \`And I have separated in that day the
land of Goshen, in which My people are staying, that the beetle is not
there, so that thou knowest that I \[am\] Jehovah in the midst of the
land,

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> and I have put a division between My
people and thy people: to-morrow is this sign.'

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And Jehovah doth so, and the grievous
beetle entereth the house of Pharaoh, and the house of his servants, and
in all the land of Egypt the land is corrupted from the presence of the
beetle.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> And Pharaoh calleth unto Moses and to
Aaron, and saith, \`Go, sacrifice to your God in the land;'

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> and Moses saith, \`Not right to do so,
for the abomination of the Egyptians we do sacrifice to Jehovah our God;
lo, we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes --
and they do not stone us!

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> A journey of three days we go into the
wilderness, and have sacrificed to Jehovah our God, as He saith unto
us.'

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And Pharaoh saith, \`I send you away, and
ye have sacrificed to Jehovah your God in the wilderness, only go not
very far off; make ye supplication for me;'

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> and Moses saith, \`Lo, I am going out
from thee, and have made supplication unto Jehovah, and the beetle hath
turned aside from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people --
to-morrow, only let not Pharaoh add to deceive -- in not sending the
people away to sacrifice to Jehovah.'

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And Moses goeth out from Pharaoh, and
maketh supplication unto Jehovah,

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> and Jehovah doth according to the word of
Moses, and turneth aside the beetle from Pharaoh, from his servants, and
from his people -- there hath not been left one;

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> and Pharaoh hardeneth his heart also at
this time, and hath not sent the people away.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Go in unto
Pharaoh, and thou hast spoken unto him, Thus said Jehovah, God of the
Hebrews, Send My people away, and they serve me,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> for, if thou art refusing to send away, and
art still keeping hold upon them,

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> lo, the hand of Jehovah is on thy cattle
which \[are\] in the field, on horses, on asses, on camels, on herd, and
on flock -- a pestilence very grievous.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> \`And Jehovah hath separated between the
cattle of Israel and the cattle of Egypt, and there doth not die a thing
of all the sons of Israel's;

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> and Jehovah setteth an appointed time,
saying, To-morrow doth Jehovah do this thing in the land.'

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And Jehovah doth this thing on the morrow,
and all the cattle of Egypt die, and of the cattle of the sons of Israel
not one hath died;

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> and Pharaoh sendeth, and lo, not even one
of the cattle of Israel hath died, and the heart of Pharaoh is hard, and
he hath not sent the people away.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses and unto
Aaron, \`Take to you the fulness of your hands \[of\] soot of a furnace,
and Moses hath sprinkled it towards the heavens, before the eyes of
Pharaoh,

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> and it hath become small dust over all the
land of Egypt, and it hath become on man and on cattle a boil breaking
forth \[with\] blains, in all the land of Egypt.'

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And they take the soot of the furnace,
and stand before Pharaoh, and Moses sprinkleth it towards the heavens,
and it is a boil \[with\] blains, breaking forth, on man and on beast;

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> and the scribes have not been able to
stand before Moses, because of the boil, for the boil hath been on the
scribes, and on all the Egyptians.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And Jehovah strengtheneth the heart of
Pharaoh, and he hath not hearkened unto them, as Jehovah hath spoken
unto Moses.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Rise
early in the morning, and station thyself before Pharaoh, and thou hast
said unto him, Thus said Jehovah, God of the Hebrews, Send My people
away, and they serve Me,

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> for, at this time I am sending all My
plagues unto thy heart, and on thy servants, and on thy people, so that
thou knowest that there is none like Me in all the earth,

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> for now I have put forth My hand, and I
smite thee, and thy people, with pestilence, and thou art hidden from
the earth.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> \`And yet for this I have caused thee to
stand, so as to show thee My power, and for the sake of declaring My
Name in all the earth;

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> still thou art exalting thyself against
My people -- so as not to send them away;

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> lo, I am raining about \[this\] time
to-morrow hail very grievous, such as hath not been in Egypt, even from
the day of its being founded, even until now.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> \`And, now, send, strengthen thy cattle
and all that thou hast in the field; every man and beast which is found
in the field, and is not gathered into the house -- come down on them
hath the hail, and they have died.'

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> He who is fearing the word of Jehovah
among the servants of Pharaoh hath caused his servants and his cattle to
flee unto the houses;

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> and he who hath not set his heart unto
the word of Jehovah leaveth his servants and his cattle in the field.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Stretch
forth thy hand towards the heavens, and there is hail in all the land of
Egypt, on man, and on beast, and on every herb of the field in the land
of Egypt.'

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And Moses stretcheth out his rod towards
the heavens, and Jehovah hath given voices and hail, and fire goeth
towards the earth, and Jehovah raineth hail on the land of Egypt,

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> and there is hail, and fire catching
itself in the midst of the hail, very grievous, such as hath not been in
all the land of Egypt since it hath become a nation.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And the hail smiteth in all the land of
Egypt all that \[is\] in the field, from man even unto beast, and every
herb of the field hath the hail smitten, and every tree of the field it
hath broken;

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> only in the land of Goshen, where the
sons of Israel \[are\], there hath been no hail.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And Pharaoh sendeth, and calleth for
Moses and for Aaron, and saith unto them, \`I have sinned this time,
Jehovah \[is\] the Righteous, and I and my people \[are\] the Wicked,

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> make ye supplication unto Jehovah, and
plead that there be no voices of God and hail, and I send you away, and
ye add not to remain.'

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> And Moses saith unto him, \`At my going
out of the city, I spread my palms unto Jehovah -- the voices cease, and
the hail is not any more, so that thou knowest that the earth \[is\]
Jehovah's;

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> but thou and thy servants -- I have known
that ye are not yet afraid of the face of Jehovah God.'

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> And the flax and the barley have been
smitten, for the barley \[is\] budding, and the flax forming flowers,

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> and the wheat and the rye have not been
smitten, for they are late.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> And Moses goeth out from Pharaoh,
\[from\] the city, and spreadeth his hands unto Jehovah, and the voices
and the hail cease, and rain hath not been poured out to the earth;

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> and Pharaoh seeth that the rain hath
ceased, and the hail and the voices, and he continueth to sin, and
hardeneth his heart, he and his servants;

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> and the heart of Pharaoh is strong, and
he hath not sent the sons of Israel away, as Jehovah hath spoken by the
hand of Moses.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Go in
unto Pharaoh, for I have declared hard his heart, and the heart of his
servants, so that I set these My signs in their midst,

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> and so that thou recountest in the ears
of thy son, and of thy son's son, that which I have done in Egypt, and
My signs which I have set among them, and ye have known that I \[am\]
Jehovah.'

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And Moses cometh in -- Aaron also -- unto
Pharaoh, and they say unto him, \`Thus said Jehovah, God of the Hebrews,
Until when hast thou refused to be humbled at My presence? send My
people away, and they serve Me,

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> for if thou art refusing to send My
people away, lo, I am bringing in to-morrow the locust into thy border,

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> and it hath covered the eye of the land,
and none is able to see the land, and it hath eaten the remnant of that
which is escaped, which is left to you from the hail, and it hath eaten
every tree which is springing for you out of the field;

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> and they have filled thy houses, and the
houses of all thy servants, and the houses of all the Egyptians, which
neither thy fathers nor thy father's fathers have seen, since the day of
their being on the ground unto this day,' -- and he turneth and goeth
out from Pharaoh.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And the servants of Pharaoh say unto him,
\`Until when doth this \[one\] become a snare to us? send the men away,
and they serve Jehovah their God; knowest thou not yet that Egypt hath
perished?'

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And Moses is brought back -- Aaron also
-- unto Pharaoh, and he saith unto them, \`Go, serve Jehovah your God;
-- who and who \[are\] those going?'

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And Moses saith, \`With our young ones,
and with our aged ones, we go, with our sons, and with our daughters,
with our flock, and our herd, we go, for we have a festival to Jehovah.'

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And he saith unto them, \`Be it so,
Jehovah \[be\] with you when I send you and your infants away; see --
for evil \[is\] before your faces;

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> not so! go now, ye who \[are\] men, and
serve Jehovah, for that ye are seeking;' and \[one\] casteth them out
from the presence of Pharaoh.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Stretch
out thy hand against the land of Egypt for the locust, and it goeth up
against the land of Egypt, and doth eat every herb of the land -- all
that the hail hath left.'

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And Moses stretcheth out his rod
against the land of Egypt, and Jehovah hath led an east wind over the
land all that day, and all the night; the morning hath been, and the
east wind hath lifted up the locust.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And the locust goeth up against all the
land of Egypt, and resteth in all the border of Egypt -- very grievous:
before it there hath not been such a locust as it, and after it there is
none such;

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> and it covereth the eye of all the
land, and the land is darkened; and it eateth every herb of the land,
and all the fruit of the trees which the hail hath left, and there hath
not been left any green thing in the trees, or in the herb of the field,
in all the land of Egypt.'

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And Pharaoh hasteth to call for Moses
and for Aaron, and saith, \`I have sinned against Jehovah your God, and
against you,

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> and now, bear with, I pray you, my sin,
only this time, and make ye supplication to Jehovah your God, that He
turn aside from off me only this death.'

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And he goeth out from Pharaoh, and
maketh supplication unto Jehovah,

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> and Jehovah turneth a very strong sea
wind, and it lifteth up the locust, and bloweth it into the Red Sea --
there hath not been left one locust in all the border of Egypt;

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> and Jehovah strengtheneth the heart of
Pharaoh, and he hath not sent the sons of Israel away.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Stretch
out thy hand towards the heavens, and there is darkness over the land of
Egypt, and the darkness is felt.'

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And Moses stretcheth out his hand
towards the heavens, and there is darkness -- thick darkness in all the
land of Egypt three days;

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> they have not seen one another, and
none hath risen from his place three days; and to all the sons of Israel
there hath been light in their dwellings.'

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And Pharaoh calleth unto Moses and
saith, \`Go ye, serve Jehovah, only your flock and your herd are stayed,
your infants also go with you;'

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> and Moses saith, \`Thou also dost give
in our hand sacrifices and burnt-offerings, and we have prepared for
Jehovah our God;

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> and also our cattle doth go with us,
there is not left a hoof, for from it we do take to serve Jehovah our
God; and we -- we know not how we do serve Jehovah till our going
thither.'

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And Jehovah strengtheneth the heart of
Pharaoh, and he hath not been willing to send them away;

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> and Pharaoh saith to him, \`Go from me,
take heed to thyself, add not to see my face, for in the day thou seest
my face thou diest;'

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> and Moses saith, \`Rightly hast thou
spoken, I add not any more to see thy face.'

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`One
plague more I do bring in on Pharaoh, and on Egypt, afterwards he doth
send you away from this; when he is sending you away, he surely casteth
you out altogether from this \[place\];

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> speak, I pray thee, in the ears of the
people, and they ask -- each man from his neighbour, and each woman from
her neighbour, vessels of silver, and vessels of gold.'

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And Jehovah giveth the grace of the
people in the eyes of the Egyptians; also the man Moses \[is\] very
great in the land of Egypt, in the eyes of the servants of Pharaoh, and
in the eyes of the people.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And Moses saith, \`Thus said Jehovah,
About midnight I am going out into the midst of Egypt,

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> and every first-born in the land of Egypt
hath died, from the first-born of Pharaoh who is sitting on his throne,
unto the first-born of the maid-servant who \[is\] behind the
millstones, and all the first-born of beasts;

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> and there hath been a great cry in all
the land of Egypt, such as there hath not been, and such as there is not
again.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> \`And against all the sons of Israel a
dog sharpeneth not its tongue, from man even unto beast, so that ye know
that Jehovah doth make a separation between the Egyptians and Israel;

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> and all these thy servants have come down
unto me, and bowed themselves to me, saying, Go out, thou and all the
people who \[are\] at thy feet; and afterwards I do go out;' -- and he
goeth out from Pharaoh in the heat of anger.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Pharaoh
doth not hearken unto you, so as to multiply My wonders in the land of
Egypt;'

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> and Moses and Aaron have done all these
wonders before Pharaoh, and Jehovah strengtheneth Pharaoh's heart, and
he hath not sent the sons of Israel out of his land.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses and unto
Aaron, in the land of Egypt, saying,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> \`This month \[is\] to you the chief of
months -- it \[is\] the first to you of the months of the year;

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> speak ye unto all the company of Israel,
saying, In the tenth of this month -- they take to them each man a lamb
for the house of the fathers, a lamb for a house.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> \`(And if the household be too few for a
lamb, then hath he taken, he and his neighbour who is near unto his
house, for the number of persons, each according to his eating ye do
count for the lamb,)

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> a lamb, a perfect one, a male, a son of a
year, let be to you; from the sheep or from the goats ye do take \[it\].

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> \`And it hath become a charge to you,
until the fourteenth day of this month, and the whole assembly of the
company of Israel have slaughtered it between the evenings;

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> and they have taken of the blood, and
have put on the two side-posts, and on the lintel over the houses in
which they eat it.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> \`And they have eaten the flesh in this
night, roast with fire; with unleavened things and bitters they do eat
it;

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> ye do not eat of it raw, or boiled at all
in water, but roast with fire, its head with its legs, and with its
inwards;

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> and ye do not leave of it till morning,
and that which is remaining of it till morning with fire ye do burn.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> \`And thus ye do eat it: your loins
girded, your sandals on your feet, and your staff in your hand, and ye
have eaten it in haste; it is Jehovah's passover,

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> and I have passed over through the land
of Egypt during this night, and have smitten every first-born in the
land of Egypt, from man even unto beast, and on all the gods of Egypt I
do judgments; I \[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> \`And the blood hath become a sign for
you on the houses where ye \[are\], and I have seen the blood, and have
passed over you, and a plague is not on you for destruction in My
smiting in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> \`And this day hath become to you a
memorial, and ye have kept it a feast to Jehovah to your generations; --
a statute age-during; ye keep it a feast.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Seven days ye eat unleavened things;
only -- in the first day ye cause leaven to cease out of your houses;
for any one eating anything fermented from the first day till the
seventh day, even that person hath been cut off from Israel.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> \`And in the first day \[is\] a holy
convocation, and in the seventh day ye have a holy convocation; any work
is not done in them, only that which is eaten by any person -- it alone
is done by you,

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> and ye have observed the unleavened
things, for in this self-same day I have brought out your hosts from the
land of Egypt, and ye have observed this day to your generations -- a
statute age-during.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> \`In the first \[month\], in the
fourteenth day of the month, in the evening, ye do eat unleavened things
until the one and twentieth day of the month, at evening;

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> seven days leaven is not found in your
houses, for any \[one\] eating anything fermented -- that person hath
been cut off from the company of Israel, among the sojourners or among
the natives of the land;

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> anything fermented ye do not eat, in
all your dwellings ye do eat unleavened things.'

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And Moses calleth for all the elders of
Israel, and saith unto them, \`Draw out and take for yourselves \[from\]
the flock, for your families, and slaughter the passover-sacrifice;

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> and ye have taken a bunch of hyssop,
and have dipped \[it\] in the blood which \[is\] in the basin, and have
struck \[it\] on the lintel, and on the two side-posts, from the blood
which \[is\] in the basin, and ye, ye go not out each from the opening
of his house till morning.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> \`And Jehovah hath passed on to smite
the Egyptians, and hath seen the blood on the lintel, and on the two
side-posts, and Jehovah hath passed over the opening, and doth not
permit the destruction to come into your houses to smite.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> \`And ye have observed this thing, for
a statute to thee, and to thy sons -- unto the age;

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> and it hath been, when ye come in unto
the land which Jehovah giveth to you, as He hath spoken, that ye have
kept this service;

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> and it hath come to pass when your sons
say unto you, What \[is\] this service ye have?

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> that ye have said, A sacrifice of
passover it \[is\] to Jehovah, who passed over the houses of the sons of
Israel in Egypt, in His smiting the Egyptians, and our houses He
delivered.'

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> And the people bow and do obeisance,
and the sons of Israel go and do as Jehovah commanded Moses and Aaron;
so have they done.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> And it cometh to pass, at midnight,
that Jehovah hath smitten every first-born in the land of Egypt, from
the first-born of Pharaoh who is sitting on his throne, unto the
first-born of the captive who \[is\] in the prison-house, and every
first-born of beasts.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> And Pharaoh riseth by night, he and all
his servants, and all the Egyptians, and there is a great cry in Egypt,
for there is not a house where there is not \[one\] dead,

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> and he calleth for Moses and for Aaron
by night, and saith, \`Rise, go out from the midst of my people, both ye
and the sons of Israel, and go, serve Jehovah according to your word;

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> both your flock and your herd take ye,
as ye have spoken, and go; then ye have blessed also me.'

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> And the Egyptians are urgent on the
people, hasting to send them away out of the land, for they said, \`We
are all dead;'

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> and the people taketh up its dough
before it is fermented, their kneading-troughs \[are\] bound up in their
garments on their shoulder.

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> And the sons of Israel have done
according to the word of Moses, and they ask from the Egyptians vessels
of silver and vessels of gold, and garments;

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> and Jehovah hath given the grace of the
people in the eyes of the Egyptians, and they cause them to ask, and
they spoil the Egyptians.

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> And the sons of Israel journey from
Rameses to Succoth, about six hundred thousand men on foot, apart from
infants;

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> and a great rabble also hath gone up
with them, and flock and herd -- very much cattle.

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> And they bake with the dough which they
have brought out from Egypt unleavened cakes, for it hath not fermented;
for they have been cast out of Egypt, and have not been able to delay,
and also provision they have not made for themselves.

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> And the dwelling of the sons of Israel
which they have dwelt in Egypt \[is\] four hundred and thirty years;

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> and it cometh to pass, at the end of
four hundred and thirty years -- yea, it cometh to pass in this
self-same day -- all the hosts of Jehovah have gone out from the land of
Egypt.

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> A night of watchings it \[is\] to
Jehovah, to bring them out from the land of Egypt; it \[is\] this night
to Jehovah of watchings to all the sons of Israel to their generations.

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses and Aaron,
\`This \[is\] a statute of the passover; Any son of a stranger doth not
eat of it;

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> and any man's servant, the purchase of
money, when thou hast circumcised him -- then he doth eat of it;

<span id="an_12:45">12:45</span> a settler or hired servant doth not eat
of it;

<span id="an_12:46">12:46</span> in one house it is eaten, thou dost not
carry out of the house \[any\] of the flesh without, and a bone ye do
not break of it;

<span id="an_12:47">12:47</span> all the company of Israel do keep it.

<span id="an_12:48">12:48</span> \`And when a sojourner sojourneth with
thee, and hath made a passover to Jehovah, every male of his \[is\] to
be circumcised, and then he doth come near to keep it, and he hath been
as a native of the land, but any uncircumcised one doth not eat of it;

<span id="an_12:49">12:49</span> one law is to a native, and to a
sojourner who is sojourning in your midst.'

<span id="an_12:50">12:50</span> And all the sons of Israel do as
Jehovah commanded Moses and Aaron; so have they done.

<span id="an_12:51">12:51</span> And it cometh to pass in this self-same
day, Jehovah hath brought out the sons of Israel from the land of Egypt,
by their hosts.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> \`Sanctify to Me every first-born,
opening any womb among the sons of Israel, among man and among beast; it
\[is\] Mine.'

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And Moses saith unto the people,
\`Remember this day \[in\] which ye have gone out from Egypt, from the
house of servants, for by strength of hand hath Jehovah brought you out
from this, and any thing fermented is not eaten;

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> To-day ye are going out, in the month of
Abib.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> \`And it hath been, when Jehovah bringeth
thee in unto the land of the Canaanite, and of the Hittite, and of the
Amorite, and of the Hivite, and of the Jebusite, which He hath sworn to
thy fathers to give to thee, a land flowing with milk and honey, that
thou hast done this service in this month.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> \`Seven days thou dost eat unleavened
things, and in the seventh day \[is\] a feast to Jehovah;

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> unleavened things are eaten the seven
days, and any thing fermented is not seen with thee; yea, leaven is not
seen with thee in all thy border.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> \`And thou hast declared to thy son in
that day, saying, \`\[It is\] because of what Jehovah did to me, in my
going out from Egypt,

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> and it hath been to thee for a sign on
thy hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes, so that the law of
Jehovah is in thy mouth, for by a strong hand hath Jehovah brought thee
out from Egypt;

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> and thou hast kept this statute at its
appointed season from days to days.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> \`And it hath been, when Jehovah
bringeth thee in unto the land of the Canaanite, as He hath sworn to
thee and to thy fathers, and hath given it to thee,

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> that thou hast caused every one opening
a womb to pass over to Jehovah, and every firstling -- the increase of
beasts which thou hast: the males \[are\] Jehovah's.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> \`And every firstling of an ass thou
dost ransom with a lamb, and if thou dost not ransom \[it\], then thou
hast beheaded it: and every first-born of man among thy sons thou dost
ransom.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> \`And it hath been, when thy son asketh
thee hereafter, saying, What \[is\] this? that thou hast said unto him,
By strength of hand hath Jehovah brought us out from Egypt, from a house
of servants;

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> yea, it cometh to pass, when Pharaoh
hath been pained to send us away, that Jehovah doth slay every
first-born in the land of Egypt, from the first-born of man even unto
the first-born of beast; therefore I am sacrificing to Jehovah all
opening a womb who \[are\] males, and every first-born of my sons I
ransom;

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> and it hath been for a token on thy
hand, and for frontlets between thine eyes, for by strength of hand hath
Jehovah brought us out of Egypt.'

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> And it cometh to pass in Pharaoh's
sending the people away, that God hath not led them the way of the land
of the Philistines, for it \[is\] near; for God said, \`Lest the people
repent in their seeing war, and have turned back towards Egypt;'

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> and God turneth round the people the
way of the wilderness of the Red Sea, and by fifties have the sons of
Israel gone up from the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And Moses taketh the bones of Joseph
with him, for he certainly caused the sons of Israel to swear, saying,
\`God doth certainly inspect you, and ye have brought up my bones from
this with you.'

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And they journey from Succoth, and
encamp in Etham at the extremity of the wilderness,

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> and Jehovah is going before them by day
in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them in the way, and by night in a
pillar of fire, to give light to them, to go by day and by night;

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> He removeth not the pillar of the cloud
by day, and the pillar of the fire by night, \[from\] before the people.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> \`Speak unto the sons of Israel, and they
turn back and encamp before Pi-Hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea,
before Baal-Zephon; over-against it ye do encamp by the sea,

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> and Pharaoh hath said of the sons of
Israel, They are entangled in the land, the wilderness hath shut upon
them;

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> and I have strengthened the heart of
Pharaoh, and he hath pursued after them, and I am honoured on Pharaoh,
and on all his force, and the Egyptians have known that I \[am\]
Jehovah;' and they do so.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And it is declared to the king of Egypt
that the people hath fled, and the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants
is turned against the people, and they say, \`What \[is\] this we have
done? that we have sent Israel away from our service.'

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And he harnesseth his chariot, and his
people he hath taken with him,

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> and he taketh six hundred chosen
chariots, even all the chariots of Egypt, and captains over them all;

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> and Jehovah strengtheneth the heart of
Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he pursueth after the sons of Israel, and the
sons of Israel are going out with a high hand,

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> and the Egyptians pursue after them, and
all the chariot horses of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his force,
overtake them, encamping by the sea, by Pi-Hahiroth, before Baal-Zephon.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And Pharaoh hath drawn near, and the
sons of Israel lift up their eyes, and lo, the Egyptians are journeying
after them, and they fear exceedingly, and the sons of Israel cry unto
Jehovah.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And they say unto Moses, \`Because
there are no graves in Egypt, hast thou taken us away to die in a
wilderness? what is this thou hast done to us -- to bring us out from
Egypt?

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> Is not this the word which we spake
unto thee in Egypt, saying, Cease from us, and we serve the Egyptians;
for better for us to serve the Egyptians than to die in a wilderness?'

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And Moses saith unto the people, \`Fear
not, station yourselves, and see the salvation of Jehovah, which He doth
for you to-day; for, as ye have seen the Egyptians to-day, ye add no
more to see them -- to the age;

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> Jehovah doth fight for you, and ye keep
silent.'

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`What?
thou criest unto Me -- speak unto the sons of Israel, and they journey;

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> and thou, lift up thy rod, and stretch
out thy hand towards the sea, and cleave it, and the sons of Israel go
into the midst of the sea on dry land.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> \`And I -- lo, I am strengthening the
heart of the Egyptians, and they go in after them, and I am honoured on
Pharaoh, and on all his force, on his chariots, and on his horsemen;

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> and the Egyptians have known that I
\[am\] Jehovah, in My being honoured on Pharaoh, on his chariots, and on
his horsemen.'

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And the messenger of God, who is going
before the camp of Israel, journeyeth and goeth at their rear; and the
pillar of the cloud journeyeth from their front, and standeth at their
rear,

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> and cometh in between the camp of the
Egyptians and the camp of Israel, and the cloud and the darkness are,
and he enlighteneth the night, and the one hath not drawn near unto the
other all the night.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And Moses stretcheth out his hand
towards the sea, and Jehovah causeth the sea to go on by a strong east
wind all the night, and maketh the sea become dry ground, and the waters
are cleaved,

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> and the sons of Israel go into the
midst of the sea, on dry land, and the waters \[are\] to them a wall, on
their right and on their left.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And the Egyptians pursue, and go in
after them (all the horses of Pharaoh, his chariots, and his horsemen)
unto the midst of the sea,

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> and it cometh to pass, in the morning
watch, that Jehovah looketh unto the camp of the Egyptians through the
pillar of fire and of the cloud, and troubleth the camp of the
Egyptians,

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> and turneth aside the wheels of their
chariots, and they lead them with difficulty, and the Egyptians say,
\`Let us flee from the face of Israel, for Jehovah is fighting for them
against the Egyptians.'

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Stretch
out thy hand toward the sea, and the waters turn back on the Egyptians,
on their chariots, and on their horsemen.'

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And Moses stretcheth out his hand
towards the sea, and the sea turneth back, at the turning of the
morning, to its perennial flow, and the Egyptians are fleeing at its
coming, and Jehovah shaketh off the Egyptians in the midst of the sea,

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> and the waters turn back, and cover the
chariots and the horsemen, even all the force of Pharaoh, who are coming
in after them into the sea -- there hath not been left of them even one.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> And the sons of Israel have gone on dry
land in the midst of the sea, and the waters \[are\] to them a wall, on
their right and on their left;

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> and Jehovah saveth Israel in that day
out of the hand of the Egyptians, and Israel seeth the Egyptians dead on
the sea-shore,

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> and Israel seeth the great hand with
which Jehovah hath wrought against the Egyptians, and the people fear
Jehovah, and remain stedfast in Jehovah, and in Moses His servant.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Then singeth Moses and the sons of Israel
this song to Jehovah, and they speak, saying: -- \`I sing to Jehovah,
For triumphing He hath triumphed; The horse and its rider He hath thrown
into the sea.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> My strength and song is JAH, And He is
become my salvation: This \[is\] my God, and I glorify Him; God of my
father, and I exalt Him.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Jehovah \[is\] a man of battle; Jehovah
\[is\] His name.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Chariots of Pharaoh and his force He hath
cast into the sea; And the choice of his captains Have sunk in the Red
Sea!

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> The depths do cover them; They went down
into the depths as a stone.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Thy right hand, O Jehovah, Is become
honourable in power; Thy right hand, O Jehovah, Doth crush an enemy.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And in the abundance of Thine excellency
Thou throwest down Thy withstanders, Thou sendest forth Thy wrath -- It
consumeth them as stubble.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And by the spirit of Thine anger Have
waters been heaped together; Stood as a heap have flowings; Congealed
have been depths In the heart of a sea.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> The enemy said, I pursue, I overtake; I
apportion spoil; Filled is my soul with them; I draw out my sword; My
hand destroyeth them: --

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Thou hast blown with Thy wind The sea
hath covered them; They sank as lead in mighty waters.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Who \[is\] like Thee among the gods, O
Jehovah? Who \[is\] like Thee -- honourable in holiness -- Fearful in
praises -- doing wonders?

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Thou hast stretched out Thy right hand
-- Earth swalloweth them!

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> Thou hast led forth in Thy kindness The
people whom Thou hast redeemed. Thou hast led on in Thy strength Unto
Thy holy habitation.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> Peoples have heard, they are troubled;
Pain hath seized inhabitants of Philistia.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> Then have chiefs of Edom been troubled:
Mighty ones of Moab -- Trembling doth seize them! Melted have all
inhabitants of Canaan!

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Fall on them doth terror and dread; By
the greatness of Thine arm They are still as a stone, Till Thy people
pass over, O Jehovah; Till the people pass over Whom Thou hast
purchased.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> Thou dost bring them in, And dost plant
them In a mountain of Thine inheritance, A fixed place for Thy dwelling
Thou hast made, O Jehovah; A sanctuary, O Lord, Thy hands have
established;

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Jehovah reigneth -- to the age, and for
ever!'

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> For the horse of Pharaoh hath gone in
with his chariots and with his horsemen into the sea, and Jehovah
turneth back on them the waters of the sea, and the sons of Israel have
gone on dry land in the midst of the sea.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And Miriam the inspired one, sister of
Aaron, taketh the timbrel in her hand, and all the women go out after
her, with timbrels and with choruses;

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> and Miriam answereth to them: -- \`Sing
ye to Jehovah, For Triumphing He hath triumphed; The horse and its rider
He hath thrown into the sea!'

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> And Moses causeth Israel to journey
from the Red Sea, and they go out unto the wilderness of Shur, and they
go three days in the wilderness, and have not found water,

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> and they come in to Marah, and have not
been able to drink the waters of Marah, for they \[are\] bitter;
therefore hath \[one\] called its name Marah.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> And the people murmur against Moses,
saying, \`What do we drink?'

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> and he crieth unto Jehovah, and Jehovah
sheweth him a tree, and he casteth unto the waters, and the waters
become sweet. There He hath made for them a statute, and an ordinance,
and there He hath tried them,

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> and He saith, \`If thou dost really
hearken to the voice of Jehovah thy God, and dost that which is right in
His eyes, and hast hearkened to His commands, and kept all His statutes:
none of the sickness which I laid on the Egyptians do I lay on thee, for
I, Jehovah, am healing thee.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And they come to Elim, and there
\[are\] twelve fountains of water, and seventy palm trees; and they
encamp there by the waters.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And they journey from Elim, and all the
company of the sons of Israel come in unto the wilderness of Sin, which
\[is\] between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month
of their going out from the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And all the company of the sons of Israel
murmur against Moses and against Aaron in the wilderness;

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> and the sons of Israel say unto them,
\`Oh that we had died by the hand of Jehovah in the land of Egypt, in
our sitting by the flesh-pot, in our eating bread to satiety -- for ye
have brought us out unto this wilderness to put all this assembly to
death with hunger.'

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Lo, I am
raining to you bread from the heavens -- and the people have gone out
and gathered the matter of a day in its day -- so that I try them
whether they walk in My law, or not;

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> and it hath been on the sixth day, that
they have prepared that which they bring in, and it hath been double
above that which they gather day \[by\] day.'

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And Moses saith -- Aaron also -- unto all
the sons of Israel, \`Evening -- and ye have known that Jehovah hath
brought you out from the land of Egypt;

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> and morning -- and ye have seen the
honour of Jehovah, in His hearing your murmurings against Jehovah, and
what \[are\] we, that ye murmur against us?'

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And Moses saith, \`In Jehovah's giving to
you in the evening flesh to eat, and bread in the morning to satiety --
in Jehovah's hearing your murmurings, which ye are murmuring against
Him, and what \[are\] we? your murmurings \[are\] not against us, but
against Jehovah.'

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And Moses saith unto Aaron, \`Say unto
all the company of the sons of Israel, Come ye near before Jehovah, for
He hath heard your murmurings;'

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> and it cometh to pass, when Aaron is
speaking unto all the company of the sons of Israel, that they turn
towards the wilderness, and lo, the honour of Jehovah is seen in the
cloud.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> \`I have heard the murmurings of the
sons of Israel; speak unto them, saying, Between the evenings ye eat
flesh, and in the morning ye are satisfied \[with\] bread, and ye have
known that I \[am\] Jehovah your God.'

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And it cometh to pass in the evening,
that the quail cometh up, and covereth the camp, and in the morning
there hath been the lying of dew round about the camp,

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> and the lying of the dew goeth up, and
lo, on the face of the wilderness a thin, bare thing, thin as hoar-frost
on the earth.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And the sons of Israel see, and say one
unto another, \`What \[is\] it?' for they have not known what it \[is\];
and Moses saith unto them, \`It \[is\] the bread which Jehovah hath
given to you for food.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> \`This \[is\] the thing which Jehovah
hath commanded: Gather of it each according to his eating, an omer for a
poll; and the number of your persons, take ye each for those in his
tent.'

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And the sons of Israel do so, and they
gather, he who is \[gathering\] much, and he who is \[gathering\]
little;

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> and they measure with an omer, and he
who is \[gathering\] much hath nothing over, and he who is \[gathering\]
little hath no lack, each according to his eating they have gathered.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> And Moses saith unto them, \`Let no man
leave of it till morning;'

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> and they have not hearkened unto Moses,
and some of them do leave of it till morning, and it bringeth up worms
and stinketh; and Moses is wroth with them.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> And they gather it morning by morning,
each according to his eating; when the sun hath been warm, then it hath
melted.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And it cometh to pass on the sixth day,
they have gathered a second bread, two omers for one, and all the
princes of the company come in, and declare to Moses.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And he saith unto them, \`It \[is\]
that which Jehovah hath spoken \[of\]; a rest -- a holy sabbath to
Jehovah -- \[is\] to-morrow; that which ye bake, bake; and that which ye
boil, boil; and all that is over, let rest for yourselves in charge till
the morning.'

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> And they let it rest until the morning,
as Moses hath commanded, and it hath not stank, and a worm hath not been
in it.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> And Moses saith, \`Eat it to-day, for
to-day \[is\] a sabbath to Jehovah; to-day ye find it not in the field:

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> six days ye do gather it, and in the
seventh day -- the sabbath -- in it there is none.'

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> And it cometh to pass on the seventh
day, some of the people have gone out to gather, and have not found.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`How
long have ye refused to keep My commands, and My laws?

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> see, because Jehovah hath given to you
the sabbath, therefore He is giving to you on the sixth day bread of two
days; abide ye each \[in\] his place, no one doth go out from his place
on the seventh day.'

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> And the people rest on the seventh day,

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> and the house of Israel call its name
Manna, and it \[is\] as coriander seed, white; and its taste \[is\] as a
cake with honey.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> And Moses saith, \`This \[is\] the
thing which Jehovah hath commanded: Fill the omer with it, for a charge
for your generations, so that they see the bread which I have caused you
to eat in the wilderness, in My bringing you out from the land of
Egypt.'

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> And Moses saith unto Aaron, \`Take one
pot, and put there the fulness of the omer of manna, and let it rest
before Jehovah, for a charge for your generations;'

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> as Jehovah hath given commandment unto
Moses, so doth Aaron let it rest before the Testimony, for a charge.

<span id="an_16:35">16:35</span> And the sons of Israel have eaten the
manna forty years, until their coming in unto the land to be inhabited;
the manna they have eaten till their coming in unto the extremity of the
land of Canaan.

<span id="an_16:36">16:36</span> and the omer is a tenth of the ephah.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And all the company of the sons of Israel
journey from the wilderness of Sin, on their journeyings, by the command
of Jehovah, and encamp in Rephidim, and there is no water for the people
to drink;

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> and the people strive with Moses, and
say, \`Give us water, and we drink.' And Moses saith to them, \`What? --
ye strive with me, what? -- ye try Jehovah?'

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> and the people thirst there for water,
and the people murmur against Moses, and say, \`Why \[is\] this? -- thou
hast brought us up out of Egypt, to put us to death, also our sons and
our cattle, with thirst.'

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And Moses crieth to Jehovah, saying,
\`What do I to this people? yet a little, and they have stoned me.'

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Pass over
before the people, and take with thee of the elders of Israel, and thy
rod with which thou hast smitten the River take in thy hand, and thou
hast gone:

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> Lo, I am standing before thee there on
the rock in Horeb, and thou hast smitten on the rock, and waters have
come out from it, and the people have drunk.' And Moses doth so before
the eyes of the elders of Israel,

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> and he calleth the name of the place
Massah, and Meribah, because of the \`strife' of the sons of Israel, and
because of their \`trying' Jehovah, saying, \`Is Jehovah in our midst or
not?'

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And Amalek cometh, and fighteth with
Israel in Rephidim,

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> and Moses saith unto Joshua, \`Choose for
us men, and go out, fight with Amalek: to-morrow I am standing on the
top of the hill, and the rod of God in my hand.'

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And Joshua doth as Moses hath said to
him, to fight with Amalek, and Moses, Aaron, and Hur, have gone up
\[to\] the top of the height;

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> and it hath come to pass, when Moses
lifteth up his hand, that Israel hath been mighty, and when he letteth
his hands rest, that Amalek hath been mighty.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> And the hands of Moses \[are\] heavy,
and they take a stone, and set \[it\] under him, and he sitteth on it:
and Aaron and Hur have taken hold on his hands, on this side one, and on
that one, and his hands are stedfast till the going in of the sun;

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> and Joshua weakeneth Amalek and his
people by the mouth of the sword.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Write
this, a memorial in a Book, and set \[it\] in the ears of Joshua, that I
do utterly wipe away the remembrance of Amalek from under the heavens;'

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> and Moses buildeth an altar, and
calleth its name Jehovah-Nissi,

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> and saith, \`Because a hand \[is\] on
the throne of Jah, war \[is\] to Jehovah with Amalek from generation --
generation.'

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> And Jethro priest of Midian,
father-in-law of Moses, heareth all that God hath done for Moses, and
for Israel his people, that Jehovah hath brought out Israel from Egypt,

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> and Jethro, father-in-law of Moses,
taketh Zipporah, wife of Moses, besides her parents,

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> and her two sons, of whom the name of the
one \[is\] Gershom, for he said, \`a sojourner I have been in a strange
land:'

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> and the name of the other \[is\] Eliezer,
for, \`the God of my father \[is\] for my help, and doth deliver me from
the sword of Pharaoh.'

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And Jethro, father-in-law of Moses,
cometh, and his sons, and his wife, unto Moses, unto the wilderness
where he is encamping -- the mount of God;

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> and he saith unto Moses, \`I, thy
father-in-law, Jethro, am coming unto thee, and thy wife, and her two
sons with her.'

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And Moses goeth out to meet his
father-in-law, and boweth himself, and kisseth him, and they ask one at
another of welfare, and come into the tent;

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> and Moses recounteth to his father-in-law
all that Jehovah hath done to Pharaoh, and to the Egyptians, on account
of Israel, all the travail which hath found them in the way, and Jehovah
doth deliver them.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And Jethro rejoiceth for all the good
which Jehovah hath done to Israel, whom He hath delivered from the hand
of the Egyptians;

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> and Jethro saith, \`Blessed \[is\]
Jehovah, who hath delivered you from the hand of the Egyptians, and from
the hand of Pharaoh -- who hath delivered this people from under the
hand of the Egyptians;

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> now I have known that Jehovah \[is\]
greater than all the gods, for in the thing they have acted proudly --
\[He is\] above them!'

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> And Jethro, father-in-law of Moses,
taketh a burnt-offering and sacrifices for God; and Aaron cometh in, and
all the elders of Israel, to eat bread with the father-in-law of Moses,
before God.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> And it cometh to pass on the morrow,
that Moses sitteth to judge the people, and the people stand before
Moses, from the morning unto the evening;

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> and the father-in-law of Moses seeth
all that he is doing to the people, and saith, \`What \[is\] this thing
which thou art doing to the people? wherefore art thou sitting by
thyself, and all the people standing by thee from morning till evening?'

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> And Moses saith to his father-in-law,
\`Because the people come unto me to seek God;

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> when they have a matter, it hath come
unto me, and I have judged between a man and his neighbour, and made
known the statutes of God, and His laws.'

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And the father-in-law of Moses saith
unto him, \`The thing which thou art doing \[is\] not good;

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> thou dost surely wear away, both thou,
and this people which \[is\] with thee, for the thing is too heavy for
thee, thou art not able to do it by thyself.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> \`Now, hearken to my voice, I counsel
thee, and God is with thee: be thou for the people over-against God, and
thou hast brought in the things unto God;

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> and thou hast warned them
\[concerning\] the statutes and the laws, and hast made known to them
the way in which they go, and the work which they do.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> \`And thou -- thou dost provide out of
all the people men of ability, fearing God, men of truth, hating
dishonest gain, and hast placed \[these\] over them, heads of thousands,
heads of hundreds, heads of fifties, and heads of tens,

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> and they have judged the people at all
times; and it hath come to pass, every great matter they bring in unto
thee, and every small matter they judge themselves; and lighten it from
off thyself, and they have borne with thee.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> If thou dost this thing, and God hath
commanded thee, then thou hast been able to stand, and all this people
also goeth in unto its place in peace.'

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> And Moses hearkeneth to the voice of
his father-in-law, and doth all that he said,

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> and Moses chooseth men of ability out
of all Israel, and maketh them chiefs over the people, heads of
thousands, heads of hundreds, heads of fifties, and heads of tens,

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> and they have judged the people at all
times; the hard matter they bring in unto Moses, and every small matter
they judge themselves.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And Moses sendeth his father-in-law
away, and he goeth away unto his own land.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> In the third month of the going out of
the sons of Israel from the land of Egypt, in this day they have come
into the wilderness of Sinai,

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> and they journey from Rephidim, and enter
the wilderness of Sinai, and encamp in the wilderness; and Israel
encampeth there before the mount.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And Moses hath gone up unto God, and
Jehovah calleth unto him out of the mount, saying, \`Thus dost thou say
to the house of Jacob, and declare to the sons of Israel,

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> Ye -- ye have seen that which I have done
to the Egyptians, and I bear you on eagles' wings, and bring you in unto
Myself.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> \`And now, if ye really hearken to My
voice, then ye have kept My covenant, and been to Me a peculiar treasure
more than all the peoples, for all the earth \[is\] Mine;

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> and ye -- ye are to Me a kingdom of
priests and a holy nation: these \[are\] the words which thou dost speak
unto the sons of Israel.'

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And Moses cometh, and calleth for the
elders of the people, and setteth before them all these words which
Jehovah hath commanded him;

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> and all the people answer together and
say, \`All that Jehovah hath spoken we do;' and Moses returneth the
words of the people unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Lo, I am
coming unto thee in the thickness of the cloud, so that the people hear
in My speaking with thee, and also believe in thee to the age;' and
Moses declareth the words of the people unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Go unto
the people; and thou hast sanctified them to-day and to-morrow, and they
have washed their garments,

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> and have been prepared for the third
day; for on the third day doth Jehovah come down before the eyes of all
the people, on mount Sinai.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> \`And thou hast made a border \[for\]
the people round about, saying, Take heed to yourselves, going up into
the mount, or coming against its extremity; whoever is coming against
the mount is certainly put to death;

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> a hand cometh not against him, for he
is certainly stoned or shot through, whether beast or man it liveth not;
in the drawing out of the jubilee cornet they go up into the mount.'

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And Moses cometh down from the mount
unto the people, and sanctifieth the people, and they wash their
garments;

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> and he saith unto the people, \`Be ye
prepared for the third day, come not nigh unto a woman.'

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And it cometh to pass, on the third
day, while it is morning, that there are voices, and lightnings, and a
heavy cloud, on the mount, and the sound of a trumpet very strong; and
all the people who \[are\] in the camp do tremble.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And Moses bringeth out the people to
meet God from the camp, and they station themselves at the lower part of
the mount,

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> and mount Sinai \[is\] wholly a smoke
from the presence of Jehovah, who hath come down on it in fire, and its
smoke goeth up as smoke of the furnace, and the whole mount trembleth
exceedingly;

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> and the sound of the trumpet is going
on, and very strong; Moses speaketh, and God doth answer him with a
voice.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And Jehovah cometh down on mount Sinai,
unto the top of the mount, and Jehovah calleth for Moses unto the top of
the mount, and Moses goeth up.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Go
down, protest to the people, lest they break through unto Jehovah to
see, and many of them have fallen;

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> and also the priests who are coming
nigh unto Jehovah do sanctify themselves, lest Jehovah break forth on
them.'

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> And Moses saith unto Jehovah, \`The
people \[is\] unable to come up unto mount Sinai, for Thou -- Thou hast
protested to us, saying, Make a border \[for\] the mount, then thou hast
sanctified it.'

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> And Jehovah saith unto him, \`Go,
descend, then thou hast come up, thou, and Aaron with thee; and the
priests and the people do not break through, to come up unto Jehovah,
lest He break forth upon them.'

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> And Moses goeth down unto the people,
and saith unto them: --

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> \`And God speaketh all these words,
saying,

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> I \[am\] Jehovah thy God, who hath
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of a house of servants.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> \`Thou hast no other Gods before Me.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> \`Thou dost not make to thyself a graven
image, or any likeness which \[is\] in the heavens above, or which
\[is\] in the earth beneath, or which \[is\] in the waters under the
earth.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Thou dost not bow thyself to them, nor
serve them: for I, Jehovah thy God, \[am\] a zealous God, charging
iniquity of fathers on sons, on the third \[generation\], and on the
fourth, of those hating Me,

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> and doing kindness to thousands, of those
loving Me and keeping My commands.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> \`Thou dost not take up the name of
Jehovah thy God for a vain thing, for Jehovah acquitteth not him who
taketh up His name for a vain thing.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> \`Remember the Sabbath-day to sanctify
it;

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> six days thou dost labour, and hast done
all thy work,

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> and the seventh day \[is\] a Sabbath to
Jehovah thy God; thou dost not do any work, thou, and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy man-servant, and thy handmaid, and thy cattle, and thy
sojourner who is within thy gates, --

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> for six days hath Jehovah made the
heavens and the earth, the sea, and all that \[is\] in them, and resteth
in the seventh day; therefore hath Jehovah blessed the Sabbath-day, and
doth sanctify it.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> \`Honour thy father and thy mother, so
that thy days are prolonged on the ground which Jehovah thy God is
giving to thee.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> \`Thou dost not murder.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> \`Thou dost not commit adultery.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> \`Thou dost not steal.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> \`Thou dost not answer against thy
neighbour a false testimony.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> \`Thou dost not desire the house of thy
neighbour, thou dost not desire the wife of thy neighbour, or his
man-servant, or his handmaid, or his ox, or his ass, or anything which
\[is\] thy neighbour's.'

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> And all the people are seeing the
voices, and the flames, and the sound of the trumpet, and the mount
smoking; and the people see, and move, and stand afar off,

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> and say unto Moses, \`Speak thou with
us, and we hear, and let not God speak with us, lest we die.'

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And Moses saith unto the people, \`Fear
not, for to try you hath God come, and in order that His fear may be
before your faces -- that ye sin not.'

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> And the people stand afar off, and
Moses hath drawn nigh unto the thick darkness where God \[is\].

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Thus
dost thou say unto the sons of Israel: Ye -- ye have seen that from the
heavens I have spoken with you;

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> ye do not make with Me gods of silver,
even gods of gold ye do not make to yourselves.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> \`An altar of earth thou dost make for
Me, and thou hast sacrificed on it thy burnt-offerings and thy
peace-offerings, thy flock and thy herd; in every place where I cause My
name to be remembered I come in unto thee, and have blessed thee.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> \`And if an altar of stones thou dost
make to Me, thou dost not build them of hewn work; when thy tool thou
hast waved over it, then thou dost pollute it;

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> neither dost thou go up by steps on
Mine altar, that thy nakedness be not revealed upon it.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> \`And these \[are\] the judgments which
thou dost set before them:

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> \`When thou buyest a Hebrew servant --
six years he doth serve, and in the seventh he goeth out as a freeman
for nought;

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> if by himself he cometh in, by himself he
goeth out; if he \[is\] owner of a wife, then his wife hath gone out
with him;

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> if his lord give to him a wife, and she
hath borne to him sons or daughters -- the wife and her children are her
lord's, and he goeth out by himself.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> \`And if the servant really say: I have
loved my lord, my wife, and my sons -- I do not go out free;

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> then hath his lord brought him nigh unto
God, and hath brought him nigh unto the door, or unto the side-post, and
his lord hath bored his ear with an awl, and he hath served him -- to
the age.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> \`And when a man selleth his daughter for
a handmaid, she doth not go out according to the going out of the
men-servants;

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> if evil in the eyes of her lord, so that
he hath not betrothed her, then he hath let her be ransomed; to a
strange people he hath not power to sell her, in his dealing
treacherously with her.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> \`And if to his son he betroth her,
according to the right of daughters he doth to her.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> \`If another \[woman\] he take for him,
her food, her covering, and her habitation, he doth not withdraw;

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> and if these three he do not to her,
then she hath gone out for nought, without money.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> \`He who smiteth a man so that he hath
died, is certainly put to death;

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> as to him who hath not laid wait, and
God hath brought to his hand, I have even set for thee a place whither
he doth flee.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> \`And when a man doth presume against
his neighbour to slay him with subtilty, from Mine altar thou dost take
him to die.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> \`And he who smiteth his father or his
mother is certainly put to death.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> \`And he who stealeth a man, and hath
sold him, and he hath been found in his hand, is certainly put to death.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> \`And he who is reviling his father or
his mother is certainly put to death.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> \`And when men contend, and a man hath
smitten his neighbour with a stone, or with the fist, and he die not,
but hath fallen on the bed;

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> if he rise, and hath gone up and down
without on his staff, then hath the smiter been acquitted; only his
cessation he giveth, and he is thoroughly healed.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> \`And when a man smiteth his
man-servant or his handmaid, with a rod, and he hath died under his hand
-- he is certainly avenged;

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> only if he remain a day, or two days,
he is not avenged, for he \[is\] his money.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> \`And when men strive, and have smitten
a pregnant woman, and her children have come out, and there is no
mischief, he is certainly fined, as the husband of the woman doth lay
upon him, and he hath given through the judges;

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> and if there is mischief, then thou
hast given life for life,

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for
hand, foot for foot,

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> burning for burning, wound for wound,
stripe for stripe.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> \`And when a man smiteth the eye of his
man-servant, or the eye of his handmaid, and hath destroyed it, as a
freeman he doth send him away for his eye;

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> and if a tooth of his man-servant or a
tooth of his handmaid he knock out, as a freeman he doth send him away
for his tooth.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> \`And when an ox doth gore man or
woman, and they have died, the ox is certainly stoned, and his flesh is
not eaten, and the owner of the ox \[is\] acquitted;

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> and if the ox is \[one\] accustomed to
gore heretofore, and it hath been testified to its owner, and he doth
not watch it, and it hath put to death a man or woman, the ox is stoned,
and its owner also is put to death.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> \`If atonement is laid upon him, then
he hath given the ransom of his life, according to all that is laid upon
him;

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> whether it gore a son or gore a
daughter, according to this judgment it is done to him.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> \`If the ox gore a man-servant or a
handmaid, thirty silver shekels he doth give to their lord, and the ox
is stoned.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> \`And when a man doth open a pit, or
when a man doth dig a pit, and doth not cover it, and an ox or ass hath
fallen thither, --

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> the owner of the pit doth repay, money
he doth give back to its owner, and the dead is his.

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> \`And when a man's ox doth smite the ox
of his neighbour, and it hath died, then they have sold the living ox,
and halved its money, and also the dead one they do halve;

<span id="an_21:36">21:36</span> or, it hath been known that the ox is
\[one\] accustomed to gore heretofore, and its owner doth not watch it,
he certainly repayeth ox for ox, and the dead is his.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> \`When a man doth steal an ox or sheep,
and hath slaughtered it or sold it, five of the herd he doth repay for
the ox, and four of the flock for the sheep.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> \`If in the breaking through, the thief
is found, and he hath been smitten, and hath died, there is no blood for
him;

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> if the sun hath risen upon him, blood
\[is\] for him, he doth certainly repay; if he have nothing, then he
hath been sold for his theft;

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> if the theft is certainly found in his
hand alive, whether ox, or ass, or sheep -- double he repayeth.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> \`When a man depastureth a field or
vineyard, and hath sent out his beast, and it hath pastured in the field
of another, \[of\] the best of his field, and the best of his vineyard,
he doth repay.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> \`When fire goeth forth, and hath found
thorns, and a stack, or the standing corn, or the field, hath been
consumed, he who causeth the burning doth certainly repay.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> \`When a man doth give unto his neighbour
silver, or vessels to keep, and it hath been stolen out of the man's
house; if the thief is found, he repayeth double.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> \`If the thief is not found, then the
master of the house hath been brought near unto God, whether he hath not
put forth his hand against the work of his neighbour;

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> for every matter of transgression, for
ox, for ass, for sheep, for raiment, for any lost thing of which it is
said that it is his; unto God cometh the matter of them both; he whom
God doth condemn, he repayeth double to his neighbour.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> \`When a man doth give unto his
neighbour an ass, or ox, or sheep, or any beast to keep, and it hath
died, or hath been hurt, or taken captive, none seeing --

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> an oath of Jehovah is between them
both, that he hath not put forth his hand against the work of his
neighbour, and its owner hath accepted, and he doth not repay;

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> but if it is certainly stolen from him,
he doth repay to its owner;

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> if it is certainly torn, he bringeth it
in -- a witness; the torn thing he doth not repay.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> \`And when a man doth ask \[anything\]
from his neighbour, and it hath been hurt or hath died -- its owner not
being with it -- he doth certainly repay;

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> if its owner \[is\] with it, he doth
not repay, -- if it \[is\] a hired thing, it hath come for its hire.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> \`And when a man doth entice a virgin
who \[is\] not betrothed, and hath lain with her, he doth certainly
endow her to himself for a wife;

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> if her father utterly refuse to give
her to him, money he doth weigh out according to the dowry of virgins.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> \`A witch thou dost not keep alive.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> \`Whoever lieth with a beast is
certainly put to death.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> \`He who is sacrificing to a god, save
to Jehovah alone, is devoted.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> \`And a sojourner thou dost not
oppress, nor crush him, for sojourners ye have been in the land of
Egypt.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> \`Any widow or orphan ye do not
afflict;

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> if thou dost really afflict him, surely
if he at all cry unto Me, I certainly hear his cry;

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> and Mine anger hath burned, and I have
slain you by the sword, and your wives have been widows, and your sons
orphans.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> \`If thou dost lend My poor people with
thee money, thou art not to him as a usurer; thou dost not lay on him
usury;

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> if thou dost at all take in pledge the
garment of thy neighbour, during the going in of the sun thou dost
return it to him:

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> for it alone is his covering, it \[is\]
his garment for his skin; wherein doth he lie down? and it hath come to
pass, when he doth cry unto Me, that I have heard, for I \[am\]
gracious.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> \`God thou dost not revile, and a
prince among thy people thou dost not curse.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> \`Thy fulness and thy liquids thou dost
not delay; the first-born of thy sons thou dost give to Me;

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> so thou dost to thine ox, to thy sheep;
seven days it is with its dam, on the eighth day thou dost give it to
Me.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> \`And ye are holy men to Me, and flesh
torn in the field ye do not eat, to a dog ye do cast it.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> \`Thou dost not lift up a vain report;
thou dost not put thy hand with a wicked man to be a violent witness.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> \`Thou art not after many to evil, nor
dost thou testify concerning a strife, to turn aside after many to cause
\[others\] to turn aside;

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> and a poor man thou dost not honour in
his strife.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> \`When thou meetest thine enemy's ox or
his ass going astray, thou dost certainly turn it back to him;

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> when thou seest the ass of him who is
hating thee crouching under its burden, then thou hast ceased from
leaving \[it\] to it -- thou dost certainly leave \[it\] with him.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> \`Thou dost not turn aside the judgment
of thy needy one in his strife;

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> from a false matter thou dost keep far
off, and an innocent and righteous man thou dost not slay; for I do not
justify a wicked man.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> \`And a bribe thou dost not take; for the
bribe bindeth the open-\[eyed\], and perverteth the words of the
righteous.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> \`And a sojourner thou dost not oppress,
and ye -- ye have known the soul of the sojourner, for sojourners ye
have been in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> \`And six years thou dost sow thy land,
and hast gathered its increase;

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> and the seventh thou dost release it,
and hast left it, and the needy of thy people have eaten, and their
leaving doth the beast of the field eat; so dost thou to thy vineyard --
to thine olive-yard.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> \`Six days thou dost do thy work, and
on the seventh day thou dost rest, so that thine ox and thine ass doth
rest, and the son of thine handmaid and the sojourner is refreshed;

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> and in all that which I have said unto
you ye do take heed; and the name of other gods ye do not mention; it is
not heard on thy mouth.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> \`Three times thou dost keep a feast to
Me in a year;

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> the Feast of Unleavened things thou
dost keep; seven days thou dost eat unleavened things, as I have
commanded thee, at the time appointed \[in\] the month of Abib; for in
it thou hast come forth out of Egypt, and ye do not appear \[in\] My
presence empty;

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> and the Feast of Harvest, the first
fruits of thy works which thou sowest in the field; and the Feast of the
In-Gathering, in the outgoing of the year, in thy gathering thy works
out of the field.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> \`Three times in a year do all thy
males appear before the face of the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> \`Thou dost not sacrifice on a
fermented thing the blood of My sacrifice, and the fat of My festival
doth not remain till morning;

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> the beginning of the first-fruits of
thy ground thou dost bring into the house of Jehovah thy God; thou dost
not boil a kid in its mother's milk.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> \`Lo, I am sending a messenger before
thee to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee in unto the place which
I have prepared;

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> be watchful because of his presence,
and hearken to his voice, rebel not against him, for he beareth not with
your transgression, for My name \[is\] in his heart;

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> for, if thou diligently hearken to his
voice, and hast done all that which I speak, then I have been at enmity
with thine enemies, and have distressed those distressing thee.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> \`For My messenger goeth before thee,
and hath brought thee in unto the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the
Perizzite, and the Canaanite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, and I have
cut them off.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> \`Thou dost not bow thyself to their
gods, nor serve them, nor do according to their doings, but dost utterly
devote them, and thoroughly break their standing pillars.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> \`And ye have served Jehovah your God,
and He hath blessed thy bread and thy water, and I have turned aside
sickness from thine heart;

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> there is not a miscarrying and barren
one in thy land; the number of thy days I fulfil:

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> My terror I send before thee, and I
have put to death all the people among whom thou comest, and I have
given the neck of all thine enemies unto thee.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> \`And I have sent the hornet before
thee, and it hath cast out the Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite,
from before thee;

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> I cast them not out from before thee in
one year, lest the land be a desolation, and the beast of the field hath
multiplied against thee;

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> little \[by\] little I cast them out
from before thee, till thou art fruitful, and hast inherited the land.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> \`And I have set thy border from the
Red Sea, even unto the sea of the Philistines, and from the wilderness
unto the River: for I give into your hand the inhabitants of the land,
and thou hast cast them out from before thee;

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> thou dost not make a covenant with
them, and with their gods;

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> they do not dwell in thy land, lest
they cause thee to sin against Me when thou servest their gods, when it
becometh a snare to thee.'

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> And unto Moses He said, \`Come up unto
Jehovah, thou, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of
Israel, and ye have bowed yourselves afar off;'

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> and Moses hath drawn nigh by himself unto
Jehovah; and they draw not nigh, and the people go not up with him.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And Moses cometh in, and recounteth to
the people all the words of Jehovah, and all the judgments, and all the
people answer -- one voice, and say, \`All the words which Jehovah hath
spoken we do.'

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> And Moses writeth all the words of
Jehovah, and riseth early in the morning, and buildeth an altar under
the hill, and twelve standing pillars for the twelve tribes of Israel;

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> and he sendeth the youths of the sons of
Israel, and they cause burnt-offerings to ascend, and sacrifice
sacrifices of peace-offerings to Jehovah -- calves.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> And Moses taketh half of the blood, and
putteth in basins, and half of the blood hath he sprinkled on the altar;

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> and he taketh the Book of the Covenant,
and proclaimeth in the ears of the people, and they say, \`All that
which Jehovah hath spoken we do, and obey.'

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> And Moses taketh the blood, and
sprinkleth on the people, and saith, \`Lo, the blood of the covenant
which Jehovah hath made with you, concerning all these things.'

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> And Moses goeth up, Aaron also, Nadab and
Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel,

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> and they see the God of Israel, and
under His feet \[is\] as the white work of the sapphire, and as the
substance of the heavens for purity;

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> and unto those of the sons of Israel
who are near He hath not put forth His hand, and they see God, and eat
and drink.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Come up
unto Me to the mount, and be there, and I give to thee the tables of
stone, and the law, and the command, which I have written to direct
them.'

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> And Moses riseth -- Joshua his minister
also -- and Moses goeth up unto the mount of God;

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> and unto the elders he hath said,
\`Abide ye for us in this \[place\], until that we turn back unto you,
and lo, Aaron and Hur \[are\] with you -- he who hath matters doth come
nigh unto them.'

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> And Moses goeth up unto the mount, and
the cloud covereth the mount;

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> and the honour of Jehovah doth
tabernacle on mount Sinai, and the cloud covereth it six days, and He
calleth unto Moses on the seventh day from the midst of the cloud.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> And the appearance of the honour of
Jehovah \[is\] as a consuming fire on the top of the mount, before the
eyes of the sons of Israel;

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> and Moses goeth into the midst of the
cloud, and goeth up unto the mount, and Moses is on the mount forty days
and forty nights.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> \`Speak unto the sons of Israel, and they
take for Me a heave-offering; from every man whose heart impelleth him
ye do take My heave-offering.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> \`And this \[is\] the heave-offering
which ye take from them; gold, and silver, and brass,

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
linen, and goats' \[hair\],

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> and rams' skins made red, and badgers'
skins, and shittim wood,

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> oil for the light, spices for the
anointing oil, and for the perfume of the spices,

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> shoham stones, and stones for setting for
an ephod, and for a breastplate.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> \`And they have made for Me a sanctuary,
and I have tabernacled in their midst;

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> according to all that which I am shewing
thee, the pattern of the tabernacle, and the pattern of all its vessels,
even so ye do make \[it\].

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> \`And they have made an ark of shittim
wood; two cubits and a half its length, and a cubit and a half its
breadth, and a cubit and a half its height;

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> and thou hast overlaid it \[with\] pure
gold, within and without thou dost overlay it, and thou hast made on it
a ring of gold round about.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> \`And thou hast cast for it four rings
of gold, and hast put \[them\] on its four feet, even two rings on its
one side, and two rings on its second side;

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> and thou hast made staves of shittim
wood, and hast overlaid them \[with\] gold,

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> and hast brought the staves into the
rings on the sides of the ark, to bear the ark by them,

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> in the rings of the ark are the staves,
they are not turned aside from it;

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> and thou hast put unto the ark the
testimony which I give unto thee.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> \`And thou hast made a mercy-seat of
pure gold, two cubits and a half its length, and a cubit and a half its
breadth;

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> and thou hast made two cherubs of gold,
beaten work dost thou make them, at the two ends of the mercy-seat;

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> and make thou one cherub at the end on
this side, and one cherub at the end on that; at the mercy-seat ye do
make the cherubs on its two ends.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> \`And the cherubs have been spreading
out wings on high, covering the mercy-seat over with their wings, and
their faces \[are\] one towards another -- towards the mercy-seat are
the faces of the cherubs.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> \`And thou hast put the mercy-seat on
the ark above, and unto the ark thou dost put the testimony which I give
unto thee;

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> and I have met with thee there, and
have spoken with thee from off the mercy-seat (from between the two
cherubs, which \[are\] on the ark of the testimony) all that which I
command thee concerning the sons of Israel.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> \`And thou hast made a table of shittim
wood, two cubits its length, and a cubit its breadth, and a cubit and a
half its height,

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> and hast overlaid it \[with\] pure
gold, and hast made for it a crown of gold round about,

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> and hast made for it a border of a
handbreadth round about, and hast made a crown of gold to its border
round about.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> \`And thou hast made to it four rings
of gold, and hast put the rings on the four corners, which \[are\] to
its four feet;

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> over-against the border are the rings
for places for staves to bear the table;

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> and thou hast made the staves of
shittim wood, and hast overlaid them with gold, and the table hath been
borne with them;

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> and thou hast made its dishes, and its
bowls, and its covers, and its cups, with which they pour out; of pure
gold thou dost make them;

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> and thou hast put on the table bread of
the presence before Me continually.

<span id="an_25:31">25:31</span> \`And thou hast made a candlestick of
pure gold, of beaten work is the candlestick made; its base, and its
branch, its calyxes, its knops, and its flowers are of the same;

<span id="an_25:32">25:32</span> and six branches are coming out of its
sides, three branches of the candlestick out of the one side, and three
branches of the candlestick out of the second side;

<span id="an_25:33">25:33</span> three calyxes made like almonds in the
one branch, a knop and a flower, and three calyxes made like almonds in
one branch, a knop and a flower; so for the six branches which are
coming out from the candlestick.

<span id="an_25:34">25:34</span> \`And in the candlestick \[are\] four
calyxes made like almonds, its knops and its flowers;

<span id="an_25:35">25:35</span> and a knop under two branches of the
same, and a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two
branches of the same, \[are\] to the six branches which are coming out
of the candlestick;

<span id="an_25:36">25:36</span> their knops and their branches are of
the same, all of it one beaten work of pure gold;

<span id="an_25:37">25:37</span> and thou hast made its seven lamps, and
\[one\] hath caused its lights to go up, and it hath given light
over-against its front.

<span id="an_25:38">25:38</span> \`And its snuffers and its snuff dishes
\[are\] of pure gold;

<span id="an_25:39">25:39</span> of a talent of pure gold he doth make
it, with all these vessels.

<span id="an_25:40">25:40</span> And see thou and do \[them\] by their
pattern which thou art shewn in the mount.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> \`And thou dost make the tabernacle: ten
curtains of twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet; \[with\]
cherubs, work of a designer, thou dost make them;

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> the length of the one curtain \[is\]
eight and twenty by the cubit, and the breadth of the one curtain four
by the cubit, one measure \[is\] to all the curtains;

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> five of the curtains are joining one unto
another, and five curtains are joining one to another.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> \`And thou hast made loops of blue upon
the edge of the one curtain, at the end in the joining; and so thou
makest in the edge of the outermost curtain, in the joining of the
second.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> fifty loops thou dost make in the one
curtain, and fifty loops thou dost make in the edge of the curtain which
\[is\] in the joining of the second, causing the loops to take hold one
unto another;

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> and thou hast made fifty hooks of gold,
and hast joined the curtains one to another by the hooks, and the
tabernacle hath been one.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> \`And thou hast made curtains of goats'
\[hair\], for a tent over the tabernacle; thou dost make eleven
curtains:

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> the length of the one curtain \[is\]
thirty by the cubit, and the breadth of the one curtain four by the
cubit; one measure \[is\] to the eleven curtains;

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> and thou hast joined the five curtains
apart, and the six curtains apart, and hast doubled the six curtains
over-against the front of the tent.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> \`And thou hast made fifty loops on the
edge of the one curtain, the outermost in the joining, and fifty loops
on the edge of the curtain which is joining the second;

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> and thou hast made fifty hooks of
brass, and hast brought in the hooks into the loops, and hast joined the
tent, and it hath been one.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> \`And the superfluity in the curtains
of the tent -- the half of the curtain which is superfluous -- hath
spread over the hinder part of the tabernacle;

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> and the cubit on this side, and the
cubit on that, in the superfluity in the length of the curtains of the
tent, is spread out over the sides of the tabernacle, on this and on
that, to cover it;

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> and thou hast made a covering for the
tent, of rams' skins made red, and a covering of badgers' skins above.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> \`And thou hast made the boards for the
tabernacle, of shittim wood, standing up;

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> ten cubits \[is\] the length of the
board, and a cubit and a half the breadth of the one board;

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> two handles \[are\] to the one board,
joined one unto another; so thou dost make for all the boards of the
tabernacle;

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> and thou hast made the boards of the
tabernacle: twenty boards for the south side southward;

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> and forty sockets of silver thou dost
make under the twenty boards, two sockets under the one board for its
two handles, and two sockets under the other board for its two handles.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> \`And for the second side of the
tabernacle, for the north side, \[are\] twenty boards,

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> and their forty sockets of silver, two
sockets under the one board, and two sockets under another board.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> And for the sides of the tabernacle
westward, thou dost make six boards.

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> And two boards thou dost make for the
corners of the tabernacle in the two sides.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> And they are pairs beneath, and
together they are pairs above its head unto the one ring; so is it for
them both, they are for the two corners.

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> And they have been eight boards, and
their sockets of silver \[are\] sixteen sockets, two sockets under the
one board, and two sockets under another board.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> \`And thou hast made bars of shittim
wood: five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> and five bars for the boards of the
second side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the side
of the tabernacle at the two sides, westward;

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> and one hath caused the middle bar in
the midst of the boards to reach from end unto end;

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> and the boards thou dost overlay
\[with\] gold, and their rings thou dost make of gold places for bars,
and hast overlaid their bars with gold;

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> and thou hast raised up the tabernacle
according to its fashion which thou hast been shewn in the mount.

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> \`And thou hast made a vail of blue,
and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen, work of a designer; he maketh
it \[with\] cherubs;

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> and thou hast put it on four pillars of
shittim wood, overlaid \[with\] gold, their pegs \[are\] of gold, on
four sockets of silver.

<span id="an_26:33">26:33</span> \`And thou hast put the vail under the
hooks, and hast brought in thither within the vail the ark of the
testimony; and the vail hath made a separation for you between the holy
and the holy of holies.

<span id="an_26:34">26:34</span> \`And thou hast put the mercy-seat on
the ark of the testimony, in the holy of holies.

<span id="an_26:35">26:35</span> \`And thou hast set the table at the
outside of the vail, and the candlestick over-against the table on the
side of the tabernacle southward, and the table thou dost put on the
north side.

<span id="an_26:36">26:36</span> \`And thou hast made a covering for the
opening of the tent, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen,
work of an embroiderer;

<span id="an_26:37">26:37</span> and thou hast made for the covering
five pillars of shittim \[wood\], and hast overlaid them \[with\] gold,
their pegs \[are\] of gold, and thou hast cast for them five sockets of
brass.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> \`And thou hast made the altar of shittim
wood, five cubits the length, and five cubits the breadth -- the altar
is square -- and three cubits its height.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And thou hast made its horns on its four
corners, its horns are of the same, and thou hast overlaid it \[with\]
brass.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> And thou hast made its pots to remove its
ashes, and its shovels, and its bowls, and its forks, and its fire-pans,
even all its vessels thou dost make of brass.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> \`And thou hast made for it a grate of
net-work of brass, and hast made on the net four rings of brass on its
four extremities,

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> and hast put it under the compass of the
altar beneath, and the net hath been unto the middle of the altar.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> \`And thou hast made staves for the
altar, staves of shittim wood, and hast overlaid them \[with\] brass.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> And the staves have been brought into the
rings, and the staves have been on the two sides of the altar in bearing
it.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> Hollow with boards thou dost make it, as
it hath been shewed thee in the mount, so do they make \[it\].

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> \`And thou hast made the court of the
tabernacle: for the south side southward, hangings for the court of
twined linen, a hundred by the cubit \[is\] the length for the one side,

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> and its twenty pillars and their twenty
sockets \[are\] of brass, the pegs of the pillars and their fillets
\[are\] of silver;

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> and so for the north side in length,
hangings of a hundred \[cubits\] in length, and its twenty pillars and
their twenty sockets \[are\] of brass, the pegs of the pillars and their
fillets \[are\] of silver.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> \`And \[for\] the breadth of the court
at the west side \[are\] hangings of fifty cubits, their pillars ten,
and their sockets ten.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> And \[for\] the breadth of the court at
the east side, eastward, \[are\] fifty cubits.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> And the hangings at the side \[are\]
fifteen cubits, their pillars three, and their sockets three.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> And at the second side \[are\] hangings
fifteen \[cubits\], their pillars three, and their sockets three.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> \`And for the gate of the court a
covering of twenty cubits, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined
linen, work of an embroiderer; their pillars four, their sockets four.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> All the pillars of the court round
about \[are\] filleted \[with\] silver, their pegs \[are\] silver, and
their sockets brass.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> \`The length of the court \[is\] a
hundred by the cubit, and the breadth fifty by fifty, and the height
five cubits, of twined linen, and their sockets \[are\] brass,

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> even all the vessels of the tabernacle,
in all its service, and all its pins, and all the pins of the court,
\[are\] brass.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> \`And thou -- thou dost command the
sons of Israel, and they bring unto thee pure beaten olive oil for the
light, to cause the lamp to go up continually;

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> in the tent of meeting, at the outside
of the vail, which \[is\] over the testimony, doth Aaron -- his sons
also -- arrange it from evening till morning before Jehovah -- a statute
age-during to their generations, from the sons of Israel.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> \`And thou, bring thou near unto thee
Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, from the midst of the sons of
Israel, for his being priest to Me, \[even\] Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu,
Eleazar and Ithamar, sons of Aaron;

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> and thou hast made holy garments for
Aaron thy brother, for honour and for beauty;

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> and thou -- thou dost speak unto all the
wise of heart, whom I have filled \[with\] a spirit of wisdom, and they
have made the garments of Aaron to sanctify him for his being priest to
Me.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> \`And these \[are\] the garments which
they make: a breastplate, and an ephod, and an upper robe, and an
embroidered coat, a mitre, and a girdle; yea, they have made holy
garments for Aaron thy brother, and for his sons, for his being priest
to Me.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> \`And they take the gold, and the blue,
and the purple, and the scarlet, and the linen,

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> and have made the ephod of gold, blue,
and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen, work of a designer;

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> it hath two shoulders joining at its two
ends, and it is joined.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> \`And the girdle of his ephod which
\[is\] on him, according to its work, is of the same, of gold, blue, and
purple, and scarlet, and twined linen.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> \`And thou hast taken the two shoham
stones, and hast opened on them the names of the sons of Israel;

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> six of their names on the one stone,
and the names of the remaining six on the second stone, according to
their births;

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> the work of an engraver in stone,
openings of a signet, thou dost open the two stones by the names of the
sons of Israel; turned round, embroidered \[with\] gold, thou dost make
them.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> \`And thou hast set the two stones on
the shoulders of the ephod -- stones of memorial to the sons of Israel
-- and Aaron hath borne their names before Jehovah, on his two
shoulders, for a memorial.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> \`And thou hast made embroidered things
of gold,

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> and two chains of pure gold, wreathed
work thou dost make them, work of thick bands, and thou hast put the
thick chains on the embroidered things.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> \`And thou hast made a breastplate of
judgment, work of a designer; according to the work of the ephod thou
dost make it; of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen
thou dost make it;

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> it is square, doubled, a span its
length, and a span its breadth.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> \`And thou hast set in it settings of
stone, four rows of stone; a row of sardius, topaz, and carbuncle \[is\]
the first row;

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> and the second row \[is\] emerald,
sapphire, and diamond;

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> and the third row \[is\] opal, agate,
and amethyst;

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> and the fourth row \[is\] beryl, and
onyx, and jasper; embroidered with gold are they in their settings,

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> and the stones are according to the
names of the sons of Israel, twelve, according to their names, openings
of a signet, each by his name are they for the twelve tribes.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> \`And thou hast made on the breastplate
wreathed chains, work of thick bands, of pure gold;

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> and thou hast made on the breastplate
two rings of gold, and hast put the two rings on the two ends of the
breastplate;

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> and thou hast put the two thick bands
of gold on the two rings at the ends of the breastplate;

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> and the two ends of the two thick bands
thou dost put on the two embroidered things, and thou hast put \[them\]
on the shoulders of the ephod over-against its face.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> \`And thou hast made two rings of gold,
and hast set them on the two ends of the breastplate, on its border,
which \[is\] over-against the ephod within;

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> and thou hast made two rings of gold,
and hast put them on the two shoulders of the ephod, beneath,
over-against its front, over-against its joining, above the girdle of
the ephod,

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> and they bind the breastplate by its
rings unto the rings of the ephod with a ribbon of blue, to be above the
girdle of the ephod, and the breastplate is not loosed from the ephod.

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> \`And Aaron hath borne the names of the
sons of Israel in the breastplate of judgment, on his heart, in his
going in unto the sanctuary, for a memorial before Jehovah continually.

<span id="an_28:30">28:30</span> \`And thou hast put unto the
breastplate of judgment the Lights and the Perfections, and they have
been on the heart of Aaron, in his going in before Jehovah, and Aaron
hath borne the judgment of the sons of Israel on his heart before
Jehovah continually.

<span id="an_28:31">28:31</span> \`And thou hast made the upper robe of
the ephod completely of blue,

<span id="an_28:32">28:32</span> and the opening for its head hath been
in its midst, a border is to its opening round about, work of a weaver,
as the opening of a habergeon there is to it; it is not rent.

<span id="an_28:33">28:33</span> \`And thou hast made on its hem
pomegranates of blue, and purple, and scarlet, on its hem round about,
and bells of gold in their midst round about;

<span id="an_28:34">28:34</span> a bell of gold and a pomegranate, a
bell of gold and a pomegranate \[are\] on the hems of the upper robe
round about.

<span id="an_28:35">28:35</span> \`And it hath been on Aaron to minister
in, and its sound hath been heard in his coming in unto the sanctuary
before Jehovah, and in his going out, and he doth not die.

<span id="an_28:36">28:36</span> \`And thou hast made a flower of pure
gold, and hast opened on it -- openings of a signet -- \`Holy to
Jehovah;'

<span id="an_28:37">28:37</span> and thou hast put it on a blue ribbon,
and it hath been on the mitre -- over-against the front of the mitre it
is;

<span id="an_28:38">28:38</span> and it hath been on the forehead of
Aaron, and Aaron hath borne the iniquity of the holy things which the
sons of Israel do hallow, even all their holy gifts; and it hath been on
his forehead continually for a pleasing thing for them before Jehovah.

<span id="an_28:39">28:39</span> \`And thou hast embroidered the coat of
linen, and hast made a mitre of linen, and a girdle thou dost make --
work of an embroiderer.

<span id="an_28:40">28:40</span> \`And for the sons of Aaron thou dost
make coats, and thou hast made for them girdles, yea, bonnets thou dost
make for them, for honour and for beauty;

<span id="an_28:41">28:41</span> and thou hast clothed Aaron thy brother
with them, and his sons with him, and hast anointed them, and hast
consecrated their hand, and hast sanctified them, and they have been
priests to Me.

<span id="an_28:42">28:42</span> \`And make thou for them linen trousers
to cover the naked flesh: they are from the loins even unto the thighs;

<span id="an_28:43">28:43</span> and they have been on Aaron and on his
sons, in their going in unto the tent of meeting, or in their drawing
nigh unto the altar to minister in the sanctuary, and they do not bear
iniquity nor have they died; a statute age-during to him, and to his
seed after him.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> \`And this \[is\] the thing which thou
dost to them, to hallow them, for being priests to Me: Take one bullock,
a son of the herd, and two rams, perfect ones,

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> and bread unleavened, and cakes
unleavened anointed with oil, of fine wheaten flour thou dost make them,

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> and thou hast put them on one basket, and
hast brought them near in the basket, also the bullock and the two rams.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> \`And Aaron and his sons thou dost bring
near unto the opening of the tent of meeting, and hast bathed them with
water;

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> and thou hast taken the garments, and
hast clothed Aaron with the coat, and the upper robe of the ephod, and
the ephod, and the breastplate, and hast girded him with the girdle of
the ephod,

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> and hast set the mitre on his head, and
hast put the holy crown on the mitre,

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> and hast taken the anointing oil, and
hast poured \[it\] on his head, and hast anointed him.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> \`And his sons thou dost bring near, and
hast clothed them \[with\] coats,

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> and hast girded them \[with\] a girdle
(Aaron and his sons), and hast bound on them bonnets; and the priesthood
hath been theirs by a statute age-during, and thou hast consecrated the
hand of Aaron, and the hand of his sons,

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> and hast brought near the bullock
before the tent of meeting, and Aaron hath laid -- his sons also --
their hands on the head of the bullock.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> \`And thou hast slaughtered the bullock
before Jehovah, at the opening of the tent of meeting,

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> and hast taken of the blood of the
bullock, and hast put \[it\] on the horns of the altar with thy finger,
and all the blood thou dost pour out at the foundation of the altar;

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> and thou hast taken all the fat which
is covering the inwards, and the redundance on the liver, and the two
kidneys, and the fat which \[is\] on them, and hast made perfume on the
altar;

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> and the flesh of the bullock, and his
skin, and his dung, thou dost burn with fire at the outside of the camp;
it \[is\] a sin-offering.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> \`And the one ram thou dost take, and
Aaron and his sons have laid their hands on the head of the ram,

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> and thou hast slaughtered the ram, and
hast taken its blood, and hast sprinkled \[it\] on the altar round
about,

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> and the ram thou dost cut into its
pieces, and hast washed its inwards, and its legs, and hast put \[them\]
on its pieces, and on its head;

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> and thou hast made perfume with the
whole ram on the altar. It \[is\] a burnt-offering to Jehovah, a sweet
fragrance; a fire-offering it \[is\] to Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> \`And thou hast taken the second ram,
and Aaron hath laid -- his sons also -- their hands on the head of the
ram,

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> and thou hast slaughtered the ram, and
hast taken of its blood, and hast put on the tip of the right ear of
Aaron, and on the tip of the right ear of his sons, and on the thumb of
their right hand, and on the great toe of their right foot, and hast
sprinkled the blood on the altar round about;

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> and thou hast taken of the blood which
\[is\] on the altar, and of the anointing oil, and hast sprinkled on
Aaron, and on his garments, and on his sons, and on the garments of his
sons with him, and he hath been hallowed, he, and his garments, and his
sons, and the garments of his sons with him.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> \`And thou hast taken from the ram the
fat, and the fat tail, and the fat which is covering the inwards, and
the redundance on the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat which
\[is\] on them, and the right leg, for it \[is\] a ram of consecration,

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> and one round cake of bread, and one
cake of oiled bread, and one thin cake out of the basket of the
unleavened things which \[is\] before Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> \`And thou hast set the whole on the
hands of Aaron, and on the hands of his sons, and hast waved them -- a
wave-offering before Jehovah;

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> and thou hast taken them out of their
hand, and hast made perfume on the altar beside the burnt-offering, for
sweet fragrance before Jehovah; a fire-offering it \[is\] to Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> \`And thou hast taken the breast from
the ram of the consecration which \[is\] for Aaron, and hast waved it --
a wave-offering before Jehovah, and it hath become thy portion;

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> and thou hast sanctified the breast of
the wave-offering, and the leg of the heave-offering, which hath been
waved, and which hath been lifted up from the ram of the consecration,
of that which \[is\] for Aaron, and of that which \[is\] for his sons;

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> and it hath been for Aaron and for his
sons, by a statute age-during from the sons of Israel, for it \[is\] a
heave-offering; and it is a heave offering from the sons of Israel, from
the sacrifices of their peace-offerings -- their heave-offering to
Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> \`And the holy garments which are
Aaron's, are for his sons after him, to be anointed in them, and to
consecrate in them their hand;

<span id="an_29:30">29:30</span> seven days doth the priest in his stead
(of his sons) put them on, when he goeth in unto the tent of meeting, to
minister in the sanctuary.

<span id="an_29:31">29:31</span> \`And the ram of the consecration thou
dost take, and hast boiled its flesh in the holy place;

<span id="an_29:32">29:32</span> and Aaron hath eaten -- his sons also
-- the flesh of the ram, and the bread which \[is\] in the basket, at
the opening of the tent of meeting;

<span id="an_29:33">29:33</span> and they have eaten those things by
which there is atonement to consecrate their hand, to sanctify them; and
a stranger doth not eat -- for they \[are\] holy;

<span id="an_29:34">29:34</span> and if there be left of the flesh of
the consecration or of the bread till the morning, then thou hast burned
that which is left with fire; it is not eaten, for it \[is\] holy.

<span id="an_29:35">29:35</span> \`And thou hast done thus to Aaron and
to his sons, according to all that I have commanded thee; seven days
thou dost consecrate their hand;

<span id="an_29:36">29:36</span> and a bullock, a sin-offering, thou
dost prepare daily for the atonements, and thou hast atoned for the
altar, in thy making atonement on it, and hast anointed it to sanctify
it;

<span id="an_29:37">29:37</span> seven days thou dost make atonement for
the altar, and hast sanctified it, and the altar hath been most holy;
all that is coming against the altar is holy.

<span id="an_29:38">29:38</span> \`And this \[is\] that which thou dost
prepare on the altar; two lambs, sons of a year, daily continually;

<span id="an_29:39">29:39</span> the one lamb thou dost prepare in the
morning, and the second lamb thou dost prepare between the evenings;

<span id="an_29:40">29:40</span> and a tenth \[deal\] of fine flour,
mixed with beaten oil, a fourth part of a hin, and a libation, a fourth
part of a hin, of wine, \[is\] for the one lamb.

<span id="an_29:41">29:41</span> \`And the second lamb thou dost prepare
between the evenings; according to the present of the morning, and
according to its libation, thou dost prepare for it, for sweet
fragrance, a fire-offering, to Jehovah: --

<span id="an_29:42">29:42</span> a continual burnt-offering for your
generations, at the opening of the tent of meeting, before Jehovah,
whither I am met with you, to speak unto thee there,

<span id="an_29:43">29:43</span> and I have met there with the sons of
Israel, and it hath been sanctified by My honour.

<span id="an_29:44">29:44</span> \`And I have sanctified the tent of
meeting, and the altar, and Aaron and his sons I sanctify for being
priests to Me,

<span id="an_29:45">29:45</span> and I have tabernacled in the midst of
the sons of Israel, and have become their God,

<span id="an_29:46">29:46</span> and they have known that I \[am\]
Jehovah their God, who hath brought them out of the land of Egypt, that
I may tabernacle in their midst; I \[am\] Jehovah their God.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> \`And thou hast made an altar \[for\]
making perfume; \[of\] shittim wood thou dost make it;

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> a cubit its length, and a cubit its
breadth, (it is square), and two cubits its height; its horns \[are\] of
the same.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> \`And thou hast overlaid it with pure
gold, its top, and its sides round about, and its horns; and thou hast
made to it a crown of gold round about;

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> and two rings of gold thou dost make to
it under its crown; on its two ribs thou dost make \[them\], on its two
sides, and they have become places for staves, to bear it with them.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> \`And thou hast made the staves of
shittim wood, and hast overlaid them with gold;

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> and thou hast put it before the vail,
which \[is\] by the ark of the testimony, before the mercy-seat which
\[is\] over the testimony, whither I am met with thee.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> \`And Aaron hath made perfume on it,
perfume of spices, morning by morning; in his making the lamps right he
doth perfume it,

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> and in Aaron's causing the lamps to go up
between the evenings, he doth perfume it; a continual perfume before
Jehovah to your generations.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> \`Ye do not cause strange perfume to go
up upon it, and burnt-offering, and present, and libation ye do not pour
out on it;

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> and Aaron hath made atonement on its
horns, once in a year, by the blood of the sin-offering of atonements;
once in a year doth he make atonement for it, to your generations; it
\[is\] most holy to Jehovah.'

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> \`When thou takest up the sum of the
sons of Israel for their numbers, then they have given each an atonement
\[for\] his soul to Jehovah in their being numbered, and there is no
plague among them in their being numbered.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> \`This they do give, every one passing
over unto those numbered, half a shekel, by the shekel of the sanctuary
(the shekel \[is\] twenty gerahs); half a shekel \[is\] the
heave-offering to Jehovah;

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> every one passing over unto those
numbered, from a son of twenty years and upwards, doth give the
heave-offering of Jehovah;

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> the rich doth not multiply, and the
poor doth not diminish from the half-shekel, to give the heave-offering
of Jehovah, to make atonement for your souls.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> \`And thou hast taken the
atonement-money from the sons of Israel, and hast given it for the
service of the tent of meeting; and it hath been to the sons of Israel
for a memorial before Jehovah, to make atonement for your souls.'

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> \`And thou hast made a laver of brass
(and its base of brass), for washing; and thou hast put it between the
tent of meeting and the altar, and hast put water there;

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> and Aaron and his sons have washed at
it their hands and their feet,

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> in their going in unto the tent of
meeting they wash \[with\] water, and die not; or in their drawing nigh
unto the altar to minister, to perfume a fire-offering to Jehovah,

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> then they have washed their hands and
their feet, and they die not, and it hath been to them a statute
age-during, to him and to his seed to their generations.'

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> \`And thou, take to thyself principal
spices, wild honey five hundred \[shekels\]; and spice-cinnamon, the
half of that, two hundred and fifty; and spice-cane two hundred and
fifty;

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> and cassia five hundred, by the shekel
of the sanctuary, and olive oil a hin;

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> and thou hast made it a holy anointing
oil, a compound mixture, work of a compounder; it is a holy anointing
oil.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> \`And thou hast anointed with it the
tent of meeting, and the ark of the testimony,

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> and the table and all its vessels, and
the candlestick and its vessels, and the altar of perfume,

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> and the altar of burnt-offering and all
its vessels, and the laver and its base;

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> and thou hast sanctified them, and they
have been most holy; all that is coming against them is holy;

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> and Aaron and his sons thou dost
anoint, and hast sanctified them for being priests to Me.

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> \`And unto the sons of Israel thou dost
speak, saying, A holy anointing oil is this to Me, to your generations;

<span id="an_30:32">30:32</span> on flesh of man it is not poured, and
with its proper proportion ye make none like it; it \[is\] holy; it is
holy to you;

<span id="an_30:33">30:33</span> a man who compoundeth \[any\] like it,
or who putteth of it on a stranger -- hath even been cut off from his
people.'

<span id="an_30:34">30:34</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Take to
thee spices, stacte, and onycha, and galbanum, spices and pure
frankincense; they are part for part;

<span id="an_30:35">30:35</span> and thou hast made it a perfume, a
compound, work of a compounder, salted, pure, holy;

<span id="an_30:36">30:36</span> and thou hast beaten \[some\] of it
small, and hast put of it before the testimony, in the tent of meeting,
whither I am met with thee; most holy it is to you.

<span id="an_30:37">30:37</span> \`As to the perfume which thou makest,
with its proper proportion ye do not make to yourselves, holy it is to
thee to Jehovah;

<span id="an_30:38">30:38</span> a man who maketh \[any\] like it -- to
be refreshed by it -- hath even been cut off from his people.'

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> \`See, I have called by name Bezaleel,
son of Uri, son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah,

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> and I fill him \[with\] the Spirit of
God, in wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all work,

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> to devise devices to work in gold, and in
silver, and in brass,

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> and in graving of stone for settings, and
in graving of wood to work in all work.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> \`And I, lo, I have given with him
Aholiab, son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, and in the heart of
every wise-hearted one I have given wisdom, and they have made all that
which I have commanded thee.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> \`The tent of meeting, and the ark of
testimony, and the mercy-seat which \[is\] on it, and all the vessels of
the tent,

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> and the table and its vessels, and the
pure candlestick and all its vessels, and the altar of the perfume,

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> and the altar of the burnt-offering and
all its vessels, and the laver and its base,

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> and the coloured garments, and the holy
garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, for acting
as priests in;

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> and the anointing oil, and the perfume
of the spices for the sanctuary; according to all that I have commanded
thee -- they do.'

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> \`And thou, speak unto the sons of
Israel, saying, Only, My sabbaths ye do keep, for it \[is\] a sign
between Me and you, to your generations, to know that I, Jehovah, am
sanctifying you;

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> and ye have kept the sabbath, for it
\[is\] holy to you, he who is polluting it is certainly put to death --
for any who doeth work in it -- that person hath even been cut off from
the midst of his people.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> \`Six days is work done, and in the
seventh day \[is\] a sabbath of holy rest to Jehovah; any who doeth work
in the sabbath-day is certainly put to death,

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> and the sons of Israel have observed
the sabbath; to keep the sabbath to their generations \[is\] a covenant
age-during,

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> between Me and the sons of Israel it
\[is\] a sign -- to the age; for six days Jehovah made the heavens and
the earth, and in the seventh day He hath ceased, and is refreshed.'

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> And He giveth unto Moses, when He
finisheth speaking with him in mount Sinai, two tables of the testimony,
tables of stone, written by the finger of God.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> And the people see that Moses is delaying
to come down from the mount, and the people assemble against Aaron, and
say unto him, \`Rise, make for us gods who go before us, for this Moses
-- the man who brought us up out of the land of Egypt -- we have not
known what hath happened to him.'

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> And Aaron saith unto them, \`Break off
the rings of gold which \[are\] in the ears of your wives, your sons,
and your daughters, and bring in unto me;'

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> and all the people themselves break off
the rings of gold which \[are\] in their ears, and bring in unto Aaron,

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> and he receiveth from their hand, and
doth fashion it with a graving tool, and doth make it a molten calf, and
they say, \`These thy gods, O Israel, who brought thee up out of the
land of Egypt.'

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> And Aaron seeth, and buildeth an altar
before it, and Aaron calleth, and saith, \`A festival to Jehovah --
to-morrow;'

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> and they rise early on the morrow, and
cause burnt-offerings to ascend, and bring nigh peace-offerings; and the
people sit down to eat and to drink, and rise up to play.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Go,
descend, for thy people whom thou hast brought up out of the land of
Egypt hath done corruptly,

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> they have turned aside hastily from the
way that I have commanded them; they have made for themselves a molten
calf, and bow themselves to it, and sacrifice to it, and say, These thy
gods, O Israel, who brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.'

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`I have
seen this people, and lo, it \[is\] a stiff-necked people;

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> and now, let Me alone, and My anger
doth burn against them, and I consume them, and I make thee become a
great nation.'

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> And Moses appeaseth the face of Jehovah
his God, and saith, \`Why, O Jehovah, doth Thine anger burn against Thy
people, whom Thou hast brought forth out of the land of Egypt with great
power and with a strong hand?

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> why do the Egyptians speak, saying, For
evil He brought them out to slay them among mountains, and to consume
them from off the face of the ground? turn back from the heat of Thine
anger, and repent of the evil against Thy people.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> \`Be mindful of Abraham, of Isaac, and
of Israel, Thy servants, to whom Thou hast sworn by Thyself, and unto
whom Thou speakest: I multiply your seed as stars of the heavens, and
all this land, as I have said, I give to your seed, and they have
inherited to the age;'

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> and Jehovah repenteth of the evil which
He hath spoken of doing to His people.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> And Moses turneth, and goeth down from
the mount, and the two tables of the testimony \[are\] in his hand,
tables written on both their sides, on this and on that \[are\] they
written;

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> and the tables are the work of God, and
the writing is the writing of God, graven on the tables.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> And Joshua heareth the voice of the
people in their shouting, and saith unto Moses, \`A noise of battle in
the camp!'

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> and he saith, \`It is not the voice of
the crying of might, nor is it the voice of the crying of weakness -- a
voice of singing I am hearing.'

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> And it cometh to pass, when he hath
drawn near unto the camp, that he seeth the calf, and the dancing, and
the anger of Moses burneth, and he casteth out of his hands the tables,
and breaketh them under the mount;

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> and he taketh the calf which they have
made, and burneth \[it\] with fire, and grindeth until \[it is\] small,
and scattereth on the face of the waters, and causeth the sons of Israel
to drink.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> And Moses saith unto Aaron, \`What hath
this people done to thee, that thou hast brought in upon it a great
sin?'

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> and Aaron saith, \`Let not the anger of
my lord burn; thou -- thou hast known the people that it \[is\] in evil;

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> and they say to me, Make for us gods,
who go before us, for this Moses -- the man who brought us up out of the
land of Egypt -- we have not known what hath happened to him;

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> and I say to them, Whoso hath gold, let
them break \[it\] off, and they give to me, and I cast it into the fire,
and this calf cometh out.'

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> And Moses seeth the people that it
\[is\] unbridled, for Aaron hath made it unbridled for contempt among
its withstanders,

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> and Moses standeth in the gate of the
camp, and saith, \`Who \[is\] for Jehovah? -- unto me!' and all the sons
of Levi are gathered unto him;

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> and he saith to them, \`Thus said
Jehovah, God of Israel, Put each his sword by his thigh, pass over and
turn back from gate to gate through the camp, and slay each his brother,
and each his friend, and each his relation.'

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> And the sons of Levi do according to
the word of Moses, and there fall of the people on that day about three
thousand men,

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> and Moses saith, \`Consecrate your hand
to-day to Jehovah, for a man \[is\] against his son, and against his
brother, so as to bring on you to-day a blessing.'

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> And it cometh to pass, on the morrow,
that Moses saith unto the people, \`Ye -- ye have sinned a great sin,
and now I go up unto Jehovah, if so be I atone for your sin.'

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> And Moses turneth back unto Jehovah,
and saith, \`Oh this people hath sinned a great sin, that they make to
themselves a god of gold;

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> and now, if Thou takest away their sin
-- and if not -- blot me, I pray thee, out of Thy book which Thou hast
written.'

<span id="an_32:33">32:33</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Whoso
hath sinned against Me -- I blot him out of My book;

<span id="an_32:34">32:34</span> and now, go, lead the people
whithersoever I have spoken to thee of; lo, My messenger goeth before
thee, and in the day of my charging -- then I have charged upon them
their sin.'

<span id="an_32:35">32:35</span> And Jehovah plagueth the people,
because they made the calf which Aaron made.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, \`Go,
ascend from this \[place\], thou and the people, whom thou hast brought
up out of the land of Egypt, unto the land which I have sworn to
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, To thy seed I give it,'

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> (and I have sent before thee a messenger,
and have cast out the Canaanite, the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the
Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite,)

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> unto a land flowing with milk and honey,
for I do not go up in thy midst, for thou \[art\] a stiff-necked people
-- lest I consume thee in the way.'

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> And the people hear this sad thing, and
mourn; and none put his ornaments on him.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Say unto
the sons of Israel, Ye \[are\] a stiff-necked people; one moment -- I
come up into thy midst, and have consumed thee; and now, put down thine
ornaments from off thee, and I know what I do to thee;'

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> and the sons of Israel take off their
ornaments at mount Horeb.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> And Moses taketh the tent, and hath
stretched it out at the outside of the camp, afar off from the camp, and
hath called it, \`Tent of Meeting;' and it hath come to pass, every one
seeking Jehovah goeth out unto the tent of meeting, which \[is\] at the
outside of the camp.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> And it hath come to pass, at the going
out of Moses unto the tent, all the people rise, and have stood, each at
the opening of his tent, and have looked expectingly after Moses, until
his going into the tent.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> And it hath come to pass, at the going in
of Moses to the tent, the pillar of the cloud cometh down, and hath
stood at the opening of the tent, and He hath spoken with Moses;

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> and all the people have seen the pillar
of the cloud standing at the opening of the tent, and all the people
have risen and bowed themselves, each at the opening of his tent.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> And Jehovah hath spoken unto Moses face
unto face, as a man speaketh unto his friend; and he hath turned back
unto the camp, and his minister Joshua, son of Nun, a youth, departeth
not out of the tent.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> And Moses saith unto Jehovah, \`See,
Thou art saying unto me, Bring up this people, and Thou hast not caused
me to know whom Thou dost send with me; and Thou hast said, I have known
thee by name, and also thou hast found grace in Mine eyes.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> \`And now, if, I pray Thee, I have
found grace in Thine eyes, cause me to know, I pray Thee, Thy way, and I
know Thee, so that I find grace in Thine eyes, and consider that this
nation \[is\] Thy people;'

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> and He saith, \`My presence doth go,
and I have given rest to thee.'

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> And he saith unto Him, \`If Thy
presence is not going -- take us not up from this \[place\];

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> and in what is it known now, that I
have found grace in Thine eyes -- I and Thy people -- is it not in Thy
going with us? and we have been distinguished -- I and Thy people --
from all the people who \[are\] on the face of the ground.'

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Even
this thing which thou hast spoken I do; for thou hast found grace in
Mine eyes, and I know thee by name.'

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> And he saith, \`Shew me, I pray Thee,
Thine honour;'

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> and He saith, \`I cause all My goodness
to pass before thy face, and have called concerning the Name of Jehovah
before thee, and favoured him whom I favour, and loved him whom I love.'

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> He saith also, \`Thou art unable to see
My face, for man doth not see Me, and live;'

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> Jehovah also saith, \`Lo, a place
\[is\] by Me, and thou hast stood on the rock,

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> and it hath come to pass, in the
passing by of Mine honour, that I have set thee in a cleft of the rock,
and spread out My hands over thee, until My passing by,

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> and I have turned aside My hands, and
thou hast seen My back parts, and My face is not seen.'

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Hew for
thyself two tables of stone like the first, and I have written on the
tables the words which were on the first tables which thou hast broken;

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> and be prepared at morning, and thou hast
come up in the morning unto mount Sinai, and hast stood before Me there,
on the top of the mount,

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> and no man cometh up with thee, and also
no man is seen in all the mount, also the flock and the herd do not feed
over-against that mount.'

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> And he heweth two tables of stone like
the first, and Moses riseth early in the morning, and goeth up unto
mount Sinai, as Jehovah commanded him, and he taketh in his hand two
tables of stone.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> And Jehovah cometh down in a cloud, and
stationeth Himself with him there, and calleth in the Name of Jehovah,

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> and Jehovah passeth over before his face,
and calleth: \`Jehovah, Jehovah God, merciful and gracious, slow to
anger, and abundant in kindness and truth,

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> keeping kindness for thousands, taking
away iniquity, and transgression, and sin, and not entirely acquitting,
charging iniquity of fathers on children, and on children's children, on
a third \[generation\], and on a fourth.'

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> And Moses hasteth, and boweth to the
earth, and doth obeisance,

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> and saith, \`If, I pray Thee, I have
found grace in Thine eyes, O my Lord, let my Lord, I pray Thee, go in
our midst (for it \[is\] a stiff-necked people), and thou hast forgiven
our iniquity and our sin, and hast inherited us.'

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> And He saith, \`Lo, I am making a
covenant: before all thy people I do wonders, which have not been done
in all the earth, or in any nation, and all the people in whose midst
thou \[art\] have seen the work of Jehovah, for it \[is\] fearful that
which I am doing with thee.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> \`Observe for thyself that which I am
commanding thee to-day: lo, I am casting out from before thee the
Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the
Hivite, and the Jebusite;

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> take heed to thyself, lest thou make a
covenant with the inhabitant of the land into which thou art going, lest
it become a snare in thy midst;

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> for their altars ye break down, and
their standing pillars ye shiver, and its shrines ye cut down;

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> for ye do not bow yourselves to another
god -- for Jehovah, whose name \[is\] Zealous, is a zealous God.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> \`Lest thou make a covenant with the
inhabitant of the land, and they have gone a-whoring after their gods,
and have sacrificed to their gods, and \[one\] hath called to thee, and
thou hast eaten of his sacrifice,

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> and thou hast taken of their daughters
to thy sons, and their daughters have gone a-whoring after their gods,
and have caused thy sons to go a-whoring after their gods;

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> a molten god thou dost not make to
thyself.

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> \`The feast of unleavened things thou
dost keep; seven days thou dost eat unleavened things, as I have
commanded thee, at an appointed time, the month of Abib: for in the
month of Abib thou didst come out from Egypt.

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> \`All opening a womb \[are\] Mine, and
every firstling of thy cattle born a male, ox or sheep;

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> and the firstling of an ass thou dost
ransom with a lamb; and if thou dost not ransom, then thou hast beheaded
it; every first-born of thy sons thou dost ransom, and they do not
appear before Me empty.

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> \`Six days thou dost work, and on the
seventh day thou dost rest; in ploughing-time and in harvest thou dost
rest.

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> \`And a feast of weeks thou dost
observe for thyself; first-fruits of wheat-harvest; and the feast of
in-gathering, at the revolution of the year.

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> \`Three times in a year do all thy
males appear before the Lord Jehovah, God of Israel;

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> for I dispossess nations from before
thee, and have enlarged thy border, and no man doth desire thy land in
thy going up to appear before Jehovah thy God three times in a year.

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> \`Thou dost not slaughter with a
fermented thing the blood of My sacrifice; and the sacrifice of the
feast of the passover doth not remain till morning:

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> the first of the first-fruits of the
land thou dost bring into the house of Jehovah thy God; thou dost not
boil a kid in its mother's milk.'

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> And Jehovah saith unto Moses, \`Write
for thyself these words, for, according to the tenor of these words I
have made with thee a covenant, and with Israel.'

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> And he is there with Jehovah forty days
and forty nights; bread he hath not eaten, and water he hath not drunk;
and he writeth on the tables the matters of the covenant -- the ten
matters.

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> And it cometh to pass, when Moses is
coming down from mount Sinai (and the two tables of the testimony
\[are\] in the hand of Moses in his coming down from the mount), that
Moses hath not known that the skin of his face hath shone in His
speaking with him,

<span id="an_34:30">34:30</span> and Aaron seeth -- all the sons of
Israel also -- Moses, and lo, the skin of his face hath shone, and they
are afraid of coming nigh unto him.

<span id="an_34:31">34:31</span> And Moses calleth unto them, and Aaron
and all the princes in the company return unto him, and Moses speaketh
unto them;

<span id="an_34:32">34:32</span> and afterwards have all the sons of
Israel come nigh, and he chargeth them with all that Jehovah hath spoken
with him in mount Sinai.

<span id="an_34:33">34:33</span> And Moses finisheth speaking with them,
and putteth on his face a vail;

<span id="an_34:34">34:34</span> and in the going in of Moses before
Jehovah to speak with Him, he turneth aside the vail until his coming
out; and he hath come out and hath spoken unto the sons of Israel that
which he is commanded;

<span id="an_34:35">34:35</span> and the sons of Israel have seen the
face of Moses that the skin of the face of Moses hath shone, and Moses
hath put back the vail on his face until his going in to speak with Him.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> And Moses assembleth all the company of
the sons of Israel, and saith unto them, \`These \[are\] the things
which Jehovah hath commanded -- to do them:

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> Six days is work done, and on the seventh
day there is to you a holy \[day\], a sabbath of rest to Jehovah; any
who doeth work in it is put to death;

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> ye do not burn a fire in any of your
dwellings on the sabbath-day.'

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> And Moses speaketh unto all the company
of the sons of Israel, saying, \`This \[is\] the thing which Jehovah
hath commanded, saying,

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> Take ye from among you a heave-offering
to Jehovah; every one whose heart \[is\] willing doth bring it, -- the
heave-offering of Jehovah, -- gold, and silver, and brass,

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
linen, and goats' \[hair\],

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> and rams' skins made red, and badgers'
skins, and shittim wood,

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> and oil for the light, and spices for the
anointing oil, and for the spice perfume,

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> and shoham stones, and stones for
settings, for an ephod, and for a breastplate.

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> \`And all the wise-hearted among you
come in, and make all that Jehovah hath commanded:

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> \`The tabernacle, its tent, and its
covering, its hooks, and its boards, its bars, its pillars, and its
sockets,

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> \`The ark and its staves, the
mercy-seat, and the vail of the covering,

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> \`The table and its staves, and all its
vessels, and the bread of the presence,

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> \`And the candlestick for the light,
and its vessels, and its lamps, and the oil for the light,

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> \`And the altar of perfume, and its
staves, and the anointing oil, and the spice perfume, and the covering
of the opening at the opening of the tabernacle,

<span id="an_35:16">35:16</span> \`The altar of burnt-offering and the
brazen grate which it hath, its staves, and all its vessels, the laver
and its base,

<span id="an_35:17">35:17</span> \`The hangings of the court, its
pillars, and their sockets, and the covering of the gate of the court,

<span id="an_35:18">35:18</span> \`The pins of the tabernacle, and the
pins of the court, and their cords,

<span id="an_35:19">35:19</span> \`The coloured garments, to do service
in the sanctuary, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the
garments of his sons to act as priest in.'

<span id="an_35:20">35:20</span> And all the company of the sons of
Israel go out from the presence of Moses,

<span id="an_35:21">35:21</span> and they come in -- every man whom his
heart hath lifted up, and every one whom his spirit hath made willing --
they have brought in the heave-offering of Jehovah for the work of the
tent of meeting, and for all its service, and for the holy garments.

<span id="an_35:22">35:22</span> And they come in -- the men with the
women -- every willing-hearted one -- they have brought in nose-ring,
and ear-ring, and seal-ring, and necklace, all golden goods, even every
one who hath waved a wave-offering of gold to Jehovah.

<span id="an_35:23">35:23</span> And every man with whom hath been found
blue, and purple, and scarlet, and linen, and goats' \[hair\], and rams'
skins made red, and badgers' skins, have brought \[them\] in;

<span id="an_35:24">35:24</span> every one lifting up a heave-offering
of silver and brass have brought in the heave-offering of Jehovah; and
every one with whom hath been found shittim wood for any work of the
service brought \[it\] in.

<span id="an_35:25">35:25</span> And every wise-hearted woman hath spun
with her hands, and they bring in yarn, the blue, and the purple, the
scarlet, and the linen;

<span id="an_35:26">35:26</span> and all the women whose heart hath
lifted them up in wisdom, have spun the goats' \[hair\].

<span id="an_35:27">35:27</span> And the princes have brought in the
shoham stones, and the stones for settings, for the ephod, and for the
breastplate,

<span id="an_35:28">35:28</span> and the spices, and the oil for the
light, and for the anointing oil, and for the spice perfume;

<span id="an_35:29">35:29</span> every man and woman (whom their heart
hath made willing to bring in for all the work which Jehovah commanded
to be done by the hand of Moses) \[of\] the sons of Israel brought in a
willing-offering to Jehovah.

<span id="an_35:30">35:30</span> And Moses saith unto the sons of
Israel, \`See, Jehovah hath called by name Bezaleel, son of Uri, son of
Hur, of the tribe of Judah,

<span id="an_35:31">35:31</span> and He doth fill him \[with\] the
Spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all
work,

<span id="an_35:32">35:32</span> even to devise devices to work in gold,
and in silver, and in brass,

<span id="an_35:33">35:33</span> and in graving of stones for settings,
and in graving of wood to work in any work of design.

<span id="an_35:34">35:34</span> \`And to direct He hath put in his
heart, he and Aholiab, son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan;

<span id="an_35:35">35:35</span> He hath filled them with wisdom of
heart to do every work, of engraver, and designer, and embroiderer (in
blue, and in purple, in scarlet, and in linen), and weaver, who do any
work, and of designers of designs.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> And Bezaleel, and Aholiab, and every
wise-hearted man, in whom Jehovah hath given wisdom and understanding to
know to do every work of the service of the sanctuary, have done
according to all that Jehovah commanded.

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> And Moses calleth unto Bezaleel, and unto
Aholiab, and unto every wise-hearted man in whose heart Jehovah hath
given wisdom, every one whom his heart lifted up, to come near unto the
work to do it.

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> And they take from before Moses all the
heave-offering which the sons of Israel have brought in for the work of
the service of the sanctuary to do it; and still they have brought in
unto him a willing-offering morning by morning.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> And all the wise men, who are doing all
the work of the sanctuary, come each from his work which they are doing,

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> and speak unto Moses, saying, \`The
people are multiplying to bring in more than sufficient for the service
of the work which Jehovah commanded to make.'

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> And Moses commandeth, and they cause a
voice to pass over through the camp, saying, \`Let not man or woman make
any more work for the heave-offering of the sanctuary;' and the people
are restrained from bringing,

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> and the work hath been sufficient for
them, for all the work, to do it, and to leave.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> And all the wise-hearted ones among the
doers of the work make the tabernacle; ten curtains of twined linen, and
blue, and purple, and scarlet, \[with\] cherubs, work of a designer, he
hath made them.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> The length of the one curtain \[is\]
eight and twenty by the cubit, and the breadth of the one curtain four
by the cubit; one measure \[is\] to all the curtains.

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> And he joineth the five curtains one
unto another, and the \[other\] five curtains he hath joined one unto
another;

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> and he maketh loops of blue on the edge
of the one curtain, at the end, in the joining; so he hath made in the
edge of the outmost curtain, in the joining of the second;

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> fifty loops he hath made in the one
curtain, and fifty loops hath he made in the end of the curtain which
\[is\] in the joining of the second; the loops are taking hold one on
another.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> And he maketh fifty hooks of gold, and
joineth the curtains one unto another by the hooks, and the tabernacle
is one.

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> And he maketh curtains of goats'
\[hair\] for a tent over the tabernacle; eleven curtains he hath made
them;

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> the length of the one curtain \[is\]
thirty by the cubit, and the breadth of the one curtain \[is\] four
cubits; one measure \[is\] to the eleven curtains;

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> and he joineth the five curtains apart,
and the six curtains apart.

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> And he maketh fifty loops on the outer
edge of the curtain, in the joining; and fifty loops he hath made on the
edge of the curtain which is joining the second;

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> and he maketh fifty hooks of brass to
join the tent -- to be one;

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> and he maketh a covering for the tent
of rams' skins made red, and a covering of badgers' skins above.

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> And he maketh the boards for the
tabernacle of shittim wood, standing up;

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> ten cubits \[is\] the length of the
\[one\] board, and a cubit and a half the breadth of the \[one\] board;

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> two handles \[are\] to the one board,
joined one unto another; so he hath made for all the boards of the
tabernacle.

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> And he maketh the boards for the
tabernacle; twenty boards for the south side southward;

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> and forty sockets of silver he hath
made under the twenty boards, two sockets under the one board for its
two handles, and two sockets under the other board for its two handles.

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> And for the second side of the
tabernacle, for the north side, he hath made twenty boards,

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> and their forty sockets of silver, two
sockets under the one board, and two sockets under the other board;

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> and for the sides of the tabernacle,
westward, hath he made six boards;

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> and two boards hath he made for the
corners of the tabernacle, in the two sides;

<span id="an_36:29">36:29</span> and they have been twins below, and
together they are twins at its head, at the one ring; so he hath done to
both of them at the two corners;

<span id="an_36:30">36:30</span> and there have been eight boards; and
their sockets of silver \[are\] sixteen sockets, two sockets under the
one board.

<span id="an_36:31">36:31</span> And he maketh bars of shittim wood,
five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,

<span id="an_36:32">36:32</span> and five bars for the boards of the
second side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the
tabernacle, for the sides westward;

<span id="an_36:33">36:33</span> and he maketh the middle bar to enter
into the midst of the boards from end to end;

<span id="an_36:34">36:34</span> and the boards he hath overlaid with
gold, and their rings he hath made of gold, places for bars, and he
overlayeth the bars with gold.

<span id="an_36:35">36:35</span> And he maketh the vail of blue, and
purple, and scarlet, and twined linen, work of a designer he hath made
it, \[with\] cherubs;

<span id="an_36:36">36:36</span> and he maketh for it four pillars of
shittim \[wood\], and overlayeth them with gold; their pegs \[are\] of
gold; and he casteth for them four sockets of silver.

<span id="an_36:37">36:37</span> And he maketh a covering for the
opening of the tent, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen,
work of an embroiderer,

<span id="an_36:38">36:38</span> also its five pillars, and their pegs;
and he overlaid their tops and their fillets \[with\] gold, and their
five sockets \[are\] brass.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> And Bezaleel maketh the ark of shittim
wood, two cubits and a half its length, and a cubit and a half its
breadth, and a cubit and a half its height;

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> and he overlayeth it with pure gold
within and without, and maketh for it a wreath of gold round about;

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> and he casteth for it four rings of gold,
on its four feet, even two rings on its one side, and two rings on its
second side;

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> and he maketh staves of shittim wood, and
overlayeth them with gold,

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> and he bringeth in the staves into the
rings, by the sides of the ark, to bear the ark.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> And he maketh a mercy-seat of pure gold,
two cubits and a half its length, and a cubit and a half its breadth;

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> and he maketh two cherubs of gold, of
beaten work he hath made them, at the two ends of the mercy-seat;

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> one cherub at the end on this \[side\],
and one cherub at the end on that, out of the mercy-seat he hath made
the cherubs, at its two ends;

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> and the cherubs are spreading out wings
on high, covering over the mercy-seat with their wings, and their faces
\[are\] one towards another; towards the mercy-seat have the faces of
the cherubs been.

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> And he maketh the table of shittim
wood; two cubits its length, and a cubit its breadth, and a cubit and a
half its height,

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> and overlayeth it with pure gold, and
maketh for it a wreath of gold round about.

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> And he maketh for it a border of a
handbreadth round about, and maketh a wreath of gold for its border
round about;

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> and he casteth for it four rings of
gold, and putteth the rings on the four corners which \[are\] to its
four feet;

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> over-against the border have the rings
been, places for staves to bear the table.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> And he maketh the staves of shittim
wood, and overlayeth them with gold, to bear the table;

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> and he maketh the vessels which \[are\]
upon the table, its dishes, and its bowls, and its cups, and the cups by
which they pour out, of pure gold.

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> And he maketh the candlestick of pure
gold; of beaten work he hath made the candlestick, its base, and its
branch, its calyxes, its knops, and its flowers, have been of the same;

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> and six branches are coming out of its
sides, three branches of the candlestick out of its one side, and three
branches of the candlestick out of its second side;

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> three calyxes, made like almonds, in
the one branch, a knop and a flower; and three calyxes, made like
almonds, in another branch, a knop and a flower; so to the six branches
which are coming out of the candlestick.

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> And in the candlestick \[are\] four
calyxes, made like almonds, its knops, and its flowers,

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> and a knop under the two branches of
the same, and a knop under the two branches of the same, and a knop
under the two branches of the same, \[are\] to the six branches which
are coming out of it;

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> their knops and their branches have
been of the same; all of it one beaten work of pure gold.

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> And he maketh its seven lamps, and its
snuffers, and its snuff-dishes, of pure gold;

<span id="an_37:24">37:24</span> of a talent of pure gold he hath made
it, and all its vessels.

<span id="an_37:25">37:25</span> And he maketh the perfume-altar of
shittim wood; a cubit its length, and a cubit its breadth (square), and
two cubits its height; its horns have been of the same;

<span id="an_37:26">37:26</span> and he overlayeth it with pure gold,
its top and its sides round about, and its horns; and he maketh for it a
wreath of gold round about;

<span id="an_37:27">37:27</span> and two rings of gold he hath made for
it under its wreath, at its two corners, at its two sides, for places
for staves to bear it with them.

<span id="an_37:28">37:28</span> And he maketh the staves of shittim
wood, and overlayeth them with gold;

<span id="an_37:29">37:29</span> and he maketh the holy anointing oil,
and the pure spice-perfume -- work of a compounder.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> And he maketh the altar of burnt-offering
of shittim wood, five cubits its length, and five cubits its breadth
(square), and three cubits its height;

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> and he maketh its horns on its four
corners; its horns have been of the same; and he overlayeth it with
brass;

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> and he maketh all the vessels of the
altar, the pots, and the shovels, and the sprinkling-pans, the forks,
and the fire-pans; all its vessels he hath made of brass.

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> And he maketh for the altar a brazen
grate of net-work, under its border beneath, unto its midst;

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> and he casteth four rings for the four
ends of the brazen grate -- places for bars;

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> and he maketh the staves of shittim wood,
and overlayeth them with brass;

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> and he bringeth in the staves into the
rings on the sides of the altar, to bear it with them; hollow \[with\]
boards he made it.

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> And he maketh the laver of brass, and its
base of brass, with the looking-glasses of the women assembling, who
have assembled at the opening of the tent of meeting.

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> And he maketh the court; at the south
side southward, the hangings of the court of twined linen, a hundred by
the cubit,

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> their pillars \[are\] twenty, and their
brazen sockets twenty, the pegs of the pillars and their fillets \[are\]
silver;

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> and at the north side, a hundred by the
cubit, their pillars \[are\] twenty, and their sockets of brass twenty;
the pegs of the pillars and their fillets \[are\] silver;

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> and at the west side \[are\] hangings,
fifty by the cubit; their pillars \[are\] ten, and their sockets ten;
the pegs of the pillars and their fillets \[are\] silver;

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> and at the east side eastward fifty
cubits.

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> The hangings on the side \[are\]
fifteen cubits, their pillars three, and their sockets three,

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> and at the second side at the gate of
the court, on this and on that, \[are\] hangings, fifteen cubits, their
pillars three, and their sockets three;

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> all the hangings of the court round
about \[are\] of twined linen,

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> and the sockets for the pillars of
brass, the pegs of the pillars and their fillets of silver, and the
overlaying of their tops of silver, and all the pillars of the court are
filleted with silver.

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> And the covering of the gate of the
court \[is\] the work of an embroiderer, of blue, and purple, and
scarlet, and twined linen; and twenty cubits \[is\] the length, and the
height with the breadth five cubits, over-against the hangings of the
court;

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> and their pillars \[are\] four, and
their sockets of brass four, their pegs \[are\] of silver, and the
overlaying of their tops and their fillets \[are\] of silver;

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> and all the pins for the tabernacle,
and for the court round about, \[are\] of brass.

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> These are the numberings of the
tabernacle (the tabernacle of testimony), which hath been numbered by
the command of Moses, the service of the Levites, by the hand of Ithamar
son of Aaron the priest.

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> And Bezaleel son of Uri, son of Hur, of
the tribe of Judah, hath made all that Jehovah commanded Moses;

<span id="an_38:23">38:23</span> and with him \[is\] Aholiab son of
Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, an engraver, and designer, and
embroiderer in blue, and in purple, and in scarlet, and in linen.

<span id="an_38:24">38:24</span> All the gold which is prepared for the
work in all the work of the sanctuary (and it is the gold of the
wave-offering) \[is\] twenty and nine talents, and seven hundred and
thirty shekels, by the shekel of the sanctuary.

<span id="an_38:25">38:25</span> And the silver of those numbered of the
company \[is\] a hundred talents, and a thousand and seven hundred and
five and seventy shekels, by the shekel of the sanctuary;

<span id="an_38:26">38:26</span> a bekah for a poll (half a shekel, by
the shekel of the sanctuary,) for every one who is passing over unto
those numbered, from a son of twenty years and upwards, for six hundred
thousand, and three thousand, and five hundred and fifty.

<span id="an_38:27">38:27</span> And a hundred talents of silver are to
cast the sockets of the sanctuary, and the sockets of the vail; a
hundred sockets for the hundred talents, a talent for a socket;

<span id="an_38:28">38:28</span> and the thousand and seven hundred and
five and seventy he hath made pegs for the pillars, and overlaid their
tops, and filleted them.

<span id="an_38:29">38:29</span> And the brass of the wave-offering
\[is\] seventy talents, and two thousand and four hundred shekels;

<span id="an_38:30">38:30</span> and he maketh with it the sockets of
the opening of the tent of meeting, and the brazen altar, and the brazen
grate which it hath, and all the vessels of the altar,

<span id="an_38:31">38:31</span> and the sockets of the court round
about, and the sockets of the gate of the court, and all the pins of the
tabernacle, and all the pins of the court round about.

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> And of the blue, and the purple, and the
scarlet, they made coloured garments, to minister in the sanctuary; and
they make the holy garments which \[are\] for Aaron, as Jehovah hath
commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> And he maketh the ephod, of gold, blue,
and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen,

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> and they expand the plates of gold, and
have cut off wires to work in the midst of the blue, and in the midst of
the purple, and in the midst of the scarlet, and in the midst of the
linen -- work of a designer;

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> shoulder-pieces they have made for it,
joining; at its two ends it is joined.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> And the girdle of his ephod which \[is\]
on it is of the same, according to its work, of gold, blue, and purple,
and scarlet, and twined linen, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> And they prepare the shoham stones, set,
embroidered \[with\] gold, opened with openings of a signet, by the
names of the sons of Israel;

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> and he setteth them on the shoulders of
the ephod -- stones of memorial for the sons of Israel, as Jehovah hath
commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> And he maketh the breastplate, work of a
designer, like the work of the ephod, of gold, blue, and purple, and
scarlet, and twined linen;

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> it hath been square; double they have
made the breastplate, a span its length, and a span its breadth,
doubled.

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> And they fill in it four rows of
stones; a row of a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle \[is\] the one row;

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> and the second row an emerald, a
sapphire, and a diamond;

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> and the third row an opal, an agate,
and an amethyst;

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> and the fourth row a beryl, an onyx,
and a jasper -- set, embroidered \[with\] gold, in their settings.

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> And the stones, according to the names
of the sons of Israel, are twelve, according to their names, openings of
a signet, each according to his name, for the twelve tribes.

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> And they make on the breastplate
wreathed chains, work of thick bands, of pure gold;

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> and they make two embroidered things of
gold, and two rings of gold, and put the two rings on the two ends of
the breastplate,

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> and they put the two thick bands of
gold on the two rings on the ends of the breastplate;

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> and the two ends of the two thick bands
they have put on the two embroidered things, and they put them on the
shoulders of the ephod, over-against its front.

<span id="an_39:19">39:19</span> And they make two rings of gold, and
set \[them\] on the two ends of the breastplate, on its border, which
\[is\] on the side of the ephod within;

<span id="an_39:20">39:20</span> and they make two rings of gold, and
put them on the two shoulders of the ephod below, over-against its
front, over-against its joining, above the girdle of the ephod;

<span id="an_39:21">39:21</span> and they bind the breastplate by its
rings unto the rings of the ephod, with a ribbon of blue, to be above
the girdle of the ephod, and the breastplate is not loosed from off the
ephod, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:22">39:22</span> And he maketh the upper robe of the
ephod, work of a weaver, completely of blue;

<span id="an_39:23">39:23</span> and the opening of the upper robe
\[is\] in its midst, as the opening of a habergeon, a border \[is\] to
its opening round about, it is not rent;

<span id="an_39:24">39:24</span> and they make on the hems of the upper
robe pomegranates of blue, and purple, and scarlet, twined.

<span id="an_39:25">39:25</span> And they make bells of pure gold, and
put the bells in the midst of the pomegranates, on the hems of the upper
robe, round about, in the midst of the pomegranates;

<span id="an_39:26">39:26</span> a bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a
pomegranate, \[are\] on the hems of the upper robe, round about, to
minister in, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:27">39:27</span> And they make the coats of linen, work
of a weaver, for Aaron and for his sons,

<span id="an_39:28">39:28</span> and the mitre of linen, and the
beautiful bonnets of linen, and the linen trousers, of twined linen,

<span id="an_39:29">39:29</span> and the girdle of twined linen, and
blue, and purple, and scarlet, work of an embroiderer, as Jehovah hath
commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:30">39:30</span> And they make the flower of the holy
crown of pure gold, and write on it a writing, openings of a signet,
\`Holy to Jehovah;'

<span id="an_39:31">39:31</span> and they put on it a ribbon of blue, to
put \[it\] on the mitre above, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:32">39:32</span> And all the service of the tabernacle
of the tent of meeting is completed; and the sons of Israel do according
to all that Jehovah hath commanded Moses; so they have done.

<span id="an_39:33">39:33</span> And they bring in the tabernacle unto
Moses, the tent, and all its vessels, its hooks, its boards, its bars,
and its pillars, and its sockets;

<span id="an_39:34">39:34</span> and the covering of rams' skins, which
are made red, and the covering of badgers' skins, and the vail of the
covering;

<span id="an_39:35">39:35</span> the ark of the testimony and its
staves, and the mercy-seat;

<span id="an_39:36">39:36</span> the table, all its vessels, and the
bread of the presence;

<span id="an_39:37">39:37</span> the pure candlestick, its lamps, the
lamps of arrangement, and all its vessels, and the oil for the light.

<span id="an_39:38">39:38</span> And the golden altar, and the anointing
oil, and the spice-perfume, and the covering of the opening of the tent;

<span id="an_39:39">39:39</span> the brazen altar and the brazen grate
which it hath, its staves, and all its vessels, the laver and its base.

<span id="an_39:40">39:40</span> The hangings of the court, its pillars,
and its sockets; and the covering for the gate of the court, its cords,
and its pins; and all the vessels of the service of the tabernacle, for
the tent of meeting;

<span id="an_39:41">39:41</span> the coloured clothes to minister in the
sanctuary, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of
his sons, to act as priest in.

<span id="an_39:42">39:42</span> According to all that Jehovah hath
commanded Moses, so have the sons of Israel done all the service;

<span id="an_39:43">39:43</span> and Moses seeth all the work, and lo,
they have done it as Jehovah hath commanded; so they have done. And
Moses doth bless them.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> \`On the first day of the month, in the
first month, thou dost raise up the tabernacle of the tent of meeting,

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> and hast set there the ark of the
testimony, and hast covered over the ark with the vail,

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> and hast brought in the table, and set
its arrangement in order, and hast brought in the candlestick, and
caused its lamps to go up.

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> \`And thou hast put the golden altar for
perfume before the ark of the testimony, and hast put the covering of
the opening to the tabernacle,

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> and hast put the altar of the
burnt-offering before the opening of the tabernacle of the tent of
meeting,

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> and hast put the laver between the tent
of meeting and the altar, and hast put water there.

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> \`And thou hast set the court round
about, and hast placed the covering of the gate of the court,

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> and hast taken the anointing oil, and
anointed the tabernacle, and all that \[is\] in it, and hallowed it, and
all its vessels, and it hath been holy;

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> and thou hast anointed the altar of the
burnt-offering, and all its vessels, and sanctified the altar, and the
altar hath been most holy;

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> and thou hast anointed the laver and
its base, and sanctified it.

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> \`And thou hast brought near Aaron and
his sons unto the opening of the tent of meeting, and hast bathed them
with water;

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> and thou hast clothed Aaron with the
holy garments, and anointed him, and sanctified him, and he hath acted
as priest to Me.

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> \`And his sons thou dost bring near,
and hast clothed them with coats,

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> and anointed them as thou hast anointed
their father, and they have acted as priests to Me, and their anointing
hath been to be to them for a priesthood age-during, to their
generations.'

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> And Moses doth according to all that
Jehovah hath commanded him; so he hath done.

<span id="an_40:17">40:17</span> And it cometh to pass, in the first
month, in the second year, in the first of the month, the tabernacle
hath been raised up;

<span id="an_40:18">40:18</span> and Moses raiseth up the tabernacle,
and setteth its sockets, and placeth its boards, and placeth its bars,
and raiseth its pillars,

<span id="an_40:19">40:19</span> and spreadeth the tent over the
tabernacle, and putteth the covering of the tent upon it above, as
Jehovah hath commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:20">40:20</span> And he taketh and putteth the testimony
unto the ark, and setteth the staves on the ark, and putteth the
mercy-seat on the ark above;

<span id="an_40:21">40:21</span> and bringeth in the ark unto the
tabernacle, and placeth the vail of the covering, and covereth over the
ark of the testimony, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:22">40:22</span> And he putteth the table in the tent of
meeting, on the side of the tabernacle northward, at the outside of the
vail,

<span id="an_40:23">40:23</span> and setteth in order upon it the
arrangement of bread, before Jehovah, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:24">40:24</span> And he putteth the candlestick in the
tent of meeting, over-against the table, on the side of the tabernacle
southward,

<span id="an_40:25">40:25</span> and causeth the lamps to go up before
Jehovah, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:26">40:26</span> And he setteth the golden altar in the
tent of meeting, before the vail,

<span id="an_40:27">40:27</span> and maketh perfume on it --
spice-perfume -- as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:28">40:28</span> And he setteth the covering of the
opening to the tabernacle,

<span id="an_40:29">40:29</span> and the altar of the burnt-offering he
hath set at the opening of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting, and
causeth the burnt-offering to go up upon it, and the present, as Jehovah
hath commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:30">40:30</span> And he putteth the laver between the
tent of meeting and the altar, and putteth water there for washing,

<span id="an_40:31">40:31</span> and Moses and Aaron and his sons have
washed their hands and their feet at the same;

<span id="an_40:32">40:32</span> in their going in unto the tent of
meeting, and in their drawing near unto the altar, they wash, as Jehovah
hath commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:33">40:33</span> And he raiseth up the court round about
the tabernacle, and about the altar, and placeth the covering of the
gate of the court; and Moses completeth the work.

<span id="an_40:34">40:34</span> And the cloud covereth the tent of
meeting, and the honour of Jehovah hath filled the tabernacle;

<span id="an_40:35">40:35</span> and Moses hath not been able to go in
unto the tent of meeting, for the cloud hath tabernacled on it, and the
honour of Jehovah hath filled the tabernacle.

<span id="an_40:36">40:36</span> And in the going up of the cloud from
off the tabernacle the sons of Israel journey in all their journeys;

<span id="an_40:37">40:37</span> and if the cloud go not up then they
journey not, until the day of its going up:

<span id="an_40:38">40:38</span> for the cloud of Jehovah \[is\] on the
tabernacle by day, and fire is in it by night, before the eyes of all
the house of Israel in all their journeys.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus](lev.md)
