[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](co2)  [Next](eph.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Galatians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an apostle -- not from men, nor
through man, but through Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who did raise
him out of the dead --

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> and all the brethren with me, to the
assemblies of Galatia:

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Grace to you, and peace from God the
Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> who did give himself for our sins, that he
might deliver us out of the present evil age, according to the will of
God even our Father,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> to whom \[is\] the glory to the ages of the
ages. Amen.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> I wonder that ye are so quickly removed
from Him who did call you in the grace of Christ to another good news;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> that is not another, except there be
certain who are troubling you, and wishing to pervert the good news of
the Christ;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> but even if we or a messenger out of heaven
may proclaim good news to you different from what we did proclaim to you
-- anathema let him be!

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> as we have said before, and now say again,
If any one to you may proclaim good news different from what ye did
receive -- anathema let him be!

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> for now men do I persuade, or God? or do
I seek to please men? for if yet men I did please -- Christ's servant I
should not be.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And I make known to you, brethren, the
good news that were proclaimed by me, that it is not according to man,

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> for neither did I from man receive it,
nor was I taught \[it\], but through a revelation of Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> for ye did hear of my behaviour once in
Judaism, that exceedingly I was persecuting the assembly of God, and
wasting it,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> and I was advancing in Judaism above many
equals in age in mine own race, being more abundantly zealous of my
fathers' deliverances,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> and when God was well pleased -- having
separated me from the womb of my mother, and having called \[me\]
through His grace --

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> to reveal His Son in me, that I might
proclaim him good news among the nations, immediately I conferred not
with flesh and blood,

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> nor did I go up to Jerusalem unto those
who were apostles before me, but I went away to Arabia, and again
returned to Damascus,

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> then, after three years I went up to
Jerusalem to enquire about Peter, and remained with him fifteen days,

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> and other of the apostles I did not see,
except James, the brother of the Lord.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And the things that I write to you, lo,
before God -- I lie not;

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> then I came to the regions of Syria and
of Cilicia,

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> and was unknown by face to the assemblies
of Judea, that \[are\] in Christ,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> and only they were hearing, that \`he who
is persecuting us then, doth now proclaim good news -- the faith that
then he was wasting;'

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> and they were glorifying God in me.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Then, after fourteen years again I went up
to Jerusalem with Barnabas, having taken with me also Titus;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> and I went up by revelation, and did submit
to them the good news that I preach among the nations, and privately to
those esteemed, lest in vain I might run or did run;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> but not even Titus, who \[is\] with me,
being a Greek, was compelled to be circumcised --

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> and \[that\] because of the false brethren
brought in unawares, who did come in privily to spy out our liberty that
we have in Christ Jesus, that us they might bring under bondage,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> to whom not even for an hour we gave place
by subjection, that the truth of the good news might remain to you.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And from those who were esteemed to be
something -- whatever they were then, it maketh no difference to me --
the face of man God accepteth not, for -- to me those esteemed did add
nothing,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> but, on the contrary, having seen that I
have been entrusted with the good news of the uncircumcision, as Peter
with \[that\] of the circumcision,

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> for He who did work with Peter to the
apostleship of the circumcision, did work also in me in regard to the
nations,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> and having known the grace that was given
to me, James, and Cephas, and John, who were esteemed to be pillars, a
right hand of fellowship they did give to me, and to Barnabas, that we
to the nations, and they to the circumcision \[may go\],

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> only, of the poor that we should be
mindful, which also I was diligent -- this very thing -- to do.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And when Peter came to Antioch, to the
face I stood up against him, because he was blameworthy,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> for before the coming of certain from
James, with the nations he was eating, and when they came, he was
withdrawing and separating himself, fearing those of the circumcision,

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> and dissemble with him also did the other
Jews, so that also Barnabas was carried away by their dissimulation.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> But when I saw that they are not walking
uprightly to the truth of the good news, I said to Peter before all,
\`If thou, being a Jew, in the manner of the nations dost live, and not
in the manner of the Jews, how the nations dost thou compel to Judaize?

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> we by nature Jews, and not sinners of the
nations,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> having known also that a man is not
declared righteous by works of law, if not through the faith of Jesus
Christ, also we in Christ Jesus did believe, that we might be declared
righteous by the faith of Christ, and not by works of law, wherefore
declared righteous by works of law shall be no flesh.'

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And if, seeking to be declared righteous
in Christ, we ourselves also were found sinners, \[is\] then Christ a
ministrant of sin? let it not be!

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> for if the things I threw down, these
again I build up, a transgressor I set myself forth;

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> for I through law, did die, that to God I
may live;

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> with Christ I have been crucified, and
live no more do I, and Christ doth live in me; and that which I now live
in the flesh -- in the faith I live of the Son of God, who did love me
and did give himself for me;

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> I do not make void the grace of God, for
if righteousness \[be\] through law -- then Christ died in vain.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> O thoughtless Galatians, who did bewitch
you, not to obey the truth -- before whose eyes Jesus Christ was
described before among you crucified?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> this only do I wish to learn from you -- by
works of law the Spirit did ye receive, or by the hearing of faith?

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> so thoughtless are ye! having begun in the
Spirit, now in the flesh do ye end?

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> so many things did ye suffer in vain! if,
indeed, even in vain.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> He, therefore, who is supplying to you the
Spirit, and working mighty acts among you -- by works of law or by the
hearing of faith \[is it\]?

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> according as Abraham did believe God, and
it was reckoned to him -- to righteousness;

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> know ye, then, that those of faith -- these
are sons of Abraham,

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> and the Writing having foreseen that by
faith God doth declare righteous the nations did proclaim before the
good news to Abraham --

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> \`Blessed in thee shall be all the
nations;' so that those of faith are blessed with the faithful Abraham,

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> for as many as are of works of law are
under a curse, for it hath been written, \`Cursed \[is\] every one who
is not remaining in all things that have been written in the Book of the
Law -- to do them,'

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> and that in law no one is declared
righteous with God, is evident, because \`The righteous by faith shall
live;'

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> and the law is not by faith, but -- \`The
man who did them shall live in them.'

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Christ did redeem us from the curse of
the law, having become for us a curse, for it hath been written,
\`Cursed is every one who is hanging on a tree,'

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> that to the nations the blessing of
Abraham may come in Christ Jesus, that the promise of the Spirit we may
receive through the faith.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Brethren, as a man I say \[it\], even of
man a confirmed covenant no one doth make void or doth add to,

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> and to Abraham were the promises spoken,
and to his seed; He doth not say, \`And to seeds,' as of many, but as of
one, \`And to thy seed,' which is Christ;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> and this I say, A covenant confirmed
before by God to Christ, the law, that came four hundred and thirty
years after, doth not set aside, to make void the promise,

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> for if by law \[be\] the inheritance,
\[it is\] no more by promise, but to Abraham through promise did God
grant \[it\].

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Why, then, the law? on account of the
transgressions it was added, till the seed might come to which the
promise hath been made, having been set in order through messengers in
the hand of a mediator --

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> and the mediator is not of one, and God
is one --

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> the law, then, \[is\] against the
promises of God? -- let it not be! for if a law was given that was able
to make alive, truly by law there would have been the righteousness,

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> but the Writing did shut up the whole
under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ may be given to
those believing.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And before the coming of the faith, under
law we were being kept, shut up to the faith about to be revealed,

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> so that the law became our
child-conductor -- to Christ, that by faith we may be declared
righteous,

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> and the faith having come, no more under
a child-conductor are we,

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> for ye are all sons of God through the
faith in Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> for as many as to Christ were baptized
did put on Christ;

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> there is not here Jew or Greek, there is
not here servant nor freeman, there is not here male and female, for all
ye are one in Christ Jesus;

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> and if ye \[are\] of Christ then of
Abraham ye are seed, and according to promise -- heirs.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And I say, so long time as the heir is a
babe, he differeth nothing from a servant -- being lord of all,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> but is under tutors and stewards till the
time appointed of the father,

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> so also we, when we were babes, under the
elements of the world were in servitude,

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> and when the fulness of time did come, God
sent forth His Son, come of a woman, come under law,

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> that those under law he may redeem, that
the adoption of sons we may receive;

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> and because ye are sons, God did send forth
the spirit of His Son into your hearts, crying, \`Abba, Father!'

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> so that thou art no more a servant, but a
son, and if a son, also an heir of God through Christ.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> But then, indeed, not having known God, ye
were in servitude to those not by nature gods,

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> and now, having known God -- and rather
being known by God -- how turn ye again unto the weak and poor elements
to which anew ye desire to be in servitude?

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> days ye observe, and months, and times,
and years!

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> I am afraid of you, lest in vain I did
labour toward you.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Become as I \[am\] -- because I also
\[am\] as ye brethren, I beseech you; to me ye did no hurt,

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> and ye have known that through infirmity
of the flesh I did proclaim good news to you at the first,

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> and my trial that \[is\] in my flesh ye
did not despise nor reject, but as a messenger of God ye did receive me
-- as Christ Jesus;

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> what then was your happiness? for I
testify to you, that if possible, your eyes having plucked out, ye would
have given to me;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> so that your enemy have I become, being
true to you?

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> they are zealous for you -- \[yet\] not
well, but they wish to shut us out, that for them ye may be zealous;

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> and \[it is\] good to be zealously
regarded, in what is good, at all times, and not only in my being
present with you;

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> my little children, of whom again I
travail in birth, till Christ may be formed in you,

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> and I was wishing to be present with you
now, and to change my voice, because I am in doubt about you.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Tell me, ye who are willing to be under
law, the law do ye not hear?

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> for it hath been written, that Abraham
had two sons, one by the maid-servant, and one by the free-woman,

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> but he who \[is\] of the maid-servant,
according to flesh hath been, and he who \[is\] of the free-woman,
through the promise;

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> which things are allegorized, for these
are the two covenants: one, indeed, from mount Sinai, to servitude
bringing forth, which is Hagar;

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> for this Hagar is mount Sinai in Arabia,
and doth correspond to the Jerusalem that now \[is\], and is in
servitude with her children,

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> and the Jerusalem above is the
free-woman, which is mother of us all,

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> for it hath been written, \`Rejoice, O
barren, who art not bearing; break forth and cry, thou who art not
travailing, because many \[are\] the children of the desolate -- more
than of her having the husband.'

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> And we, brethren, as Isaac, are children
of promise,

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> but as then he who was born according to
the flesh did persecute him according to the spirit, so also now;

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> but what saith the Writing? \`Cast forth
the maid-servant and her son, for the son of the maid-servant may not be
heir with the son of the free-woman;'

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> then, brethren, we are not a
maid-servant's children, but the free-woman's.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> In the freedom, then, with which Christ did
make you free -- stand ye, and be not held fast again by a yoke of
servitude;

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> lo, I Paul do say to you, that if ye be
circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing;

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> and I testify again to every man
circumcised, that he is a debtor to do the whole law;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> ye were freed from the Christ, ye who in
law are declared righteous; from the grace ye fell away;

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> for we by the Spirit, by faith, a hope of
righteousness do wait for,

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> for in Christ Jesus neither circumcision
availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, but faith through love working.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Ye were running well; who did hinder you --
not to obey the truth?

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> the obedience \[is\] not of him who is
calling you!

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> a little leaven the whole lump doth leaven;

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> I have confidence in regard to you in the
Lord, that ye will be none otherwise minded; and he who is troubling you
shall bear the judgment, whoever he may be.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And I, brethren, if uncircumcision I yet
preach, why yet am I persecuted? then hath the stumbling-block of the
cross been done away;

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> O that even they would cut themselves off
who are unsettling you!

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> For ye -- to freedom ye were called,
brethren, only not the freedom for an occasion to the flesh, but through
the love serve ye one another,

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> for all the law in one word is fulfilled
-- in this: \`Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself;'

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> and if one another ye do bite and devour,
see -- that ye may not by one another be consumed.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And I say: In the Spirit walk ye, and the
desire of the flesh ye may not complete;

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> for the flesh doth desire contrary to the
Spirit, and the Spirit contrary to the flesh, and these are opposed one
to another, that the things that ye may will -- these ye may not do;

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> and if by the Spirit ye are led, ye are
not under law.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And manifest also are the works of the
flesh, which are: Adultery, whoredom, uncleanness, lasciviousness,

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, strifes,
emulations, wraths, rivalries, dissensions, sects,

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> envyings, murders, drunkennesses,
revellings, and such like, of which I tell you before, as I also said
before, that those doing such things the reign of God shall not inherit.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> And the fruit of the Spirit is: Love,
joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness, faith,

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> meekness, temperance: against such there
is no law;

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> and those who are Christ's, the flesh did
crucify with the affections, and the desires;

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> if we may live in the Spirit, in the
Spirit also we may walk;

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> let us not become vain-glorious -- one
another provoking, one another envying!

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Brethren, if a man also may be overtaken in
any trespass, ye who \[are\] spiritual restore such a one in a spirit of
meekness, considering thyself -- lest thou also may be tempted;

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> of one another the burdens bear ye, and so
fill up the law of the Christ,

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> for if any one doth think \[himself\] to be
something -- being nothing -- himself he doth deceive;

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> and his own work let each one prove, and
then in regard to himself alone the glorying he shall have, and not in
regard to the other,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> for each one his own burden shall bear.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And let him who is instructed in the word
share with him who is instructing -- in all good things.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Be not led astray; God is not mocked; for
what a man may sow -- that also he shall reap,

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> because he who is sowing to his own flesh,
of the flesh shall reap corruption; and he who is sowing to the Spirit,
of the Spirit shall reap life age-during;

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> and in the doing good we may not be
faint-hearted, for at the proper time we shall reap -- not desponding;

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> therefore, then, as we have opportunity,
may we work the good to all, and especially unto those of the household
of the faith.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Ye see in how large letters I have
written to you with my own hand;

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> as many as are willing to make a good
appearance in the flesh, these constrain you to be circumcised -- only
that for the cross of the Christ they may not be persecuted,

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> for neither do those circumcised
themselves keep the law, but they wish you to be circumcised, that in
your flesh they may glory.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And for me, let it not be -- to glory,
except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which to me the
world hath been crucified, and I to the world;

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> for in Christ Jesus neither circumcision
availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new creation;

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> and as many as by this rule do walk --
peace upon them, and kindness, and on the Israel of God!

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Henceforth, let no one give me trouble,
for I the scars of the Lord Jesus in my body do bear.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ \[is\]
with your spirit, brethren! Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians](eph.md)
