[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nah)  [Next](zep.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Habakkuk

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The burden that Habakkuk the prophet hath
seen:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Till when, O Jehovah, have I cried, And
Thou dost not hear? I cry unto Thee -- \`Violence,' and Thou dost not
save.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Why dost Thou shew me iniquity, And
perversity dost cause to behold? And spoiling and violence \[are\]
before me, And there is strife, and contention doth lift \[itself\] up,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Therefore doth law cease, And judgment doth
not go forth for ever, For the wicked is compassing the righteous,
Therefore wrong judgment goeth forth.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Look ye on nations, and behold and marvel
greatly. For a work He is working in your days, Ye do not believe though
it is declared.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> For, lo, I am raising up the Chaldeans, The
bitter and hasty nation, That is going to the broad places of earth, To
occupy tabernacles not its own.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Terrible and fearful it \[is\], From itself
its judgment and its excellency go forth.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Swifter than leopards have been its horses,
And sharper than evening wolves, And increased have its horsemen, Even
its horsemen from afar come in, They fly as an eagle, hasting to
consume.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Wholly for violence it doth come in, Their
faces swallowing up the east wind, And it doth gather as the sand a
captivity.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And at kings it doth scoff, And princes
\[are\] a laughter to it, At every fenced place it doth laugh, And it
heapeth up dust, and captureth it.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Then passed on hath the spirit, Yea, he
doth transgress, And doth ascribe this his power to his god.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Art not Thou of old, O Jehovah, my God,
my Holy One? We do not die, O Jehovah, For judgment Thou hast appointed
it, And, O Rock, for reproof Thou hast founded it.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Purer of eyes than to behold evil, To
look on perverseness Thou art not able, Why dost Thou behold the
treacherous? Thou keepest silent when the wicked Doth swallow the more
righteous than he,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And Thou makest man as fishes of the sea,
As a creeping thing -- none ruling over him.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Each of them with a hook he hath brought
up, He doth catch it in his net, and gathereth it in his drag, Therefore
he doth joy and rejoice.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Therefore he doth sacrifice to his net,
And doth make perfume to his drag, For by them \[is\] his portion
fertile, and his food fat.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Doth he therefore empty his net, And
continually to slay nations spare not?

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> On my charge I stand, and I station myself
on a bulwark, and I watch to see what He doth speak against me, and what
I do reply to my reproof.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And Jehovah answereth me and saith: \`Write
a vision, and explain on the tables, That he may run who is reading it.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> For yet the vision \[is\] for a season, And
it breatheth for the end, and doth not lie, If it tarry, wait for it,
For surely it cometh, it is not late.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Lo, a presumptuous one! Not upright is his
soul within him, And the righteous by his stedfastness liveth.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And also, because the wine \[is\]
treacherous, A man is haughty, and remaineth not at home, Who hath
enlarged as sheol his soul, And is as death that is not satisfied, And
doth gather unto itself all the nations, And doth assemble unto itself
all the peoples,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Do not these -- all of them -- against him
a simile taken up, And a moral of acute sayings for him, And say, Wo
\[to\] him who is multiplying \[what is\] not his? Till when also is he
multiplying to himself heavy pledges?

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Do not thy usurers instantly rise up, And
those shaking thee awake up, And thou hast been for a spoil to them?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Because thou hast spoiled many nations,
Spoil thee do all the remnant of the peoples, Because of man's blood,
and of violence \[to\] the land, \[To\] the city, and \[to\] all
dwelling in it.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Wo \[to\] him who is gaining evil gain for
his house, To set on high his nest, To be delivered from the hand of
evil,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Thou hast counselled a shameful thing to
thy house, To cut off many peoples, and sinful \[is\] thy soul.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For a stone from the wall doth cry out,
And a holdfast from the wood answereth it.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Wo \[to\] him who is building a city by
blood, And establishing a city by iniquity.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Lo, is it not from Jehovah of Hosts And
peoples are fatigued for fire, And nations for vanity are weary?

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> For full is the earth of the knowledge of
the honour of Jehovah, As waters cover \[the bottom of\] a sea.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Wo \[to\] him who is giving drink to his
neighbour, Pouring out thy bottle, and also making drunk, In order to
look on their nakedness.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Thou hast been filled -- shame without
honour, Drink thou also, and be uncircumcised, Turn round unto thee doth
the cup of the right hand of Jehovah, And shameful spewing \[is\] on
thine honour.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> For violence \[to\] Lebanon doth cover
thee, And spoil of beasts doth affright them, Because of man's blood,
and of violence \[to\] the land, \[To\] the city, and \[to\] all
dwelling in it.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> What profit hath a graven image given
That its former hath graven it? A molten image and teacher of falsehood,
That trusted hath the former on his own formation -- to make dumb idols?

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Wo \[to\] him who is saying to wood,
\`Awake,' \`Stir up,' to a dumb stone, It a teacher! lo, it is overlaid
-- gold and silver, And there is no spirit in its midst.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And Jehovah \[is\] in His holy temple, Be
silent before Him, all the earth!

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> A prayer of Habakkuk the prophet concerning
erring ones:

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> O Jehovah, I heard thy report, I have been
afraid, O Jehovah, Thy work! in midst of years revive it, In the midst
of years Thou makest known In anger Thou dost remember mercy.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> God from Teman doth come, The Holy One from
mount Paran. Pause! Covered the heavens hath His majesty, And His praise
hath filled the earth.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And the brightness is as the light, He hath
rays out of His hand, And there -- the hiding of His strength.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Before Him goeth pestilence, And a burning
flame goeth forth at His feet.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> He hath stood, and He measureth earth, He
hath seen, and He shaketh off nations, And scatter themselves do
mountains of antiquity, Bowed have the hills of old, The ways of old
\[are\] His.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Under sorrow I have seen tents of Cushan,
Tremble do curtains of the land of Midian.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Against rivers hath Jehovah been wroth?
Against rivers \[is\] Thine anger? Against the sea \[is\] Thy wrath? For
Thou dost ride on Thy horses -- Thy chariots of salvation?

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Utterly naked Thou dost make Thy bow, Sworn
are the tribes -- saying, \`Pause!' \[With\] rivers Thou dost cleave the
earth.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Seen thee -- pained are mountains, An
inundation of waters hath passed over, Given forth hath the deep its
voice, High its hands it hath lifted up.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Sun -- moon -- hath stood -- a
habitation, At the light thine arrows go on, At the brightness, the
glittering of thy spear.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> In indignation Thou dost tread earth, In
anger Thou dost thresh nations.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Thou hast gone forth for the salvation of
Thy people, For salvation with Thine anointed, Thou hast smitten the
head of the house of the wicked, Laying bare the foundation unto the
neck. Pause!

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Thou hast pierced with his staves the
head of his leaders, They are tempestuous to scatter me, Their
exultation \[is\] as to consume the poor in secret.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Thou hast proceeded through the sea with
Thy horses -- the clay of many waters.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> I have heard, and my belly trembleth, At
the noise have my lips quivered, Rottenness doth come into my bones, And
in my place I do tremble, That I rest for a day of distress, At the
coming up of the people, he overcometh it.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Though the fig-tree doth not flourish,
And there is no produce among vines, Failed hath the work of the olive,
And fields have not yielded food, Cut off from the fold hath been the
flock, And there is no herd in the stalls.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Yet I, in Jehovah I exult, I do joy in
the God of my salvation.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Jehovah the Lord \[is\] my strength, And
He doth make my feet like hinds, And on my high-places causeth me to
tread. To the overseer with my stringed instruments!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zephaniah](zep.md)
