[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](zep)  [Next](zac) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Haggai

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> In the second year of Darius the king, in
the sixth month, in the first day of the month, hath a word of Jehovah
been by the hand of Haggai the prophet, unto Zerubbabel son of
Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and unto Joshua son of Josedech, the high
priest, saying:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Thus spake Jehovah of Hosts, saying: This
people! -- they have said, \`The time hath not come, The time the house
of Jehovah \[is\] to be built.'

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And there is a word of Jehovah by the hand
of Haggai the prophet, saying:

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Is it time for you -- you! To dwell in your
covered houses, And this house to lie waste?

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And now, thus said Jehovah of Hosts, Set
your heart to your ways.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Ye have sown much, and brought in little,
To eat, and not to satiety, To drink, and not to drunkenness, To clothe,
and none hath heat, And he who is hiring himself out, Is hiring himself
for a bag pierced through.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Set your heart
to your ways.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Go up the mountain, and ye have brought in
wood, And build the house, and I am pleased with it. And I am honoured,
said Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Looking for much, and lo, little, And ye
brought \[it\] home, and I blew on it, Wherefore? -- an affirmation of
Jehovah of Hosts, Because of My house that is waste, And ye are running
-- each to his house,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Therefore, over you refrained have the
heavens from dew, And the land hath refrained its increase.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And I proclaim draught on the land, And
on the mountains, and on the corn, And on the new wine, and on the oil,
And on what the ground doth bring forth, And on man, and on beast, And
on all labour of the hands.'

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, and
Joshua son of Josedech, the high priest, and all the remnant of the
people, do hearken to the voice of Jehovah their God, and unto the words
of Haggai the prophet, as Jehovah their God had sent him, and the people
are afraid of the face of Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And Haggai, messenger of Jehovah, in
messages of Jehovah, speaketh to the people, saying: \`I \[am\] with
you, an affirmation of Jehovah.'

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And Jehovah doth stir up the spirit of
Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and the spirit of Joshua
son of Josedech, the high priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of
the people, and they come in, and do work in the house of Jehovah of
Hosts their God,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> in the twenty and fourth day of the sixth
month, in the second year of Darius the king.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> In the seventh \[month\], in the twenty and
first of the month, hath a word of Jehovah been by the hand of Haggai
the prophet, saying:

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> \`Speak, I pray thee, unto Zerubbabel son
of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and unto Joshua, son of Josedech, the
high priest, and unto the remnant of the people, saying:

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Who among you hath been left that saw this
house in its former honour? And what are ye seeing it now? Is it not,
compared with it, as nothing in your eyes?

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And now, be strong, O Zerubbabel, An
affirmation of Jehovah, And be strong, O Joshua, son of Josedech, the
high priest, And be strong, all ye people of the land, An affirmation of
Jehovah, And do ye -- (for I \[am\] with you, An affirmation of Jehovah
of Hosts) --

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> The thing that I covenanted with you, In
your coming forth from Egypt, And My Spirit is remaining in your midst,
fear not.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> For thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Yet once
more -- it \[is\] a little, And I am shaking the heavens and the earth,
And the sea, and the dry land,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And I have shaken all the nations, And they
have come \[to\] the desire of all the nations, And I have filled this
house \[with\] honour, Said Jehovah of Hosts.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Mine \[is\] the silver, and Mine the gold,
An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Greater is the honour of this latter house,
Than of the former, said Jehovah of Hosts, And in this place do I give
peace, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts.'

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> On the twenty and fourth of the ninth
\[month\], in the second year of Darius, hath a word of Jehovah been by
the hand of Haggai the prophet, saying:

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: \`Ask, I pray
thee, the priests \[of\] the law, saying:

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Lo, one doth carry holy flesh in the
skirt of his garment, and he hath come with his skirt against the bread,
or against the pottage, or against the wine, or against the oil, or
against any food -- is it holy?' And the priests answer and say, \`No.'

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And Haggai saith, \`If the unclean of
body doth come against any of these, is it unclean?' And the priests
answer and say, \`It is unclean.'

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And Haggai answereth and saith, \`So
\[is\] this people, and so \[is\] this nation before Me -- an
affirmation of Jehovah -- and so \[is\] every work of their hands, and
that which they bring near there -- it is unclean.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And now, lay \[it\], I pray you, to your
heart, From this day, and onwards, Before the laying of stone to stone
in the temple of Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> From that time \[one\] hath come to a
heap of twenty, And it hath been ten, He hath come unto the wine-fat to
draw out fifty purahs, And it hath been twenty.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> I have smitten you with blasting, And
with mildew, and with hail -- All the work of your hands, And there is
none of you with Me, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Set \[it\], I pray you, to your heart,
from this day and onwards, from the twenty and fourth day of the ninth
\[month\], even from the day that the temple of Jehovah hath been
founded, set \[it\] to your heart.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Is the seed yet in the barn? And hitherto
the vine and the fig, And the pomegranate, and the olive-tree, Have not
borne -- from this day I bless.'

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And there is a word of Jehovah a second
time unto Haggai, on the twenty and fourth of the month, saying:

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> \`Speak unto Zerubbabel governor of
Judah, saying: I am shaking the heavens and the earth,

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And have overturned the throne of
kingdoms, And I have destroyed the strength of kingdoms of the nations,
And overturned chariot and its charioteers, And come down have horses
and their riders, Each by the sword of his brother.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> In that day -- an affirmation of Jehovah
of Hosts, I take thee, Zerubbabel, son of Shealtiel, My servant -- an
affirmation of Jehovah, And have set thee as a signet, for on thee I
have fixed, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah](zac)
