[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](plm)  [Next](jam.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Hebrews

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> In many parts, and many ways, God of old
having spoken to the fathers in the prophets,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> in these last days did speak to us in a
Son, whom He appointed heir of all things, through whom also He did make
the ages;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> who being the brightness of the glory, and
the impress of His subsistence, bearing up also the all things by the
saying of his might -- through himself having made a cleansing of our
sins, sat down at the right hand of the greatness in the highest,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> having become so much better than the
messengers, as he did inherit a more excellent name than they.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For to which of the messengers said He
ever, \`My Son thou art -- I to-day have begotten thee?' and again, \`I
will be to him for a father, and he shall be to Me for a son?'

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> and when again He may bring in the
first-born to the world, He saith, \`And let them bow before him -- all
messengers of God;'

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> and unto the messengers, indeed, He saith,
\`Who is making His messengers spirits, and His ministers a flame of
fire;'

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> and unto the Son: \`Thy throne, O God,
\[is\] to the age of the age; a scepter of righteousness \[is\] the
scepter of thy reign;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> thou didst love righteousness, and didst
hate lawlessness; because of this did He anoint thee -- God, thy God --
with oil of gladness above thy partners;'

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> and, \`Thou, at the beginning, Lord, the
earth didst found, and a work of thy hands are the heavens;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> these shall perish, and Thou dost remain,
and all, as a garment, shall become old,

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> and as a mantle Thou shall roll them
together, and they shall be changed, and Thou art the same, and Thy
years shall not fail.'

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And unto which of the messengers said He
ever, \`Sit at My right hand, till I may make thine enemies thy
footstool?'

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> are they not all spirits of service --
for ministration being sent forth because of those about to inherit
salvation?

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Because of this it behoveth \[us\] more
abundantly to take heed to the things heard, lest we may glide aside,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> for if the word being spoken through
messengers did become stedfast, and every transgression and disobedience
did receive a just recompense,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> how shall we escape, having neglected so
great salvation? which a beginning receiving -- to be spoken through the
Lord -- by those having heard was confirmed to us,

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> God also bearing joint-witness both with
signs and wonders, and manifold powers, and distributions of the Holy
Spirit, according to His will.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For not to messengers did He subject the
coming world, concerning which we speak,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> and one in a certain place did testify
fully, saying, \`What is man, that Thou art mindful of him, or a son of
man, that Thou dost look after him?

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Thou didst make him some little less than
messengers, with glory and honour Thou didst crown him, and didst set
him over the works of Thy hands,

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> all things Thou didst put in subjection
under his feet,' for in the subjecting to him the all things, nothing
did He leave to him unsubjected, and now not yet do we see the all
things subjected to him,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> and him who was made some little less than
messengers we see -- Jesus -- because of the suffering of the death,
with glory and honour having been crowned, that by the grace of God for
every one he might taste of death.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> For it was becoming to Him, because of
whom \[are\] the all things, and through whom \[are\] the all things,
many sons to glory bringing, the author of their salvation through
sufferings to make perfect,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> for both he who is sanctifying and those
sanctified \[are\] all of one, for which cause he is not ashamed to call
them brethren,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> saying, \`I will declare Thy name to my
brethren, in the midst of an assembly I will sing praise to Thee;' and
again, \`I will be trusting on Him;'

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> and again, \`Behold I and the children
that God did give to me.'

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Seeing, then, the children have partaken
of flesh and blood, he himself also in like manner did take part of the
same, that through death he might destroy him having the power of death
-- that is, the devil --

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> and might deliver those, whoever, with
fear of death, throughout all their life, were subjects of bondage,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> for, doubtless, of messengers it doth not
lay hold, but of seed of Abraham it layeth hold,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> wherefore it did behove him in all things
to be made like to the brethren, that he might become a kind and
stedfast chief-priest in the things with God, to make propitiation for
the sins of the people,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> for in that he suffered, himself being
tempted, he is able to help those who are tempted.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of a
heavenly calling, consider the apostle and chief priest of our
profession, Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> being stedfast to Him who did appoint him,
as also Moses in all his house,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> for of more glory than Moses hath this one
been counted worthy, inasmuch as more honour than the house hath he who
doth build it,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> for every house is builded by some one, and
He who the all things did build \[is\] God,

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> and Moses indeed \[was\] stedfast in all
his house, as an attendant, for a testimony of those things that were to
be spoken,

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> and Christ, as a Son over his house, whose
house are we, if the boldness and the rejoicing of the hope unto the end
we hold fast.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Wherefore, (as the Holy Spirit saith,
\`To-day, if His voice ye may hear --

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> ye may not harden your hearts, as in the
provocation, in the day of the temptation in the wilderness,

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> in which tempt Me did your fathers, they
did prove Me, and saw My works forty years;

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> wherefore I was grieved with that
generation, and said, Always do they go astray in heart, and these have
not known My ways;

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> so I sware in My anger, If they shall
enter into My rest -- !')

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> See, brethren, lest there shall be in any
of you an evil heart of unbelief in the falling away from the living
God,

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> but exhort ye one another every day,
while the To-day is called, that none of you may be hardened by the
deceitfulness of the sin,

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> for partakers we have become of the
Christ, if the beginning of the confidence unto the end we may hold
fast,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> in its being said, \`To-day, if His voice
ye may hear, ye may not harden your hearts, as in the provocation,'

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> for certain having heard did provoke, but
not all who did come out of Egypt through Moses;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> but with whom was He grieved forty years?
was it not with those who did sin, whose carcasses fell in the
wilderness?

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> and to whom did He swear that they shall
not enter into His rest, except to those who did not believe? --

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> and we see that they were not able to
enter in because of unbelief.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> We may fear, then, lest a promise being
left of entering into His rest, any one of you may seem to have come
short,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> for we also are having good news
proclaimed, even as they, but the word heard did not profit them, not
being mixed with faith in those who heard,

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> for we do enter into the rest -- we who did
believe, as He said, \`So I sware in My anger, If they shall enter into
My rest -- ;' and yet the works were done from the foundation of the
world,

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> for He spake in a certain place concerning
the seventh \[day\] thus: \`And God did rest in the seventh day from all
His works;'

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> and in this \[place\] again, \`If they
shall enter into My rest -- ;'

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> since then, it remaineth for certain to
enter into it, and those who did first hear good news entered not in
because of unbelief --

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> again He doth limit a certain day,
\`To-day,' (in David saying, after so long a time,) as it hath been
said, \`To-day, if His voice ye may hear, ye may not harden your
hearts,'

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> for if Joshua had given them rest, He would
not concerning another day have spoken after these things;

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> there doth remain, then, a sabbatic rest to
the people of God,

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> for he who did enter into his rest, he
also rested from his works, as God from His own.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> May we be diligent, then, to enter into
that rest, that no one in the same example of the unbelief may fall,

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> for the reckoning of God is living, and
working, and sharp above every two-edged sword, and piercing unto the
dividing asunder both of soul and spirit, of joints also and marrow, and
a discerner of thoughts and intents of the heart;

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> and there is not a created thing not
manifest before Him, but all things \[are\] naked and open to His eyes
-- with whom is our reckoning.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Having, then, a great chief priest passed
through the heavens -- Jesus the Son of God -- may we hold fast the
profession,

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> for we have not a chief priest unable to
sympathise with our infirmities, but \[one\] tempted in all things in
like manner -- apart from sin;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> we may come near, then, with freedom, to
the throne of the grace, that we may receive kindness, and find grace --
for seasonable help.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> For every chief priest -- out of men taken
-- in behalf of men is set in things \[pertaining\] to God, that he may
offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins,

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> able to be gentle to those ignorant and
going astray, since himself also is compassed with infirmity;

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> and because of this infirmity he ought, as
for the people, so also for himself to offer for sins;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> and no one to himself doth take the honour,
but he who is called by God, as also Aaron:

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> so also the Christ did not glorify himself
to become chief priest, but He who spake unto him: \`My Son thou art, I
to-day have begotten thee;'

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> as also in another \[place\] He saith,
\`Thou \[art\] a priest -- to the age, according to the order of
Melchisedek;'

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> who in the days of his flesh both prayers
and supplications unto Him who was able to save him from death -- with
strong crying and tears -- having offered up, and having been heard in
respect to that which he feared,

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> through being a Son, did learn by the
things which he suffered -- the obedience,

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> and having been made perfect, he did become
to all those obeying him a cause of salvation age-during,

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> having been addressed by God a chief
priest, according to the order of Melchisedek,

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> concerning whom we have much discourse
and of hard explanation to say, since ye have become dull of hearing,

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> for even owing to be teachers, because of
the time, again ye have need that one teach you what \[are\] the
elements of the beginning of the oracles of God, and ye have become
having need of milk, and not of strong food,

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> for every one who is partaking of milk
\[is\] unskilled in the word of righteousness -- for he is an infant,

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> and of perfect men is the strong food,
who because of the use are having the senses exercised, unto the
discernment both of good and of evil.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Wherefore, having left the word of the
beginning of the Christ, unto the perfection we may advance, not again a
foundation laying of reformation from dead works, and of faith on God,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> of the teaching of baptisms, of laying on
also of hands, of rising again also of the dead, and of judgment
age-during,

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> and this we will do, if God may permit,

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> for \[it is\] impossible for those once
enlightened, having tasted also of the heavenly gift, and partakers
having became of the Holy Spirit,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> and did taste the good saying of God, the
powers also of the coming age,

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> and having fallen away, again to renew
\[them\] to reformation, having crucified again to themselves the Son of
God, and exposed to public shame.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> For earth, that is drinking in the rain
many times coming upon it, and is bringing forth herbs fit for those
because of whom also it is dressed, doth partake of blessing from God,

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> and that which is bearing thorns and briers
\[is\] disapproved of, and nigh to cursing, whose end \[is\] for
burning;

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> and we are persuaded, concerning you,
beloved, the things that are better, and accompanying salvation, though
even thus we speak,

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> for God is not unrighteous to forget your
work, and the labour of the love, that ye shewed to His name, having
ministered to the saints and ministering;

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> and we desire each one of you the same
diligence to shew, unto the full assurance of the hope unto the end,

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> that ye may not become slothful, but
followers of those who through faith and patient endurance are
inheriting the promises.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> For to Abraham God, having made promise,
seeing He was able to swear by no greater, did swear by Himself,

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> saying, \`Blessing indeed I will bless
thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee;'

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> and so, having patiently endured, he did
obtain the promise;

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> for men indeed do swear by the greater,
and an end of all controversy to them for confirmation \[is\] the oath,

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> in which God, more abundantly willing to
shew to the heirs of the promise the immutability of his counsel, did
interpose by an oath,

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> that through two immutable things, in
which \[it is\] impossible for God to lie, a strong comfort we may have
who did flee for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before \[us\],

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> which we have, as an anchor of the soul,
both sure and stedfast, and entering into that within the vail,

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> whither a forerunner for us did enter --
Jesus, after the order of Melchisedek chief priest having become -- to
the age.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> For this Melchisedek, king of Salem, priest
of God Most High, who did meet Abraham turning back from the smiting of
the kings, and did bless him,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> to whom also a tenth of all did Abraham
divide, (first, indeed, being interpreted, \`King of righteousness,' and
then also, King of Salem, which is, King of Peace,)

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> without father, without mother, without
genealogy, having neither beginning of days nor end of life, and being
made like to the Son of God, doth remain a priest continually.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> And see how great this one \[is\], to whom
also a tenth Abraham the patriarch did give out of the best of the
spoils,

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> and those, indeed, out of the sons of Levi
receiving the priesthood, a command have to take tithes from the people
according to the law, that is, their brethren, even though they came
forth out of the loins of Abraham;

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> and he who was not reckoned by genealogy of
them, received tithes from Abraham, and him having the promises he hath
blessed,

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> and apart from all controversy, the less by
the better is blessed --

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> and here, indeed, men who die do receive
tithes, and there \[he\], who is testified to that he was living,

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> and so to speak, through Abraham even Levi
who is receiving tithes, hath paid tithes,

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> for he was yet in the loins of the father
when Melchisedek met him.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> If indeed, then, perfection were through
the Levitical priesthood -- for the people under it had received law --
what further need, according to the order of Melchisedek, for another
priest to arise, and not to be called according to the order of Aaron?

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> for the priesthood being changed, of
necessity also, of the law a change doth come,

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> for he of whom these things are said in
another tribe hath had part, of whom no one gave attendance at the
altar,

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> for \[it is\] evident that out of Judah
hath arisen our Lord, in regard to which tribe Moses spake nothing
concerning priesthood.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And it is yet more abundantly most
evident, if according to the similitude of Melchisedek there doth arise
another priest,

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> who came not according to the law of a
fleshly command, but according to the power of an endless life,

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> for He doth testify -- \`Thou \[art\] a
priest -- to the age, according to the order of Melchisedek;'

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> for a disannulling indeed doth come of
the command going before because of its weakness, and unprofitableness,

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> (for nothing did the law perfect) and the
bringing in of a better hope, through which we draw nigh to God.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And inasmuch as \[it is\] not apart from
oath, (for those indeed apart from oath are become priests,

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> and he with an oath through Him who is
saying unto him, \`The Lord sware, and will not repent, Thou \[art\] a
priest -- to the age, according to the order of Melchisedek;')

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> by so much of a better covenant hath
Jesus become surety,

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> and those indeed are many who have become
priests, because by death they are hindered from remaining;

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> and he, because of his remaining -- to
the age, hath the priesthood not transient,

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> whence also he is able to save to the
very end, those coming through him unto God -- ever living to make
intercession for them.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> For such a chief priest did become us --
kind, harmless, undefiled, separate from the sinners, and become higher
than the heavens,

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> who hath no necessity daily, as the chief
priests, first for his own sins to offer up sacrifice, then for those of
the people; for this he did once, having offered up himself;

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> for the law doth appoint men chief
priests, having infirmity, but the word of the oath that \[is\] after
the law \[appointeth\] the Son -- to the age having been perfected.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And the sum concerning the things spoken of
\[is\]: we have such a chief priest, who did sit down at the right hand
of the throne of the greatness in the heavens,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> of the holy places a servant, and of the
true tabernacle, which the Lord did set up, and not man,

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> for every chief priest to offer both gifts
and sacrifices is appointed, whence \[it is\] necessary for this one to
have also something that he may offer;

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> for if, indeed, he were upon earth, he
would not be a priest -- (there being the priests who are offering
according to the law, the gifts,

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> who unto an example and shadow do serve of
the heavenly things, as Moses hath been divinely warned, being about to
construct the tabernacle, for \`See (saith He) thou mayest make all
things according to the pattern that was shewn to thee in the mount;')
--

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> and now he hath obtained a more excellent
service, how much also of a better covenant is he mediator, which on
better promises hath been sanctioned,

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> for if that first were faultless, a place
would not have been sought for a second.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> For finding fault, He saith to them, \`Lo,
days come, saith the Lord, and I will complete with the house of Israel,
and with the house of Judah, a new covenant,

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> not according to the covenant that I made
with their fathers, in the day of My taking \[them\] by their hand, to
bring them out of the land of Egypt -- because they did not remain in My
covenant, and I did not regard them, saith the Lord, --

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> because this \[is\] the covenant that I
will make with the house of Israel, after those days, saith the Lord,
giving My laws into their mind, and upon their hearts I will write them,
and I will be to them for a God, and they shall be to Me for a people;

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> and they shall not teach each his
neighbour, and each his brother, saying, Know thou the Lord, because
they shall all know Me from the small one of them unto the great one of
them,

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> because I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and their sins and their lawlessnesses I will remember
no more;' --

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> in the saying \`new,' He hath made the
first old, and what doth become obsolete and is old \[is\] nigh
disappearing.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> It had, indeed, then (even the first
tabernacle) ordinances of service, also a worldly sanctuary,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> for a tabernacle was prepared, the first,
in which was both the lamp-stand, and the table, and the bread of the
presence -- which is called \`Holy;'

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> and after the second vail a tabernacle that
is called \`Holy of holies,'

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> having a golden censer, and the ark of the
covenant overlaid all round about with gold, in which \[is\] the golden
pot having the manna, and the rod of Aaron that budded, and the tables
of the covenant,

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> and over it cherubim of the glory,
overshadowing the mercy-seat, concerning which we are not now to speak
particularly.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And these things having been thus prepared,
into the first tabernacle, indeed, at all times the priests do go in,
performing the services,

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> and into the second, once in the year, only
the chief priest, not apart from blood, which he doth offer for himself
and the errors of the people,

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> the Holy Spirit this evidencing that not
yet hath been manifested the way of the holy \[places\], the first
tabernacle having yet a standing;

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> which \[is\] a simile in regard to the
present time, in which both gifts and sacrifices are offered, which are
not able, in regard to conscience, to make perfect him who is serving,

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> only in victuals, and drinks, and
different baptisms, and fleshly ordinances -- till the time of
reformation imposed upon \[them\].

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And Christ being come, chief priest of
the coming good things, through the greater and more perfect tabernacle
not made with hands -- that is, not of this creation --

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> neither through blood of goats and
calves, but through his own blood, did enter in once into the holy
places, age-during redemption having obtained;

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> for if the blood of bulls, and goats, and
ashes of an heifer, sprinkling those defiled, doth sanctify to the
purifying of the flesh,

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> how much more shall the blood of the
Christ (who through the age-during Spirit did offer himself unblemished
to God) purify your conscience from dead works to serve the living God?

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And because of this, of a new covenant he
is mediator, that, death having come, for redemption of the
transgressions under the first covenant, those called may receive the
promise of the age-during inheritance,

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> for where a covenant \[is\], the death of
the covenant-victim to come in is necessary,

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> for a covenant over dead victims \[is\]
stedfast, since it is no force at all when the covenant-victim liveth,

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> whence not even the first apart from
blood hath been initiated,

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> for every command having been spoken,
according to law, by Moses, to all the people, having taken the blood of
the calves and goats, with water, and scarlet wool, and hyssop, he both
the book itself and all the people did sprinkle,

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> saying, \`This \[is\] the blood of the
covenant that God enjoined unto you,'

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> and both the tabernacle and all the
vessels of the service with blood in like manner he did sprinkle,

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> and with blood almost all things are
purified according to the law, and apart from blood-shedding forgiveness
doth not come.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> \[It is\] necessary, therefore, the
pattern indeed of the things in the heavens to be purified with these,
and the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these;

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> for not into holy places made with hands
did the Christ enter -- figures of the true -- but into the heaven
itself, now to be manifested in the presence of God for us;

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> nor that he may many times offer himself,
even as the chief priest doth enter into the holy places every year with
blood of others;

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> since it had behoved him many times to
suffer from the foundation of the world, but now once, at the full end
of the ages, for putting away of sin through his sacrifice, he hath been
manifested;

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> and as it is laid up to men once to die,
and after this -- judgment,

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> so also the Christ, once having been
offered to bear the sins of many, a second time, apart from a
sin-offering, shall appear, to those waiting for him -- to salvation!

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> For the law having a shadow of the coming
good things -- not the very image of the matters, every year, by the
same sacrifices that they offer continually, is never able to make
perfect those coming near,

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> since, would they not have ceased to be
offered, because of those serving having no more conscience of sins,
having once been purified?

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> but in those \[sacrifices\] is a
remembrance of sins every year,

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> for it is impossible for blood of bulls
and goats to take away sins.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Wherefore, coming into the world, he
saith, \`Sacrifice and offering Thou didst not will, and a body Thou
didst prepare for me,

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> in burnt-offerings, and concerning
sin-offerings, Thou didst not delight,

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> then I said, Lo, I come, (in a volume of
the book it hath been written concerning me,) to do, O God, Thy will;'

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> saying above -- \`Sacrifice, and
offering, and burnt-offerings, and concerning sin-offering Thou didst
not will, nor delight in,' -- which according to the law are offered --

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> then he said, \`Lo, I come to do, O God,
Thy will;' he doth take away the first that the second he may establish;

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> in the which will we are having been
sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once,

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> and every priest, indeed, hath stood
daily serving, and the same sacrifices many times offering, that are
never able to take away sins.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And He, for sin one sacrifice having
offered -- to the end, did sit down on the right hand of God, --

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> as to the rest, expecting till He may
place his enemies \[as\] his footstool,

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> for by one offering he hath perfected
to the end those sanctified;

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> and testify to us also doth the Holy
Spirit, for after that He hath said before,

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> \`This \[is\] the covenant that I will
make with them after those days, saith the Lord, giving My laws on their
hearts, and upon their minds I will write them,'

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> and \`their sins and their lawlessness
I will remember no more;'

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> and where forgiveness of these \[is\],
there is no more offering for sin.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Having, therefore, brethren, boldness
for the entrance into the holy places, in the blood of Jesus,

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> which way he did initiate for us -- new
and living, through the vail, that is, his flesh --

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> and a high priest over the house of
God,

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> may we draw near with a true heart, in
full assurance of faith, having the hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, and having the body bathed with pure water;

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> may we hold fast the unwavering
profession of the hope, (for faithful \[is\] He who did promise),

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> and may we consider one another to
provoke to love and to good works,

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> not forsaking the assembling of
ourselves together, as a custom of certain \[is\], but exhorting, and so
much the more as ye see the day coming nigh.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> For we -- willfully sinning after the
receiving the full knowledge of the truth -- no more for sins doth there
remain a sacrifice,

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> but a certain fearful looking for of
judgment, and fiery zeal, about to devour the opposers;

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> any one who did set at nought a law of
Moses, apart from mercies, by two or three witnesses, doth die,

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> of how much sorer punishment shall he
be counted worthy who the Son of God did trample on, and the blood of
the covenant did count a common thing, in which he was sanctified, and
to the Spirit of the grace did despite?

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> for we have known Him who is saying,
\`Vengeance \[is\] Mine, I will recompense, saith the Lord;' and again,
\`The Lord shall judge His people;' --

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> fearful \[is\] the falling into the
hands of a living God.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> And call to your remembrance the former
days, in which, having been enlightened, ye did endure much conflict of
sufferings,

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> partly both with reproaches and
tribulations being made spectacles, and partly having become partners of
those so living,

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> for also with my bonds ye sympathised,
and the robbery of your goods with joy ye did receive, knowing that ye
have in yourselves a better substance in the heavens, and an enduring
one.

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> Ye may not cast away, then, your
boldness, which hath great recompense of reward,

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> for of patience ye have need, that the
will of God having done, ye may receive the promise,

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> for yet a very very little, He who is
coming will come, and will not tarry;

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> and \`the righteous by faith shall
live,' and \`if he may draw back, My soul hath no pleasure in him,'

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> and we are not of those drawing back to
destruction, but of those believing to a preserving of soul.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And faith is of things hoped for a
confidence, of matters not seen a conviction,

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> for in this were the elders testified of;

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> by faith we understand the ages to have
been prepared by a saying of God, in regard to the things seen not
having come out of things appearing;

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> by faith a better sacrifice did Abel
offer to God than Cain, through which he was testified to be righteous,
God testifying of his gifts, and through it, he being dead, doth yet
speak.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> By faith Enoch was translated -- not to
see death, and was not found, because God did translate him; for before
his translation he had been testified to -- that he had pleased God
well,

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> and apart from faith it is impossible to
please well, for it behoveth him who is coming to God to believe that He
is, and to those seeking Him He becometh a rewarder.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> By faith Noah, having been divinely
warned concerning the things not yet seen, having feared, did prepare an
ark to the salvation of his house, through which he did condemn the
world, and of the righteousness according to faith he became heir.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> By faith Abraham, being called, did obey,
to go forth to the place that he was about to receive for an
inheritance, and he went forth, not knowing whither he doth go;

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> by faith he did sojourn in the land of
the promise as a strange country, in tabernacles having dwelt with Isaac
and Jacob, fellow-heirs of the same promise,

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> for he was looking for the city having
the foundations, whose artificer and constructor \[is\] God.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> By faith also Sarah herself did receive
power to conceive seed, and she bare after the time of life, seeing she
did judge Him faithful who did promise;

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> wherefore, also from one were begotten
-- and that of one who had become dead -- as the stars of the heaven in
multitude, and as sand that \[is\] by the sea-shore -- the innumerable.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> In faith died all these, not having
received the promises, but from afar having seen them, and having been
persuaded, and having saluted \[them\], and having confessed that
strangers and sojourners they are upon the earth,

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> for those saying such things make
manifest that they seek a country;

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> and if, indeed, they had been mindful
of that from which they came forth, they might have had an opportunity
to return,

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> but now they long for a better, that
is, an heavenly, wherefore God is not ashamed of them, to be called
their God, for He did prepare for them a city.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> By faith Abraham hath offered up Isaac,
being tried, and the only begotten he did offer up who did receive the
promises,

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> of whom it was said -- \`In Isaac shall
a seed be called to thee;'

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> reckoning that even out of the dead God
is able to raise up, whence also in a figure he did receive \[him\].

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> By faith, concerning coming things,
Isaac did bless Jacob and Esau;

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> by faith Jacob dying -- each of the
sons of Joseph did bless, and did bow down upon the top of his staff;

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> by faith, Joseph dying, concerning the
outgoing of the sons of Israel did make mention, and concerning his
bones did give command.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> By faith Moses, having been born, was
hid three months by his parents, because they saw the child comely, and
were not afraid of the decree of the king;

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> by faith Moses, having become great,
did refuse to be called a son of the daughter of Pharaoh,

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> having chosen rather to be afflicted
with the people of God, than to have sin's pleasure for a season,

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> greater wealth having reckoned the
reproach of the Christ than the treasures in Egypt, for he did look to
the recompense of reward;

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> by faith he left Egypt behind, not
having been afraid of the wrath of the king, for, as seeing the
Invisible One -- he endured;

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> by faith he kept the passover, and the
sprinkling of the blood, that He who is destroying the first-born might
not touch them.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> By faith they did pass through the Red
Sea as through dry land, which the Egyptians having received a trial of,
were swallowed up;

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> by faith the walls of Jericho did fall,
having been surrounded for seven days;

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> by faith Rahab the harlot did not
perish with those who disbelieved, having received the spies with peace.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> And what shall I yet say? for the time
will fail me recounting about Gideon, Barak also, and Samson, and
Jephthah, David also, and Samuel, and the prophets,

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> who through faith did subdue kingdoms,
wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped mouths of lions,

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> quenched the power of fire, escaped the
mouth of the sword, were made powerful out of infirmities, became strong
in battle, caused to give way camps of the aliens.

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> Women received by a rising again their
dead, and others were tortured, not accepting the redemption, that a
better rising again they might receive,

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> and others of mockings and scourgings
did receive trial, and yet of bonds and imprisonment;

<span id="an_11:37">11:37</span> they were stoned, they were sawn
asunder, they were tried; in the killing of the sword they died; they
went about in sheepskins, in goatskins -- being destitute, afflicted,
injuriously treated,

<span id="an_11:38">11:38</span> of whom the world was not worthy; in
deserts wandering, and \[in\] mountains, and \[in\] caves, and \[in\]
the holes of the earth;

<span id="an_11:39">11:39</span> and these all, having been testified to
through the faith, did not receive the promise,

<span id="an_11:40">11:40</span> God for us something better having
provided, that apart from us they might not be made perfect.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Therefore, we also having so great a
cloud of witnesses set around us, every weight having put off, and the
closely besetting sin, through endurance may we run the contest that is
set before us,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> looking to the author and perfecter of
faith -- Jesus, who, over-against the joy set before him -- did endure a
cross, shame having despised, on the right hand also of the throne of
God did sit down;

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> for consider again him who endured such
gainsaying from the sinners to himself, that ye may not be wearied in
your souls -- being faint.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Not yet unto blood did ye resist -- with
the sin striving;

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> and ye have forgotten the exhortation
that doth speak fully with you as with sons, \`My son, be not despising
chastening of the Lord, nor be faint, being reproved by Him,

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> for whom the Lord doth love He doth
chasten, and He scourgeth every son whom He receiveth;'

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> if chastening ye endure, as to sons God
beareth Himself to you, for who is a son whom a father doth not chasten?

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> and if ye are apart from chastening, of
which all have become partakers, then bastards are ye, and not sons.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Then, indeed, fathers of our flesh we
have had, chastising \[us\], and we were reverencing \[them\]; shall we
not much rather be subject to the Father of the spirits, and live?

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> for they, indeed, for a few days,
according to what seemed good to them, were chastening, but He for
profit, to be partakers of His separation;

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> and all chastening for the present,
indeed, doth not seem to be of joy, but of sorrow, yet afterward the
peaceable fruit of righteousness to those exercised through it -- it
doth yield.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Wherefore, the hanging-down hands and
the loosened knees set ye up;

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> and straight paths make for your feet,
that that which is lame may not be turned aside, but rather be healed;

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> peace pursue with all, and the
separation, apart from which no one shall see the Lord,

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> looking diligently over lest any one be
failing of the grace of God, lest any root of bitterness springing up
may give trouble, and through this many may be defiled;

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> lest any one be a fornicator, or a
profane person, as Esau, who in exchange for one morsel of food did sell
his birthright,

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> for ye know that also afterwards,
wishing to inherit the blessing, he was disapproved of, for a place of
reformation he found not, though with tears having sought it.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> For ye came not near to the mount
touched and scorched with fire, and to blackness, and darkness, and
tempest,

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> and a sound of a trumpet, and a voice
of sayings, which those having heard did entreat that a word might not
be added to them,

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> for they were not bearing that which is
commanded, \`And if a beast may touch the mountain, it shall be stoned,
or with an arrow shot through,'

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> and, (so terrible was the sight,) Moses
said, \`I am fearful exceedingly, and trembling.'

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> But, ye came to Mount Zion, and to a
city of the living God, to the heavenly Jerusalem, and to myriads of
messengers,

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> to the company and assembly of the
first-born in heaven enrolled, and to God the judge of all, and to
spirits of righteous men made perfect,

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> and to a mediator of a new covenant --
Jesus, and to blood of sprinkling, speaking better things than that of
Abel!

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> See, may ye not refuse him who is
speaking, for if those did not escape who refused him who upon earth was
divinely speaking -- much less we who do turn away from him who
\[speaketh\] from heaven,

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> whose voice the earth shook then, and
now hath he promised, saying, \`Yet once -- I shake not only the earth,
but also the heaven;'

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> and this -- \`Yet once' -- doth make
evident the removal of the things shaken, as of things having been made,
that the things not shaken may remain;

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> wherefore, a kingdom that cannot be
shaken receiving, may we have grace, through which we may serve God
well-pleasingly, with reverence and religious fear;

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> for also our God \[is\] a consuming
fire.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Let brotherly love remain;

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> of the hospitality be not forgetful, for
through this unawares certain did entertain messengers;

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> be mindful of those in bonds, as having
been bound with them, of those maltreated, as also yourselves being in
the body;

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> honourable \[is\] the marriage in all,
and the bed undefiled, and whoremongers and adulterers God shall judge.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Without covetousness the behaviour, being
content with the things present, for He hath said, \`No, I will not
leave, no, nor forsake thee,'

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> so that we do boldly say, \`The Lord
\[is\] to me a helper, and I will not fear what man shall do to me.'

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Be mindful of those leading you, who did
speak to you the word of God, whose faith -- considering the issue of
the behaviour -- be imitating,

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Jesus Christ yesterday and to-day the
same, and to the ages;

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> with teachings manifold and strange be
not carried about, for \[it is\] good that by grace the heart be
confirmed, not with meats, in which they who were occupied were not
profited;

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> we have an altar, of which to eat they
have no authority who the tabernacle are serving,

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> for of those beasts whose blood is
brought for sin into the holy places through the chief priest -- of
these the bodies are burned without the camp.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Wherefore, also Jesus -- that he might
sanctify through \[his\] own blood the people -- without the gate did
suffer;

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> now, then, may we go forth unto him
without the camp, his reproach bearing;

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> for we have not here an abiding city,
but the coming one we seek;

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> through him, then, we may offer up a
sacrifice of praise always to God, that is, the fruit of lips, giving
thanks to His name;

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> and of doing good, and of fellowship,
be not forgetful, for with such sacrifices God is well-pleased.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Be obedient to those leading you, and
be subject, for these do watch for your souls, as about to give account,
that with joy they may do this, and not sighing, for this \[is\]
unprofitable to you.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Pray for us, for we trust that we have
a good conscience, in all things willing to behave well,

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> and more abundantly do I call upon
\[you\] to do this, that more quickly I may be restored to you.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And the God of the peace, who did bring
up out of the dead the great shepherd of the sheep -- in the blood of an
age-during covenant -- our Lord Jesus,

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> make you perfect in every good work to
do His will, doing in you that which is well-pleasing before Him,
through Jesus Christ, to whom \[is\] the glory -- to the ages of the
ages! Amen.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And I entreat you, brethren, suffer the
word of the exhortation, for also through few words I have written to
you.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> Know ye that the brother Timotheus is
released, with whom, if he may come more shortly, I will see you.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Salute all those leading you, and all
the saints; salute you doth those from Italy:

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> the grace \[is\] with you all! Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James](jam.md)
