[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pe2)  [Next](jo2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: 1 John

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> That which was from the beginning, that
which we have heard, that which we have seen with our eyes, that which
we did behold, and our hands did handle, concerning the Word of the Life
--

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> and the Life was manifested, and we have
seen, and do testify, and declare to you the Life, the age-during, which
was with the Father, and was manifested to us --

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> that which we have seen and heard declare
we to you, that ye also may have fellowship with us, and our fellowship
\[is\] with the Father, and with His Son Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> and these things we write to you, that your
joy may be full.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And this is the message that we have heard
from Him, and announce to you, that God is light, and darkness in Him is
not at all;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> if we may say -- \`we have fellowship with
Him,' and in the darkness may walk -- we lie, and do not the truth;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> and if in the light we may walk, as He is
in the light -- we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of
Jesus Christ His Son doth cleanse us from every sin;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> if we may say -- \`we have not sin,'
ourselves we lead astray, and the truth is not in us;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> if we may confess our sins, stedfast He is
and righteous that He may forgive us the sins, and may cleanse us from
every unrighteousness;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> if we may say -- \`we have not sinned,' a
liar we make Him, and His word is not in us.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> My little children, these things I write to
you, that ye may not sin: and if any one may sin, an advocate we have
with the Father, Jesus Christ, a righteous one,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> and he -- he is a propitiation for our
sins, and not for ours only, but also for the whole world,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> and in this we know that we have known him,
if his commands we may keep;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> he who is saying, \`I have known him,' and
his command is not keeping, a liar he is, and in him the truth is not;

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> and whoever may keep his word, truly in him
the love of God hath been perfected; in this we know that in him we are.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> He who is saying in him he doth remain,
ought according as he walked also himself so to walk.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Brethren, a new command I write not to you,
but an old command, that ye had from the beginning -- the old command is
the word that ye heard from the beginning;

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> again, a new command I write to you, which
thing is true in him and in you, because the darkness doth pass away,
and the true light doth now shine;

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> he who is saying, in the light he is, and
his brother is hating, in the darkness he is till now;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> he who is loving his brother, in the
light he doth remain, and a stumbling-block in him there is not;

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> and he who is hating his brother, in the
darkness he is, and in the darkness he doth walk, and he hath not known
whither he doth go, because the darkness did blind his eyes.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> I write to you, little children, because
the sins have been forgiven you through his name;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> I write to you, fathers, because ye have
known him who \[is\] from the beginning; I write to you, young men,
because ye have overcome the evil. I write to you, little youths,
because ye have known the Father:

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> I did write to you, fathers, because ye
have known him who \[is\] from the beginning; I did write to you, young
men, because ye are strong, and the word of God in you doth remain, and
ye have overcome the evil.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Love not ye the world, nor the things in
the world; if any one doth love the world, the love of the Father is not
in him,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> because all that \[is\] in the world --
the desire of the flesh, and the desire of the eyes, and the ostentation
of the life -- is not of the Father, but of the world,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> and the world doth pass away, and the
desire of it, and he who is doing the will of God, he doth remain -- to
the age.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Little youths, it is the last hour; and
even as ye heard that the antichrist doth come, even now antichrists
have become many -- whence we know that it is the last hour;

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> out of us they went forth, but they were
not of us, for if they had been of us, they would have remained with us;
but -- that they might be manifested that they are not all of us.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And ye have an anointing from the Holy
One, and have known all things;

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> I did not write to you because ye have
not known the truth, but because ye have known it, and because no lie is
of the truth.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Who is the liar, except he who is denying
that Jesus is the Christ? this one is the antichrist who is denying the
Father and the Son;

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> every one who is denying the Son, neither
hath he the Father, \[he who is confessing the Son hath the Father
also.\]

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> Ye, then, that which ye heard from the
beginning, in you let it remain; if in you may remain that which from
the beginning ye did hear, ye also in the Son and in the Father shall
remain,

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> and this is the promise that He did
promise us -- the life the age-during.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> These things I did write to you
concerning those leading you astray;

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> and you, the anointing that ye did
receive from him, in you it doth remain, and ye have no need that any
one may teach you, but as the same anointing doth teach you concerning
all, and is true, and is not a lie, and even as was taught you, ye shall
remain in him.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> And now, little children, remain in him,
that when he may be manifested, we may have boldness, and may not be
ashamed before him, in his presence;

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> if ye know that he is righteous, know ye
that every one doing the righteousness, of him hath been begotten.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> See ye what love the Father hath given to
us, that children of God we may be called; because of this the world
doth not know us, because it did not know Him;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> beloved, now, children of God are we, and
it was not yet manifested what we shall be, and we have known that if he
may be manifested, like him we shall be, because we shall see him as he
is;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> and every one who is having this hope on
him, doth purify himself, even as he is pure.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Every one who is doing the sin, the
lawlessness also he doth do, and the sin is the lawlessness,

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> and ye have known that he was manifested
that our sins he may take away, and sin is not in him;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> every one who is remaining in him doth not
sin; every one who is sinning, hath not seen him, nor known him.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Little children, let no one lead you
astray; he who is doing the righteousness is righteous, even as he is
righteous,

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> he who is doing the sin, of the devil he
is, because from the beginning the devil doth sin; for this was the Son
of God manifested, that he may break up the works of the devil;

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> every one who hath been begotten of God,
sin he doth not, because his seed in him doth remain, and he is not able
to sin, because of God he hath been begotten.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> In this manifest are the children of God,
and the children of the devil; every one who is not doing righteousness,
is not of God, and he who is not loving his brother,

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> because this is the message that ye did
hear from the beginning, that we may love one another,

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> not as Cain -- of the evil one he was,
and he did slay his brother, and wherefore did he slay him? because his
works were evil, and those of his brother righteous.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Do not wonder, my brethren, if the world
doth hate you;

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> we -- we have known that we have passed
out of the death to the life, because we love the brethren; he who is
not loving the brother doth remain in the death.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Every one who is hating his brother -- a
man-killer he is, and ye have known that no man-killer hath life
age-during in him remaining,

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> in this we have known the love, because
he for us his life did lay down, and we ought for the brethren the lives
to lay down;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> and whoever may have the goods of the
world, and may view his brother having need, and may shut up his bowels
from him -- how doth the love of God remain in him?

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> My little children, may we not love in
word nor in tongue, but in word and in truth!

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> and in this we know that of the truth we
are, and before Him we shall assure our hearts,

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> because if our heart may condemn --
because greater is God than our heart, and He doth know all things.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Beloved, if our heart may not condemn us,
we have boldness toward God,

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> and whatever we may ask, we receive from
Him, because His commands we keep, and the things pleasing before Him we
do,

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> and this is His command, that we may
believe in the name of His Son Jesus Christ, and may love one another,
even as He did give command to us,

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> and he who is keeping His commands, in
Him he doth remain, and He in him; and in this we know that He doth
remain in us, from the Spirit that He gave us.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Beloved, every spirit believe not, but
prove the spirits, if of God they are, because many false prophets have
gone forth to the world;

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> in this know ye the Spirit of God; every
spirit that doth confess Jesus Christ in the flesh having come, of God
it is,

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> and every spirit that doth not confess
Jesus Christ in the flesh having come, of God it is not; and this is
that of the antichrist, which ye heard that it doth come, and now in the
world it is already.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Ye -- of God ye are, little children, and
ye have overcome them; because greater is He who \[is\] in you, than he
who is in the world.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> They -- of the world they are; because of
this from the world they speak, and the world doth hear them;

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> we -- of God we are; he who is knowing God
doth hear us; he who is not of God, doth not hear us; from this we know
the spirit of the truth, and the spirit of the error.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Beloved, may we love one another, because
the love is of God, and every one who is loving, of God he hath been
begotten, and doth know God;

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> he who is not loving did not know God,
because God is love.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> In this was manifested the love of God in
us, because His Son -- the only begotten -- hath God sent to the world,
that we may live through him;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> in this is the love, not that we loved
God, but that He did love us, and did send His Son a propitiation for
our sins.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Beloved, if thus did God love us, we also
ought one another to love;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> God no one hath ever seen; if we may love
one another, God in us doth remain, and His love is having been
perfected in us;

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> in this we know that in Him we do remain,
and He in us, because of His Spirit He hath given us.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And we -- we have seen and do testify,
that the Father hath sent the Son -- Saviour of the world;

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> whoever may confess that Jesus is the Son
of God, God in him doth remain, and he in God;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> and we -- we have known and believed the
love, that God hath in us; God is love, and he who is remaining in the
love, in God he doth remain, and God in him.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> In this made perfect hath been the love
with us, that boldness we may have in the day of the judgment, because
even as He is, we -- we also are in this world;

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> fear is not in the love, but the perfect
love doth cast out the fear, because the fear hath punishment, and he
who is fearing hath not been made perfect in the love;

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> we -- we love him, because He -- He first
loved us;

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> if any one may say -- \`I love God,' and
his brother he may hate, a liar he is; for he who is not loving his
brother whom he hath seen, God -- whom he hath not seen -- how is he
able to love?

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> and this \[is\] the command we have from
Him, that he who is loving God, may also love his brother.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Every one who is believing that Jesus is
the Christ, of God he hath been begotten, and every one who is loving
Him who did beget, doth love also him who is begotten of Him:

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> in this we know that we love the children
of God, when we may love God, and His commands may keep;

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> for this is the love of God, that His
commands we may keep, and His commands are not burdensome;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> because every one who is begotten of God
doth overcome the world, and this is the victory that did overcome the
world -- our faith;

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> who is he who is overcoming the world, if
not he who is believing that Jesus is the Son of God?

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> This one is he who did come through water
and blood -- Jesus the Christ, not in the water only, but in the water
and the blood; and the Spirit it is that is testifying, because the
Spirit is the truth,

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> because three are who are testifying \[in
the heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit, and these -- the
three -- are one;

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> and three are who are testifying in the
earth\], the Spirit, and the water, and the blood, and the three are
into the one.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> If the testimony of men we receive, the
testimony of God is greater, because this is the testimony of God that
He hath testified concerning His Son.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> He who is believing in the Son of God,
hath the testimony in himself; he who is not believing God, a liar hath
made Him, because he hath not believed in the testimony that God hath
testified concerning His Son;

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> and this is the testimony, that life
age-during did God give to us, and this -- the life -- is in His Son;

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> he who is having the Son, hath the life;
he who is not having the Son of God -- the life he hath not.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> These things I did write to you who are
believing in the name of the Son of God, that ye may know that life ye
have age-during, and that ye may believe in the name of the Son of God.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And this is the boldness that we have
toward Him, that if anything we may ask according to his will, He doth
hear us,

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> and if we have known that He doth hear
us, whatever we may ask, we have known that we have the requests that we
have requested from Him.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> If any one may see his brother sinning a
sin not unto death, he shall ask, and He shall give to him life to those
sinning not unto death; there is sin to death, not concerning it do I
speak that he may beseech;

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> all unrighteousness is sin, and there is
sin not unto death.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> We have known that every one who hath
been begotten of God doth not sin, but he who was begotten of God doth
keep himself, and the evil one doth not touch him;

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> we have known that of God we are, and the
whole world in the evil doth lie;

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> and we have known that the Son of God is
come, and hath given us a mind, that we may know Him who is true, and we
are in Him who is true, in His Son Jesus Christ; this one is the true
God and the life age-during!

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Little children, guard yourselves from
the idols! Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 John](jo2)
