[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](luk)  [Next](act) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: John

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God;

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> this one was in the beginning with God;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> all things through him did happen, and
without him happened not even one thing that hath happened.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> In him was life, and the life was the light
of men,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> and the light in the darkness did shine,
and the darkness did not perceive it.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> There came a man -- having been sent from
God -- whose name \[is\] John,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> this one came for testimony, that he might
testify about the Light, that all might believe through him;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> that one was not the Light, but -- that he
might testify about the Light.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> He was the true Light, which doth enlighten
every man, coming to the world;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> in the world he was, and the world
through him was made, and the world did not know him:

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> to his own things he came, and his own
people did not receive him;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> but as many as did receive him to them he
gave authority to become sons of God -- to those believing in his name,

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> who -- not of blood nor of a will of
flesh, nor of a will of man but -- of God were begotten.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And the Word became flesh, and did
tabernacle among us, and we beheld his glory, glory as of an only
begotten of a father, full of grace and truth.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> John doth testify concerning him, and
hath cried, saying, \`This was he of whom I said, He who after me is
coming, hath come before me, for he was before me;'

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> and out of his fulness did we all
receive, and grace over-against grace;

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> for the law through Moses was given, the
grace and the truth through Jesus Christ did come;

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> God no one hath ever seen; the only
begotten Son, who is on the bosom of the Father -- he did declare.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And this is the testimony of John, when
the Jews sent out of Jerusalem priests and Levites, that they might
question him, \`Who art thou?'

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> and he confessed and did not deny, and
confessed -- \`I am not the Christ.'

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And they questioned him, \`What then?
Elijah art thou?' and he saith, \`I am not.' -- \`The prophet art thou?'
and he answered, \`No.'

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> They said then to him, \`Who art thou,
that we may give an answer to those sending us? what dost thou say
concerning thyself?'

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> He said, \`I \[am\] a voice of one crying
in the wilderness: Make straight the way of the Lord, as said Isaiah the
prophet.'

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And those sent were of the Pharisees,

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> and they questioned him and said to him,
\`Why, then, dost thou baptize, if thou art not the Christ, nor Elijah,
nor the prophet?'

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> John answered them, saying, \`I baptize
with water, but in midst of you he hath stood whom ye have not known,
this one it is who is coming after me, who hath been before me,

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> of whom I am not worthy that I may loose
the cord of his sandal.'

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> These things came to pass in Bethabara,
beyond the Jordan, where John was baptizing,

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> on the morrow John seeth Jesus coming
unto him, and saith, \`Lo, the Lamb of God, who is taking away the sin
of the world;

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> this is he concerning whom I said, After
me doth come a man, who hath come before me, because he was before me:

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> and I knew him not, but, that he might be
manifested to Israel, because of this I came with the water baptizing.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> And John testified, saying -- \`I have
seen the Spirit coming down, as a dove, out of heaven, and it remained
on him;

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> and I did not know him, but he who sent
me to baptize with water, He said to me, On whomsoever thou mayst see
the Spirit coming down, and remaining on him, this is he who is
baptizing with the Holy Spirit;

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> and I have seen, and have testified, that
this is the Son of God.'

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> On the morrow, again, John was standing,
and two of his disciples,

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> and having looked on Jesus walking, he
saith, \`Lo, the Lamb of God;'

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> and the two disciples heard him speaking,
and they followed Jesus.

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> And Jesus having turned, and having
beheld them following, saith to them, \`What seek ye?' and they said to
them, \`Rabbi, (which is, being interpreted, Teacher,) where remainest
thou?'

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> He saith to them, \`Come and see;' they
came, and saw where he doth remain, and with him they remained that day
and the hour was about the tenth.

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, was
one of the two who heard from John, and followed him;

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> this one doth first find his own brother
Simon, and saith to him, \`We have found the Messiah,' (which is, being
interpreted, The Anointed,)

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> and he brought him unto Jesus: and having
looked upon him, Jesus saith, \`Thou art Simon, the son of Jonas, thou
shalt be called Cephas,' (which is interpreted, A rock.)

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> On the morrow, he willed to go forth to
Galilee, and he findeth Philip, and saith to him, \`Be following me.'

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> And Philip was from Bethsaida, of the
city of Andrew and Peter;

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> Philip findeth Nathanael, and saith to
him, \`Him of whom Moses wrote in the Law, and the prophets, we have
found, Jesus the son of Joseph, who \[is\] from Nazareth;'

<span id="an_1:46">1:46</span> and Nathanael said to him, \`Out of
Nazareth is any good thing able to be?' Philip said to him, \`Come and
see.'

<span id="an_1:47">1:47</span> Jesus saw Nathanael coming unto him, and
he saith concerning him, \`Lo, truly an Israelite, in whom guile is
not;'

<span id="an_1:48">1:48</span> Nathanael saith to him, \`Whence me dost
thou know?' Jesus answered and said to him, \`Before Philip's calling
thee -- thou being under the fig-tree -- I saw thee.'

<span id="an_1:49">1:49</span> Nathanael answered and saith to him,
\`Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art the king of Israel.'

<span id="an_1:50">1:50</span> Jesus answered and said to him, \`Because
I said to thee, I saw thee under the fig-tree, thou dost believe;
greater things than these thou shalt see;'

<span id="an_1:51">1:51</span> and he saith to him, \`Verily, verily, I
say to you, henceforth ye shall see the heaven opened, and the
messengers of God going up and coming down upon the Son of Man.'

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And the third day a marriage happened in
Cana of Galilee, and the mother of Jesus was there,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> and also Jesus was called, and his
disciples, to the marriage;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> and wine having failed, the mother of Jesus
saith unto him, \`Wine they have not;'

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Jesus saith to her, \`What -- to me and to
thee, woman? not yet is mine hour come.'

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> His mother saith to the ministrants,
\`Whatever he may say to you -- do.'

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And there were there six water-jugs of
stone, placed according to the purifying of the Jews, holding each two
or three measures.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Jesus saith to them, \`Fill the water-jugs
with water;' and they filled them -- unto the brim;

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> and he saith to them, \`Draw out, now, and
bear to the director of the apartment;' and they bare.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And as the director of the apartment tasted
the water become wine, and knew not whence it is, (but the ministrants
knew, who have drawn the water,) the director of the feast doth call the
bridegroom,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> and saith to him, \`Every man, at first,
the good wine doth set forth; and when they may have drunk freely, then
the inferior; thou didst keep the good wine till now.'

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> This beginning of the signs did Jesus in
Cana of Galilee, and manifested his glory, and his disciples believed in
him;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> after this he went down to Capernaum, he,
and his mother, and his brethren, and his disciples; and there they
remained not many days.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And the passover of the Jews was nigh,
and Jesus went up to Jerusalem,

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> and he found in the temple those selling
oxen, and sheep, and doves, and the money-changers sitting,

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> and having made a whip of small cords, he
put all forth out of the temple, also the sheep, and the oxen; and of
the money-changers he poured out the coins, and the tables he overthrew,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> and to those selling the doves he said,
\`Take these things hence; make not the house of my Father a house of
merchandise.'

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And his disciples remembered that it is
written, \`The zeal of Thy house did eat me up;'

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> the Jews then answered and said to him,
\`What sign dost thou shew to us -- that thou dost these things?'

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Jesus answered and said to them,
\`Destroy this sanctuary, and in three days I will raise it up.'

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> The Jews, therefore, said, \`Forty and
six years was this sanctuary building, and wilt thou in three days raise
it up?'

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> but he spake concerning the sanctuary of
his body;

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> when, then, he was raised out of the
dead, his disciples remembered that he said this to them, and they
believed the Writing, and the word that Jesus said.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And as he was in Jerusalem, in the
passover, in the feast, many believed in his name, beholding his signs
that he was doing;

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> and Jesus himself was not trusting
himself to them, because of his knowing all \[men\],

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> and because he had no need that any
should testify concerning man, for he himself was knowing what was in
man.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And there was a man of the Pharisees,
Nicodemus his name, a ruler of the Jews,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> this one came unto him by night, and said
to him, \`Rabbi, we have known that from God thou hast come -- a
teacher, for no one these signs is able to do that thou dost, if God may
not be with him.'

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Jesus answered and said to him, \`Verily,
verily, I say to thee, If any one may not be born from above, he is not
able to see the reign of God;'

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Nicodemus saith unto him, \`How is a man
able to be born, being old? is he able into the womb of his mother a
second time to enter, and to be born?'

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Jesus answered, \`Verily, verily, I say to
thee, If any one may not be born of water, and the Spirit, he is not
able to enter into the reign of God;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> that which hath been born of the flesh is
flesh, and that which hath been born of the Spirit is spirit.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> \`Thou mayest not wonder that I said to
thee, It behoveth you to be born from above;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> the Spirit where he willeth doth blow, and
his voice thou dost hear, but thou hast not known whence he cometh, and
whither he goeth; thus is every one who hath been born of the Spirit.'

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Nicodemus answered and said to him, \`How
are these things able to happen?'

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Jesus answered and said to him, \`Thou
art the teacher of Israel -- and these things thou dost not know!

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> \`Verily, verily, I say to thee -- What
we have known we speak, and what we have seen we testify, and our
testimony ye do not receive;

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> if the earthly things I said to you, and
ye do not believe, how, if I shall say to you the heavenly things, will
ye believe?

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> and no one hath gone up to the heaven,
except he who out of the heaven came down -- the Son of Man who is in
the heaven.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> \`And as Moses did lift up the serpent in
the wilderness, so it behoveth the Son of Man to be lifted up,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> that every one who is believing in him
may not perish, but may have life age-during,

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> for God did so love the world, that His
Son -- the only begotten -- He gave, that every one who is believing in
him may not perish, but may have life age-during.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> For God did not send His Son to the world
that he may judge the world, but that the world may be saved through
him;

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> he who is believing in him is not judged,
but he who is not believing hath been judged already, because he hath
not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> \`And this is the judgment, that the
light hath come to the world, and men did love the darkness rather than
the light, for their works were evil;

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> for every one who is doing wicked things
hateth the light, and doth not come unto the light, that his works may
not be detected;

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> but he who is doing the truth doth come
to the light, that his works may be manifested, that in God they are
having been wrought.'

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> After these things came Jesus and his
disciples to the land of Judea, and there he did tarry with them, and
was baptizing;

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> and John was also baptizing in Aenon,
nigh to Salem, because there were many waters there, and they were
coming and were being baptized --

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> for John was not yet cast into the prison
--

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> there arose then a question from the
disciples of John with \[some\] Jews about purifying,

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> and they came unto John, and said to him,
\`Rabbi, he who was with thee beyond the Jordan, to whom thou didst
testify, lo, this one is baptizing, and all are coming unto him.'

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> John answered and said, \`A man is not
able to receive anything, if it may not have been given him from the
heaven;

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> ye yourselves do testify to me that I
said, I am not the Christ, but, that I am having been sent before him;

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> he who is having the bride is bridegroom,
and the friend of the bridegroom, who is standing and hearing him, with
joy doth rejoice because of the voice of the bridegroom; this, then, my
joy hath been fulfilled.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> \`Him it behoveth to increase, and me to
become less;

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> he who from above is coming is above all;
he who is from the earth, from the earth he is, and from the earth he
speaketh; he who from the heaven is coming is above all.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> \`And what he hath seen and heard this he
doth testify, and his testimony none receiveth;

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> he who is receiving his testimony did
seal that God is true;

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> for he whom God sent, the sayings of God
he speaketh; for not by measure doth God give the Spirit;

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> the Father doth love the Son, and all
things hath given into his hand;

<span id="an_3:36">3:36</span> he who is believing in the Son, hath life
age-during; and he who is not believing the Son, shall not see life, but
the wrath of God doth remain upon him.'

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> When therefore the Lord knew that the
Pharisees heard that Jesus more disciples doth make and baptize than
John,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> (though indeed Jesus himself was not
baptizing, but his disciples,)

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> he left Judea and went away again to
Galilee,

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> and it was behoving him to go through
Samaria.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> He cometh, therefore, to a city of Samaria,
called Sychar, near to the place that Jacob gave to Joseph his son;

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> and there was there a well of Jacob. Jesus
therefore having been weary from the journeying, was sitting thus on the
well; it was as it were the sixth hour;

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> there cometh a woman out of Samaria to draw
water. Jesus saith to her, \`Give me to drink;'

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> for his disciples were gone away to the
city, that they may buy victuals;

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> the Samaritan woman therefore saith to him,
\`How dost thou, being a Jew, ask drink from me, being a Samaritan
woman?' for Jews have no dealing with Samaritans.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Jesus answered and said to her, \`If thou
hadst known the gift of God, and who it is who is saying to thee, Give
me to drink, thou wouldest have asked him, and he would have given thee
living water.'

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> The woman saith to him, \`Sir, thou hast
not even a vessel to draw with, and the well is deep; whence, then, hast
thou the living water?

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Art thou greater than our father Jacob,
who did give us the well, and himself out of it did drink, and his sons,
and his cattle?'

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Jesus answered and said to her, \`Every
one who is drinking of this water shall thirst again;

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> but whoever may drink of the water that I
will give him, may not thirst -- to the age; and the water that I will
give him shall become in him a well of water, springing up to life
age-during.'

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> The woman saith unto him, \`Sir, give me
this water, that I may not thirst, nor come hither to draw.'

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Jesus saith to her, \`Go, call thy
husband, and come hither;'

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> the woman answered and said, \`I have not
a husband.' Jesus saith to her, \`Well didst thou say -- A husband I
have not;

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> for five husbands thou hast had, and,
now, he whom thou hast is not thy husband; this hast thou said truly.'

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> The woman saith to him, \`Sir, I perceive
that thou art a prophet;

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> our fathers in this mountain did worship,
and ye -- ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where it behoveth to
worship.'

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Jesus saith to her, \`Woman, believe me,
that there doth come an hour, when neither in this mountain, nor in
Jerusalem, shall ye worship the Father;

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> ye worship what ye have not known; we
worship what we have known, because the salvation is of the Jews;

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> but, there cometh an hour, and it now is,
when the true worshippers will worship the Father in spirit and truth,
for the Father also doth seek such to worship him;

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> God \[is\] a Spirit, and those
worshipping Him, in spirit and truth it doth behove to worship.'

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> The woman saith to him, \`I have known
that Messiah doth come, who is called Christ, when that one may come, he
will tell us all things;'

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> Jesus saith to her, \`I am \[he\], who am
speaking to thee.'

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> And upon this came his disciples, and
were wondering that with a woman he was speaking, no one, however, said,
\`What seekest thou?' or \`Why speakest thou with her?'

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> The woman then left her water-jug, and
went away to the city, and saith to the men,

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> \`Come, see a man, who told me all things
-- as many as I did; is this the Christ?'

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> They went forth therefore out of the
city, and were coming unto him.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> And in the meanwhile his disciples were
asking him, saying, \`Rabbi, eat;'

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> and he said to them, \`I have food to eat
that ye have not known.'

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> The disciples then said one to another,
\`Did any one bring him anything to eat?'

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> Jesus saith to them, \`My food is, that I
may do the will of Him who sent me, and may finish His work;

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> do not say that it is yet four months,
and the harvest cometh; lo, I say to you, Lift up your eyes, and see the
fields, that they are white unto harvest already.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> \`And he who is reaping doth receive a
reward, and doth gather fruit to life age-during, that both he who is
sowing and he who is reaping may rejoice together;

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> for in this the saying is the true one,
that one is the sower and another the reaper.

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> I sent you to reap that on which ye have
not laboured; others laboured, and ye into their labour have entered.

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> And from that city many believed in him,
of the Samaritans, because of the word of the woman testifying, -- \`He
told me all things -- as many as I did.'

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> When, then, the Samaritans came unto him,
they were asking him to remain with them, and he remained there two
days;

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> and many more did believe because of his
word,

<span id="an_4:42">4:42</span> and said to the woman -- \`No more
because of thy speaking do we believe; for we ourselves have heard and
known that this is truly the Saviour of the world -- the Christ.'

<span id="an_4:43">4:43</span> And after the two days he went forth
thence, and went away to Galilee,

<span id="an_4:44">4:44</span> for Jesus himself testified that a
prophet in his own country shall not have honour;

<span id="an_4:45">4:45</span> when then, he came to Galilee, the
Galileans received him, having seen all things that he did in Jerusalem
in the feast -- for they also went to the feast.

<span id="an_4:46">4:46</span> Jesus came, therefore, again to Cana of
Galilee, where he made the water wine, and there was a certain courtier,
whose son was ailing in Capernaum,

<span id="an_4:47">4:47</span> he, having heard that Jesus is come out
of Judea to Galilee, went away unto him, and was asking him that he may
come down and may heal his son, for he was about to die.

<span id="an_4:48">4:48</span> Jesus then said unto him, \`If signs and
wonders ye may not see, ye will not believe.'

<span id="an_4:49">4:49</span> The courtier saith unto him, \`Sir, come
down before my child die;'

<span id="an_4:50">4:50</span> Jesus saith to him, \`Be going on; thy
son doth live.' And the man believed the word that Jesus said to him,
and was going on,

<span id="an_4:51">4:51</span> and he now going down, his servants met
him, and told, saying -- \`Thy child doth live;'

<span id="an_4:52">4:52</span> he inquired then of them the hour in
which he became better, and they said to him -- \`Yesterday at the
seventh hour the fever left him;'

<span id="an_4:53">4:53</span> then the father knew that \[it was\] in
that hour in which Jesus said to him -- \`Thy son doth live,' and he
himself believed, and his whole house;

<span id="an_4:54">4:54</span> this again a second sign did Jesus,
having come out of Judea to Galilee.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> After these things there was a feast of the
Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem,

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> and there is in Jerusalem by the
sheep-\[gate\] a pool that is called in Hebrew Bethesda, having five
porches,

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> in these were lying a great multitude of
the ailing, blind, lame, withered, waiting for the moving of the water,

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> for a messenger at a set time was going
down in the pool, and was troubling the water, the first then having
gone in after the troubling of the water, became whole of whatever
sickness he was held.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> and there was a certain man there being in
ailment thirty and eight years,

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> him Jesus having seen lying, and having
known that he is already a long time, he saith to him, \`Dost thou wish
to become whole?'

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> The ailing man answered him, \`Sir, I have
no man, that, when the water may be troubled, he may put me into the
pool, and while I am coming, another doth go down before me.'

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Jesus saith to him, \`Rise, take up thy
couch, and be walking;'

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> and immediately the man became whole, and
he took up his couch, and was walking, and it was a sabbath on that day,

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> the Jews then said to him that hath been
healed, \`It is a sabbath; it is not lawful to thee to take up the
couch.'

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> He answered them, \`He who made me whole
-- that one said to me, Take up thy couch, and be walking;'

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> they questioned him, then, \`Who is the
man who is saying to thee, Take up thy couch and be walking?'

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> But he that was healed had not known who
he is, for Jesus did move away, a multitude being in the place.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> After these things, Jesus findeth him in
the temple, and said to him, \`Lo, thou hast become whole; sin no more,
lest something worse may happen to thee.'

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> The man went away, and told the Jews that
it is Jesus who made him whole,

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> and because of this were the Jews
persecuting Jesus, and seeking to kill him, because these things he was
doing on a sabbath.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And Jesus answered them, \`My Father till
now doth work, and I work;'

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> because of this, then, were the Jews
seeking the more to kill him, because not only was he breaking the
sabbath, but he also called God his own Father, making himself equal to
God.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Jesus therefore responded and said to
them, \`Verily, verily, I say to you, The Son is not able to do anything
of himself, if he may not see the Father doing anything; for whatever
things He may do, these also the Son in like manner doth;

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> for the Father doth love the Son, and
doth shew to him all things that He himself doth; and greater works than
these He will shew him, that ye may wonder.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> \`For, as the Father doth raise the dead,
and doth make alive, so also the Son doth make alive whom he willeth;

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> for neither doth the Father judge any
one, but all the judgment He hath given to the Son,

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> that all may honour the Son according as
they honour the Father; he who is not honouring the Son, doth not honour
the Father who sent him.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> \`Verily, verily, I say to you -- He who
is hearing my word, and is believing Him who sent me, hath life
age-during, and to judgment he doth not come, but hath passed out of the
death to the life.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> \`Verily, verily, I say to you -- There
cometh an hour, and it now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God, and those having heard shall live;

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> for, as the Father hath life in himself,
so He gave also to the Son to have life in himself,

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> and authority He gave him also to do
judgment, because he is Son of Man.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> \`Wonder not at this, because there doth
come an hour in which all those in the tombs shall hear his voice,

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> and they shall come forth; those who did
the good things to a rising again of life, and those who practised the
evil things to a rising again of judgment.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> \`I am not able of myself to do anything;
according as I hear I judge, and my judgment is righteous, because I
seek not my own will, but the will of the Father who sent me.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> \`If I testify concerning myself, my
testimony is not true;

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> another there is who is testifying
concerning me, and I have known that the testimony that he doth testify
concerning me is true;

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> ye have sent unto John, and he hath
testified to the truth.

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> \`But I do not receive testimony from
man, but these things I say that ye may be saved;

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> he was the burning and shining lamp, and
ye did will to be glad, for an hour, in his light.

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> \`But I have the testimony greater than
John's, for the works that the Father gave me, that I might finish them,
the works themselves that I do, they testify concerning me, that the
Father hath sent me.

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> \`And the Father who sent me Himself hath
testified concerning me; ye have neither heard His voice at any time,
nor His appearance have ye seen;

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> and His word ye have not remaining in
you, because whom He sent, him ye do not believe.

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> \`Ye search the Writings, because ye
think in them to have life age-during, and these are they that are
testifying concerning me;

<span id="an_5:40">5:40</span> and ye do not will to come unto me, that
ye may have life;

<span id="an_5:41">5:41</span> glory from man I do not receive,

<span id="an_5:42">5:42</span> but I have known you, that the love of
God ye have not in yourselves.

<span id="an_5:43">5:43</span> \`I have come in the name of my Father,
and ye do not receive me; if another may come in his own name, him ye
will receive;

<span id="an_5:44">5:44</span> how are ye able -- ye -- to believe,
glory from one another receiving, and the glory that \[is\] from God
alone ye seek not?

<span id="an_5:45">5:45</span> \`Do not think that I will accuse you
unto the Father; there is who is accusing you, Moses -- in whom ye have
hoped;

<span id="an_5:46">5:46</span> for if ye were believing Moses, ye would
have been believing me, for he wrote concerning me;

<span id="an_5:47">5:47</span> but if his writings ye believe not, how
shall ye believe my sayings?'

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> After these things Jesus went away beyond
the sea of Galilee (of Tiberias),

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> and there was following him a great
multitude, because they were seeing his signs that he was doing on the
ailing;

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> and Jesus went up to the mount, and he was
there sitting with his disciples,

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> and the passover was nigh, the feast of the
Jews.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Jesus then having lifted up \[his\] eyes
and having seen that a great multitude doth come to him, saith unto
Philip, \`Whence shall we buy loaves, that these may eat?' --

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> and this he said, trying him, for he
himself had known what he was about to do.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Philip answered him, \`Two hundred
denaries' worth of loaves are not sufficient to them, that each of them
may receive some little;'

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> one of his disciples -- Andrew, the brother
of Simon Peter -- saith to him,

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> \`There is one little lad here who hath
five barley loaves, and two fishes, but these -- what are they to so
many?'

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And Jesus said, \`Make the men to sit
down;' and there was much grass in the place, the men then sat down, in
number, as it were, five thousand,

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> and Jesus took the loaves, and having
given thanks he distributed to the disciples, and the disciples to those
reclining, in like manner, also of the little fishes as much as they
wished.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And when they were filled, he saith to
his disciples, \`Gather together the broken pieces that are over, that
nothing may be lost;'

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> they gathered together, therefore, and
filled twelve hand-baskets with broken pieces, from the five barley
loaves that were over to those having eaten.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> The men, then, having seen the sign that
Jesus did, said -- \`This is truly the Prophet, who is coming to the
world;'

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Jesus, therefore, having known that they
are about to come, and to take him by force that they may make him king,
retired again to the mountain himself alone.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And when evening came, his disciples went
down to the sea,

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> and having entered into the boat, they
were going over the sea to Capernaum, and darkness had already come, and
Jesus had not come unto them,

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> the sea also -- a great wind blowing --
was being raised,

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> having pushed onwards, therefore, about
twenty-five or thirty furlongs, they behold Jesus walking on the sea,
and coming nigh to the boat, and they were afraid;

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> and he saith to them, \`I am \[he\], be
not afraid;'

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> they were willing then to receive him
into the boat, and immediately the boat came unto the land to which they
were going.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> On the morrow, the multitude that was
standing on the other side of the sea, having seen that there was no
other little boat there except one -- that into which his disciples
entered -- and that Jesus went not in with his disciples into the little
boat, but his disciples went away alone,

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> (and other little boats came from
Tiberias, nigh the place where they did eat the bread, the Lord having
given thanks),

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> when therefore the multitude saw that
Jesus is not there, nor his disciples, they also themselves did enter
into the boats, and came to Capernaum seeking Jesus;

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> and having found him on the other side of
the sea, they said to him, \`Rabbi, when hast thou come hither?'

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> Jesus answered them and said, \`Verily,
verily, I say to you, Ye seek me, not because ye saw signs, but because
ye did eat of the loaves, and were satisfied;

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> work not for the food that is perishing,
but for the food that is remaining to life age-during, which the Son of
Man will give to you, for him did the Father seal -- \[even\] God.'

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> They said therefore unto him, \`What may
we do that we may work the works of God?'

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> Jesus answered and said to them, \`This
is the work of God, that ye may believe in him whom He did send.'

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> They said therefore to him, \`What sign,
then, dost thou, that we may see and may believe thee? what dost thou
work?

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> our fathers the manna did eat in the
wilderness, according as it is having been written, Bread out of the
heaven He gave them to eat.'

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> Jesus, therefore, said to them, \`Verily,
verily, I say to you, Moses did not give you the bread out of the
heaven; but my Father doth give you the true bread out of the heaven;

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> for the bread of God is that which is
coming down out of the heaven, and giving life to the world.'

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> They said, therefore, unto him, \`Sir,
always give us this bread.'

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> And Jesus said to them, \`I am the bread
of the life; he who is coming unto me may not hunger, and he who is
believing in me may not thirst -- at any time;

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> but I said to you, that ye also have seen
me, and ye believe not;

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> all that the Father doth give to me will
come unto me; and him who is coming unto me, I may in no wise cast
without,

<span id="an_6:38">6:38</span> because I have come down out of the
heaven, not that I may do my will, but the will of Him who sent me.

<span id="an_6:39">6:39</span> \`And this is the will of the Father who
sent me, that all that He hath given to me I may not lose of it, but may
raise it up in the last day;

<span id="an_6:40">6:40</span> and this is the will of Him who sent me,
that every one who is beholding the Son, and is believing in him, may
have life age-during, and I will raise him up in the last day.'

<span id="an_6:41">6:41</span> The Jews, therefore, were murmuring at
him, because he said, \`I am the bread that came down out of the
heaven;'

<span id="an_6:42">6:42</span> and they said, \`Is not this Jesus, the
son of Joseph, whose father and mother we have known? how then saith
this one -- Out of the heaven I have come down?'

<span id="an_6:43">6:43</span> Jesus answered, therefore, and said to
them, \`Murmur not one with another;

<span id="an_6:44">6:44</span> no one is able to come unto me, if the
Father who sent me may not draw him, and I will raise him up in the last
day;

<span id="an_6:45">6:45</span> it is having been written in the
prophets, And they shall be all taught of God; every one therefore who
heard from the Father, and learned, cometh to me;

<span id="an_6:46">6:46</span> not that any one hath seen the Father,
except he who is from God, he hath seen the Father.

<span id="an_6:47">6:47</span> \`Verily, verily, I say to you, He who is
believing in me, hath life age-during;

<span id="an_6:48">6:48</span> I am the bread of the life;

<span id="an_6:49">6:49</span> your fathers did eat the manna in the
wilderness, and they died;

<span id="an_6:50">6:50</span> this is the bread that out of the heaven
is coming down, that any one may eat of it, and not die.

<span id="an_6:51">6:51</span> \`I am the living bread that came down
out of the heaven; if any one may eat of this bread he shall live -- to
the age; and the bread also that I will give is my flesh, that I will
give for the life of the world.'

<span id="an_6:52">6:52</span> The Jews, therefore, were striving with
one another, saying, \`How is this one able to give us \[his\] flesh to
eat?'

<span id="an_6:53">6:53</span> Jesus, therefore, said to them, \`Verily,
verily, I say to you, If ye may not eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and
may not drink his blood, ye have no life in yourselves;

<span id="an_6:54">6:54</span> he who is eating my flesh, and is
drinking my blood, hath life age-during, and I will raise him up in the
last day;

<span id="an_6:55">6:55</span> for my flesh truly is food, and my blood
truly is drink;

<span id="an_6:56">6:56</span> he who is eating my flesh, and is
drinking my blood, doth remain in me, and I in him.

<span id="an_6:57">6:57</span> \`According as the living Father sent me,
and I live because of the Father, he also who is eating me, even that
one shall live because of me;

<span id="an_6:58">6:58</span> this is the bread that came down out of
the heaven; not as your fathers did eat the manna, and died; he who is
eating this bread shall live -- to the age.'

<span id="an_6:59">6:59</span> These things he said in a synagogue,
teaching in Capernaum;

<span id="an_6:60">6:60</span> many, therefore, of his disciples having
heard, said, \`This word is hard; who is able to hear it?'

<span id="an_6:61">6:61</span> And Jesus having known in himself that
his disciples are murmuring about this, said to them, \`Doth this
stumble you?

<span id="an_6:62">6:62</span> if then ye may behold the Son of Man
going up where he was before?

<span id="an_6:63">6:63</span> the spirit it is that is giving life; the
flesh doth not profit anything; the sayings that I speak to you are
spirit, and they are life;

<span id="an_6:64">6:64</span> but there are certain of you who do not
believe;' for Jesus had known from the beginning who they are who are
not believing, and who is he who will deliver him up,

<span id="an_6:65">6:65</span> and he said, \`Because of this I have
said to you -- No one is able to come unto me, if it may not have been
given him from my Father.'

<span id="an_6:66">6:66</span> From this \[time\] many of his disciples
went away backward, and were no more walking with him,

<span id="an_6:67">6:67</span> Jesus, therefore, said to the twelve,
\`Do ye also wish to go away?'

<span id="an_6:68">6:68</span> Simon Peter, therefore, answered him,
\`Sir, unto whom shall we go? thou hast sayings of life age-during;

<span id="an_6:69">6:69</span> and we have believed, and we have known,
that thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.'

<span id="an_6:70">6:70</span> Jesus answered them, \`Did not I choose
you -- the twelve? and of you -- one is a devil.

<span id="an_6:71">6:71</span> And he spake of Judas, Simon's \[son\],
Iscariot, for he was about to deliver him up, being one of the twelve.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And Jesus was walking after these things in
Galilee, for he did not wish to walk in Judea, because the Jews were
seeking to kill him,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> and the feast of the Jews was nigh -- that
of tabernacles --

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> his brethren, therefore, said unto him,
\`Remove hence, and go away to Judea, that thy disciples also may behold
thy works that thou dost;

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> for no one in secret doth anything, and
himself seeketh to be in public; if thou dost these things -- manifest
thyself to the world;'

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> for not even were his brethren believing in
him.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Jesus, therefore, saith to them, \`My time
is not yet present, but your time is always ready;

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> the world is not able to hate you, but me
it doth hate, because I testify concerning it that its works are evil.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Ye -- go ye up to this feast; I do not yet
go up to this feast, because my time hath not yet been fulfilled;'

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> and saying these things to them, he
remained in Galilee.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And when his brethren went up, then also
he himself went up to the feast, not manifestly, but as in secret;

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> the Jews, therefore, were seeking him, in
the feast, and said, \`Where is that one?'

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> and there was much murmuring about him
among the multitudes, some indeed said -- \`He is good;' and others
said, \`No, but he leadeth astray the multitude;'

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> no one, however, was speaking freely
about him, through fear of the Jews.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And it being now the middle of the feast,
Jesus went up to the temple, and he was teaching,

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> and the Jews were wondering, saying,
\`How hath this one known letters -- not having learned?'

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> Jesus answered them and said, \`My
teaching is not mine, but His who sent me;

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> if any one may will to do His will, he
shall know concerning the teaching, whether it is of God, or -- I do
speak from myself.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> \`He who is speaking from himself his own
glory doth seek, but he who is seeking the glory of him who sent him,
this one is true, and unrighteousness is not in him;

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> hath not Moses given you the law? and
none of you doth the law; why me do ye seek to kill?'

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> The multitude answered and said, \`Thou
hast a demon, who doth seek to kill thee?'

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Jesus answered and said to them, \`One
work I did, and ye all wonder,

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> because of this, Moses hath given you the
circumcision -- not that it is of Moses, but of the fathers -- and on a
sabbath ye circumcise a man;

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> if a man doth receive circumcision on a
sabbath that the law of Moses may not be broken, are ye wroth with me
that I made a man all whole on a sabbath?

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> judge not according to appearance, but
the righteous judgment judge.'

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Certain, therefore, of the Jerusalemites
said, \`Is not this he whom they are seeking to kill?

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> and, lo, he doth speak freely, and they
say nothing to him; did the rulers at all know truly that this is truly
the Christ?

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> but this one -- we have known whence he
is; and the Christ, when he doth come, no one doth know whence he is.'

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> Jesus cried, therefore, in the temple,
teaching and saying, \`Ye have both known me, and ye have known whence I
am; and I have not come of myself, but He who sent me is true, whom ye
have not known;

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> and I have known Him, because I am from
Him, and He did send me.'

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> They were seeking, therefore, to seize
him, and no one laid the hand on him, because his hour had not yet come,

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> and many out of the multitude did believe
in him, and said -- \`The Christ -- when he may come -- will he do more
signs than these that this one did?'

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> The Pharisees heard the multitude
murmuring these things concerning him, and the Pharisees and the chief
priests sent officers that they may take him;

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> Jesus, therefore, said to them, \`Yet a
little time I am with you, and I go away unto Him who sent me;

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> ye will seek me, and ye shall not find;
and where I am, ye are not able to come.'

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> The Jews, therefore, said among
themselves, \`Whither is this one about to go that we shall not find
him? -- to the dispersion of the Greeks is he about to go? and to teach
the Greeks;

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> what is this word that he said, Ye will
seek me, and ye shall not find? and, Where I am, ye are not able to
come?'

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> And in the last, the great day of the
feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, \`If any one doth thirst, let him
come unto me and drink;

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> he who is believing in me, according as
the Writing said, Rivers out of his belly shall flow of living water;'

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> and this he said of the Spirit, which
those believing in him were about to receive; for not yet was the Holy
Spirit, because Jesus was not yet glorified.

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> Many, therefore out of the multitude,
having heard the word, said, \`This is truly the Prophet;'

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> others said, \`This is the Christ;' and
others said, \`Why, out of Galilee doth the Christ come?

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> Did not the Writing say, that out of the
seed of David, and from Bethlehem -- the village where David was -- the
Christ doth come?'

<span id="an_7:43">7:43</span> A division, therefore, arose among the
multitude because of him.

<span id="an_7:44">7:44</span> And certain of them were willing to seize
him, but no one laid hands on him;

<span id="an_7:45">7:45</span> the officers came, therefore, unto the
chief priests and Pharisees, and they said to them, \`Wherefore did ye
not bring him?'

<span id="an_7:46">7:46</span> The officers answered, \`Never so spake
man -- as this man.'

<span id="an_7:47">7:47</span> The Pharisees, therefore, answered them,
\`Have ye also been led astray?

<span id="an_7:48">7:48</span> did any one out of the rulers believe in
him? or out of the Pharisees?

<span id="an_7:49">7:49</span> but this multitude, that is not knowing
the law, is accursed.'

<span id="an_7:50">7:50</span> Nicodemus saith unto them -- he who came
by night unto him -- being one of them,

<span id="an_7:51">7:51</span> \`Doth our law judge the man, if it may
not hear from him first, and know what he doth?'

<span id="an_7:52">7:52</span> They answered and said to him, \`Art thou
also out of Galilee? search and see, that a prophet out of Galilee hath
not risen;'

<span id="an_7:53">7:53</span> and each one went on to his house, but
Jesus went on to the mount of the Olives.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And at dawn he came again to the temple,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> and all the people were coming unto him,
and having sat down, he was teaching them;

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> and the scribes and the Pharisees bring
unto him a woman having been taken in adultery, and having set her in
the midst,

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> they say to him, \`Teacher, this woman was
taken in the very crime -- committing adultery,

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> and in the law, Moses did command us that
such be stoned; thou, therefore, what dost thou say?'

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> and this they said, trying him, that they
might have to accuse him. And Jesus, having stooped down, with the
finger he was writing on the ground,

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> and when they continued asking him, having
bent himself back, he said unto them, \`The sinless of you -- let him
first cast the stone at her;'

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> and again having stooped down, he was
writing on the ground,

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> and they having heard, and by the
conscience being convicted, were going forth one by one, having begun
from the elders -- unto the last; and Jesus was left alone, and the
woman standing in the midst.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And Jesus having bent himself back, and
having seen no one but the woman, said to her, \`Woman, where are those
-- thine accusers? did no one pass sentence upon thee?'

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> and she said, \`No one, Sir;' and Jesus
said to her, \`Neither do I pass sentence on thee; be going on, and no
more sin.'

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Again, therefore, Jesus spake to them,
saying, \`I am the light of the world; he who is following me shall not
walk in the darkness, but he shall have the light of the life.'

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> The Pharisees, therefore, said to him,
\`Thou of thyself dost testify, thy testimony is not true;'

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Jesus answered and said to them, \`And if
I testify of myself -- my testimony is true, because I have known whence
I came, and whither I go, and ye -- ye have not known whence I come, or
whither I go.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> \`Ye according to the flesh do judge; I
do not judge any one,

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> and even if I do judge my judgment is
true, because I am not alone, but I and the Father who sent me;

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> and also in your law it hath been
written, that the testimony of two men are true;

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> I am \[one\] who is testifying of myself,
and the Father who sent me doth testify of me.'

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> They said, therefore, to him, \`Where is
thy father?' Jesus answered, \`Ye have neither known me nor my Father:
if me ye had known, my Father also ye had known.'

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> These sayings spake Jesus in the
treasury, teaching in the temple, and no one seized him, because his
hour had not yet come;

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> therefore said Jesus again to them, \`I
go away, and ye will seek me, and in your sin ye shall die; whither I go
away, ye are not able to come.'

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> The Jews, therefore, said, \`Will he kill
himself, because he saith, Whither I go away, ye are not able to come?'

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> and he said to them, \`Ye are from
beneath, I am from above; ye are of this world, I am not of this world;

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> I said, therefore, to you, that ye shall
die in your sins, for if ye may not believe that I am \[he\], ye shall
die in your sins.'

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> They said, therefore, to him, \`Thou --
who art thou?' and Jesus said to them, \`Even what I did speak of to you
at the beginning;

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> many things I have to speak concerning
you and to judge, but He who sent me is true, and I -- what things I
heard from Him -- these I say to the world.'

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> They knew not that of the Father he spake
to them;

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> Jesus, therefore, said to them, \`When ye
may lift up the Son of Man then ye will know that I am \[he\]; and of
myself I do nothing, but according as my Father did teach me, these
things I speak;

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> and He who sent me is with me; the Father
did not leave me alone, because I, the things pleasing to Him, do
always.'

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> As he is speaking these things, many
believed in him;

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> Jesus, therefore, said unto the Jews who
believed in him, \`If ye may remain in my word, truly my disciples ye
are, and ye shall know the truth,

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> and the truth shall make you free.'

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> They answered him, \`Seed of Abraham we
are; and to no one have we been servants at any time; how dost thou say
-- Ye shall become free?'

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> Jesus answered them, \`Verily, verily, I
say to you -- Every one who is committing sin, is a servant of the sin,

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> and the servant doth not remain in the
house -- to the age, the son doth remain -- to the age;

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> if then the son may make you free, in
reality ye shall be free.

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> \`I have known that ye are seed of
Abraham, but ye seek to kill me, because my word hath no place in you;

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> I -- that which I have seen with my
Father do speak, and ye, therefore, that which ye have seen with your
father -- ye do.'

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> They answered and said to him, \`Our
father is Abraham;' Jesus saith to them, \`If children of Abraham ye
were, the works of Abraham ye were doing;

<span id="an_8:40">8:40</span> and now, ye seek to kill me -- a man who
hath spoken to you the truth I heard from God; this Abraham did not;

<span id="an_8:41">8:41</span> ye do the works of your father.' They
said, therefore, to him, \`We of whoredom have not been born; one Father
we have -- God;'

<span id="an_8:42">8:42</span> Jesus then said to them, \`If God were
your father, ye were loving me, for I came forth from God, and am come;
for neither have I come of myself, but He sent me;

<span id="an_8:43">8:43</span> wherefore do ye not know my speech?
because ye are not able to hear my word.

<span id="an_8:44">8:44</span> \`Ye are of a father -- the devil, and
the desires of your father ye will to do; he was a man-slayer from the
beginning, and in the truth he hath not stood, because there is no truth
in him; when one may speak the falsehood, of his own he speaketh,
because he is a liar -- also his father.

<span id="an_8:45">8:45</span> \`And because I say the truth, ye do not
believe me.

<span id="an_8:46">8:46</span> Who of you doth convict me of sin? and if
I speak truth, wherefore do ye not believe me?

<span id="an_8:47">8:47</span> he who is of God, the sayings of God he
doth hear; because of this ye do not hear, because of God ye are not.'

<span id="an_8:48">8:48</span> The Jews, therefore, answered and said to
him, \`Do we not say well, that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a demon?'

<span id="an_8:49">8:49</span> Jesus answered, \`I have not a demon, but
I honour my Father, and ye dishonour me;

<span id="an_8:50">8:50</span> and I do not seek my own glory; there is
who is seeking and is judging;

<span id="an_8:51">8:51</span> verily, verily, I say to you, If any one
may keep my word, death he may not see -- to the age.'

<span id="an_8:52">8:52</span> The Jews, therefore, said to him, \`Now
we have known that thou hast a demon; Abraham did die, and the prophets,
and thou dost say, If any one may keep my word, he shall not taste of
death -- to the age!

<span id="an_8:53">8:53</span> Art thou greater than our father Abraham,
who died? and the prophets died; whom dost thou make thyself?'

<span id="an_8:54">8:54</span> Jesus answered, \`If I glorify myself, my
glory is nothing; it is my Father who is glorifying me, of whom ye say
that He is your God;

<span id="an_8:55">8:55</span> and ye have not known Him, and I have
known Him, and if I say that I have not known Him, I shall be like you
-- speaking falsely; but I have known Him, and His word I keep;

<span id="an_8:56">8:56</span> Abraham, your father, was glad that he
might see my day; and he saw, and did rejoice.'

<span id="an_8:57">8:57</span> The Jews, therefore, said unto him,
\`Thou art not yet fifty years old, and Abraham hast thou seen?'

<span id="an_8:58">8:58</span> Jesus said to them, \`Verily, verily, I
say to you, Before Abraham's coming -- I am;'

<span id="an_8:59">8:59</span> they took up, therefore, stones that they
may cast at him, but Jesus hid himself, and went forth out of the
temple, going through the midst of them, and so passed by.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And passing by, he saw a man blind from
birth,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> and his disciples asked him, saying,
\`Rabbi, who did sin, this one or his parents, that he should be born
blind?'

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Jesus answered, \`Neither did this one sin
nor his parents, but that the works of God may be manifested in him;

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> it behoveth me to be working the works of
Him who sent me while it is day; night doth come, when no one is able to
work: --

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> when I am in the world, I am a light of the
world.'

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> These things saying, he spat on the ground,
and made clay of the spittle, and rubbed the clay on the eyes of the
blind man, and said to him,

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> \`Go away, wash at the pool of Siloam,'
which is, interpreted, Sent. He went away, therefore, and did wash, and
came seeing;

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> the neighbours, therefore, and those seeing
him before, that he was blind, said, \`Is not this he who is sitting and
begging?'

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> others said -- \`This is he;' and others --
\`He is like to him;' he himself said, -- \`I am \[he\].'

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> They said, therefore, to him, \`How were
thine eyes opened?'

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> he answered and said, \`A man called
Jesus made clay, and rubbed my eyes, and said to me, Go away to the pool
of Siloam, and wash; and having gone away and having washed, I received
sight;'

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> they said, therefore, to him, \`Where is
that one?' he saith, \`I have not known.'

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> They bring him to the Pharisees who once
\[was\] blind,

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> and it was a sabbath when Jesus made the
clay, and opened his eyes.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Again, therefore, the Pharisees also were
asking him how he received sight, and he said to them, \`Clay he did put
upon my eyes, and I did wash -- and I see.'

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Of the Pharisees, therefore, certain
said, \`This man is not from God, because the sabbath he doth not keep;'
others said, \`How is a man -- a sinful one -- able to do such signs?'
and there was a division among them.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> They said to the blind man again, \`Thou
-- what dost thou say of him -- that he opened thine eyes?'

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> and he said -- \`He is a prophet.' The
Jews, therefore, did not believe concerning him that he was blind and
did receive sight, till that they called the parents of him who received
sight,

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> and they asked them, saying, \`Is your
son, of whom ye say that he was born blind? how then now doth he see?'

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> His parents answered them and said, \`We
have known that this is our son, and that he was born blind;

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> and how he now seeth, we have not known;
or who opened his eyes, we have not known; himself is of age, ask him;
he himself shall speak concerning himself.'

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> These things said his parents, because
they were afraid of the Jews, for already had the Jews agreed together,
that if any one may confess him -- Christ, he may be put out of the
synagogue;

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> because of this his parents said -- \`He
is of age, ask him.'

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> They called, therefore, a second time the
man who was blind, and they said to him, \`Give glory to God, we have
known that this man is a sinner;'

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> he answered, therefore, and said, \`If he
be a sinner -- I have not known, one thing I have known, that, being
blind, now I see.'

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And they said to him again, \`What did he
to thee? how did he open thine eyes?'

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> He answered them, \`I told you already,
and ye did not hear; why again do ye wish to hear? do ye also wish to
become his disciples?'

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> They reviled him, therefore, and said,
\`Thou art his disciple, and we are Moses' disciples;

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> we have known that God hath spoken to
Moses, but this one -- we have not known whence he is.'

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> The man answered and said to them, \`Why,
in this is a wonderful thing, that ye have not known whence he is, and
he opened my eyes!

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> and we have known that God doth not hear
sinners, but, if any one may be a worshipper of God, and may do His
will, him He doth hear;

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> from the age it was not heard, that any
one did open eyes of one who hath been born blind;

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> if this one were not from God, he were
not able to do anything.'

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> They answered and said to him, \`In sins
thou wast born altogether, and thou dost teach us!' and they cast him
forth without.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> Jesus heard that they cast him forth
without, and having found him, he said to him, \`Dost thou believe in
the Son of God?'

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> he answered and said, \`Who is he, sir,
that I may believe in him?'

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> And Jesus said to him, \`Thou hast both
seen him, and he who is speaking with thee is he;'

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> and he said, \`I believe, sir,' and bowed
before him.

<span id="an_9:39">9:39</span> And Jesus said, \`For judgment I to this
world did come, that those not seeing may see, and those seeing may
become blind.'

<span id="an_9:40">9:40</span> And those of the Pharisees who were with
him heard these things, and they said to him, \`Are we also blind?'

<span id="an_9:41">9:41</span> Jesus said to them, \`If ye were blind,
ye were not having had sin, but now ye say -- We see, therefore doth
your sin remain.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> \`Verily, verily, I say to you, He who is
not entering through the door to the fold of the sheep, but is going up
from another side, that one is a thief and a robber;

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> and he who is entering through the door
is shepherd of the sheep;

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> to this one the doorkeeper doth open, and
the sheep hear his voice, and his own sheep he doth call by name, and
doth lead them forth;

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> and when his own sheep he may put forth,
before them he goeth on, and the sheep follow him, because they have
known his voice;

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> and a stranger they will not follow, but
will flee from him, because they have not known the voice of strangers.'

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> This similitude spake Jesus to them, and
they knew not what the things were that he was speaking to them;

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Jesus said therefore again to them,
\`Verily, verily, I say to you -- I am the door of the sheep;

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> all, as many as came before me, are
thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not hear them;

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> I am the door, through me if any one may
come in, he shall be saved, and he shall come in, and go out, and find
pasture.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> \`The thief doth not come, except that
he may steal, and kill, and destroy; I came that they may have life, and
may have \[it\] abundantly.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> \`I am the good shepherd; the good
shepherd his life layeth down for the sheep;

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> and the hireling, and not being a
shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, doth behold the wolf coming, and
doth leave the sheep, and doth flee; and the wolf catcheth them, and
scattereth the sheep;

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> and the hireling doth flee because he
is an hireling, and is not caring for the sheep.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> \`I am the good shepherd, and I know my
\[sheep\], and am known by mine,

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> according as the Father doth know me,
and I know the Father, and my life I lay down for the sheep,

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> and other sheep I have that are not of
this fold, these also it behoveth me to bring, and my voice they will
hear, and there shall become one flock -- one shepherd.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> \`Because of this doth the Father love
me, because I lay down my life, that again I may take it;

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> no one doth take it from me, but I lay
it down of myself; authority I have to lay it down, and authority I have
again to take it; this command I received from my Father.'

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Therefore, again, there came a division
among the Jews, because of these words,

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> and many of them said, \`He hath a
demon, and is mad, why do ye hear him?'

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> others said, \`These sayings are not
those of a demoniac; is a demon able blind men's eyes to open?'

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And the dedication in Jerusalem came,
and it was winter,

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> and Jesus was walking in the temple, in
the porch of Solomon,

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> the Jews, therefore, came round about
him, and said to him, \`Till when our soul dost thou hold in suspense?
if thou art the Christ, tell us freely.'

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> Jesus answered them, \`I told you, and
ye do not believe; the works that I do in the name of my Father, these
testify concerning me;

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> but ye do not believe, for ye are not
of my sheep,

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> according as I said to you: My sheep my
voice do hear, and I know them, and they follow me,

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> and life age-during I give to them, and
they shall not perish -- to the age, and no one shall pluck them out of
my hand;

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> my Father, who hath given to me, is
greater than all, and no one is able to pluck out of the hand of my
Father;

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> I and the Father are one.'

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> Therefore, again, did the Jews take up
stones that they may stone him;

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Jesus answered them, \`Many good works
did I shew you from my Father; because of which work of them do ye stone
me?'

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> The Jews answered him, saying, \`For a
good work we do not stone thee, but for evil speaking, and because thou,
being a man, dost make thyself God.'

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> Jesus answered them, \`Is it not having
been written in your law: I said, ye are gods?

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> if them he did call gods unto whom the
word of God came, (and the Writing is not able to be broken,)

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> of him whom the Father did sanctify,
and send to the world, do ye say -- Thou speakest evil, because I said,
Son of God I am?

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> if I do not the works of my Father, do
not believe me;

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> and if I do, even if me ye may not
believe, the works believe, that ye may know and may believe that in me
\[is\] the Father, and I in Him.'

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> Therefore were they seeking again to
seize him, and he went forth out of their hand,

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> and went away again to the other side
of the Jordan, to the place where John was at first baptizing, and
remained there,

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> and many came unto him, and said --
\`John, indeed, did no sign, and all things, as many as John said about
this one were true;'

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> and many did believe in him there.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And there was a certain one ailing,
Lazarus, from Bethany, of the village of Mary and Martha her sister --

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> and it was Mary who did anoint the Lord
with ointment, and did wipe his feet with her hair, whose brother
Lazarus was ailing --

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> therefore sent the sisters unto him,
saying, \`Sir, lo, he whom thou dost love is ailing;'

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> and Jesus having heard, said, \`This
ailment is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God
may be glorified through it.'

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And Jesus was loving Martha, and her
sister, and Lazarus,

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> when, therefore, he heard that he is
ailing, then indeed he remained in the place in which he was two days,

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> then after this, he saith to the
disciples, \`We may go to Judea again;'

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> the disciples say to him, \`Rabbi, now
were the Jews seeking to stone thee, and again thou dost go thither!'

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Jesus answered, \`Are there not twelve
hours in the day? if any one may walk in the day, he doth not stumble,
because the light of this world he doth see;

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> and if any one may walk in the night,
he stumbleth, because the light is not in him.'

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> These things he said, and after this he
saith to them, \`Lazarus our friend hath fallen asleep, but I go on that
I may awake him;'

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> therefore said his disciples, \`Sir, if
he hath fallen asleep, he will be saved;'

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> but Jesus had spoken about his death,
but they thought that about the repose of sleep he speaketh.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Then, therefore, Jesus said to them
freely, \`Lazarus hath died;

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> and I rejoice, for your sake, (that ye
may believe,) that I was not there; but we may go to him;'

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> therefore said Thomas, who is called
Didymus, to the fellow-disciples, \`We may go -- we also, that we may
die with him,'

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> Jesus, therefore, having come, found
him having been four days already in the tomb.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And Bethany was nigh to Jerusalem,
about fifteen furlongs off,

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> and many of the Jews had come unto
Martha and Mary, that they might comfort them concerning their brother;

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> Martha, therefore, when she heard that
Jesus doth come, met him, and Mary kept sitting in the house.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Martha, therefore, said unto Jesus,
\`Sir, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died;

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> but even now, I have known that
whatever thou mayest ask of God, God will give to thee;'

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> Jesus saith to her, \`Thy brother shall
rise again.'

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Martha saith to him, \`I have known
that he will rise again, in the rising again in the last day;'

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Jesus said to her, \`I am the rising
again, and the life; he who is believing in me, even if he may die,
shall live;

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> and every one who is living and
believing in me shall not die -- to the age;

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> believest thou this?' she saith to him,
\`Yes, sir, I have believed that thou art the Christ, the Son of God,
who is coming to the world.'

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> And these things having said, she went
away, and called Mary her sister privately, saying, \`The Teacher is
present, and doth call thee;'

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> she, when she heard, riseth up quickly,
and doth come to him;

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> and Jesus had not yet come to the
village, but was in the place where Martha met him;

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> the Jews, therefore, who were with her
in the house, and were comforting her, having seen Mary that she rose up
quickly and went forth, followed her, saying -- \`She doth go away to
the tomb, that she may weep there.'

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> Mary, therefore, when she came where
Jesus was, having seen him, fell at his feet, saying to him, \`Sir, if
thou hadst been here, my brother had not died;'

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> Jesus, therefore, when he saw her
weeping, and the Jews who came with her weeping, did groan in the
spirit, and troubled himself, and he said,

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> \`Where have ye laid him?' they say to
him, \`Sir, come and see;'

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> Jesus wept.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> The Jews, therefore, said, \`Lo, how he
was loving him!'

<span id="an_11:37">11:37</span> and certain of them said, \`Was not
this one, who did open the eyes of the blind man, able to cause that
also this one might not have died?'

<span id="an_11:38">11:38</span> Jesus, therefore, again groaning in
himself, cometh to the tomb, and it was a cave, and a stone was lying
upon it,

<span id="an_11:39">11:39</span> Jesus saith, \`Take ye away the stone;'
the sister of him who hath died -- Martha -- saith to him, \`Sir,
already he stinketh, for he is four days dead;'

<span id="an_11:40">11:40</span> Jesus saith to her, \`Said I not to
thee, that if thou mayest believe, thou shalt see the glory of God?'

<span id="an_11:41">11:41</span> They took away, therefore, the stone
where the dead was laid, and Jesus lifted his eyes upwards, and said,
\`Father, I thank Thee, that Thou didst hear me;

<span id="an_11:42">11:42</span> and I knew that Thou always dost hear
me, but, because of the multitude that is standing by, I said \[it\],
that they may believe that Thou didst send me.'

<span id="an_11:43">11:43</span> And these things saying, with a loud
voice he cried out, \`Lazarus, come forth;'

<span id="an_11:44">11:44</span> and he who died came forth, being bound
feet and hands with grave-clothes, and his visage with a napkin was
bound about; Jesus saith to them, \`Loose him, and suffer to go.'

<span id="an_11:45">11:45</span> Many, therefore, of the Jews who came
unto Mary, and beheld what Jesus did, believed in him;

<span id="an_11:46">11:46</span> but certain of them went away unto the
Pharisees, and told them what Jesus did;

<span id="an_11:47">11:47</span> the chief priests, therefore, and the
Pharisees, gathered together a sanhedrim, and said, \`What may we do?
because this man doth many signs?

<span id="an_11:48">11:48</span> if we may let him alone thus, all will
believe in him; and the Romans will come, and will take away both our
place and nation.'

<span id="an_11:49">11:49</span> and a certain one of them, Caiaphas,
being chief priest of that year, said to them, \`Ye have not known
anything,

<span id="an_11:50">11:50</span> nor reason that it is good for us that
one man may die for the people, and not the whole nation perish.'

<span id="an_11:51">11:51</span> And this he said not of himself, but
being chief priest of that year, he did prophesy that Jesus was about to
die for the nation,

<span id="an_11:52">11:52</span> and not for the nation only, but that
also the children of God, who have been scattered abroad, he may gather
together into one.

<span id="an_11:53">11:53</span> From that day, therefore, they took
counsel together that they may kill him;

<span id="an_11:54">11:54</span> Jesus, therefore, was no more freely
walking among the Jews, but went away thence to the region nigh the
wilderness, to a city called Ephraim, and there he tarried with his
disciples.

<span id="an_11:55">11:55</span> And the passover of the Jews was nigh,
and many went up to Jerusalem out of the country before the passover,
that they might purify themselves;

<span id="an_11:56">11:56</span> they were seeking, therefore, Jesus,
and said one with another, standing in the temple, \`What doth appear to
you -- that he may not come to the feast?'

<span id="an_11:57">11:57</span> and both the chief priests and the
Pharisees had given a command, that if any one may know where he is, he
may shew \[it\], so that they may seize him.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Jesus, therefore, six days before the
passover, came to Bethany, where was Lazarus, who had died, whom he
raised out of the dead;

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> they made, therefore, to him a supper
there, and Martha was ministering, and Lazarus was one of those
reclining together (at meat) with him;

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Mary, therefore, having taken a pound of
ointment of spikenard, of great price, anointed the feet of Jesus and
did wipe with her hair his feet, and the house was filled from the
fragrance of the ointment.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Therefore saith one of his disciples --
Judas Iscariot, of Simon, who is about to deliver him up --

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> \`Wherefore was not this ointment sold
for three hundred denaries, and given to the poor?'

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> and he said this, not because he was
caring for the poor, but because he was a thief, and had the bag, and
what things were put in he was carrying.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> Jesus, therefore, said, \`Suffer her; for
the day of my embalming she hath kept it,

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> for the poor ye have always with
yourselves, and me ye have not always.'

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> A great multitude, therefore, of the Jews
knew that he is there, and they came, not because of Jesus only, but
that Lazarus also they may see, whom he raised out of the dead;

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> and the chief priests took counsel,
that also Lazarus they may kill,

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> because on account of him many of the
Jews were going away, and were believing in Jesus.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> On the morrow, a great multitude that
came to the feast, having heard that Jesus doth come to Jerusalem,

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> took the branches of the palms, and
went forth to meet him, and were crying, \`Hosanna, blessed \[is\] he
who is coming in the name of the Lord -- the king of Israel;'

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> and Jesus having found a young ass did
sit upon it, according as it is written,

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> \`Fear not, daughter of Sion, lo, thy
king doth come, sitting on an ass' colt.'

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And these things his disciples did not
know at the first, but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered
that these things were having been written about him, and these things
they did to him.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> The multitude, therefore, who are with
him, were testifying that he called Lazarus out of the tomb, and did
raise him out of the dead;

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> because of this also did the multitude
meet him, because they heard of his having done this sign,

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> the Pharisees, therefore, said among
themselves, \`Ye see that ye do not gain anything, lo, the world did go
after him.'

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> And there were certain Greeks out of
those coming up that they may worship in the feast,

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> these then came near to Philip, who
\[is\] from Bethsaida of Galilee, and were asking him, saying, \`Sir, we
wish to see Jesus;'

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Philip cometh and telleth Andrew, and
again Andrew and Philip tell Jesus.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> And Jesus responded to them, saying,
\`The hour hath come that the Son of Man may be glorified;

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> verily, verily, I say to you, if the
grain of the wheat, having fallen to the earth, may not die, itself
remaineth alone; and if it may die, it doth bear much fruit;

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> he who is loving his life shall lose
it, and he who is hating his life in this world -- to life age-during
shall keep it;

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> if any one may minister to me, let him
follow me, and where I am, there also my ministrant shall be; and if any
one may minister to me -- honour him will the Father.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> \`Now hath my soul been troubled, and
what? shall I say -- Father, save me from this hour? -- but because of
this I came to this hour;

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> Father, glorify Thy name.' There came,
therefore, a voice out of the heaven, \`I both glorified, and again I
will glorify \[it\];'

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> the multitude, therefore, having stood
and heard, were saying that there hath been thunder; others said, \`A
messenger hath spoken to him.'

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> Jesus answered and said, \`Not because
of me hath this voice come, but because of you;

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> now is a judgment of this world, now
shall the ruler of this world be cast forth;

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> and I, if I may be lifted up from the
earth, will draw all men unto myself.'

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> And this he said signifying by what
death he was about to die;

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> the multitude answered him, \`We heard
out of the law that the Christ doth remain -- to the age; and how dost
thou say, That it behoveth the Son of Man to be lifted up? who is this
-- the Son of Man?'

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> Jesus, therefore, said to them, \`Yet a
little time is the light with you; walk while ye have the light, that
darkness may not overtake you; and he who is walking in the darkness
hath not known where he goeth;

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> while ye have the light, believe in the
light, that sons of light ye may become.' These things spake Jesus, and
having gone away, he was hid from them,

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> yet he having done so many signs before
them, they were not believing in him,

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> that the word of Isaiah the prophet
might be fulfilled, which he said, \`Lord, who gave credence to our
report? and the arm of the Lord -- to whom was it revealed?'

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> Because of this they were not able to
believe, that again Isaiah said,

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> \`He hath blinded their eyes, and
hardened their heart, that they might not see with the eyes, and
understand with the heart, and turn back, and I might heal them;'

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> these things said Isaiah, when he saw
his glory, and spake of him.

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> Still, however, also out of the rulers
did many believe in him, but because of the Pharisees they were not
confessing, that they might not be put out of the synagogue,

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> for they loved the glory of men more
than the glory of God.

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> And Jesus cried and said, \`He who is
believing in me, doth not believe in me, but in Him who sent me;

<span id="an_12:45">12:45</span> and he who is beholding me, doth behold
Him who sent me;

<span id="an_12:46">12:46</span> I a light to the world have come, that
every one who is believing in me -- in the darkness may not remain;

<span id="an_12:47">12:47</span> and if any one may hear my sayings, and
not believe, I -- I do not judge him, for I came not that I might judge
the world, but that I might save the world.

<span id="an_12:48">12:48</span> \`He who is rejecting me, and not
receiving my sayings, hath one who is judging him, the word that I
spake, that will judge him in the last day,

<span id="an_12:49">12:49</span> because I spake not from myself, but
the Father who sent me, He did give me a command, what I may say, and
what I may speak,

<span id="an_12:50">12:50</span> and I have known that His command is
life age-during; what, therefore, I speak, according as the Father hath
said to me, so I speak.'

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And before the feast of the passover,
Jesus knowing that his hour hath come, that he may remove out of this
world unto the Father, having loved his own who \[are\] in the world --
to the end he loved them.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And supper being come, the devil already
having put \[it\] into the heart of Judas of Simon, Iscariot, that he
may deliver him up,

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Jesus knowing that all things the Father
hath given to him -- into \[his\] hands, and that from God he came
forth, and unto God he goeth,

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> doth rise from the supper, and doth lay
down his garments, and having taken a towel, he girded himself;

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> afterward he putteth water into the
basin, and began to wash the feet of his disciples, and to wipe with the
towel with which he was being girded.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> He cometh, therefore, unto Simon Peter,
and that one saith to him, \`Sir, thou -- dost thou wash my feet?'

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Jesus answered and said to him, \`That
which I do thou hast not known now, but thou shalt know after these
things;'

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Peter saith to him, \`Thou mayest not
wash my feet -- to the age.' Jesus answered him, \`If I may not wash
thee, thou hast no part with me;'

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Simon Peter saith to him, \`Sir, not my
feet only, but also the hands and the head.'

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Jesus saith to him, \`He who hath been
bathed hath no need save to wash his feet, but he is clean altogether;
and ye are clean, but not all;'

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> for he knew him who is delivering him
up; because of this he said, \`Ye are not all clean.'

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> When, therefore, he washed their feet,
and took his garments, having reclined (at meat) again, he said to them,
\`Do ye know what I have done to you?

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> ye call me, The Teacher and The Lord,
and ye say well, for I am;

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> if then I did wash your feet -- the
Lord and the Teacher -- ye also ought to wash one another's feet.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> \`For an example I gave to you, that,
according as I did to you, ye also may do;

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> verily, verily, I say to you, a servant
is not greater than his lord, nor an apostle greater than he who sent
him;

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> if these things ye have known, happy
are ye, if ye may do them;

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> not concerning you all do I speak; I
have known whom I chose for myself; but that the Writing may be
fulfilled: He who is eating the bread with me, did lift up against me
his heel.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> \`From this time I tell you, before its
coming to pass, that, when it may come to pass, ye may believe that I am
\[he\];

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> verily, verily, I say to you, he who is
receiving whomsoever I may send, doth receive me; and he who is
receiving me, doth receive Him who sent me.'

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> These things having said, Jesus was
troubled in the spirit, and did testify, and said, \`Verily, verily, I
say to you, that one of you will deliver me up;'

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> the disciples were looking, therefore,
one at another, doubting concerning whom he speaketh.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> And there was one of his disciples
reclining (at meat) in the bosom of Jesus, whom Jesus was loving;

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Simon Peter, then, doth beckon to this
one, to inquire who he may be concerning whom he speaketh,

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> and that one having leant back on the
breast of Jesus, respondeth to him, \`Sir, who is it?'

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> Jesus answereth, \`That one it is to
whom I, having dipped the morsel, shall give it;' and having dipped the
morsel, he giveth \[it\] to Judas of Simon, Iscariot.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> And after the morsel, then the
Adversary entered into that one, Jesus, therefore, saith to him, \`What
thou dost -- do quickly;'

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> and none of those reclining at meat
knew for what intent he said this to him,

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> for certain were thinking, since Judas
had the bag, that Jesus saith to him, \`Buy what we have need of for the
feast;' or that he may give something to the poor;

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> having received, therefore, the morsel,
that one immediately went forth, and it was night.

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> When, therefore, he went forth, Jesus
saith, \`Now was the Son of Man glorified, and God was glorified in him;

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> if God was glorified in him, God also
will glorify him in Himself; yea, immediately He will glorify him.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> \`Little children, yet a little am I
with you; ye will seek me, and, according as I said to the Jews --
Whither I go away, ye are not able to come, to you also I do say \[it\]
now.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> \`A new commandment I give to you, that
ye love one another; according as I did love you, that ye also love one
another;

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> in this shall all know that ye are my
disciples, if ye may have love one to another.'

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> Simon Peter saith to him, \`Sir,
whither dost thou go away?' Jesus answered him, \`Whither I go away,
thou art not able now to follow me, but afterward thou shalt follow me.'

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> Peter saith to him, \`Sir, wherefore am
I not able to follow thee now? my life for thee I will lay down;'

<span id="an_13:38">13:38</span> Jesus answered him, \`Thy life for me
thou wilt lay down! verily, verily, I say to thee, a cock will not crow
till thou mayest deny me thrice.'

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> \`Let not your heart be troubled, believe
in God, also in me believe;

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> in the house of my Father are many
mansions; and if not, I would have told you; I go on to prepare a place
for you;

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> and if I go on and prepare for you a
place, again do I come, and will receive you unto myself, that where I
am ye also may be;

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> and whither I go away ye have known, and
the way ye have known.'

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> Thomas saith to him, \`Sir, we have not
known whither thou goest away, and how are we able to know the way?'

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Jesus saith to him, \`I am the way, and
the truth, and the life, no one doth come unto the Father, if not
through me;

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> if ye had known me, my Father also ye
would have known, and from this time ye have known Him, and have seen
Him.'

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> Philip saith to him, \`Sir, shew to us
the Father, and it is enough for us;'

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Jesus saith to him, \`So long time am I
with you, and thou hast not known me, Philip? he who hath seen me hath
seen the Father; and how dost thou say, Shew to us the Father?

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> Believest thou not that I \[am\] in the
Father, and the Father is in me? the sayings that I speak to you, from
myself I speak not, and the Father who is abiding in me, Himself doth
the works;

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> believe me, that I \[am\] in the
Father, and the Father in me; and if not, because of the works
themselves, believe me.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> \`Verily, verily, I say to you, he who
is believing in me, the works that I do -- that one also shall do, and
greater than these he shall do, because I go on to my Father;

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> and whatever ye may ask in my name, I
will do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son;

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> if ye ask anything in my name I will do
\[it\].

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> \`If ye love me, my commands keep,

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> and I will ask the Father, and another
Comforter He will give to you, that he may remain with you -- to the
age;

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> the Spirit of truth, whom the world is
not able to receive, because it doth not behold him, nor know him, and
ye know him, because he doth remain with you, and shall be in you.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> \`I will not leave you bereaved, I come
unto you;

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> yet a little, and the world doth no
more behold me, and ye behold me, because I live, and ye shall live;

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> in that day ye shall know that I \[am\]
in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you;

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> he who is having my commands, and is
keeping them, that one it is who is loving me, and he who is loving me
shall be loved by my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest
myself to him.'

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Judas saith to him, (not the Iscariot),
\`Sir, what hath come to pass, that to us thou are about to manifest
thyself, and not to the world?'

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> Jesus answered and said to him, \`If
any one may love me, my word he will keep, and my Father will love him,
and unto him we will come, and abode with him we will make;

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> he who is not loving me, my words doth
not keep; and the word that ye hear is not mine, but the Father's who
sent me.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> \`These things I have spoken to you,
remaining with you,

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> and the Comforter, the Holy Spirit,
whom the Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things, and
remind you of all things that I said to you.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> \`Peace I leave to you; my peace I give
to you, not according as the world doth give do I give to you; let not
your heart be troubled, nor let it be afraid;

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> ye heard that I said to you -- I go
away, and I come unto you; if ye did love me, ye would have rejoiced
that I said -- I go on to the Father, because my Father is greater than
I.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> \`And now I have said \[it\] to you
before it come to pass, that when it may come to pass, ye may believe;

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> I will no more talk much with you, for
the ruler of this world doth come, and in me he hath nothing;

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> but that the world may know that I love
the Father, and according as the Father gave me command so I do; arise,
we may go hence.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> \`I am the true vine, and my Father is
the husbandman;

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> every branch in me not bearing fruit, He
doth take it away, and every one bearing fruit, He doth cleanse by
pruning it, that it may bear more fruit;

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> already ye are clean, because of the word
that I have spoken to you;

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> remain in me, and I in you, as the branch
is not able to bear fruit of itself, if it may not remain in the vine,
so neither ye, if ye may not remain in me.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> \`I am the vine, ye the branches; he who
is remaining in me, and I in him, this one doth bear much fruit, because
apart from me ye are not able to do anything;

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> if any one may not remain in me, he was
cast forth without as the branch, and was withered, and they gather
them, and cast to fire, and they are burned;

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> if ye may remain in me, and my sayings in
you may remain, whatever ye may wish ye shall ask, and it shall be done
to you.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> \`In this was my Father glorified, that
ye may bear much fruit, and ye shall become my disciples.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> According as the Father did love me, I
also loved you, remain in my love;

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> if my commandments ye may keep, ye
shall remain in my love, according as I the commands of my Father have
kept, and do remain in His love;

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> these things I have spoken to you, that
my joy in you may remain, and your joy may be full.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> \`This is my command, that ye love one
another, according as I did love you;

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> greater love than this hath no one,
that any one his life may lay down for his friends;

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> ye are my friends, if ye may do
whatever I command you;

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> no more do I call you servants, because
the servant hath not known what his lord doth, and you I have called
friends, because all things that I heard from my Father, I did make
known to you.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> \`Ye did not choose out me, but I chose
out you, and did appoint you, that ye might go away, and might bear
fruit, and your fruit might remain, that whatever ye may ask of the
Father in my name, He may give you.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> \`These things I command you, that ye
love one another;

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> if the world doth hate you, ye know
that it hath hated me before you;

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> if of the world ye were, the world its
own would have been loving, and because of the world ye are not -- but I
chose out of the world -- because of this the world hateth you.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> \`Remember the word that I said to you,
A servant is not greater than his lord; if me they did persecute, you
also they will persecute; if my word they did keep, yours also they will
keep;

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> but all these things will they do to
you, because of my name, because they have not known Him who sent me;

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> if I had not come and spoken to them,
they were not having sin; but now pretext they have not for their sin.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> \`He who is hating me, doth hate also
my Father;

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> if I did not do among them the works
that no other hath done, they were not having sin, and now they have
both seen and hated both me and my Father;

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> but -- that the word may be fulfilled
that was written in their law -- They hated me without a cause.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> \`And when the Comforter may come, whom
I will send to you from the Father -- the Spirit of truth, who from the
Father doth come forth, he will testify of me;

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> and ye also do testify, because from
the beginning ye are with me.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> \`These things I have spoken to you, that
ye may not be stumbled,

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> out of the synagogues they will put you;
but an hour doth come, that every one who hath killed you, may think to
offer service unto God;

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> and these things they will do to you,
because they did not know the Father, nor me.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> \`But these things I have spoken to you,
that when the hour may come, ye may remember them, that I said \[them\]
to you, and these things to you from the beginning I did not say,
because I was with you;

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> and now I go away to Him who sent me, and
none of you doth ask me, Whither dost thou go?

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> but because these things I have said to
you, the sorrow hath filled your heart.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> \`But I tell you the truth; it is better
for you that I go away, for if I may not go away, the Comforter will not
come unto you, and if I go on, I will send Him unto you;

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> and having come, He will convict the
world concerning sin, and concerning righteousness, and concerning
judgment;

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> concerning sin indeed, because they do
not believe in me;

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> and concerning righteousness, because
unto my Father I go away, and no more do ye behold me;

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> and concerning judgment, because the
ruler of this world hath been judged.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> \`I have yet many things to say to you,
but ye are not able to bear \[them\] now;

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> and when He may come -- the Spirit of
truth -- He will guide you to all the truth, for He will not speak from
Himself, but as many things as He will hear He will speak, and the
coming things He will tell you;

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> He will glorify me, because of mine He
will take, and will tell to you.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> \`All things, as many as the Father
hath, are mine; because of this I said, That of mine He will take, and
will tell to you;

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> a little while, and ye do not behold
me, and again a little while, and ye shall see me, because I go away
unto the Father.'

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Therefore said \[some\] of his
disciples one to another, \`What is this that he saith to us, A little
while, and ye do not behold me, and again a little while, and ye shall
see me, and, Because I go away unto the Father?'

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> they said then, \`What is this he saith
-- the little while? we have not known what he saith.'

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Jesus, therefore, knew that they were
wishing to ask him, and he said to them, \`Concerning this do ye seek
one with another, because I said, A little while, and you do not behold
me, and again a little while, and ye shall see me?

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> verily, verily, I say to you, that ye
shall weep and lament, and the world will rejoice; and ye shall be
sorrowful, but your sorrow joy will become.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> \`The woman, when she may bear, hath
sorrow, because her hour did come, and when she may bear the child, no
more doth she remember the anguish, because of the joy that a man was
born to the world.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> \`And ye, therefore, now, indeed, have
sorrow; and again I will see you, and your heart shall rejoice, and your
joy no one doth take from you,

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> and in that day ye will question me
nothing; verily, verily, I say to you, as many things as ye may ask of
the Father in my name, He will give you;

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> till now ye did ask nothing in my name;
ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> \`These things in similitudes I have
spoken to you, but there cometh an hour when no more in similitudes will
I speak to you, but freely of the Father, will tell you.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> \`In that day, in my name ye will make
request, and I do not say to you that I will ask the Father for you,

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> for the Father himself doth love you,
because me ye have loved, and ye have believed that I from God came
forth;

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> I came forth from the Father, and have
come to the world; again I leave the world, and go on unto the Father.'

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> His disciples say to him, \`Lo, now
freely thou dost speak, and no similitude speakest thou;

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> now we have known that thou hast known
all things, and hast no need that any one do question thee; in this we
believe that from God thou didst come forth.'

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> Jesus answered them, \`Now do ye
believe? lo, there doth come an hour,

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> and now it hath come, that ye may be
scattered, each to his own things, and me ye may leave alone, and I am
not alone, because the Father is with me;

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> these things I have spoken to you, that
in me ye may have peace, in the world ye shall have tribulation, but
take courage -- I have overcome the world.'

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> These things spake Jesus, and lifted up
his eyes to the heaven, and said -- \`Father, the hour hath come,
glorify Thy Son, that Thy Son also may glorify Thee,

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> according as Thou didst give to him
authority over all flesh, that -- all that Thou hast given to him -- he
may give to them life age-during;

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> and this is the life age-during, that
they may know Thee, the only true God, and him whom Thou didst send --
Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> I did glorify Thee on the earth, the work
I did finish that Thou hast given me, that I may do \[it\].

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> \`And now, glorify me, Thou Father, with
Thyself, with the glory that I had before the world was, with Thee;

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> I did manifest Thy name to the men whom
Thou hast given to me out of the world; Thine they were, and to me Thou
hast given them, and Thy word they have kept;

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> now they have known that all things, as
many as Thou hast given to me, are from Thee,

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> because the sayings that Thou hast given
to me, I have given to them, and they themselves received, and have
known truly, that from Thee I came forth, and they did believe that Thou
didst send me.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> \`I ask in regard to them; not in regard
to the world do I ask, but in regard to those whom Thou hast given to
me, because Thine they are,

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> and all mine are Thine, and Thine
\[are\] mine, and I have been glorified in them;

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> and no more am I in the world, and
these are in the world, and I come unto Thee. Holy Father, keep them in
Thy name, whom Thou hast given to me, that they may be one as we;

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> when I was with them in the world, I
was keeping them in Thy name; those whom Thou hast given to me I did
guard, and none of them was destroyed, except the son of the
destruction, that the Writing may be fulfilled.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> \`And now unto Thee I come, and these
things I speak in the world, that they may have my joy fulfilled in
themselves;

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> I have given to them Thy word, and the
world did hate them, because they are not of the world, as I am not of
the world;

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> I do not ask that Thou mayest take them
out of the world, but that Thou mayest keep them out of the evil.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> \`Of the world they are not, as I of
the world am not;

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> sanctify them in Thy truth, Thy word is
truth;

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> as Thou didst send me to the world, I
also did send them to the world;

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> and for them do I sanctify myself, that
they also themselves may be sanctified in truth.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> \`And not in regard to these alone do I
ask, but also in regard to those who shall be believing, through their
word, in me;

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> that they all may be one, as Thou
Father \[art\] in me, and I in Thee; that they also in us may be one,
that the world may believe that Thou didst send me.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> \`And I, the glory that thou hast given
to me, have given to them, that they may be one as we are one;

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> I in them, and Thou in me, that they
may be perfected into one, and that the world may know that Thou didst
send me, and didst love them as Thou didst love me.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> \`Father, those whom Thou hast given to
me, I will that where I am they also may be with me, that they may
behold my glory that Thou didst give to me, because Thou didst love me
before the foundation of the world.

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> \`Righteous Father, also the world did
not know Thee, and I knew Thee, and these have known that Thou didst
send me,

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> and I made known to them Thy name, and
will make known, that the love with which Thou lovedst me in them may
be, and I in them.'

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> These things having said, Jesus went
forth with his disciples beyond the brook of Kedron, where was a garden,
into which he entered, himself and his disciples,

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> and Judas also, who delivered him up, had
known the place, because many times did Jesus assemble there with his
disciples.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> Judas, therefore, having taken the band
and officers out of the chief priests and Pharisees, doth come thither
with torches and lamps, and weapons;

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Jesus, therefore, knowing all things that
are coming upon him, having gone forth, said to them, \`Whom do ye
seek?'

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> they answered him, \`Jesus the Nazarene;'
Jesus saith to them, \`I am \[he\];' -- and Judas who delivered him up
was standing with them; --

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> when, therefore, he said to them -- \`I
am \[he\],' they went away backward, and fell to the ground.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> Again, therefore, he questioned them,
\`Whom do ye seek?' and they said, \`Jesus the Nazarene;'

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> Jesus answered, \`I said to you that I am
\[he\]; if, then, me ye seek, suffer these to go away;'

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> that the word might be fulfilled that he
said -- \`Those whom Thou hast given to me, I did not lose of them even
one.'

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> Simon Peter, therefore, having a sword,
drew it, and struck the chief priest's servant, and cut off his right
ear -- and the name of the servant was Malchus --

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Jesus, therefore, said to Peter, \`Put
the sword into the sheath; the cup that the Father hath given to me, may
I not drink it?'

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> The band, therefore, and the captain,
and the officers of the Jews, took hold on Jesus, and bound him,

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> and they led him away to Annas first,
for he was father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was chief priest of that year,

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> and Caiaphas was he who gave counsel to
the Jews, that it is good for one man to perish for the people.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> And following Jesus was Simon Peter,
and the other disciple, and that disciple was known to the chief priest,
and he entered with Jesus to the hall of the chief priest,

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> and Peter was standing at the door
without, therefore went forth the other disciple who was known to the
chief priest, and he spake to the female keeping the door, and he
brought in Peter.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> Then said the maid keeping the door to
Peter, \`Art thou also of the disciples of this man?' he saith, \`I am
not;'

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> and the servants and the officers were
standing, having made a fire of coals, because it was cold, and they
were warming themselves, and Peter was standing with them, and warming
himself.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> The chief priests, therefore,
questioned Jesus concerning his disciples, and concerning his teaching;

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> Jesus answered him, \`I spake freely to
the world, I did always teach in a synagogue, and in the temple, where
the Jews do always come together; and in secret I spake nothing;

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> why me dost thou question? question
those having heard what I spake to them; lo, these have known what I
said.'

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> And he having said these things, one of
the officers standing by did give Jesus a slap, saying, \`Thus dost thou
answer the chief priest?'

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Jesus answered him, \`If I spake ill,
testify concerning the ill; and if well, why me dost thou smite?'

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> Annas then sent him bound to Caiaphas
the chief priest.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> And Simon Peter was standing and
warming himself, they said then to him, \`Art thou also of his
disciples?' he denied, and said, \`I am not.'

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> One of the servants of the chief
priest, being kinsman of him whose ear Peter cut off, saith, \`Did not I
see thee in the garden with him?'

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> again, therefore, Peter denied, and
immediately a cock crew.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> They led, therefore, Jesus from
Caiaphas to the praetorium, and it was early, and they themselves did
not enter into the praetorium, that they might not be defiled, but that
they might eat the passover;

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> Pilate, therefore, went forth unto
them, and said, \`What accusation do ye bring against this man?'

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> they answered and said to him, \`If he
were not an evil doer, we had not delivered him to thee.'

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> Pilate, therefore, said to them, \`Take
ye him -- ye -- and according to your law judge him;' the Jews,
therefore, said to him, \`It is not lawful to us to put any one to
death;'

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> that the word of Jesus might be
fulfilled which he said, signifying by what death he was about to die.

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> Pilate, therefore, entered into the
praetorium again, and called Jesus, and said to him, \`Thou art the King
of the Jews?'

<span id="an_18:34">18:34</span> Jesus answered him, \`From thyself dost
thou say this? or did others say it to thee about me?'

<span id="an_18:35">18:35</span> Pilate answered, \`Am I a Jew? thy
nation, and the chief priests did deliver thee up to me; what didst
thou?'

<span id="an_18:36">18:36</span> Jesus answered, \`My kingdom is not of
this world; if my kingdom were of this world, my officers had struggled
that I might not be delivered up to Jews; but now my kingdom is not from
hence.'

<span id="an_18:37">18:37</span> Pilate, therefore, said to him, \`Art
thou then a king?' Jesus answered, \`Thou dost say \[it\]; because a
king I am, I for this have been born, and for this I have come to the
world, that I may testify to the truth; every one who is of the truth,
doth hear my voice.'

<span id="an_18:38">18:38</span> Pilate saith to him, \`What is truth?'
and this having said, again he went forth unto the Jews, and saith to
them, \`I do find no fault in him;

<span id="an_18:39">18:39</span> and ye have a custom that I shall
release to you one in the passover; will ye, therefore, \[that\] I shall
release to you the king of the Jews?'

<span id="an_18:40">18:40</span> therefore they all cried out again,
saying, \`Not this one -- but Barabbas;' and Barabbas was a robber.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Then, therefore, did Pilate take Jesus
and scourge \[him\],

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> and the soldiers having plaited a crown
of thorns, did place \[it\] on his head, and a purple garment they put
around him,

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> and said, \`Hail! the king of the Jews;'
and they were giving him slaps.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> Pilate, therefore, again went forth
without, and saith to them, \`Lo, I do bring him to you without, that ye
may know that in him I find no fault;'

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> Jesus, therefore, came forth without,
bearing the thorny crown and the purple garment; and he saith to them,
\`Lo, the man!'

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> When, therefore, the chief priests and
the officers did see him, they cried out, saying, \`Crucify, crucify;'
Pilate saith to them, \`Take ye him -- ye, and crucify; for I find no
fault in him;'

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> the Jews answered him, \`We have a law,
and according to our law he ought to die, for he made himself Son of
God.'

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> When, therefore, Pilate heard this word,
he was the more afraid,

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> and entered again to the praetorium, and
saith to Jesus, \`Whence art thou?' and Jesus gave him no answer.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> Pilate, therefore, saith to him, \`To
me dost thou not speak? hast thou not known that I have authority to
crucify thee, and I have authority to release thee?'

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> Jesus answered, \`Thou wouldst have no
authority against me, if it were not having been given thee from above;
because of this, he who is delivering me up to thee hath greater sin.'

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> From this \[time\] was Pilate seeking
to release him, and the Jews were crying out, saying, \`If this one thou
mayest release, thou art not a friend of Caesar; every one making
himself a king, doth speak against Caesar.'

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Pilate, therefore, having heard this
word, brought Jesus without -- and he sat down upon the tribunal -- to a
place called, \`Pavement,' and in Hebrew, Gabbatha;

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> and it was the preparation of the
passover, and as it were the sixth hour, and he saith to the Jews, \`Lo,
your king!'

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> and they cried out, \`Take away, take
away, crucify him;' Pilate saith to them, \`Your king shall I crucify?'
the chief priests answered, \`We have no king except Caesar.'

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> Then, therefore, he delivered him up to
them, that he may be crucified, and they took Jesus and led \[him\]
away,

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> and bearing his cross, he went forth to
the place called \[Place\] of a Skull, which is called in Hebrew
Golgotha;

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> where they crucified him, and with him
two others, on this side, and on that side, and Jesus in the midst.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> And Pilate also wrote a title, and put
\[it\] on the cross, and it was written, \`Jesus the Nazarene, the king
of the Jews;'

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> this title, therefore, read many of the
Jews, because the place was nigh to the city where Jesus was crucified,
and it was having been written in Hebrew, in Greek, in Roman.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> The chief priests of the Jews said,
therefore, to Pilate, \`Write not -- The king of the Jews, but that one
said, I am king of the Jews;'

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> Pilate answered, \`What I have written,
I have written.'

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> The soldiers, therefore, when they did
crucify Jesus, took his garments, and made four parts, to each soldier a
part, also the coat, and the coat was seamless, from the top woven
throughout,

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> they said, therefore, to one another,
\`We may not rend it, but cast a lot for it, whose it shall be;' that
the Writing might be fulfilled, that is saying, \`They divided my
garments to themselves, and upon my raiment they did cast a lot;' the
soldiers, therefore, indeed, did these things.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> And there stood by the cross of Jesus
his mother, and his mother's sister, Mary of Cleopas, and Mary the
Magdalene;

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> Jesus, therefore, having seen \[his\]
mother, and the disciple standing by, whom he was loving, he saith to
his mother, \`Woman, lo, thy son;'

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> afterward he saith to the disciple,
\`Lo, thy mother;' and from that hour the disciple took her to his own
\[home\].

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> After this, Jesus knowing that all
things now have been finished, that the Writing may be fulfilled, saith,
\`I thirst;'

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> a vessel, therefore, was placed full of
vinegar, and they having filled a sponge with vinegar, and having put
\[it\] around a hyssop stalk, did put \[it\] to his mouth;

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> when, therefore, Jesus received the
vinegar, he said, \`It hath been finished;' and having bowed the head,
gave up the spirit.

<span id="an_19:31">19:31</span> The Jews, therefore, that the bodies
might not remain on the cross on the sabbath, since it was the
preparation, (for that sabbath day was a great one,) asked of Pilate
that their legs may be broken, and they taken away.

<span id="an_19:32">19:32</span> The soldiers, therefore, came, and of
the first indeed they did break the legs, and of the other who was
crucified with him,

<span id="an_19:33">19:33</span> and having come to Jesus, when they saw
him already having been dead, they did not break his legs;

<span id="an_19:34">19:34</span> but one of the soldiers with a spear
did pierce his side, and immediately there came forth blood and water;

<span id="an_19:35">19:35</span> and he who hath seen hath testified,
and his testimony is true, and that one hath known that true things he
speaketh, that ye also may believe.

<span id="an_19:36">19:36</span> For these things came to pass, that the
Writing may be fulfilled, \`A bone of him shall not be broken;'

<span id="an_19:37">19:37</span> and again another Writing saith, \`They
shall look to him whom they did pierce.'

<span id="an_19:38">19:38</span> And after these things did Joseph of
Arimathea -- being a disciple of Jesus, but concealed, through the fear
of the Jews -- ask of Pilate, that he may take away the body of Jesus,
and Pilate gave leave; he came, therefore, and took away the body of
Jesus,

<span id="an_19:39">19:39</span> and Nicodemus also came -- who came
unto Jesus by night at the first -- bearing a mixture of myrrh and
aloes, as it were, a hundred pounds.

<span id="an_19:40">19:40</span> They took, therefore, the body of
Jesus, and bound it with linen clothes with the spices, according as it
was the custom of the Jews to prepare for burial;

<span id="an_19:41">19:41</span> and there was in the place where he was
crucified a garden, and in the garden a new tomb, in which no one was
yet laid;

<span id="an_19:42">19:42</span> there, therefore, because of the
preparation of the Jews, because the tomb was nigh, they laid Jesus.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And on the first of the sabbaths, Mary
the Magdalene doth come early (there being yet darkness) to the tomb,
and she seeth the stone having been taken away out of the tomb,

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> she runneth, therefore, and cometh unto
Simon Peter, and unto the other disciple whom Jesus was loving, and
saith to them, \`They took away the Lord out of the tomb, and we have
not known where they laid him.'

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> Peter, therefore, went forth, and the
other disciple, and they were coming to the tomb,

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> and the two were running together, and
the other disciple did run forward more quickly than Peter, and came
first to the tomb,

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> and having stooped down, seeth the linen
clothes lying, yet, indeed, he entered not.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> Simon Peter, therefore, cometh, following
him, and he entered into the tomb, and beholdeth the linen clothes
lying,

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> and the napkin that was upon his head,
not lying with the linen clothes, but apart, having been folded up, in
one place;

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> then, therefore, entered also the other
disciple who came first unto the tomb, and he saw, and did believe;

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> for not yet did they know the Writing,
that it behoveth him out of the dead to rise again.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> The disciples therefore went away again
unto their own friends,

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> and Mary was standing near the tomb,
weeping without; as she was weeping, then, she stooped down to the tomb,
and beholdeth two messengers in white, sitting,

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> one at the head, and one at the feet,
where the body of Jesus had been laid.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> And they say to her, \`Woman, why dost
thou weep?' she saith to them, \`Because they took away my Lord, and I
have not known where they laid him;'

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> and these things having said, she
turned backward, and seeth Jesus standing, and she had not known that it
is Jesus.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Jesus saith to her, \`Woman, why dost
thou weep? whom dost thou seek;' she, supposing that he is the gardener,
saith to him, \`Sir, if thou didst carry him away, tell me where thou
didst lay him, and I will take him away;'

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Jesus saith to her, \`Mary!' having
turned, she saith to him, \`Rabbouni;' that is to say, \`Teacher.'

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Jesus saith to her, \`Be not touching
me, for I have not yet ascended unto my Father; and be going on to my
brethren, and say to them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father, and
to my God, and to your God.'

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Mary the Magdalene cometh, telling to
the disciples that she hath seen the Lord, and \[that\] these things he
said to her.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> It being, therefore, evening, on that
day, the first of the sabbaths, and the doors having been shut where the
disciples were assembled, through fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood
in the midst, and saith to them, \`Peace to you;'

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> and this having said, he shewed them
his hands and side; the disciples, therefore, rejoiced, having seen the
Lord.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> Jesus, therefore, said to them again,
\`Peace to you; according as the Father hath sent me, I also send you;'

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> and this having said, he breathed on
\[them\], and saith to them, \`Receive the Holy Spirit;

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> if of any ye may loose the sins, they
are loosed to them; if of any ye may retain, they have been retained.'

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> And Thomas, one of the twelve, who is
called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came;

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> the other disciples, therefore, said to
him, \`We have seen the Lord;' and he said to them, \`If I may not see
in his hands the mark of the nails, and may put my finger to the mark of
the nails, and may put my hand to his side, I will not believe.'

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> And after eight days, again were his
disciples within, and Thomas with them; Jesus cometh, the doors having
been shut, and he stood in the midst, and said, \`Peace to you!'

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> then he saith to Thomas, \`Bring thy
finger hither, and see my hands, and bring thy hand, and put \[it\] to
my side, and become not unbelieving, but believing.'

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> And Thomas answered and said to him,
\`My Lord and my God;'

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> Jesus saith to him, \`Because thou hast
seen me, Thomas, thou hast believed; happy those not having seen, and
having believed.'

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> Many indeed, therefore, other signs
also did Jesus before his disciples, that are not written in this book;

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> and these have been written that ye may
believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye
may have life in his name.'

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> After these things did Jesus manifest
himself again to the disciples on the sea of Tiberias, and he did
manifest himself thus:

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> There were together Simon Peter, and
Thomas who is called Didymus, and Nathanael from Cana of Galilee, and
the \[sons\] of Zebedee, and two others of his disciples.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> Simon Peter saith to them, \`I go away to
fish;' they say to him, \`We go -- we also -- with thee;' they went
forth and entered into the boat immediately, and on that night they
caught nothing.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And morning being now come, Jesus stood
at the shore, yet indeed the disciples did not know that it is Jesus;

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> Jesus, therefore, saith to them, \`Lads,
have ye any meat?'

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> they answered him, \`No;' and he said to
them, \`Cast the net at the right side of the boat, and ye shall find;'
they cast, therefore, and no longer were they able to draw it, from the
multitude of the fishes.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> That disciple, therefore, whom Jesus was
loving saith to Peter, \`The Lord it is!' Simon Peter, therefore, having
heard that it is the Lord, did gird on the outer coat, (for he was
naked,) and did cast himself into the sea;

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> and the other disciples came by the
little boat, for they were not far from the land, but as it were about
two hundred cubits off, dragging the net of the fishes;

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> when, therefore, they came to the land,
they behold a fire of coals lying, and a fish lying on it, and bread.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> Jesus saith to them, \`Bring ye from
the fishes that ye caught now;'

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> Simon Peter went up, and drew the net
up on the land, full of great fishes, an hundred fifty and three, and
though they were so many, the net was not rent.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> Jesus saith to them, \`Come ye, dine;'
and none of the disciples was venturing to inquire of him, \`Who art
thou?' knowing that it is the Lord;

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> Jesus, therefore, doth come and take
the bread and give to them, and the fish in like manner;

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> this \[is\] now a third time Jesus was
manifested to his disciples, having been raised from the dead.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> When, therefore, they dined, Jesus
saith to Simon Peter, \`Simon, \[son\] of Jonas, dost thou love me more
than these?' he saith to him, \`Yes, Lord; thou hast known that I dearly
love thee;' he saith to him, \`Feed my lambs.'

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> He saith to him again, a second time,
\`Simon, \[son\] of Jonas, dost thou love me?' he saith to him, \`Yes,
Lord; thou hast known that I dearly love thee;' he saith to him, \`Tend
my sheep.'

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> He saith to him the third time,
\`Simon, \[son\] of Jonas, dost thou dearly love me?' Peter was grieved
that he said to him the third time, \`Dost thou dearly love me?' and he
said to him, \`Lord, thou hast known all things; thou dost know that I
dearly love thee.' Jesus saith to him, \`Feed my sheep;

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> verily, verily, I say to thee, When
thou wast younger, thou wast girding thyself and wast walking whither
thou didst will, but when thou mayest be old, thou shalt stretch forth
thy hands, and another will gird thee, and shall carry \[thee\] whither
thou dost not will;'

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> and this he said, signifying by what
death he shall glorify God; and having said this, he saith to him, \`Be
following me.'

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And Peter having turned about doth see
the disciple whom Jesus was loving following, (who also reclined in the
supper on his breast, and said, \`Sir, who is he who is delivering thee
up?')

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> Peter having seen this one, saith to
Jesus, \`Lord, and what of this one?'

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> Jesus saith to him, \`If him I will to
remain till I come, what -- to thee? be thou following me.' This word,
therefore, went forth to the brethren that that disciple doth not die,

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> yet Jesus did not say to him, that he
doth not die, but, \`If him I will to remain till I come, what -- to
thee?'

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> this is the disciple who is testifying
concerning these things, and he wrote these things, and we have known
that his testimony is true.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> And there are also many other things --
as many as Jesus did -- which, if they may be written one by one, not
even the world itself I think to have place for the books written. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts](act)
