[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kg1)  [Next](ch1.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: 2 Kings

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> And Moab transgresseth against Israel after
the death of Ahab,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> and Ahaziah falleth through the lattice in
his upper chamber that \[is\] in Samaria, and is sick, and sendeth
messengers, and saith unto them, \`Go ye, inquire of Baal-Zebub god of
Ekron if I recover from this sickness.'

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And a messenger of Jehovah hath spoken unto
Elijah the Tishbite, \`Rise, go up to meet the messengers of the king of
Samaria, and speak unto them, Is it because there is not a God in Israel
-- ye are going to inquire of Baal Zebub god of Ekron?

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> and therefore, thus said Jehovah, The bed
whither thou hast gone up, thou dost not come down from it, for thou
dost certainly die;' and Elijah goeth on.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And the messengers turn back unto him, and
he saith unto them, \`What \[is\] this -- ye have turned back!'

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And they say unto him, \`A man hath come up
to meet us, and saith unto us, Go, turn back unto the king who sent you,
and ye have said unto him, Thus said Jehovah, Is it because there is not
a God in Israel -- thou art sending to inquire of Baal-Zebub god of
Ekron? therefore, the bed whither thou hast gone up, thou dost not come
down from it, for thou dost certainly die.'

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And he saith unto them, \`What \[is\] the
fashion of the man who hath come up to meet you, and speaketh unto you
these words?'

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And they say unto him, \`A man -- hairy,
and a girdle of skin girt about his loins;' and he saith, \`He \[is\]
Elijah the Tishbite.'

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And he sendeth unto him a head of fifty and
his fifty, and he goeth up unto him (and lo, he is sitting on the top of
the hill), and he speaketh unto him, \`O man of God, the king hath
spoken, Come down.'

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And Elijah answereth and speaketh unto
the head of the fifty, \`And if I \[am\] a man of God, fire doth come
down from the heavens, and consume thee and thy fifty;' and fire cometh
down from the heavens, and consumeth him and his fifty.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And he turneth and sendeth unto him
another head of fifty and his fifty, and he answereth and speaketh unto
him, \`O man of God, thus said the king, Haste, come down.'

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And Elijah answereth and speaketh unto
them, \`If I \[am\] a man of God, fire doth come down from the heavens,
and consume thee and thy fifty;' and fire of God cometh down from the
heavens, and consumeth him and his fifty.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And he turneth and sendeth a third head
of fifty and his fifty, and the third head of fifty goeth up, and cometh
in, and boweth on his knees over-against Elijah, and maketh supplication
unto him, and speaketh unto him, \`O man of God, let be precious, I pray
thee, my soul and the soul of thy servants -- these fifty -- in thine
eyes.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Lo, come down hath fire from the heavens,
and consumeth the two heads of the former fifties and their fifties;
and, now, let my soul be precious in thine eyes.'

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And a messenger of Jehovah speaketh unto
Elijah, \`Go down with him, be not afraid of him;' and he riseth and
goeth down with him unto the king,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> and speaketh unto him, \`Thus said
Jehovah, Because that thou hast sent messengers to inquire of Baal-Zebub
god of Ekron -- is it because there is not a God in Israel to inquire of
His word? therefore, the bed whither thou hast gone up -- thou dost not
come down from it, for thou dost certainly die.'

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And he dieth, according to the word of
Jehovah that Elijah spake, and Jehoram reigneth in his stead, in the
second year of Jehoram son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, for he had no
son.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And the rest of the matters of Ahaziah
that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the
kings of Israel?

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And it cometh to pass, at Jehovah's taking
up Elijah in a whirlwind to the heavens, that Elijah goeth, and Elisha,
from Gilgal,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> and Elijah saith unto Elisha, \`Abide, I
pray thee, here, for Jehovah hath sent me unto Beth-El;' and Elisha
saith, \`Jehovah liveth, and thy soul liveth, if I leave thee;' and they
go down to Beth-El.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And sons of the prophets who \[are\] in
Beth-El come out unto Elisha, and say unto him, \`Hast thou known that
to-day Jehovah is taking thy lord from thy head?' and he saith, \`I also
have known -- keep silent.'

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And Elijah saith to him, \`Elisha, abide, I
pray thee, here, for Jehovah hath sent me to Jericho;' and he saith,
\`Jehovah liveth, and thy soul liveth, if I leave thee;' and they come
in to Jericho.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And sons of the prophets who \[are\] in
Jericho come nigh unto Elisha, and say unto him, \`Hast thou known that
to-day Jehovah is taking thy lord from thy head?' and he saith, \`I also
have known -- keep silent.'

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And Elijah saith to him, \`Abide, I pray
thee, here, for Jehovah hath sent me to the Jordan;' and he saith,
\`Jehovah liveth, and thy soul liveth, if I leave thee;' and they go on
both of them,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> -- and fifty men of the sons of the
prophets have gone on, and stand over-against afar off -- and both of
them have stood by the Jordan.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And Elijah taketh his robe, and wrappeth
\[it\] together, and smiteth the waters, and they are halved, hither and
thither, and they pass over both of them on dry land.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And it cometh to pass, at their passing
over, that Elijah hath said unto Elisha, \`Ask, what do I do for thee
before I am taken from thee?' and Elisha saith, \`Then let there be, I
pray thee, a double portion of thy spirit unto me;'

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> and he saith, \`Thou hast asked a hard
thing; if thou dost see me taken from thee, it is to thee so; and if
not, it is not.'

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And it cometh to pass, they are going,
going on and speaking, and lo, a chariot of fire, and horses of fire,
and they separate between them both, and Elijah goeth up in a whirlwind,
to the heavens.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And Elisha is seeing, and he is crying,
\`My father, my father, the chariot of Israel, and its horsemen;' and he
hath not seen him again; and he taketh hold on his garments, and rendeth
them into two pieces.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And he taketh up the robe of Elijah, that
fell from off him, and turneth back and standeth on the edge of the
Jordan,

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> and he taketh the robe of Elijah that
fell from off him, and smiteth the waters, and saith, \`Where \[is\]
Jehovah, God of Elijah -- even He?' and he smiteth the waters, and they
are halved, hither and thither, and Elisha passeth over.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And they see him -- the sons of the
prophets who \[are\] in Jericho -- over-against, and they say, \`Rested
hath the spirit of Elijah on Elisha;' and they come to meet him, and bow
themselves to him to the earth,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> and say unto him, \`Lo, we pray thee,
there are with thy servants fifty men, sons of valour: let them go, we
pray thee, and they seek thy lord, lest the Spirit of Jehovah hath taken
him up, and doth cast him on one of the hills, or into one of the
valleys;' and he saith, \`Ye do not send.'

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And they press upon him, till he is
ashamed, and he saith, \`Send ye;' and they send fifty men, and they
seek three days, and have not found him;

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> and they turn back unto him -- and he is
abiding in Jericho -- and he saith unto them, \`Did I not say unto you,
Do not go?'

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And the men of the city say unto Elisha,
\`Lo, we pray thee, the site of the city \[is\] good, as my lord seeth,
and the waters \[are\] bad, and the earth sterile.'

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And he saith, \`Bring to me a new dish,
and place there salt;' and they bring \[it\] unto him,

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> and he goeth out unto the source of the
waters, and casteth there salt, and saith, \`Thus said Jehovah, I have
given healing to these waters; there is not thence any more death and
sterility.'

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And the waters are healed unto this day,
according to the word of Elisha, that he spake.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And he goeth up thence to Beth-El, and he
is going up in the way, and little youths have come out from the city,
and scoff at him, and say to him, \`Go up, bald-head! go up, bald-head!'

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> And he looketh behind him, and seeth
them, and declareth them vile in the name of Jehovah, and two bears come
out of the forest, and rend of them forty and two lads.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And he goeth thence unto the hill of
Carmel, and thence he hath turned back to Samaria.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And Jehoram son of Ahab hath reigned over
Israel, in Samaria, in the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah,
and he reigneth twelve years,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> and doth the evil thing in the eyes of
Jehovah, only not like his father, and like his mother, and he turneth
aside the standing-pillar of Baal that his father made;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> only to the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat
that he caused Israel to sin he hath cleaved, he hath not turned aside
from it.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And Mesha king of Moab was a sheep-master,
and he rendered to the king of Israel a hundred thousand lambs, and a
hundred thousand rams, \[with\] wool,

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> and it cometh to pass at the death of Ahab,
that the king of Moab transgresseth against the king of Israel.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And king Jehoram goeth out in that day from
Samaria, and inspecteth all Israel,

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> and goeth and sendeth unto Jehoshaphat king
of Judah, saying, \`The king of Moab hath transgressed against me; dost
thou go with me unto Moab for battle?' and he saith, \`I go up, as I, so
thou; as my people, so thy people; as my horses, so thy horses.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And he saith, \`Where \[is\] this -- the
way we go up?' and he saith, \`The way of the wilderness of Edom.'

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And the king of Israel goeth, and the king
of Judah, and the king of Edom, and they turn round the way seven days,
and there hath been no water for the camp, and for the cattle that
\[are\] at their feet,

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> and the king of Israel saith, \`Alas, for
Jehovah hath called for these three kings, to give them into the hand of
Moab.'

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And Jehoshaphat saith, \`Is there not
here a prophet of Jehovah, and we seek Jehovah by him?' And one of the
servants of the king of Israel answereth and saith, \`Here \[is\] Elisha
son of Shaphat, who poured water on the hands of Elijah.'

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And Jehoshaphat saith, \`The word of
Jehovah is with him;' and go down unto him do the king of Israel, and
Jehoshaphat, and the king of Edom.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And Elisha saith unto the king of Israel,
\`What -- to me and to thee? go unto the prophets of thy father, and
unto the prophets of thy mother;' and the king of Israel saith to him,
\`Nay, for Jehovah hath called for these three kings to give them into
the hand of Moab.'

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And Elisha saith, \`Jehovah of Hosts
liveth, before whom I have stood; for unless the face of Jehoshaphat
king of Judah I am lifting up, I do not look unto thee, nor see thee;

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> and now, bring to me a minstrel; and it
hath been, at the playing of the minstrel, that the hand of Jehovah is
on him,

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> and he saith, \`Thus said Jehovah, Make
this valley ditches -- ditches;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> for thus said Jehovah, Ye do not see
wind, nor do ye see rain, and that valley is full of water, and ye have
drunk -- ye, and your cattle, and your beasts.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> \`And this hath been light in the eyes of
Jehovah, and he hath given Moab into your hand,

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> and ye have smitten every fenced city,
and every choice city, and every good tree ye cause to fall, and all
fountains of waters ye stop, and every good portion ye mar with stones.'

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And it cometh to pass in the morning, at
the ascending of the \[morning\]-present, that lo, waters are coming in
from the way of Edom, and the land is filled with the waters,

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> and all Moab have heard that the kings
have come up to fight against them, and they are called together, from
every one girding on a girdle and upward, and they stand by the border.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And they rise early in the morning, and
the sun hath shone on the waters, and the Moabites see, from
over-against, the waters red as blood,

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> and say, \`Blood this \[is\]; the kings
have been surely destroyed, and they smite each his neighbour; and now
for spoil, Moab!'

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And they come in unto the camp of Israel,
and the Israelites rise, and smite the Moabites, and they flee from
their face; and they enter into Moab, so as to smite Moab,

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> and the cities they break down, and
\[on\] every good portion they cast each his stone, and have filled it,
and every fountain of water they stop, and every good tree they cause to
fall -- till one had left its stones in Kir-Haraseth, and the slingers
go round and smite it.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> And the king of Moab seeth that the
battle has been too strong for him, and he taketh with him seven hundred
men, drawing sword, to cleave through unto the king of Edom, and they
have not been able,

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> and he taketh his son, the first-born who
reigneth in his stead, and causeth him to ascend -- a burnt-offering on
the wall, and there is great wrath against Israel, and they journey from
off him, and turn back to the land.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And a certain woman of the wives of the
sons of the prophets hath cried unto Elisha, saying, \`Thy servant, my
husband, is dead, and thou hast known that thy servant was fearing
Jehovah, and the lender hath come to take my two children to him for
servants.'

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And Elisha saith unto her, \`What do I do
for thee? declare to me, what hast thou in the house?' and she saith,
\`Thy maid-servant hath nothing in the house except a pot of oil.'

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And he saith, \`Go, ask for thee vessels
from without, from all thy neighbours -- empty vessels -- let \[them\]
not be few;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> and thou hast entered, and shut the door
upon thee, and upon thy sons, and hast poured out into all these
vessels, and the full ones thou dost remove.'

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And she goeth from him, and shutteth the
door upon her, and upon her sons; they are bringing nigh unto her, and
she is pouring out,

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> and it cometh to pass, at the filling of
the vessels, that she saith unto her son, \`Bring nigh unto me a vessel
more,' and he saith unto her, \`There is not a vessel more;' and the oil
stayeth.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And she cometh and declareth to the man of
God, and he saith, \`Go, sell the oil, and repay thy loan; and thou
\[and\] thy sons do live of the rest.'

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And the day cometh that Elisha passeth over
unto Shunem, and there \[is\] a great woman, and she layeth hold on him
to eat bread, and it cometh to pass, at the time of his passing over, he
turneth aside thither to eat bread,

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> and she saith unto her husband, \`Lo, I
pray thee, I have known that a holy man of God he is, passing over by us
continually;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> let us make, I pray thee, a little upper
chamber of the wall, and we set for him there a bed, and a table, and a
high seat, and a candlestick; and it hath been, in his coming in unto
us, he doth turn aside thither.'

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And the day cometh, that he cometh in
thither, and turneth aside unto the upper chamber, and lieth there,

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> and he saith unto Gehazi his young man,
\`Call for this Shunammite;' and he calleth for her, and she standeth
before him.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And he saith to him, \`Say, I pray thee,
unto her, Lo, thou hast troubled thyself concerning us with all this
trouble; what -- to do for thee? is it to speak for thee unto the king,
or unto the head of the host?' and she saith, \`In the midst of my
people I am dwelling.'

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And he saith, \`And what -- to do for
her?' and Gehazi saith, \`Verily she hath no son, and her husband \[is\]
aged.'

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And he saith, \`Call for her;' and he
calleth for her, and she standeth at the opening,

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> and he saith, \`At this season, according
to the time of life, thou art embracing a son;' and she saith, \`Nay, my
lord, O man of God, do not lie unto thy maid-servant.'

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And the woman conceiveth and beareth a
son, at this season, according to the time of life, that Elisha spake of
unto her.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And the lad groweth, and the day cometh
that he goeth out unto his father, unto the reapers,

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> and he saith unto his father, \`My head,
my head;' and he saith unto the young man, \`Bear him unto his mother;'

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> and he beareth him, and bringeth him in
unto his mother, and he sitteth on her knees till the noon, and dieth.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And she goeth up, and layeth him on the
bed of the man of God, and shutteth \[the door\] upon him, and goeth
out,

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> and calleth unto her husband, and saith,
\`Send, I pray thee, to me, one of the young men, and one of the asses,
and I run unto the man of God, and return.'

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And he saith, \`Wherefore art thou going
unto him to-day? -- neither new moon nor sabbath!' and she saith,
\`Peace \[to thee\]!'

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> And she saddleth the ass, and saith unto
her young man, \`Lead, and go, do not restrain riding for me, except I
have said \[so\] to thee.'

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> And she goeth, and cometh in unto the man
of God, unto the hill of Carmel, and it cometh to pass, at the man of
God's seeing her from over-against, that he saith unto Gehazi his young
man, \`Lo, this Shunammite;

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> now, run, I pray thee, to meet her, and
say to her, Is there peace to thee? is there peace to thy husband? is
there peace to the lad?' and she saith, \`Peace.'

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> And she cometh in unto the man of God,
unto the hill, and layeth hold on his feet, and Gehazi cometh nigh to
thrust her away, and the man of God saith, \`Let her alone, for her soul
\[is\] bitter to her, and Jehovah hath hidden \[it\] from me, and hath
not declared \[it\] to me.'

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> And she saith, \`Did I ask a son from my
lord? did I not say, Do not deceive me?'

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> And he saith to Gehazi, \`Gird up thy
loins, and take my staff in thy hand, and go; when thou dost meet a man,
thou dost not salute him; and when a man doth salute thee, thou dost not
answer him; and thou hast laid my staff on the face of the youth.'

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> And the mother of the youth saith,
\`Jehovah liveth, and thy soul liveth -- if I leave thee;' and he riseth
and goeth after her.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> And Gehazi hath passed on before them,
and layeth the staff on the face of the youth, and there is no voice,
and there is no attention, and he turneth back to meet him, and
declareth to him, saying, \`The youth hath not awaked.'

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> And Elisha cometh in to the house, and
lo, the youth is dead, laid on his bed,

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> and he goeth in and shutteth the door
upon them both, and prayeth unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> And he goeth up, and lieth down on the
lad, and putteth his mouth on his mouth, and his eyes on his eyes, and
his hands on his hands, and stretcheth himself upon him, and the flesh
of the lad becometh warm;

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> and he turneth back and walketh in the
house, once hither and once thither, and goeth up and stretcheth himself
upon him, and the youth sneezeth till seven times, and the youth openeth
his eyes.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> And he calleth unto Gehazi, and saith,
\`Call unto this Shunammite;' and he calleth her, and she cometh in unto
him, and he saith, \`Lift up thy son.'

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> And she goeth in, and falleth at his
feet, and boweth herself to the earth, and lifteth up her son, and goeth
out.

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> And Elisha hath turned back to Gilgal,
and the famine \[is\] in the land, and the sons of the prophets are
sitting before him, and he saith to his young man, \`Set on the great
pot, and boil pottage for the sons of the prophets.'

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> And one goeth out unto the field to
gather herbs, and findeth a vine of the field, and gathereth of it
gourds of the field -- the fulness of his garment -- and cometh in and
splitteth \[them\] into the pot of pottage, for they knew \[them\] not;

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> and they pour out for the men to eat, and
it cometh to pass at their eating of the pottage, that they have cried
out, and say, \`Death \[is\] in the pot, O man of God!' and they have
not been able to eat.

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> And he saith, \`Then bring ye meal;' and
he casteth into the pot, and saith, \`Pour out for the people, and they
eat;' and there was no evil thing in the pot.

<span id="an_4:42">4:42</span> And a man hath come from Baal-Shalishah,
and bringeth in to the man of God bread of first-fruits, twenty loaves
of barley, and full ears of corn in its husk, and he saith, \`Give to
the people, and they eat.'

<span id="an_4:43">4:43</span> And his minister saith, \`What -- do I
give this before a hundred men?' and he saith, \`Give to the people, and
they eat, for thus said Jehovah, Eat and leave;'

<span id="an_4:44">4:44</span> and he giveth before them, and they eat
and leave, according to the word of Jehovah.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And Naaman, head of the host of the king of
Aram, was a great man before his lord, and accepted of face, for by him
had Jehovah given salvation to Aram, and the man was mighty in valour --
leprous.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And the Aramaeans have gone out \[by\]
troops, and they take captive out of the land of Israel a little damsel,
and she is before the wife of Naaman,

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> and she saith unto her mistress, \`O that
my lord \[were\] before the prophet who \[is\] in Samaria; then he doth
recover him from his leprosy.'

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And \[one\] goeth in and declareth to his
lord, saying, \`Thus and thus she hath spoken, the damsel who \[is\]
from the land of Israel.'

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And the king of Aram saith, \`Go thou,
enter, and I send a letter unto the king of Israel;' and he goeth and
taketh in his hand ten talents of silver, and six thousand \[pieces\] of
gold, and ten changes of garments.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And he bringeth in the letter unto the king
of Israel, saying, \`And now, at the coming in of this letter unto thee,
lo, I have sent unto thee Naaman my servant, and thou hast recovered him
from his leprosy.'

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And it cometh to pass, at the king of
Israel's reading the letter, that he rendeth his garments, and saith,
\`Am I God, to put to death and to keep alive, that this \[one\] is
sending unto me to recover a man from his leprosy? for surely know, I
pray you, and see, for he is presenting himself to me.'

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And it cometh to pass, at Elisha the man of
God's hearing that the king of Israel hath rent his garments, that he
sendeth unto the king, saying, \`Why hast thou rent thy garments? let
him come, I pray thee, unto me, and he doth know that there is a prophet
in Israel.'

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And Naaman cometh, with his horses and with
his chariot, and standeth at the opening of the house for Elisha;

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> and Elisha sendeth unto him a messenger,
saying, \`Go, and thou hast washed seven times in Jordan, and thy flesh
doth turn back to thee -- and be thou clean.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And Naaman is wroth, and goeth on, and
saith, \`Lo, I said, Unto me he doth certainly come out, and hath stood
and called in the name of Jehovah his God, and waved his hand over the
place, and recovered the leper.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of
Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? do I not wash in them
and I have been clean?' and he turneth and goeth on in fury.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And his servants come nigh, and speak
unto him, and say, \`My father, a great thing had the prophet spoken
unto thee -- dost thou not do \[it\]? and surely, when he hath said unto
thee, Wash, and be clean.'

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And he goeth down and dippeth in Jordan
seven times, according to the word of the man of God, and his flesh doth
turn back as the flesh of a little youth, and is clean.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And he turneth back unto the man of God,
he and all his camp, and cometh in, and standeth before him, and saith,
\`Lo, I pray thee, I have known that there is not a God in all the earth
except in Israel; and now, take, I pray thee, a blessing from thy
servant.'

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And he saith, \`Jehovah liveth, before
whom I have stood -- if I take \[it\];' and he presseth on him to take,
and he refuseth.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And Naaman saith, \`If not -- let be
given, I pray thee, to thy servant, a couple of mules' burden of earth,
for thy servant doth make no more burnt-offering and sacrifice to other
gods, but to Jehovah.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> For this thing Jehovah be propitious to
thy servant, in the coming in of my lord into the house of Rimmon to bow
himself there, and he was supported by my hand, and I bowed myself
\[in\] the house of Rimmon; for my bowing myself in the house of Rimmon
Jehovah be propitious, I pray thee, to thy servant in this thing.'

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And he saith to him, \`Go in peace.' And
he goeth from him a kibrath of land,

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And Gehazi, servant of Elisha the man of
God, saith, \`Lo, my lord hath spared Naaman this Aramaean, not to
receive from his hand that which he brought; Jehovah liveth; surely if I
have run after him, then I have taken from him something.'

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> And Gehazi pursueth after Naaman, and
Naaman seeth one running after him, and alighteth from off the chariot
to meet him, and saith, \`Is there peace?'

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> And he saith, \`Peace; my lord hath sent
me, saying, Lo, now, this, come unto me have two young men from the
hill-country of Ephraim, of the sons of the prophets; give, I pray thee,
to them, a talent of silver, and two changes of garments.'

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> And Naaman saith, \`Be pleased, take two
talents;' and he urgeth on him, and bindeth two talents of silver in two
purses, and two changes of garments, and giveth unto two of his young
men, and they bear before him;

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> and he cometh in unto the high place, and
taketh out of their hand, and layeth up in the house, and sendeth away
the men, and they go.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> And he hath come in, and doth stand by
his lord, and Elisha saith unto him, \`Whence -- Gehazi?' and he saith,
\`Thy servant went not hither or thither.'

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> And he saith unto him, \`My heart went
not when the man turned from off his chariot to meet thee; is it a time
to take silver, and to take garments, and olives, and vines, and flock,
and herd, and men-servants, and maid-servants?

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> yea, the leprosy of Naaman doth cleave to
thee, and to thy seed, -- to the age;' and he goeth out from before him
-- leprous as snow.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And sons of the prophet say unto Elisha,
\`Lo, we pray thee, the place where we are dwelling before thee is too
strait for us;

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> let us go, we pray thee, unto the Jordan,
and we take thence each one beam, and we make for ourselves there a
place to dwell there;' and he saith, \`Go.'

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And the one saith, \`Be pleased, I pray
thee, and go with thy servants;' and he saith, \`I -- I go.'

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And he goeth with them, and they come in to
the Jordan, and cut down the trees,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> and it cometh to pass, the one is felling
the beam, and the iron hath fallen into the water, and he crieth and
saith, \`Alas! my lord, and it asked!'

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And the man of God saith, \`Whither hath it
fallen?' and he sheweth him the place, and he cutteth a stick, and
casteth thither, and causeth the iron to swim,

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> and saith, \`Raise to thee;' and he putteth
forth his hand and taketh it.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And the king of Aram hath been fighting
against Israel, and taketh counsel with his servants, saying, \`At such
and such a place \[is\] my encamping.'

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And the man of God sendeth unto the king of
Israel, saying, \`Take heed of passing by this place, for thither are
the Aramaeans coming down;

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> and the king of Israel sendeth unto the
place of which the man of God spake to him, and warned him, and he is
preserved there not once nor twice.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And the heart of the king of Aram is
tossed about concerning this thing, and he calleth unto his servants,
and saith unto them, \`Do ye not declare to me who of us \[is\] for the
king of Israel?'

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And one of his servants saith, \`Nay, my
lord, O king, for Elisha the prophet, who \[is\] in Israel, declareth to
the king of Israel the words that thou speakest in the inner part of thy
bed-chamber.'

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And he saith, \`Go ye and see where he
\[is\], and I send and take him;' and it is declared to him, saying,
\`Lo -- in Dothan.'

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And he sendeth thither horses and
chariot, and a heavy force, and they come in by night, and go round
against the city.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And the servant of the man of God riseth
early, and goeth out, and lo, a force is surrounding the city, and horse
and chariot, and his young man saith unto him, \`Alas! my lord, how do
we do?'

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And he saith, \`Fear not, for more
\[are\] they who \[are\] with us than they who \[are\] with them.'

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And Elisha prayeth, and saith, \`Jehovah,
open, I pray Thee, his eyes, and he doth see;' and Jehovah openeth the
eyes of the young man, and he seeth, and lo, the hill is full of horses
and chariots of fire, round about Elisha.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And they come down unto it, and Elisha
prayeth unto Jehovah, and saith, \`Smite, I pray Thee, this nation with
blindness;' and He smiteth them with blindness, according to the word of
Elisha.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And Elisha saith unto them, \`This \[is\]
not the way, nor \[is\] this the city; come after me, and I lead you
unto the man whom ye seek;' and he leadeth them to Samaria.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> And it cometh to pass, at their coming in
to Samaria, that Elisha saith, \`Jehovah, open the eyes of these, and
they see;' and Jehovah openeth their eyes, and they see, and lo, in the
midst of Samaria!

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And the king of Israel saith unto Elisha,
at his seeing them, \`Do I smite -- do I smite -- my father?'

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And he saith, \`Thou dost not smite;
those whom thou hast taken captive with thy sword and with thy bow art
thou smiting? set bread and water before them, and they eat, and drink,
and go unto their lord.'

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> And he prepareth for them great
provision, and they eat and drink, and he sendeth them away, and they go
unto their lord: and troops of Aram have not added any more to come in
to the land of Israel.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> And it cometh to pass afterwards, that
Ben-Hadad king of Aram gathereth all his camp, and goeth up, and layeth
siege to Samaria,

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> and there is a great famine in Samaria,
and lo, they are laying siege to it, till the head of an ass is at
eighty silverlings, and a forth of the cab of dovesdung at five
silverlings.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> And it cometh to pass, the king of Israel
is passing by on the wall, and a woman hath cried unto him, saying,
\`Save, my lord, O king.'

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> And he saith, \`Jehovah doth not save
thee -- whence do I save thee? out of the threshing-floor, or out of the
wine-vat?'

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> And the king saith to her, \`What -- to
thee?' and she saith, \`This woman said unto me, Give thy son, and we
eat him to-day, and my son we eat to-morrow;

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> and we boil my son and eat him, and I say
unto her on the next day, Give thy son, and we eat him; and she hideth
her son.'

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> And it cometh to pass, at the king's
hearing the words of the woman, that he rendeth his garments, and he is
passing by on the wall, and the people see, and lo, the sackcloth \[is\]
on his flesh within.

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> And he saith, \`Thus doth God do to me,
and thus He doth add -- if it remain -- the head of Elisha son of
Shaphat -- upon him this day.'

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> And Elisha is sitting in his house, and
the elders are sitting with him, and \[the king\] sendeth a man from
before him; before the messenger doth come unto him, even he himself
said unto the elders, \`Have ye seen that this son of the murderer hath
sent to turn aside my head? see, at the coming in of the messenger, shut
the door, and ye have held him fast at the door, is not the sound of the
feet of his lord behind him?'

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> He is yet speaking with them, and lo, the
messenger is coming down unto him, and he saith, \`Lo, this \[is\] the
evil from Jehovah: what -- do I wait for Jehovah any more?'

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And Elisha saith, \`Hear ye a word of
Jehovah: thus said Jehovah, About this time to-morrow, a measure of fine
flour \[is\] at a shekel, and two measures of barley at a shekel, in the
gate of Samaria.'

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And the captain whom the king hath, by
whose hand he hath been supported, answereth the man of God and saith,
\`Lo, Jehovah is making windows in the heavens -- shall this thing be?'
and he saith, \`Lo, thou art seeing it with thine eyes, and thereof thou
dost not eat.'

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And four men have been leprous, at the
opening of the gate, and they say one unto another, \`What -- we are
sitting here till we have died;

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> if we have said, We go in to the city, then
the famine \[is\] in the city, and we have died there; and if we have
sat here, then we have died; and now, come and we fall unto the camp of
Aram; if they keep us alive, we live, and if they put us to death -- we
have died.'

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And they rise in the twilight, to go in
unto the camp of Aram, and they come in unto the extremity of the camp
of Aram, and lo, there is not a man there,

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> seeing Jehovah hath caused the camp of Aram
to hear a noise of chariot and a noise of horse -- a noise of great
force, and they say one unto another, \`Lo, the king of Israel hath
hired against us the kings of the Hittites, and the kings of Egypt, to
come against us.'

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And they rise and flee in the twilight, and
forsake their tents, and their horses, and their asses -- the camp as it
\[is\] -- and flee for their life.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And these lepers come in unto the extremity
of the camp, and come in unto one tent, and eat, and drink, and lift up
thence silver, and gold, and garments, and go and hide; and they turn
back and go in unto another tent, and lift up thence, and go and hide.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And they say one unto another, \`We are not
doing right this day; a day of tidings it \[is\], and we are keeping
silent; and -- we have waited till the light of the morning, then hath
punishment found us; and now, come and we go in and declare to the house
of the king.'

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And they come in, and call unto the
gatekeeper of the city, and declare for themselves, saying, \`We have
come in unto the camp of Aram, and lo, there is not there a man, or
sound of man, but the bound horse, and the bound ass, and tents as they
\[are\].'

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> and he calleth the gatekeepers, and they
declare to the house of the king within.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And the king riseth by night, and saith
unto his servants, \`Let me declare, I pray you, to you that which the
Aramaeans have done to us; they have known that we are famished, and
they are gone out from the camp to be hidden in the field, saying, When
they come out from the city, then we catch them alive, and unto the city
we enter.'

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And one of his servants answereth and
saith, \`Then let them take, I pray thee, five of the horses that are
left, that have been left in it -- lo, they \[are\] as all the multitude
of Israel who have been left in it; lo, they are as all the multitude of
Israel who have been consumed -- and we send and see.'

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And they take two chariot-horses, and the
king sendeth after the camp of Aram, saying, \`Go, and see.'

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And they go after them unto the Jordan,
and lo, all the way is full of garments and vessels that the Aramaeans
have cast away in their haste, and the messengers turn back and declare
to the king.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And the people go out and spoil the camp
of Aram, and there is a measure of fine flour at a shekel, and two
measures of barley at a shekel, according to the word of Jehovah.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> And the king hath appointed the captain,
by whose hand he is supported, over the gate, and the people tread him
down in the gate, and he dieth, as the man of God spake, which he spake
in the coming down of the king unto him,

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> yea, it cometh to pass, according to the
speaking of the man of God unto the king, saying, \`Two measures of
barley at a shekel, and a measure of fine flour at a shekel are, at this
time to-morrow, in the gate of Samaria;'

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> and the captain answereth the man of God,
and saith, \`And lo, Jehovah is making windows in the heavens -- it is
according to this word?' and he saith, \`Lo, thou art seeing with thine
eyes, and thereof thou dost not eat;'

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> and it cometh to him so, and the people
tread him down in the gate, and he dieth.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And Elisha spake unto the woman whose son
he had revived, saying, \`Rise and go, thou and thy household, and
sojourn where thou dost sojourn, for Jehovah hath called for a famine,
and also, it is coming unto the land seven years.'

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And the woman riseth, and doth according to
the word of the man of God, and goeth, she and her household, and
sojourneth in the land of the Philistines seven years.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And it cometh to pass, at the end of seven
years, that the woman turneth back from the land of the Philistines, and
goeth out to cry unto the king, for her house, and for her field.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And the king is speaking unto Gehazi,
servant of the man of God, saying, \`Recount, I pray thee, to me, the
whole of the great things that Elisha hath done.'

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And it cometh to pass, he is recounting to
the king how he had revived the dead, and lo, the woman whose son he had
revived is crying unto the king, for her house and for her field, and
Gehazi saith, \`My lord, O king, this \[is\] the woman, and this her
son, whom Elisha revived.'

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And the king asketh at the woman, and she
recounteth to him, and the king appointeth to her a certain eunuch,
saying, \`Give back all that she hath, and all the increase of the field
from the day of her leaving the land even till now.'

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And Elisha cometh in to Damascus, and
Ben-Hadad king of Aram is sick, and it is declared to him, saying, \`The
man of God hath come hither.'

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And the king saith unto Hazael, \`Take in
thy hand a present, and go to meet the man of God, and thou hast sought
Jehovah by him, saying, Do I revive from this sickness?'

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And Hazael goeth to meet him, and taketh a
present in his hand, even of every good thing of Damascus, a burden of
forty camels, and he cometh in and standeth before him, and saith, \`Thy
son Ben-Hadad, king of Aram, hath sent me unto thee, saying, Do I revive
from this sickness?'

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And Elisha saith unto him, \`Go, say,
Thou dost certainly not revive, seeing Jehovah hath shewed me that he
doth surely die.'

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And he setteth his face, yea, he setteth
\[it\] till he is ashamed, and the man of God weepeth.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And Hazael saith, \`Wherefore is my lord
weeping?' and he saith, \`Because I have known the evil that thou dost
to the sons of Israel -- their fenced places thou dost send into fire,
and their young men with sword thou dost slay, and their sucklings thou
dost dash to pieces, and their pregnant women thou dost rip up.'

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And Hazael saith, \`But what, \[is\] thy
servant the dog, that he doth this great thing?' And Elisha saith,
\`Jehovah hath shewed me thee -- king of Aram.'

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And he goeth from Elisha, and cometh in
unto his lord, and he saith unto him, \`What said Elisha to thee?' and
he saith, \`He said to me, Thou dost certainly recover.'

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And it cometh to pass on the morrow, that
he taketh the coarse cloth, and dippeth in water, and spreadeth on his
face, and he dieth, and Hazael reigneth in his stead.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And in the fifth year of Joram son of
Ahab king of Israel -- and Jehoshaphat \[is\] king of Judah -- hath
Jehoram son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah reigned;

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> a son of thirty and two years was he in
his reigning, and eight years he hath reigned in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And he walketh in the way of the kings of
Israel, as did the house of Ahab, for a daughter of Ahab was to him for
a wife, and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah,

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> and Jehovah was not willing to destroy
Judah, for the sake of David his servant, as He said to him, to give to
him a lamp -- to his sons all the days.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> In his days hath Edom revolted from under
the hand of Judah, and they cause a king to reign over them,

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> and Joram passeth over to Zair, and all
the chariots with him, and he himself hath risen by night, and smiteth
Edom, that is coming round about unto him, and the heads of the
chariots, and the people fleeth to its tents;

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> and Edom revolteth from under the hand of
Judah till this day; then doth Libnah revolt at that time.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And the rest of the matters of Joram, and
all that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of
the kings of Judah?

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And Joram lieth with his fathers, and is
buried with his fathers in the city of David, and reign doth Ahaziah his
son in his stead.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> In the twelfth year of Joram son of Ahab
king of Israel reigned hath Ahaziah son of Jehoram king of Judah;

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> a son of twenty and two years \[is\]
Ahaziah in his reigning, and one year he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and
the name of his mother \[is\] Athaliah daughter of Omri king of Israel,

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> and he walketh in the way of the house of
Ahab, and doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, like the house of
Ahab, for he \[is\] son-in-law of the house of Ahab.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And he goeth with Joram son of Ahab to
battle with Hazael king of Aram in Ramoth-Gilead, and the Aramaeans
smite Joram,

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> and Joram the king turneth back to be
healed in Jezreel of the wounds with which the Arameans smite him in
Ramah, in his fighting with Hazael king of Aram, and Ahaziah son of
Jehoram king of Judah hath gone down to see Joram son of Ahab in
Jezreel, for he is sick.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And Elisha the prophet hath called to one
of the sons of the prophets, and saith to him, \`Gird up thy loins, and
take this vial of oil in thy hand, and go to Ramoth-Gilead,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> and thou hast gone in there, and see thou
there Jehu son of Jehoshaphat, son of Nimshi, and thou hast gone in, and
caused him to rise out of the midst of his brethren, and brought him in
to the inner part of an inner-chamber,

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> and taken the vial of oil, and poured on
his head, and said, Thus said Jehovah, I have anointed thee for king
unto Israel; and thou hast opened the door, and fled, and dost not
wait.'

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And the young man goeth -- the young man
the prophet -- to Ramoth-Gilead,

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> and cometh in, and lo, chiefs of the force
are sitting, and he saith, \`I have a word unto thee, O chief!' and Jehu
saith, \`Unto which of all of us?' and he saith, \`Unto thee, O chief.'

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And he riseth and cometh in to the house,
and he poureth the oil on his head, and saith to him, \`Thus said
Jehovah, God of Israel, I have anointed thee for king unto the people of
Jehovah, unto Israel,

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> and thou hast smitten the house of Ahab thy
lord, and I have required the blood of My servants the prophets, and the
blood of all the servants of Jehovah, from the hand of Jezebel;

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> and perished hath all the house of Ahab,
and I have cut off to Ahab those sitting on the wall, and restrained,
and left, in Israel,

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> and I have given up the house of Ahab like
the house of Jeroboam son of Nebat, and as the house of Baasha son of
Ahijah,

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> and Jezebel do the dogs eat in the
portion of Jezreel, and there is none burying;' and he openeth the door
and fleeth.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And Jehu hath gone out unto the servants
of his lord, and \[one\] saith to him, \`Is there peace? wherefore came
this madman unto thee?' and he saith unto them, \`Ye have known the man
and his talk.'

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And they say, \`False, declare, we pray
thee, to us;' and he saith, \`Thus and thus spake he unto me, saying,
Thus said Jehovah, I have anointed thee for king unto Israel.'

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And they haste and take each his garment,
and put \[it\] under him at the top of the stairs, and blow with a
trumpet, and say, \`Reigned hath Jehu!'

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And Jehu son of Jehoshaphat, son of
Nimshi, conspireth against Joram -- (and Joram was keeping in
Ramoth-Gilead, he and all Israel, from the presence of Hazael king of
Aram,

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> and king Joram turneth back to be healed
in Jezreel, of the wounds with which the Aramaeans smite him, in his
fighting with Hazael king of Aram) -- and Jehu saith, \`If it is your
mind, let not an escaped one go out from the city, to go to declare
\[it\] in Jezreel.'

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And Jehu rideth, and goeth to Jezreel,
for Joram is lying there, and Ahaziah king of Judah hath gone down to
see Joram.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And the watchman is standing on the tower
in Jezreel, and seeth the company of Jehu in his coming, and saith, \`A
company I see;' and Joram saith, \`Take a rider and send to meet them,
and let him say, Is there peace?'

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> and the rider on the horse goeth to meet
him, and saith, \`Thus said the king, Is there peace?' and Jehu saith,
\`What -- to thee and to peace? turn round behind me.' And the watchman
declareth, saying, \`The messenger came unto them, and he hath not
returned.'

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And he sendeth a second rider on a horse,
and he cometh in unto them, and saith, \`Thus said the king, Is there
peace?' and Jehu saith, \`What -- to thee and to peace? turn round
behind me.'

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And the watchman declareth, saying, \`He
came unto them, and he hath not returned, and the driving \[is\] like
the driving of Jehu son of Nimshi, for with madness he driveth.'

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And Jehoram saith, \`Harness;' and his
chariot is harnessed, and Jehoram king of Israel goeth out, and Ahaziah
king of Judah, each in his chariot, and they go out to meet Jehu, and
find him in the portion of Naboth the Jezreelite.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And it cometh to pass, at Jehoram's
seeing Jehu, that he saith, \`Is there peace, Jehu?' and he saith,
\`What \[is\] the peace, while the whoredoms of Jezebel thy mother, and
her witchcrafts, are many?'

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And Jehoram turneth his hands, and
fleeth, and saith unto Ahaziah, \`Deceit, O Ahaziah!'

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> And Jehu hath filled his hand with a bow,
and smiteth Jehoram between his arms, and the arrow goeth out from his
heart, and he boweth down in his chariot.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And \[Jehu\] saith unto Bidkar his
captain, \`Lift up, cast him into the portion of the field of Naboth the
Jezreelite -- for, remember, I and thou were riding together after Ahab
his father, and Jehovah lifted upon him this burden:

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> Have I not the blood of Naboth and the
blood of his sons seen yesternight -- the affirmation of Jehovah -- yea,
I have recompensed to thee in this portion -- the affirmation of
Jehovah; -- and now, lift up, cast him into the portion, according to
the word of Jehovah.'

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And Ahaziah king of Judah hath seen, and
fleeth the way of the garden-house, and Jehu pursueth after him, and
saith, \`Smite him -- also him -- in the chariot,' in the going up to
Gur, that \[is\] Ibleam, and he fleeth to Megiddo, and dieth there,

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> and his servants carry him in a chariot
to Jerusalem, and bury him in his burying-place, with his fathers, in
the city of David.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> And in the eleventh year of Joram son of
Ahab reign did Ahaziah over Judah.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> And Jehu cometh in to Jezreel, and
Jezebel hath heard, and putteth her eyes in paint and maketh right her
head, and looketh out through the window.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> And Jehu hath come into the gate, and she
saith, \`Was there peace \[to\] Zimri -- slayer of his lord?'

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> And he lifteth up his face unto the
window, and saith, \`Who \[is\] with me? -- who?' and look out unto him
do two \[or\] three eunuchs;

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> And he saith, \`Let her go;' and they let
her go, and \[some\] of her blood is sprinkled on the wall, and on the
horses, and he treadeth her down.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> And he cometh in, and eateth, and
drinketh, and saith, \`Look after, I pray you, this cursed one, and bury
her, for she \[is\] a king's daughter.'

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And they go to bury her, and have not
found of her except the skull, and the feet, and the palms of the hands.

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> And they turn back, and declare to him,
and he saith, \`The word of Jehovah it \[is\], that He spake by the hand
of this servant Elijah the Tishbite, saying, In the portion of Jezreel
do the dogs eat the flesh of Jezebel,

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> and the carcase of Jezebel hath been as
dung on the face of the field in the portion of Jezreel, that they say
not, This \[is\] Jezebel.'

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And Ahab hath seventy sons in Samaria,
and Jehu writeth letters, and sendeth to Samaria, unto the heads of
Jezreel, the elders, and unto the supporters of Ahab, saying,

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> \`And now, at the coming in of this
letter unto you, and with you \[are\] sons of your lord, and with you
\[are\] the chariots and the horses, and a fenced city, and the armour,

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> and ye have seen the best and the
uprightest of the sons of your lord, and have set \[him\] on the throne
of his father, and fight ye for the house of your lord.'

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And they fear very greatly, and say,
\`Lo, the two kings have not stood before him, and how do we stand --
we?'

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And he who \[is\] over the house, and he
who \[is\] over the city, and the elders, and the supporters, send unto
Jehu, saying, \`Thy servants we \[are\], and all that thou sayest unto
us we do; we do not make any one king -- that which \[is\] good in thine
eyes do.'

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And he writeth unto them a letter a
second time, saying, \`If ye \[are\] for me, and to my voice are
hearkening, take the heads of the men -- the sons of your lord, and come
unto me about this time to-morrow, to Jezreel;' and the sons of the king
\[are\] seventy men, with the great ones of the city those bringing them
up.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And it cometh to pass, at the coming in
of the letter unto them, that they take the sons of the king, and
slaughter seventy men, and put their heads in baskets, and send unto him
to Jezreel,

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> and the messenger cometh in, and
declareth to him, saying, \`They have brought in the heads of the sons
of the king,' and he saith, \`Make them two heaps at the opening of the
gate till the morning.'

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And it cometh to pass in the morning,
that he goeth out, and standeth, and saith unto all the people,
\`Righteous are ye; lo, I have conspired against my lord, and slay him
-- and who smote all these?

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> Know ye now, that nothing doth fall of
the word of Jehovah to the earth that Jehovah spake against the house of
Ahab, and Jehovah hath done that which He spake by the hand of His
servant Elijah.'

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And Jehu smiteth all those left to the
house of Ahab in Jezreel, and all his great men, and his acquaintances,
and his priests, till he hath not left to him a remnant.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And he riseth, and cometh in and goeth
to Samaria; he \[is\] at the shepherds' shearing-house in the way,

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> and Jehu hath found the brethren of
Ahaziah king of Judah, and saith, \`Who \[are\] ye?' and they say,
\`Brethren of Ahaziah we \[are\], and we go down to salute the sons of
the king, and the sons of the mistress.'

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And he saith, \`Catch them alive;' and
they catch them alive, and slaughter them at the pit of the
shearing-house, forty and two men, and he hath not left a man of them.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And he goeth thence, and findeth
Jehonadab son of Rechab -- to meet him, and blesseth him, and saith unto
him, \`Is thy heart right, as my heart \[is\] with thy heart?' and
Jehonadab saith, \`It is;' -- \`Then it is; give thy hand;' and he
giveth his hand, and he causeth him to come up into him into the
chariot,

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> and saith, \`Come with me, and look on
my zeal for Jehovah;' and they cause him to ride in his chariot.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And he cometh in to Samaria, and
smiteth all those left to Ahab in Samaria, till his destroying him,
according to the word of Jehovah that He spake unto Elisha.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And Jehu gathereth the whole of the
people, and saith unto them, \`Ahab served Baal a little -- Jehu doth
serve him much:

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> and now, all the prophets of Baal, all
his servants, and all his priests, call ye unto me; let not a man be
lacking, for a great sacrifice I have for Baal; every one who is lacking
-- he doth not live;' and Jehu hath done \[it\] in subtilty, in order to
destroy the servants of Baal.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> And Jehu saith, \`Sanctify a restraint
for Baal;' and they proclaim \[it\].

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And Jehu sendeth into all Israel, and
all the servants of Baal come in, and there hath not been left a man who
hath not come in; and they come in to the house of Baal, and the house
of Baal is full -- mouth to mouth.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And he saith to him who \[is\] over the
wardrobe, \`Bring out clothing to all servants of Baal;' and he bringeth
out to them the clothing.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> And Jehu goeth in, and Jehonadab son of
Rechab, to the house of Baal, and saith to the servants of Baal,
\`Search and see, lest there be here with you of the servants of Jehovah
-- but, the servants of Baal by themselves.'

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And they come in to make sacrifices and
burnt-offerings, and Jehu hath set for himself in an out-place eighty
men, and saith, \`The man who letteth escape \[any\] of the men whom I
am bringing in unto your hand -- his soul for his soul.'

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> And it cometh to pass at his finishing
to make the burnt-offering, that Jehu saith to the runners, and to the
captains, \`Go in, smite them, let none come out;' and they smite them
by the mouth of the sword, and the runners and the captains cast
\[them\] out; and they go unto the city, to the house of Baal,

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> and bring out the standing-pillars of
the house of Baal, and burn them,

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> and break down the standing-pillar of
Baal, and break down the house of Baal, and appoint it for a
draught-house unto this day.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And Jehu destroyeth Baal out of Israel,

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> only -- the sins of Jeroboam son of
Nebat, that he caused Israel to sin, Jehu hath not turned aside from
after them -- the calves of gold that \[are\] at Beth-El, and in Dan.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> And Jehovah saith unto Jehu, \`Because
that thou hast done well, to do that which \[is\] right in Mine eyes --
according to all that \[is\] in My heart thou hast done to the house of
Ahab -- the sons of the fourth \[generation\] do sit for thee on the
throne of Israel.'

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> And Jehu hath not taken heed to walk in
the law of Jehovah, God of Israel, with all his heart, he hath not
turned aside from the sins of Jeroboam, that he caused Israel to sin.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> In those days hath Jehovah begun to cut
off \[some\] in Israel, and Hazael smiteth them in all the border of
Israel,

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> from the Jordan, at the sun-rising, the
whole land of Gilead, of the Gadite, and the Reubenite, and the
Manassahite (from Aroer, that \[is\] by the brook Arnon), even Gilead
and Bashan.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> And the rest of the matters of Jehu,
and all that he did, and all his might, are they not written on the book
of the Chronicles of the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> And Jehu lieth with his fathers, and
they bury him in Samaria, and reign doth Jehoahaz his son in his stead.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> And the days that Jehu hath reigned
over Israel \[are\] twenty and eight years, in Samaria.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And Athaliah \[is\] mother of Ahaziah,
and she hath seen that her son \[is\] dead, and she riseth, and
destroyeth all the seed of the kingdom;

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> and Jehosheba daughter of king Joram,
sister of Ahaziah, taketh Joash son of Ahaziah, and stealeth him out of
the midst of the sons of the king who are put to death, him and his
nurse, in the inner part of the bed-chambers, and they hide him from the
presence of Athaliah, and he hath not been put to death,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> and he is with her, in the house of
Jehovah, hiding himself, six years, and Athaliah is reigning over the
land.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And in the seventh year hath Jehoiada
sent and taketh the heads of the hundreds, of the executioners and of
the runners, and bringeth them in unto him, to the house of Jehovah, and
maketh with them a covenant, and causeth them to swear in the house of
Jehovah, and sheweth them the son of the king,

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> and commandeth them, saying, \`This
\[is\] the thing that ye do; The third of you \[are\] going in on the
sabbath, and keepers of the charge of the house of the king,

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> and the third \[is\] at the gate of Sur,
and the third at the gate behind the runners, and ye have kept the
charge of the house pulled down;

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> and two parts of you, all going out on
the sabbath -- they have kept the charge of the house of Jehovah about
the king,

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> and ye have compassed the king round
about, each with his weapons in his hand, and he who is coming unto the
ranges is put to death; and be ye with the king in his going out and in
his coming in.'

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And the heads of the hundreds do
according to all that Jehoiada the priest commanded, and take each his
men going in on the sabbath, with those going out on the sabbath, and
come in unto Jehoiada the priest,

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> and the priest giveth to the heads of
the hundreds the spears and the shields that king David had, that
\[are\] in the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And the runners stand, each with his
weapons in his hand, from the right shoulder of the house unto the left
shoulder of the house, by the altar and by the house, by the king round
about;

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> and he bringeth out the son of the
king, and putteth on him the crown, and the testimony, and they make him
king, and anoint him, and smite the hand, and say, \`Let the king live.'

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And Athaliah heareth the voice of the
runners \[and\] of the people, and she cometh in unto the people, to the
house of Jehovah,

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> and looketh, and lo, the king is
standing by the pillar, according to the ordinance, and the heads, and
the trumpets, \[are\] by the king, and all the people of the land are
rejoicing, and blowing with trumpets, and Athaliah rendeth her garments,
and calleth, \`Conspiracy! conspiracy!'

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And Jehoiada the priest commandeth the
heads of the hundreds, inspectors of the force, and saith unto them,
\`Bring her out unto the outside of the ranges, and him who is going
after her, put to death by the sword:' for the priest had said, \`Let
her not be put to death in the house of Jehovah.'

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And they make for her sides, and she
entereth the way of the entering in of the horses to the house of the
king, and is put to death there.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And Jehoiada maketh the covenant
between Jehovah and the king and the people, to be for a people to
Jehovah, and between the king and the people.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And all the people of the land go in to
the house of Baal, and break it down, its altars and its images they
have thoroughly broken, and Mattan priest of Baal they have slain before
the altars; and the priest setteth inspectors over the house of Jehovah,

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> and taketh the heads of the hundreds,
and the executioners, and the runners, and all the people of the land,
and they bring down the king from the house of Jehovah, and come by the
way of the gate of the runners, to the house of the king, and he sitteth
on the throne of the kings.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> And all the people of the land rejoice,
and the city \[is\] quiet, and Athaliah they have put to death by the
sword in the house of the king;

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> a son of seven years is Jehoash in his
reigning.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> In the seventh year of Jehu reigned hath
Jehoash, and forty years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of
his mother \[is\] Zibiah of Beer-Sheba,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> and Jehoash doth that which is right in
the eyes of Jehovah all his days in which Jehoiada the priest directed
him,

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> only, the high places have not turned
aside, still are the people sacrificing and making perfume in high
places.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And Jehoash saith unto the priests, \`All
the money of the sanctified things that is brought in to the house of
Jehovah, the money of him who is passing over, each the money of his
valuation, all the money that it goeth up on the heart of a man to bring
in to the house of Jehovah,

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> do the priests take to them, each from
his acquaintance, and they strengthen the breach of the house, in all
\[places\] where there is found a breach.'

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And it cometh to pass, in the twenty and
third year of king Jehoash, the priests have not strengthened the breach
of the house,

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> and king Jehoash calleth to Jehoiada the
priest, and to the priests, and saith unto them, \`Wherefore are ye not
strengthening the breach of the house? and now, receive no money from
your acquaintances, but for the breach of the house give it.'

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And the priests consent not to receive
money from the people, nor to strengthen the breach of the house,

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> and Jehoiada the priest taketh a chest,
and pierceth a hole in its lid, and putteth it near the altar, on the
right side, as one cometh in to the house of Jehovah, and the priests
keeping the threshold have put there all the money that is brought in to
the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And it cometh to pass, at their seeing
that the money \[is\] abundant in the chest, that there goeth up a
scribe of the king, and of the high priest, and they bind \[it\] up, and
count the money that is found \[in\] the house of Jehovah,

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> and have given the weighed money into
the hands of those doing the work, those inspecting the house of
Jehovah, and they bring it out to those working in the wood, and to
builders who are working in the house of Jehovah,

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> and to those \[repairing\] the wall,
and to hewers of stone, and to buy wood and hewn stones to strengthen
the breach of the house of Jehovah, and for all that goeth out on the
house, to strengthen it.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Only, there is not made for the house
of Jehovah basins of silver, snuffers, bowls, trumpets, any vessel of
gold, and vessel of silver, out of the money that is brought into the
house of Jehovah;

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> for to those doing the work they give
it, and they have strengthened with it the house of Jehovah,

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> and they do not reckon with the men
into whose hand they give the money to give to those doing the work, for
in faithfulness they are dealing.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> The money of a trespass-offering, and
the money of sin-offerings is not brought in to the house of Jehovah --
for the priests it is.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> Then go up doth Hazael king of Aram,
and fighteth against Gath, and captureth it, and Hazael setteth his face
to go up against Jerusalem;

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> and Jehoash king of Judah taketh all
the sanctified things that Jehoshaphat, and Jehoram, and Ahaziah, his
fathers, kings of Judah, had sanctified, and his own sanctified things,
and all the gold that is found in the treasures of the house of Jehovah
and of the house of the king, and sendeth to Hazael king of Aram, and he
goeth up from off Jerusalem.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> And the rest of the matters of Joash,
and all that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles
of the kings of Judah?

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> And his servants rise, and make a
conspiracy, and smite Joash in the house of Millo, that is going down to
Silla:

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> yea, Jozachar son of Shimeath, and
Jehozabad son of Shemer, his servants, have smitten him, and he dieth,
and they bury him with his fathers in the city of David, and reign doth
Amaziah his son, in his stead.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> In the twenty and third year of Joash son
of Ahaziah king of Judah, hath Jehoahaz son of Jehu reigned over Israel,
in Samaria -- seventeen years,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of
Jehovah, and goeth after the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat, that he
caused Israel to sin -- he turned not aside from it,

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> and the anger of Jehovah burneth against
Israel, and He giveth them into the hand of Hazael king of Aram, and
into the hand of Ben-Hadad son of Hazael, all the days.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> And Jehoahaz appeaseth the face of
Jehovah, and Jehovah hearkeneth unto him, for He hath seen the
oppression of Israel, for oppressed them hath the king of Aram, --

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> and Jehovah giveth to Israel a saviour,
and they go out from under the hand of Aram, and the sons of Israel
dwell in their tents as heretofore;

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> only, they have not turned aside from the
sins of the house of Jeroboam, that he caused Israel to sin, therein
they walked, and also, the shrine hath remained in Samaria, --

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> for he left not to Jehoahaz of the people
except fifty horsemen, and ten chariots, and ten thousand footmen, for
the king of Aram hath destroyed them, and maketh them as dust for
threshing.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And the rest of the matters of Jehoahaz,
and all that he did, and his might, are they not written on the book of
the Chronicles of the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> And Jehoahaz lieth with his fathers, and
they bury him in Samaria, and reign doth Joash his son in his stead.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> In the thirty and seventh year of Joash
king of Judah reigned hath Jehoash son of Jehoahaz over Israel, in
Samaria -- sixteen years,

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> and he doth the evil thing in the eyes
of Jehovah, he hath not turned aside from all the sins of Jeroboam son
of Nebat, that he caused Israel to sin, therein he walked.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> And the rest of the matters of Joash,
and all that he did, and his might with which he fought with Amaziah
king of Judah, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the
kings of Israel?

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And Joash lieth with his fathers, and
Jeroboam hath sat on his throne, and Joash is buried in Samaria, with
the kings of Israel.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And Elisha hath been sick with his
sickness in which he dieth, and come down unto him doth Joash king of
Israel, and weepeth on his face, and saith, \`My father, my father, the
chariot of Israel, and its horsemen.'

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> And Elisha saith to him, \`Take bow and
arrows:' and he taketh unto him bow and arrows.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And he saith to the king of Israel,
\`Place thy hand on the bow;' and he placeth his hand, and Elisha
putteth his hands on the hands of the king,

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> and saith, \`Open the window eastward;'
and he openeth, and Elisha saith, \`Shoot,' and he shooteth; and he
saith, \`An arrow of salvation to Jehovah, and an arrow of salvation
against Aram, and thou hast smitten Aram, in Aphek, till consuming.'

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> And he saith, \`Take the arrows,' and
he taketh; and he saith to the king of Israel, \`Smite to the earth;'
and he smiteth three times, and stayeth.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And the man of God is wroth against
him, and saith, \`By smiting five or six times then thou hadst smitten
Aram till consuming; and now, three times thou dost smite Aram.'

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And Elisha dieth, and they bury him,
and troops of Moab come in to the land, at the coming in of the year,

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> and it cometh to pass, they are burying
a man, and lo, they have seen the troop, and cast the man into the grave
of Elisha, and the man goeth and cometh against the bones of Elisha, and
liveth, and riseth on his feet.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And Hazael king of Aram hath oppressed
Israel all the days of Jehoahaz,

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> and Jehovah doth favour them, and pity
them, and turn unto them, for the sake of His covenant with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and hath not been willing to destroy them, nor to cast
them from His presence as yet.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> And Hazael king of Aram dieth, and
reign doth Ben-Hadad his son in his stead,

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> and Jehoash son of Jehoahaz turneth and
taketh the cities out of the hand of Ben-Hadad son of Hazael that he had
taken out of the hand of Jehoahaz his father in war; three times hath
Joash smitten him, and he bringeth back the cities of Israel.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> In the second year of Joash son of
Jehoahaz king of Israel reigned hath Amaziah son of Joash king of Judah;

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> a son of twenty and five years was he in
his reigning, and twenty and nine years he hath reigned in Jerusalem,
and the name of his mother \[is\] Jehoaddan of Jerusalem,

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> and he doth that which \[is\] right in
the eyes of Jehovah, only not like David his father, according to all
that Joash his father did he hath done,

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> only, the high places have not turned
aside -- yet are the people sacrificing and making perfume in high
places.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And it cometh to pass, when the kingdom
hath been strong in his hand, that he smiteth his servants, those
smiting the king his father,

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> and the sons of those smiting \[him\] he
hath not put to death, as it is written in the book of the law of Moses
that Jehovah commanded, saying, \`Fathers are not put to death for sons,
and sons are not put to death for fathers, but each for his own sin is
put to death.'

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> He hath smitten Edom, in the valley of
salt -- ten thousand, and seized Selah in war, and \[one\] calleth its
name Joktheel unto this day,

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> then hath Amaziah sent messengers unto
Jehoash son of Jehoahaz, son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, \`Come, we
look one another in the face.'

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And Jehoash king of Israel sendeth unto
Amaziah king of Judah, saying, \`The thorn that \[is\] in Lebanon hath
sent unto the cedar that \[is\] in Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter to
my son for a wife; and pass by doth a beast of the field that \[is\] in
Lebanon, and treadeth down the thorn.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> Thou hast certainly smitten Edom, and
thy heart hath lifted thee up; be honoured, and abide in thy house; and
why dost thou stir thyself up in evil, that thou hast fallen, thou, and
Judah with thee?'

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And Amaziah hath not hearkened, and go
up doth Jehoash king of Israel, and they look one another in the face,
he and Amaziah king of Judah, in Beth-Shemesh, that \[is\] Judah's,

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> and Judah is smitten before Israel, and
they flee each to his tent.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And Amaziah king of Judah, son of
Jehoash son of Ahaziah, caught hath Jehoash king of Israel in
Beth-Shemesh, and they come in to Jerusalem, and he bursteth through the
wall of Jerusalem, at the gate of Ephraim unto the gate of the corner,
four hundred cubits,

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> and hath taken all the gold and the
silver, and all the vessels that are found in the house of Jehovah, and
in the treasures of the house of the king, and the sons of the pledges,
and turneth back to Samaria.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And the rest of the matters of Jehoash
that he did, and his might, and how he fought with Amaziah king of
Judah, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings
of Israel?

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And Jehoash lieth with his fathers, and
is buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel, and reign doth Jeroboam
his son in his stead.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And Amaziah son of Joash king of Judah
liveth after the death of Jehoash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel fifteen
years,

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> and the rest of the matters of Amaziah
are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of
Judah?

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And they make a conspiracy against him
in Jerusalem, and he fleeth to Lachish, and they send after him to
Lachish, and put him to death there,

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> and lift him up on the horses, and he
is buried in Jerusalem, with his fathers, in the city of David.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And all the people of Judah take
Azariah, and he \[is\] a son of sixteen years, and cause him to reign
instead of his father Amaziah;

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> he hath built Elath, and bringeth it
back to Judah, after the lying of the king with his fathers.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> In the fifteenth year of Amaziah son of
Joash king of Judah, reigned hath Jeroboam son of Joash king of Israel
in Samaria -- forty and one years,

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> and he doth the evil thing in the eyes
of Jehovah, he hath not turned aside from all the sins of Jeroboam son
of Nebat that he caused Israel to sin.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> He hath brought back the border of
Israel, from the entering in of Hamath unto the sea of the desert,
according to the word of Jehovah, God of Israel, that He spake by the
hand of His servant Jonah son of Amittai the prophet, who \[is\] of
Gath-Hepher,

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> for Jehovah hath seen the affliction of
Israel -- very bitter, and there is none restrained, and there is none
left, and there is no helper to Israel;

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> and Jehovah hath not spoken to blot out
the name of Israel from under the heavens, and saveth them by the hand
of Jeroboam son of Joash.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> And the rest of the matters of
Jeroboam, and all that he did, and his might with which he fought, and
with which he brought back Damascus, and Hamath of Judah, into Israel,
are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of
Israel?

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> And Jeroboam lieth with his fathers,
with the kings of Israel, and reign doth Zechariah his son in his stead.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> In the twenty and seventh year of
Jeroboam king of Israel reigned hath Azariah son of Amaziah king of
Judah,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> a son of sixteen years was he in his
reigning, and fifty and two years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the
name of his mother \[is\] Jecholiah of Jerusalem,

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> and he doth that which \[is\] right in
the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that Amaziah his father did,

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> only, the high places have not turned
aside -- yet are the people sacrificing and making perfume in high
places.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> And Jehovah smiteth the king, and he is a
leper unto the day of his death, and he dwelleth in a separate house,
and Jotham son of the king \[is\] over the house, judging the people of
the land.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> And the rest of the matters of Azariah,
and all that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles
of the kings of Judah?

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And Azariah lieth with his fathers, and
they bury him with his fathers, in the city of David, and reign doth
Jotham his son in his stead.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> In the thirty and eighth year of Azariah
king of Judah reigned hath Zechariah son of Jeroboam over Israel, in
Samaria, six months,

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of
Jehovah, as did his fathers, he hath not turned aside from the sins of
Jeroboam son of Nebat that he caused Israel to sin.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> And Shallum son of Jabesh conspireth
against him, and smiteth him before the people, and putteth him to
death, and reigneth in his stead.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> And the rest of the matters of
Zechariah, lo, they are written on the book of the Chronicles of the
kings of Israel.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> It \[is\] the word of Jehovah that He
spake unto Jehu, saying, \`Sons of the fourth \[generation\] do sit for
thee on the throne of Israel;' and it is so.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> Shallum son of Jabesh hath reigned in
the thirty and ninth year of Uzziah king of Judah, and he reigneth a
month of days in Samaria;

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> and go up doth Menahem son of Gadi from
Tirzah and cometh in to Samaria, and smiteth Shallum son of Jabesh in
Samaria, and putteth him to death, and reigneth in his stead.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And the rest of the matters of Shallum,
and his conspiracy that he made, lo, they are written on the book of the
Chronicles of the kings of Israel.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Then doth Menahem smite Tiphsah, and
all who \[are\] in it, and its borders from Tirzah, for it opened not
\[to him\], and he smiteth \[it\], all its pregnant women he hath ripped
up.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> In the thirty and ninth year of Azariah
king of Judah reigned hath Menahem son of Gadi over Israel -- ten years
in Samaria.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> And he doth the evil in the eyes of
Jehovah, he hath turned not aside from the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat
that he caused Israel to sin, all his days.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> Pul king of Asshur hath come against
the land, and Menahem giveth to Pul a thousand talents of silver, for
his hand being with him to strengthen the kingdom in his hand.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And Menahem bringeth out the silver
\[from\] Israel, \[from\] all the mighty men of wealth, to give to the
king of Asshur, fifty shekels of silver for each one, and the king of
Asshur turneth back and hath not stayed there in the land.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And the rest of the matters of Menahem,
and all that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles
of the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> And Menahem lieth with his fathers, and
reign doth Pekahiah his son in his stead.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> In the fiftieth year of Azariah king of
Judah hath Pekahiah son of Menahem reigned over Israel, in Samaria --
two years,

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> and he doth the evil thing in the eyes
of Jehovah, he hath not turned aside from the sins of Jeroboam son of
Nebat that he caused Israel to sin.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> And Pekah son of Remaliah, his captain,
doth conspire against him, and smiteth him in Samaria, in the high place
of the house of the king with Argob and Arieh, and with him fifty men of
the sons of the Gileadites, and he putteth him to death, and reigneth in
his stead.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> And the rest of the matters of
Pekahiah, and all that he did, lo, they are written on the book of the
Chronicles of the kings of Israel.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> In the fifty and second year of Azariah
king of Judah, reigned hath Pekah son of Remaliah over Israel, in
Samaria -- twenty years,

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> and he doth the evil thing in the eyes
of Jehovah, he hath not turned aside from the sins of Jeroboam son of
Nebat, that he caused Israel to sin.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> In the days of Pekah king of Israel
hath Tiglath-Pileser king of Asshur come, and taketh Ijon, and
Abel-Beth-Maachah, and Janoah, and Kedesh, and Hazor, and Gilead, and
Galilee, all the land of Naphtali, and removeth them to Asshur.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> And make a conspiracy doth Hoshea son
of Elah against Pekah son of Remaliah, and smiteth him, and putteth him
to death, and reigneth in his stead, in the twentieth year of Jotham son
of Uzziah.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> And the rest of the matters of Pekah,
and all that he did, lo, they are written on the book of the Chronicles
of the kings of Israel.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> In the second year of Pekah son of
Remaliah king of Israel reigned hath Jotham son of Uzziah king of Judah.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> A son of twenty and five years was he
in his reigning, and sixteen years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the
name of his mother \[is\] Jerusha daughter of Zadok,

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> and he doth that which \[is\] right in
the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that Uzziah his father did he hath
done.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> Only, the high places have not turned
aside -- yet are the people sacrificing and making perfume in high
places; he hath built the high gate of the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> And the rest of the matters of Jotham,
and all that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles
of the kings of Judah?

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> In those days hath Jehovah begun to
send against Judah Rezin king of Amram and Pekah son of Remaliah.

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> And Jotham lieth with his fathers, and
is buried with his fathers, in the city of David his father, and reign
doth Ahaz his son in his stead.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> In the seventeenth year of Pekah son of
Remaliah reigned hath Ahaz son of Jotham king of Judah.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> A son of twenty years \[is\] Ahaz in his
reigning, and sixteen years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and he hath
not done that which \[is\] right in the eyes of Jehovah his God, like
David his father,

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> and he walketh in the way of the kings of
Israel, and also his son he hath caused to pass over into fire,
according to the abominations of the nations that Jehovah dispossessed
from the presence of the sons of Israel,

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> and he sacrificeth and maketh perfume in
high places, and on the heights, and under every green tree.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> Then doth Rezin king of Aram go up, and
Pekah son of Remaliah king of Israel, to Jerusalem, to battle, and they
lay siege to Ahaz, and they have not been able to fight.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> At that time hath Rezin king of Aram
brought back Elath to Aram, and casteth out the Jews from Elath, and the
Aramaeans have come in to Elath, and dwell there unto this day.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And Ahaz sendeth messengers unto
Tiglath-Pileser king of Asshur, saying, \`Thy servant and thy son \[am\]
I; come up and save me out of the hand of the king of Aram, and out of
the hand of the king of Israel, who are rising up against me.'

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And Ahaz taketh the silver and the gold
that is found in the house of Jehovah, and in the treasures of the house
of the king, and sendeth to the king of Asshur -- a bribe.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And hearken unto him doth the king of
Asshur, and the king of Asshur goeth up unto Damascus, and seizeth it,
and removeth \[the people of\] it to Kir, and Rezin he hath put to
death.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And king Ahaz goeth to meet
Tiglath-Pileser king of Asshur \[at\] Damascus, and seeth the altar that
\[is\] in Damascus, and king Ahaz sendeth unto Urijah the priest the
likeness of the altar, and its pattern, according to all its work,

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> and Urijah the priest buildeth the
altar according to all that king Ahaz hath sent from Damascus; so did
Urijah the priest till the coming in of king Ahaz from Damascus.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And the king cometh in from Damascus,
and the king seeth the altar, and the king draweth near on the altar,
and offereth on it,

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> and perfumeth his burnt-offering, and
his present, and poureth out his libation, and sprinkleth the blood of
the peace-offerings that he hath, on the altar.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> As to the altar of brass that \[is\]
before Jehovah -- he bringeth \[it\] near from the front of the house,
from between the altar and the house of Jehovah, and putteth it on the
side of the altar, northward.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And king Ahaz commandeth him -- Urijah
the priest -- saying, \`On the great altar perfume the burnt-offering of
the morning, and the present of the evening, and the burnt-offering of
the king, and his present, and the burnt-offering of all the people of
the land, and their present, and their libations; and all the blood of
the burnt-offering, and all the blood of the sacrifice, on it thou dost
sprinkle, and the altar of brass is to me to inquire \[by\].'

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And Urijah the priest doth according to
all that king Ahaz commanded.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And king Ahaz cutteth off the borders
of the bases, and turneth aside from off them the laver, and the sea he
hath taken down from off the brazen oxen that \[are\] under it, and
putteth it on a pavement of stones.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And the covered place for the sabbath
that they built in the house, and the entrance of the king without, he
turned \[from\] the house of Jehovah, because of the king of Asshur.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> And the rest of the matters of Ahaz
that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the
kings of Judah?

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And Ahaz lieth with his fathers, and is
buried with his fathers, in the city of David, and reign doth Hezekiah
his son in his stead.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> In the twelfth year of Ahaz king of Judah
reigned hath Hoshea son of Elah in Samaria, over Israel -- nine years,

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of
Jehovah, only, not as the kings of Israel who were before him;

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> against him came up Shalmaneser king of
Asshur, and Hoshea is to him a servant, and doth render to him a
present.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And the king of Asshur findeth in Hoshea
a conspiracy, in that he hath sent messengers unto So king of Egypt, and
hath not caused a present to go up to the king of Asshur, as year by
year, and the king of Asshur restraineth him, and bindeth him in a house
of restraint.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And the king of Asshur goeth up into all
the land, and he goeth up to Samaria, and layeth siege against it three
years;

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> in the ninth year of Hoshea hath the king
of Asshur captured Samaria, and removeth Israel to Asshur, and causeth
them to dwell in Halah, and in Habor, \[by\] the river Gozan, and \[in\]
the cities of the Medes.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And it cometh to pass, because the sons
of Israel have sinned against Jehovah their God -- who bringeth them up
out of the land of Egypt, from under the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt
-- and fear other gods,

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> and walk in the statutes of the nations
that Jehovah dispossessed from the presence of the sons of Israel, and
of the kings of Israel that they made;

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> and the sons of Israel do covertly things
that \[are\] not right against Jehovah their God, and build for them
high places in all their cities, from a tower of the watchers unto the
fenced city,

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> and set up for them standing-pillars
and shrines on every high height, and under every green tree,

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> and make perfume there in all high
places, like the nations that Jehovah removed from their presence, and
do evil things to provoke Jehovah,

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> and serve the idols, of which Jehovah
said to them, \`Ye do not do this thing;'

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> And Jehovah testifieth against Israel,
and against Judah, by the hand of every prophet, and every seer, saying,
\`Turn back from your evil ways, and keep My commands, My statutes,
according to all the law that I commanded your fathers, and that I sent
unto you by the hand of My servants the prophets;'

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> and they have not hearkened, and harden
their neck, like the neck of their fathers, who did not remain stedfast
in Jehovah their God,

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> and reject His statutes and His
covenant that He made with their fathers, and His testimonies that He
testified against them, and go after the vain thing, and become vain,
and after the nations that are round about them, of whom Jehovah
commanded them not to do like them;

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> And they forsake all the commands of
Jehovah their God, and make to them a molten image -- two calves, and
make a shrine, and bow themselves to all the host of the heavens, and
serve Baal,

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> and cause their sons and their
daughters to pass over through fire, and divine divinations, and use
enchantments, and sell themselves to do the evil thing in the eyes of
Jehovah, to provoke Him;

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> That Jehovah sheweth himself very angry
against Israel, and turneth them aside from His presence; none hath been
left, only the tribe of Judah by itself.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> Also Judah hath not kept the commands
of Jehovah their God, and they walk in the statutes of Israel that they
had made.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> And Jehovah kicketh against all the
seed of Israel, and afflicteth them, and giveth them into the hand of
spoilers, till that He hath cast them out of His presence,

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> for He hath rent Israel from the house
of David, and they make Jeroboam son of Nebat king, and Jeroboam driveth
Israel from after Jehovah, and hath caused them to sin a great sin,

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> and the sons of Israel walk in all the
sins of Jeroboam that he did, they have not turned aside therefrom,

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> till that Jehovah hath turned Israel
aside from His presence, as He spake by the hand of all His servants the
prophets, and Israel is removed from off its land to Asshur, unto this
day.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> And the king of Asshur bringeth in from
Babylon and from Cutha, and from Ava, and from Hamath, and Sepharvaim,
and causeth \[them\] to dwell in the cities of Samaria instead of the
sons of Israel, and they possess Samaria, and dwell in its cities;

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> and it cometh to pass, at the
commencement of their dwelling there, they have not feared Jehovah, and
Jehovah doth send among them the lions, and they are destroying among
them.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> And they speak to the king of Asshur,
saying, \`The nations that thou hast removed, and dost place in the
cities of Samaria, have not known the custom of the God of the land, and
He sendeth among them the lions, and lo, they are destroying them, as
they do not know the custom of the God of the land.'

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> And the king of Asshur commandeth,
saying, \`Cause to go thither one of the priests whom ye removed thence,
and they go and dwell there, and he doth teach them the custom of the
God of the land.'

<span id="an_17:28">17:28</span> And one of the priests whom they
removed from Samaria cometh in, and dwelleth in Beth-El, and he is
teaching them how they do fear Jehovah,

<span id="an_17:29">17:29</span> and they are making each nation its
gods, and place \[them\] in the houses of the high places that the
Samaritans have made, each nation in their cities where they are
dwelling.

<span id="an_17:30">17:30</span> And the men of Babylon have made
Succoth-Benoth, and the men of Cuth have made Nergal, and the men of
Hamath have made Ashima,

<span id="an_17:31">17:31</span> and the Avites have made Nibhaz and
Tartak, and the Sepharvites are burning their sons with fire to
Adrammelech and Anammelech, gods of Sepharvim.

<span id="an_17:32">17:32</span> And they are fearing Jehovah, and make
to themselves from their extremities priests of high places, and they
are acting for them in the house of the high places.

<span id="an_17:33">17:33</span> Jehovah they are fearing, and their
gods they are serving, according to the custom of the nations whence
they removed them.

<span id="an_17:34">17:34</span> Unto this day they are doing according
to the former customs -- they are not fearing Jehovah, and are not doing
according to their statutes, and according to their ordinances, and
according to the law, and according to the command, that Jehovah
commanded the sons of Jacob whose name He made Israel,

<span id="an_17:35">17:35</span> and Jehovah maketh with them a
covenant, and chargeth them, saying, \`Ye do not fear other gods, nor
bow yourselves to them, nor serve them, nor sacrifice to them,

<span id="an_17:36">17:36</span> but Jehovah who brought you up out of
the land of Egypt with great power, and with a stretched-out arm, Him ye
do fear, and to Him ye bow yourselves, and to Him ye do sacrifice;

<span id="an_17:37">17:37</span> and the statutes, and the judgments,
and the law, and the command, that He wrote for you, ye observe to do
all the days, and ye do not fear other gods;

<span id="an_17:38">17:38</span> and the covenant that I have made with
you ye do not forget, and ye do not fear other gods;

<span id="an_17:39">17:39</span> but Jehovah your God ye do fear, and He
doth deliver you out of the hand of all your enemies;'

<span id="an_17:40">17:40</span> and they have not hearkened, but
according to their former custom they are doing,

<span id="an_17:41">17:41</span> and these nations are fearing Jehovah,
and their graven images they have served, both their sons and their
sons' sons; as their fathers did, they are doing unto this day.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> And it cometh to pass, in the third year
of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel, reigned hath Hezekiah son of Ahaz
king of Judah;

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> a son of twenty and five years was he in
his reigning, and twenty and nine years he hath reigned in Jerusalem,
and the name of his mother \[is\] Abi daughter of Zechariah.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And he doth that which \[is\] right in
the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that David his father did,

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> he hath turned aside the high places, and
broken in pieces the standing-pillars, and cut down the shrine, and
beaten down the brazen serpent that Moses made, for unto these days were
the sons of Israel making perfume to it, and he calleth it \`a piece of
brass.'

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> In Jehovah, God of Israel, he hath
trusted, and after him there hath not been like him among all the kings
of Judah, nor \[among any\] who were before him;

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> and he cleaveth to Jehovah, he hath not
turned aside from after Him, and keepeth His commands that Jehovah
commanded Moses.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And Jehovah hath been with him, in every
place where he goeth out he acteth wisely, and he rebelleth against the
king of Asshur, and hath not served him;

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> he hath smitten the Philistines unto
Gaza, and its borders, from a tower of watchers unto the fenced city.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And it cometh to pass, in the fourth year
of king Hezekiah -- it \[is\] the seventh year of Hoshea son of Elah
king of Israel -- come up hath Shalmaneser king of Asshur against
Samaria, and layeth siege to it,

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> and they capture it at the end of three
years; in the sixth year of Hezekiah -- it \[is\] the ninth year of
Hoshea king of Israel -- hath Samaria been captureth,

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> and the king of Asshur removeth Israel
to Asshur, and placed them in Halah, and in Habor \[by\] the river
Gozan, and \[in\] cities of the Medes,

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> because that they have not hearkened to
the voice of Jehovah their God, and transgress His covenant -- all that
He commanded Moses, servant of Jehovah -- yea, they have not hearkened
nor done \[it\].

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> And in the fourteenth year of king
Hezekiah hath Sennacherib king of Asshur come up against all the fenced
cities of Judah, and seizeth them,

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> and Hezekiah king of Judah sendeth unto
the king of Asshur to Lachish, saying, \`I have sinned, turn back from
off me; that which thou puttest on me I bear;' and the king of Asshur
layeth on Hezekiah king of Judah three hundred talents of silver, and
thirty talents of gold,

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> and Hezekiah giveth all the silver that
is found in the house of Jehovah, and in the treasures of the house of
the king;

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> at that time hath Hezekiah cut off the
doors of the temple of Jehovah, and the pillars that Hezekiah king of
Judah had overlaid, and giveth them to the king of Asshur.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And the king of Asshur sendeth Tartan,
and the chief of the eunuchs, and the chief of the butlers, from
Lachish, unto king Hezekiah, with a heavy force, to Jerusalem, and they
go up and come in to Jerusalem, and they go up, and come in and stand by
the conduit of the upper pool that \[is\] in the highway of the fuller's
field.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> And they call unto the king, and go out
unto them doth Eliakim son of Hilkiah, who \[is\] over the house, and
Shebna the scribe, and Joah son of Asaph the remembrancer.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> And the chief of the butlers saith unto
them, \`Say, I pray you, unto Hezekiah, Thus said the great king, the
king of Asshur, What \[is\] this confidence in which thou hast confided?

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> Thou hast said: Only a word of the
lips! counsel and might \[are\] for battle; now, on whom hast thou
trusted that thou hast rebelled against me?

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> \`Now, lo, thou hast trusted for thee
on the staff of this broken reed, on Egypt; which a man leaneth on, and
it hath gone into his hand, and pierced it! -- so \[is\] Pharaoh king of
Egypt to all those trusting on him.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> \`And when ye say unto me, Unto Jehovah
our God we have trusted, is it not He whose high places and whose altars
Hezekiah hath turned aside, and saith to Judah and to Jerusalem, Before
this altar do ye bow yourselves in Jerusalem?

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> \`And, now, give a pledge for thee, I
pray thee, to my lord the king of Asshur, and I give to thee two
thousand horses, if thou art able to give for thee riders on them.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> And how dost thou turn back the face of
one captain of the least of the servants of my lord, that thou dost
trust for thee on Egypt for chariot, and for horsemen?

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> Now, without Jehovah have I come up
against this place to destroy it? Jehovah said unto me, Go up against
this land, and thou hast destroyed it.'

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> And Eliakim son of Hilkiah saith -- and
Shebna, and Joah -- to the chief of the butlers, \`Speak, we pray thee,
unto thy servants \[in\] Aramaean, for we are understanding, and do not
speak with us \[in\] Jewish, in the ears of the people who \[are\] on
the wall.'

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And the chief of the butlers saith unto
them, \`For thy lord, and unto thee, hath my lord sent me to speak these
words? is it not for the men, those sitting on the wall to eat their own
dung and to drink their own water, with you?'

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> And the chief of the butlers standeth
and calleth with a great voice \[in\] Jewish, and speaketh and saith,
\`Hear ye a word of the great king, the king of Asshur:

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> thus said the king, Let not Hezekiah
lift you up, for he is not able to deliver you out of his hand;

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> and let not Hezekiah make you trust
unto Jehovah, saying, Jehovah doth certainly deliver us, and this city
is not given into the hand of the king of Asshur.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> \`Do not hearken unto Hezekiah, for
thus said the king of Asshur, Make with me a blessing, and come out unto
me, and eat ye each of his vine, and each of his fig-tree, and drink ye
each the waters of his own well,

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> till my coming in, and I have taken you
unto a land like your own land, a land of corn and new wine, a land of
bread and vineyards, a land of oil olive, and honey, and live, and die
not; and do not hearken unto Hezekiah, when he persuadeth you, saying,
Jehovah doth deliver us.

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> \`Have the gods of the nations
delivered at all each his land out of the hand of the king of Asshur?

<span id="an_18:34">18:34</span> Where \[are\] the gods of Hamath and
Arpad? where the gods of Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivvah, that they have
delivered Samaria out of my hand?

<span id="an_18:35">18:35</span> Who \[are they\] among all the gods of
the lands that have delivered their land out of my hand, that Jehovah
doth deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?'

<span id="an_18:36">18:36</span> And the people have kept silent, and
have not answered him a word, for the command of the king is, saying,
\`Do not answer him.'

<span id="an_18:37">18:37</span> And Eliakim son of Hilkiah, who \[is\]
over the house, cometh in, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah son of Asaph
the remembrancer, unto Hezekiah, with rent garments, and they declare to
him the words of the chief of the butlers.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And it cometh to pass, at king Hezekiah's
hearing, that he rendeth his garments, and covereth himself with
sackcloth, and entereth the house of Jehovah,

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> and sendeth Eliakim, who \[is\] over the
house, and Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests, covering
themselves with sackcloth, unto Isaiah the prophet, son of Amoz,

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> and they say unto him, \`Thus said
Hezekiah -- A day of distress, and rebuke, and despising \[is\] this
day; for come have sons unto the birth, and power there is not to bring
forth.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> \`It may be Jehovah thy God doth hear all
the words of the chief of the butlers with which the king of Asshur his
lord hath sent him to reproach the living God, and hath decided
concerning the words that Jehovah thy God hath heard, and thou hast
lifted up prayer for the remnant that is found.'

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And the servants of king Hezekiah come in
unto Isaiah,

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> and Isaiah saith to them, \`Thus do ye
say unto your lord: Thus said Jehovah, Be not afraid because of the
words that thou hast heard, with which the servants of the king of
Asshur have reviled Me.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> Lo, I am giving in him a spirit, and he
hath heard a report, and hath turned back to his land, and I have caused
him to fall by the sword in his land.'

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And the chief of the butlers turneth back
and findeth the king of Asshur fighting against Libnah, for he hath
heard that he hath journeyed from Lachish.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And he heareth concerning Tirhakah king
of Cush, saying, \`Lo, he hath come out to fight with thee;' and he
turneth and sendeth messengers unto Hezekiah, saying,

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> \`Thus do ye speak unto Hezekiah king
of Judah, saying, Let not thy God lift thee up in whom thou art
trusting, saying, Jerusalem is not given into the hand of the king of
Asshur.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> Lo, thou hast heard that which the
kings of Asshur have done to all the lands -- to devote them; and thou
art delivered!

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> did the gods of the nations deliver
them whom my fathers destroyed -- Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the
sons of Eden, who \[are\] in Thelassar?

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Where \[is\] the king of Hamath, and
the king of Arpad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, Hena, and
Ivvah?'

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And Hezekiah taketh the letters out of
the hand of the messengers, and readeth them, and goeth up to the house
of Jehovah, and Hezekiah spreadeth it before Jehovah.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And Hezekiah prayeth before Jehovah,
and saith, \`O Jehovah, God of Israel, inhabiting the cherubs, Thou
\[art\] God Himself -- Thyself alone -- to all the kingdoms of the
earth: Thou hast made the heavens and the earth.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> Incline, O Jehovah, Thine ear, and
hear; open, O Jehovah, Thine eyes, and see; and hear Thou the words of
Sennacherib with which he hath sent him to reproach the living God.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> \`Truly, O Jehovah, kings of Asshur
have laid waste the nations, and their land,

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> and have put their gods into fire, for
they \[are\] no gods, but work of the hands of man, wood and stone, and
destroy them.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> And now, O Jehovah our God, save us, we
pray Thee, out of his hand, and know do all kingdoms of the earth that
Thou \[art\] Jehovah God -- Thyself alone.'

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And Isaiah son of Amoz sendeth unto
Hezekiah, saying, \`Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, That which thou
hast prayed unto Me concerning Sennacherib king of Asshur I have heard:

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> this \[is\] the word that Jehovah spake
concerning him: \`Trampled on thee -- laughed at thee, Hath the virgin
daughter of Zion Behind thee shaken the head -- Hath the daughter of
Jerusalem?

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> Whom hast thou reproached and reviled?
And against whom lifted up a voice? Yea, thou dost lift up on high thine
eyes -- Against the Holy One of Israel!

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> By the hand of thy messengers Thou hast
reproached the Lord, and sayest: In the multitude of my chariots I have
come up to a high place of mountains -- The sides of Lebanon, And I cut
down the height of its cedars, The choice of its firs, And I enter the
lodging of its extremity, The forest of its Carmel.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> I have digged, and drunk strange
waters, And I dry up with the sole of my steps All floods of a bulwark.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> Hast thou not heard from afar, it I
made, From days of old that I formed it? Now I have brought it in, And
it becometh a desolation, Ruinous heaps \[are\] fenced cities,

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> And their inhabitants \[are\]
feeble-handed, They were broken down, and are dried up, They have been
the herb of the field, And the greenness of the tender grass, Grass of
the roofs, And blasted corn -- before it hath risen up!

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> And thy sitting down, and thy going
out, And thy coming in, I have known, And thine anger towards Me;

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> Because of thine anger towards Me, And
thy noise -- it came up into Mine ears, I have put My hook in thy nose,
And My bridle in thy lips, And have caused thee to turn back, In the way
in which thou camest.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> And this to thee \[is\] the sign, Food
of the year \[is\] the spontaneous growth, And in the second year the
self-produced, And in the third year sow ye, and reap, And plant
vineyards, and eat their fruits.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> And it hath continued -- The escaped of
the house of Judah That hath been left -- to take root beneath, And hath
made fruit upward.

<span id="an_19:31">19:31</span> For from Jerusalem goeth out a remnant,
And an escape from mount Zion; The zeal of Jehovah \[of Hosts\] doth
this.

<span id="an_19:32">19:32</span> Therefore, thus said Jehovah,
Concerning the king of Asshur: He doth not come in unto this city, Nor
doth he shoot there an arrow, Nor doth he come before it with shield.
Nor doth he pour out against it a mount.

<span id="an_19:33">19:33</span> In the way that he cometh in -- In it
he turneth back, And unto this city he doth not come in, The affirmation
of Jehovah --

<span id="an_19:34">19:34</span> And I have covered over this city, To
save it, for Mine own sake, And for the sake of David My servant.'

<span id="an_19:35">19:35</span> And it cometh to pass, in that night,
that a messenger of Jehovah goeth out, and smiteth in the camp of Asshur
a hundred eighty and five thousand, and they rise early in the morning,
and lo, all of them \[are\] dead corpses.

<span id="an_19:36">19:36</span> And Sennacherib king of Asshur
journeyeth, and goeth, and turneth back, and dwelleth in Nineveh;

<span id="an_19:37">19:37</span> and it cometh to pass, he is bowing
himself in the house of Nisroch his god, and Adramelech and Sharezar
\[his sons\] have smitten him with the sword, and they have escaped to
the land of Ararat, and Esar-Haddon his son reigneth in his stead.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> In those days hath Hezekiah been sick
unto death, and come unto him doth Isaiah son of Amoz the prophet, and
saith unto him, \`Thus said Jehovah: Give a charge to thy house, for
thou art dying, and dost not live.'

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And he turneth round his face unto the
wall, and prayeth unto Jehovah, saying,

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> \`I pray Thee, O Jehovah, remember, I
pray Thee, how I have walked habitually before Thee in truth, and with a
perfect heart, and that which \[is\] good in Thine eyes I have done;'
and Hezekiah weepeth -- a great weeping.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> And it cometh to pass -- Isaiah hath not
gone out to the middle court -- that the word of Jehovah hath been unto
him, saying,

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> \`Turn back, and thou hast said unto
Hezekiah, leader of My people: Thus said Jehovah, God of David thy
father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tear, lo, I give
healing to thee, on the third day thou dost go up to the house of
Jehovah;

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> and I have added to thy days fifteen
years, and out of the hand of the king of Asshur I deliver thee and this
city, and have covered over this city for Mine own sake, and for the
sake of David My servant.'

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> And Isaiah saith, \`Take ye a cake of
figs;' and they take and lay \[it\] on the boil, and he reviveth.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And Hezekiah saith unto Isaiah, \`What
\[is\] the sign that Jehovah doth give healing to me, that I have gone
up on the third day to the house of Jehovah?'

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And Isaiah saith, \`This \[is\] to thee
the sign from Jehovah, that Jehovah doth the thing that He hath spoken
-- The shadow hath gone on ten degrees, or it doth turn back ten
degrees?'

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> And Hezekiah saith, \`It hath been
light for the shadow to incline ten degrees: nay, but let the shadow
turn backward ten degrees.'

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And Isaiah the prophet calleth unto
Jehovah, and He bringeth back the shadow by the degrees that it had gone
down in the degrees of Ahaz -- backward ten degrees.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> At that time hath Berodach-Baladan son
of Baladan king of Babylon sent letters and a present unto Hezekiah, for
he heard that Hezekiah had been sick;

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> and Hezekiah hearkeneth unto them, and
sheweth them all the house of his treasury, the silver, and the gold,
and the spices, and the good ointment, and all the house of his vessels,
and all that hath been found in his treasuries; there hath not been a
thing that Hezekiah hath not shewed them, in his house, and in all his
dominion.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> And Isaiah the prophet cometh in unto
king Hezekiah, and saith unto him, \`What said these men? and whence
come they unto thee?' And Hezekiah saith, \`From a land afar off they
have come -- from Babylon.'

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> And he saith, \`What saw they in thy
house?' and Hezekiah saith, \`All that \[is\] in my house they saw;
there hath not been a thing that I have not shewed them among my
treasures.'

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> And Isaiah saith unto Hezekiah, \`Hear
a word of Jehovah:

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Lo, days are coming, and borne hath
been all that \[is\] in thy house, and that thy father have treasured up
till this day, to Babylon; there is not left a thing, said Jehovah;

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> and of thy sons who go out from thee,
whom thou begettest, they take away, and they have been eunuchs in the
palace of the king of Babylon.'

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> And Hezekiah saith unto Isaiah, \`Good
\[is\] the word of Jehovah that thou hast spoken;' and he saith, \`Is it
not -- if peace and truth are in my days?'

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And the rest of the matters of
Hezekiah, and all his might, and how he made the pool, and the conduit,
and bringeth in the waters to the city, are they not written on the book
of the Chronicles of the kings of Judah?

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> And Hezekiah lieth with his fathers,
and reign doth Manasseh his son in his stead.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> A son of twelve years \[is\] Manasseh in
his reigning, and fifty and five years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and
the name of his mother \[is\] Hephzi-Bah;

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of
Jehovah, according to the abominations of the nations that Jehovah
dispossessed from the presence of the sons of Israel,

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> and he turneth and buildeth the high
places that Hezekiah his father destroyed, and raiseth altars for Baal,
and maketh a shrine, as did Ahab king of Israel, and boweth himself to
all the host of the heavens, and serveth them.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And he hath built altars in the house of
Jehovah, of which Jehovah said, \`In Jerusalem I put My name.'

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> And he buildeth altars to all the host of
the heavens in the two courts of the house of Jehovah;

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> and he hath caused his son to pass
through fire, and observed clouds, and used enchantment, and dealt with
a familiar spirit and wizards; he hath multiplied to do the evil thing
in the eyes of Jehovah -- to provoke to anger.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And he setteth the graven image of the
shrine that he made in the house of which Jehovah said unto David and
unto Solomon his son, \`In this house, and in Jerusalem, that I have
chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, I put My name -- to the age;

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> and I do not add to cause the foot of
Israel to move from the ground that I gave to their fathers, only, if
they observe to do according to all that I commanded them, and to all
the law that My servant Moses commanded them.'

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> And they have not hearkened, and Manasseh
causeth them to err, to do the evil thing above the nations that Jehovah
destroyed from the presence of the sons of Israel.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> And Jehovah speaketh by the hand of his
servants the prophets, saying,

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> \`Because that Manasseh king of Judah
hath done these abominations -- he hath done evil above all that the
Amorites have done who \[are\] before him, and causeth also Judah to sin
by his idols;

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> therefore thus said Jehovah, God of
Israel, Lo, I am bringing in evil on Jerusalem and Judah, that whoever
heareth of it, tingle do his two ears.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> And I have stretched out over Jerusalem
the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab, and wiped
Jerusalem as one wipeth the dish -- he hath wiped, and hath turned
\[it\] on its face.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> \`And I have left the remnant of Mine
inheritance, and given them into the hand of their enemies, and they
have been for a prey and for a spoil to all their enemies,

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> because that they have done the evil
thing in Mine eyes, and are provoking Me to anger from the day that
their fathers came out of Egypt, even unto this day.'

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> And also, innocent blood hath Manasseh
shed very much, till that he hath filled Jerusalem -- mouth to mouth;
apart from his sin that he hath caused Judah to sin, to do the evil
thing in the eyes of Jehovah.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And the rest of the matters of
Manasseh, and all that he did, and his sin that he sinned, are they not
written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Judah?

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> And Manasseh lieth with his fathers,
and is buried in the garden of his house, in the garden of Uzza, and
reign doth Amon his son in his stead.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> A son of twenty and two years \[is\]
Amon in his reigning, and two years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and
the name of his mother \[is\] Meshullemeth daughter of Haruz of Jotbah,

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> and he doth the evil thing in the eyes
of Jehovah, as did Manasseh his father,

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> and walketh in all the way that his
father walked in, and serveth the idols that his father served, and
boweth himself to them,

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> and forsaketh Jehovah, God of his
fathers, and hath not walked in the way of Jehovah.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> And the servants of Amon conspire
against him, and put the king to death in his own house,

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> and the people of the land smite all
those conspiring against king Amon, and the people of the land cause
Josiah his son to reign in his stead.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> And the rest of the matters of Amon
that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the
kings of Judah?

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> and \[one\] burieth him in his
burying-place in the garden of Uzza, and reign doth Josiah his son in
his stead.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> A son of eight years \[is\] Josiah in his
reigning, and thirty and one years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the
name of his mother \[is\] Jedidah daughter of Adaiah of Boskath,

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> and he doth that which is right in the
eyes of Jehovah, and walketh in all the way of David his father, and
hath not turned aside -- right or left.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> And it cometh to pass, in the eighteenth
year of king Josiah, the king hath sent Shaphan son of Azaliah, son of
Meshullam, the scribe, to the house of Jehovah, saying,

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> \`Go up unto Hilkiah the high priest, and
he doth complete the silver that is brought into the house of Jehovah,
that the keepers of the threshold have gathered from the people,

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> and they give it into the hand of the
doers of the work, the overseers, in the house of Jehovah, and they give
it to the doers of the work that \[is\] in the house of Jehovah, to
strengthen the breach of the house,

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> to artificers, and to builders, and \[to
repairers of\] the wall, and to buy wood and hewn stones to strengthen
the house;

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> only, the silver that is given into their
hand is not reckoned with them, for in faithfulness they are dealing.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And Hilkiah the high priest saith unto
Shaphan the scribe, \`A book of the law I have found in the house of
Jehovah;' and Hilkiah giveth the book unto Shaphan, and he readeth it.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> And Shaphan the scribe cometh in unto the
king, and bringeth the king back word, and saith, \`Thy servants have
poured out the silver that hath been found in the house, and give it
into the hand of the doers of the work, the inspectors, in the house of
Jehovah.'

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> And Shaphan the scribe declareth to the
king, saying, \`A book hath Hilkiah the priest given to me;' and Shaphan
readeth it before the king.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And it cometh to pass, at the king's
hearing the words of the book of the law, that he rendeth his garments,

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> and the king commandeth Hilkiah the
priest, and Ahikam son of Shaphan, and Achbor son of Michaiah, and
Shaphan the scribe, and Asahiah servant of the king, saying,

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> \`Go, seek Jehovah for me, and for the
people, and for all Judah, concerning the words of this book that is
found, for great \[is\] the fury of Jehovah that is kindled against us,
because that our fathers have not hearkened unto the words of this book,
to do according to all that is written for us.'

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And Hilkiah the priest goeth, and
Ahikam, and Achbor, and Shaphan, and Asahiah, unto Huldah the
prophetess, wife of Shallum, son of Tikvah, son of Harhas, keeper of the
garments, and she is dwelling in Jerusalem in the second, and they speak
unto her.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> And she saith unto them, \`Thus said
Jehovah, God of Israel, Say to the man who hath sent you unto me:

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> Thus said Jehovah, Lo, I am bringing in
evil unto this place and on its inhabitants, all the words of the book
that the king of Judah hath read,

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> because that they have forsaken Me, and
make perfume to other gods, so as to provoke Me to anger with every work
of their hands, and My wrath hath been kindled against this place, and
it is not quenched.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> \`And unto the king of Judah, who is
sending you to seek Jehovah, thus do ye say unto him, Thus said Jehovah,
God of Israel, The words that thou hast heard --

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> because thy heart \[is\] tender, and
thou art humbled because of Jehovah, in thy hearing that which I have
spoken against this place, and against its inhabitants, to be for a
desolation, and for a reviling, and dost rend thy garments, and weep
before Me -- I also have heard -- the affirmation of Jehovah --

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> therefore, lo, I am gathering thee unto
thy fathers, and thou hast been gathered unto thy grave in peace, and
thine eyes do not look on any of the evil that I am bringing in on this
place;' and they bring the king back word.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> And the king sendeth, and they gather
unto him all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem,

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> and the king goeth up to the house of
Jehovah, and every man of Judah, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
with him, and the priests, and the prophets, and all the people, from
small unto great, and he readeth in their ears all the words of the book
of the covenant that is found in the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> And the king standeth by the pillar, and
maketh the covenant before Jehovah, to walk after Jehovah, and to keep
His commands, and His testimonies, and His statutes, with all the heart,
and with all the soul, to establish the words of this covenant that are
written on this book, and all the people stand in the covenant.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> And the king commandeth Hilkiah the high
priest, and the priests of the second order, and the keepers of the
threshold, to bring out from the temple of Jehovah all the vessels that
are made for Baal, and for the shrine, and for all the host of the
heavens, and he burneth them at the outside of Jerusalem, in the fields
of Kidron, and hath borne their ashes to Beth-El.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> And he hath caused to cease the
idolatrous priests whom the kings of Judah have appointed, (and they
make perfume in high places, in cities of Judah and suburbs of
Jerusalem,) and those making perfume to Baal, to the sun, and to the
moon, and to the planets, and to all the host of the heavens.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> And he bringeth out the shrine from the
house of Jehovah to the outside of Jerusalem, unto the brook Kidron, and
burneth it at the brook Kidron, and beateth it small to dust, and
casteth its dust on the grave of the sons of the people.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> And he breaketh down the houses of the
whoremongers that \[are\] in the house of Jehovah, where the women are
weaving houses for the shrine.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> And he bringeth in all the priests out of
the cities of Judah, and defileth the high places where the priests have
made perfume, from Geba unto Beer-Sheba, and hath broken down the high
places of the gates that \[are\] at the opening of the gate of Joshua,
head of the city, that \[is\] on a man's left hand at the gate of the
city;

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> only, the priests of the high places come
not up unto the altar of Jehovah in Jerusalem, but they have eaten
unleavened things in the midst of their brethren.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> And he hath defiled Topheth, that
\[is\] in the valley of the son of Hinnom, so that no man doth cause his
son and his daughter to pass over through fire to Molech.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> And he causeth to cease the horses that
the kings of Judah have given to the sun from the entering in of the
house of Jehovah, by the chamber of Nathan-Melech the eunuch, that
\[is\] in the suburbs, and the chariots of the sun he hath burnt with
fire.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> And the altars that \[are\] on the top
of the upper chamber of Ahaz, that the kings of Judah made, and the
altars that Manasseh made in the two courts of the house of Jehovah,
hath the king broken down, and removeth thence, and hath cast their dust
unto the brook Kidron.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And the high places that \[are\] on the
front of Jerusalem, that \[are\] on the right of the mount of
corruption, that Solomon king of Israel had built to Ashtoreth
abomination of the Zidonians, and Chemosh abomination of Moab, and to
Milcom abomination of the sons of Ammon, hath the king defiled.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> And he hath broken in pieces the
standing-pillars, and cutteth down the shrines, and filleth their place
with bones of men;

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> and also the altar that \[is\] in
Beth-El, the high place that Jeroboam son of Nebat made, by which he
made Israel sin, both that altar and the high place he hath broken down,
and doth burn the high place -- he hath beat it small to dust, and hath
burnt the shrine.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> And Josiah turneth, and seeth the
graves that \[are\] there in the mount, and sendeth and taketh the bones
out of the graves, and burneth \[them\] on the altar, and defileth it,
according to the word of Jehovah that the man of God proclaimed, who
proclaimed these things.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> And he saith, \`What \[is\] this sign
that I see?' and the men of the city say unto him, \`The grave of the
man of God who hath come from Judah, and proclaimeth these things that
thou hast done concerning the altar of Beth-El.'

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> And he saith, \`Let him alone, let no
man touch his bones;' and they let his bones escape, with the bones of
the prophet who came out of Samaria.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> And also all the houses of the high
places that \[are\] in the cities of Samaria, that the kings of Israel
made to provoke to anger, hath Josiah turned aside, and doth to them
according to all the deeds that he did in Beth-El.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> And he slayeth all the priests of the
high places who \[are\] there by the altars, and burneth the bones of
man upon them, and turneth back to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> And the king commandeth the whole of
the people, saying, \`Make ye a passover to Jehovah your God, as it is
written on this book of the covenant.'

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> Surely there hath not been made like
this passover from the days of the judges who judged Israel, even all
the days of the kings of Israel, and of the kings of Judah;

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> but in the eighteenth year of king
Josiah, hath this passover been made to Jehovah in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> And also, those having familiar
spirits, and the wizards, and the teraphim, and the idols, and all the
abominations that were seen in the land of Judah, and in Jerusalem, hath
Josiah put away, in order to establish the words of the law that are
written on the book that Hilkiah the priest hath found in the house of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> And like him there hath not been before
him a king who turned back unto Jehovah with all his heart, and with all
his soul, and with all his might, according to all the law of Moses, and
after him there hath none risen like him.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> Only, Jehovah hath not turned back from
the fierceness of His great anger with which His anger burned against
Judah, because of all the provocations with which Manasseh provoked him,

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> and Jehovah saith, \`Also Judah I turn
aside from my presence, as I turned Israel aside, and I have rejected
this city that I have chosen -- Jerusalem, and the house of which I
said, My name is there.'

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> And the rest of the matters of Josiah,
and all that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles
of the kings of Judah?

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> In his days hath Pharaoh-Nechoh king of
Egypt come up against the king of Asshur, by the river Phrat, and king
Josiah goeth out to meet him, and he putteth him to death in Megiddo,
when he seeth him.

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> And his servants cause him to ride
dying from Megiddo, and bring him in to Jerusalem, and bury him in his
own grave, and the people of the land take Jehoahaz son of Josiah, and
anoint him, and cause him to reign instead of his father.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> A son of twenty and three years \[is\]
Jehoahaz in his reigning, and three months he hath reigned in Jerusalem,
and the name of his mother \[is\] Hamutal daughter of Jeremiah of
Libnah,

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> and he doth the evil thing in the eyes
of Jehovah, according to all that his fathers did,

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> and Pharaoh-Nechoh bindeth him in
Riblah, in the land of Hamath, from reigning in Jerusalem, and he
putteth a fine on the land -- a hundred talents of silver, and a talent
of gold.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> And Pharaoh-Nechoh causeth Eliakim son
of Josiah to reign instead of Josiah his father, and turneth his name to
Jehoiakim, and Jehoahaz he hath taken away, and he cometh in to Egypt,
and dieth there.

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> And the silver and the gold hath
Jehoiakim given to Pharaoh; only he valued the land to give the silver
by the command of Pharaoh; from each, according to his valuation, he
exacted the silver and the gold, from the people of the land, to give to
Pharaoh-Nechoh.

<span id="an_23:36">23:36</span> A son of twenty and five years \[is\]
Jehoiakim in his reigning, and eleven years he hath reigned in
Jerusalem, and the name of his mother \[is\] Zebudah daughter of Pedaiah
of Rumah,

<span id="an_23:37">23:37</span> and he doth the evil thing in the eyes
of Jehovah, according to all that his fathers did.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> In his days hath Nebuchadnezzar king of
Babylon come up, and Jehoiakim is to him a servant three years; and he
turneth and rebelleth against him,

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> and Jehovah sendeth against him the
troops of the Chaldeans, and the troops of Aram, and the troops of Moab,
and the troops of the sons of Ammon, and He sendeth them against Judah
to destroy it, according to the word of Jehovah, that He spake by the
hand of His servants the prophets;

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> only, by the command of Jehovah it hath
been against Judah to turn \[them\] aside from His presence, for the
sins of Manasseh, according to all that he did,

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> and also the innocent blood that he hath
shed, and he filleth Jerusalem with innocent blood, and Jehovah was not
willing to forgive.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> And the rest of the matters of Jehoiakim,
and all that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles
of the kings of Judah?

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> And Jehoiakim lieth with his fathers, and
Jehoiachin his son reigneth in his stead.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> And the king of Egypt hath not added any
more to go out from his own land, for the king of Babylon hath taken,
from the brook of Egypt unto the river Phrat, all that had been to the
king of Egypt.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> A son of eighteen years \[is\] Jehoiachin
in his reigning, and three months he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the
name of his mother \[is\] Nehushta, daughter of Elnathan of Jerusalem,

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of
Jehovah, according to all that his fathers did.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> At that time come up have servants of
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon to Jerusalem, and the city goeth into
siege,

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> and Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon
cometh against the city, and his servants are laying siege to it,

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> and Jehoiachin king of Judah goeth out
unto the king of Babylon, he, and his mother, and his servants, and his
chiefs, and his eunuchs, and the king of Babylon taketh him in the
eighth year of his reign,

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> and bringeth out thence all the
treasures of the house of Jehovah, and the treasures of the house of the
king, and cutteth in pieces all the vessels of gold that Solomon king of
Israel made in the temple of Jehovah, as Jehovah had spoken.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> And he hath removed all Jerusalem, and
all the chiefs, and all the mighty ones of valour -- ten thousand \[is\]
the removal -- and every artificer and smith, none hath been left save
the poor of the people of the land.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> And he removeth Jehoiachin to Babylon,
and the mother of the king, and the wives of the king, and his eunuchs,
and the mighty ones of the land -- he hath caused a removal to go from
Jerusalem to Babylon,

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> and all the men of valour seven
thousand, and the artificers and the smiths a thousand, the whole
\[are\] mighty men, warriors; and the king of Babylon bringeth them in a
captivity to Babylon.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> And the king of Babylon causeth
Mattaniah his father's brother to reign in his stead, and turneth his
name to Zedekiah.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> A son of twenty and one years \[is\]
Zedekiah in his reigning, and eleven years he hath reigned in Jerusalem,
and the name of his mother \[is\] Hamutal daughter of Jeremiah of
Libnah,

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> and he doth the evil thing in the eyes
of Jehovah according to all that Jehoiakim did,

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> for, by the anger of Jehovah it hath
been against Jerusalem and against Judah, till he cast them out from His
presence, that Zedekiah rebelleth against the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> And it cometh to pass, in the ninth year
of his reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth of the month, come hath
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, he and all his force, against Jerusalem,
and encampeth against it, and buildeth against it a fortification round
about.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> And the city entereth into siege till the
eleventh year of king Zedekiah,

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> on the ninth of the month -- when the
famine is severe in the city, and there hath not been bread for the
people of the land,

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> then the city is broken up, and all the
men of war \[go\] by night the way of the gate, between the two walls
that \[are\] by the garden of the king, and the Chaldeans \[are\]
against the city round about, and \[the king\] goeth the way of the
plain.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> And the force of the Chaldeans pursue
after the king, and overtake him in the plains of Jericho, and all his
force have been scattered from him;

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> and they seize the king, and bring him up
unto the king of Babylon, to Riblah, and they speak with him --
judgment.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> And the sons of Zedekiah they have
slaughtered before his eyes, and the eyes of Zedekiah he hath blinded,
and bindeth him with brazen fetters, and they bring him to Babylon.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> And in the fifth month, on the seventh of
the month (it \[is\] the nineteenth year of king Nebuchadnezzar king of
Babylon), hath Nebuzaradan chief of the executioners, servant of the
king of Babylon, come to Jerusalem,

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> and he burneth the house of Jehovah, and
the house of the king, and all the houses of Jerusalem, yea, every great
house he hath burned with fire;

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> and the walls of Jerusalem round about
have all the forces of the Chaldeans, who \[are\] with the chief of the
executioners, broken down.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> And the rest of the people, those left
in the city, and those falling who have fallen to the king of Babylon,
and the rest of the multitude, hath Nebuzaradan chief of the
executioners removed;

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> and of the poor of the land hath the
chief of the executioners left for vine-dressers and for husbandmen.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> And the pillars of brass that \[are\]
in the house of Jehovah, and the bases, and the sea of brass, that
\[is\] in the house of Jehovah, have the Chaldeans broken in pieces, and
bear away their brass to Babylon.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> And the pots, and the shovels, and the
snuffers, and the spoons, and all the vessels of brass with which they
minister they have taken,

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> and the fire-pans, and the bowls that
\[are\] wholly of silver, hath the chief of the executioners taken.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> The two pillars, the one sea, and the
bases that Solomon made for the house of Jehovah, there was no weighing
of the brass of all these vessels;

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> eighteen cubits \[is\] the height of
the one pillar, and the chapiter on it \[is\] of brass, and the height
of the chapiter \[is\] three cubits, and the net and the pomegranates
\[are\] on the chapiter round about -- the whole \[is\] of brass; and
like these hath the second pillar, with the net.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> And the chief of the executioners
taketh Seraiah the head priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the
three keepers of the threshold,

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> and out of the city he hath taken a
certain eunuch who is appointed over the men of war, and five men of
those seeing the king's face who have been found in the city, and the
head scribe of the host, who mustereth the people of the land, and sixty
men of the people of the land who are found in the city,

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> and Nebuzaradan chief of the
executioners taketh them, and causeth them to go unto the king of
Babylon, to Libnah,

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> and the king of Babylon smiteth them,
and putteth them to death in Riblah, in the land of Hamath, and he
removeth Judah from off its land.

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> And the people that is left in the land
of Judah whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon hath left -- he appointeth
over them Gedaliah son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> And all the heads of the forces hear --
they and the men -- that the king of Babylon hath appointed Gedaliah,
and they come in unto Gedaliah, to Mizpah, even Ishmael son of
Nethaniah, and Johanan son of Kareah, and Seraiah son of Tanhumeth the
Netophathite, and Jaazaniah son of the Maachathite -- they and their
men;

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> and Gedaliah sweareth to them, and to
their men, and saith to them, \`Be not afraid of the servants of the
Chaldeans, dwell in the land and serve the king of Babylon, and it is
good for you.'

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> And it cometh to pass, in the seventh
month, come hath Ishmael son of Nathaniah, son of Elishama of the seed
of the kingdom, and ten men with him, and they smite Gedaliah, and he
dieth, and the Jews and the Chaldeans who have been with him in Mizpah.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> And all the people rise, from small
even unto great, and the heads of the forces, and come in to Egypt, for
they have been afraid of the presence of the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> And it cometh to pass, in the thirty
and seventh year of the removal of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the
twelfth month, in the twenty and seventh of the month hath Evil-Merodach
king of Babylon lifted up, in the year of his reigning, the head of
Jehoiachin king of Judah, out of the house of restraint,

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> and speaketh with him good things and
putteth his throne above the throne of the kings who \[are\] with him in
Babylon,

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> and hath changed the garments of his
restraint, and he hath eaten bread continually before him all days of
his life,

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> and his allowance -- a continual
allowance -- hath been given to him from the king, the matter of a day
in its day, all days of his life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles](ch1.md)
