[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mat)  [Next](luk.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Mark

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> A beginning of the good news of Jesus
Christ, Son of God.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> As it hath been written in the prophets,
\`Lo, I send My messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way
before thee,' --

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> \`A voice of one calling in the wilderness,
Prepare ye the way of the Lord, straight make ye his paths,' --

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> John came baptizing in the wilderness, and
proclaiming a baptism of reformation -- to remission of sins,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> and there were going forth to him all the
region of Judea, and they of Jerusalem, and they were all baptized by
him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And John was clothed with camel's hair, and
a girdle of skin around his loins, and eating locusts and honey of the
field,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> and he proclaimed, saying, \`He doth come
-- who is mightier than I -- after me, of whom I am not worthy -- having
stooped down -- to loose the latchet of his sandals;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> I indeed did baptize you with water, but he
shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit.'

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And it came to pass in those days, Jesus
came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized by John at the Jordan;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> and immediately coming up from the water,
he saw the heavens dividing, and the Spirit as a dove coming down upon
him;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> and a voice came out of the heavens,
\`Thou art My Son -- the Beloved, in whom I did delight.'

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And immediately doth the Spirit put him
forth to the wilderness,

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> and he was there in the wilderness forty
days, being tempted by the Adversary, and he was with the beasts, and
the messengers were ministering to him.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And after the delivering up of John,
Jesus came to Galilee, proclaiming the good news of the reign of God,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> and saying -- \`Fulfilled hath been the
time, and the reign of God hath come nigh, reform ye, and believe in the
good news.'

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And, walking by the sea of Galilee, he
saw Simon, and Andrew his brother, casting a drag into the sea, for they
were fishers,

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> and Jesus said to them, \`Come ye after
me, and I shall make you to become fishers of men;'

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> and immediately, having left their nets,
they followed him.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And having gone on thence a little, he
saw James of Zebedee, and John his brother, and they were in the boat
refitting the nets,

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> and immediately he called them, and,
having left their father Zebedee in the boat with the hired servants,
they went away after him.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And they go on to Capernaum, and
immediately, on the sabbaths, having gone into the synagogue, he was
teaching,

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> and they were astonished at his teaching,
for he was teaching them as having authority, and not as the scribes.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And there was in their synagogue a man
with an unclean spirit, and he cried out,

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> saying, \`Away! what -- to us and to
thee, Jesus the Nazarene? thou didst come to destroy us; I have known
thee who thou art -- the Holy One of God.'

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And Jesus rebuked him, saying, \`Be
silenced, and come forth out of him,'

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> and the unclean spirit having torn him,
and having cried with a great voice, came forth out of him,

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> and they were all amazed, so as to reason
among themselves, saying, \`What is this? what new teaching \[is\] this?
that with authority also the unclean spirits he commandeth, and they
obey him!'

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> And the fame of him went forth
immediately to all the region, round about, of Galilee.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> And immediately, having come forth out of
the synagogue, they went to the house of Simon and Andrew, with James
and John,

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> and the mother-in-law of Simon was lying
fevered, and immediately they tell him about her,

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> and having come near, he raised her up,
having laid hold of her hand, and the fever left her immediately, and
she was ministering to them.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> And evening having come, when the sun did
set, they brought unto him all who were ill, and who were demoniacs,

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> and the whole city was gathered together
near the door,

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> and he healed many who were ill of
manifold diseases, and many demons he cast forth, and was not suffering
the demons to speak, because they knew him.

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> And very early, it being yet night,
having risen, he went forth, and went away to a desert place, and was
there praying;

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> and Simon and those with him went in
quest of him,

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> and having found him, they say to him, --
\`All do seek thee;'

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> and he saith to them, \`We may go to the
next towns, that there also I may preach, for for this I came forth.'

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> And he was preaching in their synagogues,
in all Galilee, and is casting out the demons,

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> and there doth come to him a leper,
calling on him, and kneeling to him, and saying to him -- \`If thou
mayest will, thou art able to cleanse me.'

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> And Jesus having been moved with
compassion, having stretched forth the hand, touched him, and saith to
him, \`I will; be thou cleansed;'

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> and he having spoken, immediately the
leprosy went away from him, and he was cleansed.

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> And having sternly charged him,
immediately he put him forth,

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> and saith to him, \`See thou mayest say
nothing to any one, but go away, thyself shew to the priest, and bring
near for thy cleansing the things Moses directed, for a testimony to
them.'

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> And he, having gone forth, began to
proclaim much, and to spread abroad the thing, so that no more he was
able openly to enter into the city, but he was without in desert places,
and they were coming unto him from every quarter.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And again he entered into Capernaum, after
\[some\] days, and it was heard that he is in the house,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> and immediately many were gathered
together, so that there was no more room, not even at the door, and he
was speaking to them the word.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And they come unto him, bringing a
paralytic, borne by four,

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> and not being able to come near to him
because of the multitude, they uncovered the roof where he was, and,
having broken \[it\] up, they let down the couch on which the paralytic
was lying,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> and Jesus having seen their faith, saith to
the paralytic, \`Child, thy sins have been forgiven thee.'

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And there were certain of the scribes there
sitting, and reasoning in their hearts,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> \`Why doth this one thus speak evil words?
who is able to forgive sins except one -- God?'

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And immediately Jesus, having known in his
spirit that they thus reason in themselves, said to them, \`Why these
things reason ye in your hearts?

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> which is easier, to say to the paralytic,
The sins have been forgiven to thee? or to say, Rise, and take up thy
couch, and walk?

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> \`And, that ye may know that the Son of
Man hath authority on the earth to forgive sins -- (he saith to the
paralytic) --

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> I say to thee, Rise, and take up thy
couch, and go away to thy house;'

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> and he rose immediately, and having taken
up the couch, he went forth before all, so that all were astonished, and
do glorify God, saying -- \`Never thus did we see.'

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And he went forth again by the sea, and
all the multitude was coming unto him, and he was teaching them,

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> and passing by, he saw Levi of Alpheus
sitting at the tax-office, and saith to him, \`Be following me,' and he,
having risen, did follow him.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And it came to pass, in his reclining (at
meat) in his house, that many tax-gatherers and sinners were reclining
(at meat) with Jesus and his disciples, for there were many, and they
followed him.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And the scribes and the Pharisees, having
seen him eating with the tax-gatherers and sinners, said to his
disciples, \`Why -- that with the tax-gatherers and sinners he doth eat
and drink?'

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And Jesus, having heard, saith to them,
\`They who are strong have no need of a physician, but they who are ill;
I came not to call righteous men, but sinners to reformation.'

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And the disciples of John and those of
the Pharisees were fasting, and they come and say to him, \`Wherefore do
the disciples of John and those of the Pharisees fast, and thy disciples
do not fast?'

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And Jesus said to them, \`Are the sons of
the bride-chamber able, while the bridegroom is with them, to fast? so
long time as they have the bridegroom with them they are not able to
fast;

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> but days shall come when the bridegroom
may be taken from them, and then they shall fast -- in those days.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> \`And no one a patch of undressed cloth
doth sew on an old garment, and if not -- the new filling it up doth
take from the old and the rent doth become worse;

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> and no one doth put new wine into old
skins, and if not -- the new wine doth burst the skins, and the wine is
poured out, and the skins will be destroyed; but new wine into new skins
is to be put.'

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And it came to pass -- he is going along
on the sabbaths through the corn-fields -- and his disciples began to
make a way, plucking the ears,

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> and the Pharisees said to him, \`Lo, why
do they on the sabbaths that which is not lawful?'

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And he said to them, \`Did ye never read
what David did, when he had need and was hungry, he and those with him?

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> how he went into the house of God, (at
\`Abiathar the chief priest,') and the loaves of the presentation did
eat, which it is not lawful to eat, except to the priests, and he gave
also to those who were with him?'

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> And he said to them, \`The sabbath for
man was made, not man for the sabbath,

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> so that the son of man is lord also of
the sabbath.'

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And he entered again into the synagogue,
and there was there a man having the hand withered,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> and they were watching him, whether on the
sabbaths he will heal him, that they might accuse him.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And he saith to the man having the hand
withered, \`Rise up in the midst.'

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And he saith to them, \`Is it lawful on the
sabbaths to do good, or to do evil? life to save, or to kill?' but they
were silent.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And having looked round upon them with
anger, being grieved for the hardness of their heart, he saith to the
man, \`Stretch forth thy hand;' and he stretched forth, and his hand was
restored whole as the other;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> and the Pharisees having gone forth,
immediately, with the Herodians, were taking counsel against him how
they might destroy him.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And Jesus withdrew with his disciples unto
the sea, and a great multitude from Galilee followed him, and from
Judea,

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> and from Jerusalem, and from Idumea and
beyond the Jordan; and they about Tyre and Sidon -- a great multitude --
having heard how great things he was doing, came unto him.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And he said to his disciples that a little
boat may wait on him, because of the multitude, that they may not press
upon him,

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> for he did heal many, so that they threw
themselves on him, in order to touch him -- as many as had plagues;

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> and the unclean spirits, when they were
seeing him, were falling down before him, and were crying, saying --
\`Thou art the Son of God;'

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> and many times he was charging them that
they might not make him manifest.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And he goeth up to the mountain, and doth
call near whom he willed, and they went away to him;

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> and he appointed twelve, that they may be
with him, and that he may send them forth to preach,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> and to have power to heal the sicknesses,
and to cast out the demons.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And he put on Simon the name Peter;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> and James of Zebedee, and John the
brother of James, and he put on them names -- Boanerges, that is, \`Sons
of thunder;'

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> and Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew,
and Matthew, and Thomas, and James of Alpheus, and Thaddeus, and Simon
the Cananite,

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> and Judas Iscariot, who did also deliver
him up; and they come into a house.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And come together again doth a multitude,
so that they are not able even to eat bread;

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> and his friends having heard, went forth
to lay hold on him, for they said that he was beside himself,

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> and the scribes who \[are\] from
Jerusalem having come down, said -- \`He hath Beelzeboul,' and -- \`By
the ruler of the demons he doth cast out the demons.'

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And, having called them near, in similes
he said to them, \`How is the Adversary able to cast out the Adversary?

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> and if a kingdom against itself be
divided, that kingdom cannot be made to stand;

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> and if a house against itself be divided,
that house cannot be made to stand;

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> and if the Adversary did rise against
himself, and hath been divided, he cannot be made to stand, but hath an
end.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> \`No one is able the vessels of the
strong man -- having entered into his house -- to spoil, if first he may
not bind the strong man, and then his house he will spoil.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> \`Verily I say to you, that all the sins
shall be forgiven to the sons of men, and evil speakings with which they
might speak evil,

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> but whoever may speak evil in regard to
the Holy Spirit hath not forgiveness -- to the age, but is in danger of
age-during judgment;'

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> because they said, \`He hath an unclean
spirit.'

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> Then come do his brethren and mother, and
standing without, they sent unto him, calling him,

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> and a multitude was sitting about him,
and they said to him, \`Lo, thy mother and thy brethren without do seek
thee.'

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> And he answered them, saying, \`Who is my
mother, or my brethren?'

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> And having looked round in a circle to
those sitting about him, he saith, \`Lo, my mother and my brethren!

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> for whoever may do the will of God, he is
my brother, and my sister, and mother.'

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And again he began to teach by the sea, and
there was gathered unto him a great multitude, so that he, having gone
into the boat, sat in the sea, and all the multitude was near the sea,
on the land,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> and he taught them many things in similes,
and he said to them in his teaching:

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> \`Hearken, lo, the sower went forth to sow;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> and it came to pass, in the sowing, some
fell by the way, and the fowls of the heaven did come and devour it;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> and other fell upon the rocky ground, where
it had not much earth, and immediately it sprang forth, because of not
having depth of earth,

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> and the sun having risen, it was scorched,
and because of not having root it did wither;

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> and other fell toward the thorns, and the
thorns did come up, and choke it, and fruit it gave not;

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> and other fell to the good ground, and was
giving fruit, coming up and increasing, and it bare, one thirty-fold,
and one sixty, and one an hundred.'

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And he said to them, \`He who is having
ears to hear -- let him hear.'

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And when he was alone, those about him,
with the twelve, did ask him of the simile,

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> and he said to them, \`To you it hath
been given to know the secret of the reign of God, but to those who are
without, in similes are all the things done;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> that seeing they may see and not
perceive, and hearing they may hear and not understand, lest they may
turn, and the sins may be forgiven them.'

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And he saith to them, \`Have ye not known
this simile? and how shall ye know all the similes?

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> He who is sowing doth sow the word;

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> and these are they by the way where the
word is sown: and whenever they may hear, immediately cometh the
Adversary, and he taketh away the word that hath been sown in their
hearts.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> \`And these are they, in like manner, who
on the rocky ground are sown: who, whenever they may hear the word,
immediately with joy do receive it,

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> and have not root in themselves, but are
temporary; afterward tribulation or persecution having come because of
the word, immediately they are stumbled.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> \`And these are they who toward the
thorns are sown: these are they who are hearing the word,

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> and the anxieties of this age, and the
deceitfulness of the riches, and the desires concerning the other
things, entering in, choke the word, and it becometh unfruitful.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> \`And these are they who on the good
ground have been sown: who do hear the word, and receive, and do bear
fruit, one thirty-fold, and one sixty, and one an hundred.'

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And he said to them, \`Doth the lamp come
that under the measure it may be put, or under the couch -- not that it
may be put on the lamp-stand?

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> for there is not anything hid that may
not be manifested, nor was anything kept hid but that it may come to
light.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> If any hath ears to hear -- let him
hear.'

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> And he said to them, \`Take heed what ye
hear; in what measure ye measure, it shall be measured to you; and to
you who hear it shall be added;

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> for whoever may have, there shall be
given to him, and whoever hath not, also that which he hath shall be
taken from him.'

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> And he said, \`Thus is the reign of God:
as if a man may cast the seed on the earth,

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> and may sleep, and may rise night and
day, and the seed spring up and grow, he hath not known how;

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> for of itself doth the earth bear fruit,
first a blade, afterwards an ear, afterwards full corn in the ear;

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> and whenever the fruit may yield itself,
immediately he doth send forth the sickle, because the harvest hath
come.'

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> And he said, \`To what may we liken the
reign of God, or in what simile may we compare it?

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> As a grain of mustard, which, whenever it
may be sown on the earth, is less than any of the seeds that are on the
earth;

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> and whenever it may be sown, it cometh
up, and doth become greater than any of the herbs, and doth make great
branches, so that under its shade the fowls of the heaven are able to
rest.'

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> And with many such similes he was
speaking to them the word, as they were able to hear,

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> and without a simile he was not speaking
to them, and by themselves, to his disciples he was expounding all.

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> And he saith to them on that day, evening
having come, \`We may pass over to the other side;'

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> and having let away the multitude, they
take him up as he was in the boat, and other little boats also were with
him.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> And there cometh a great storm of wind,
and the waves were beating on the boat, so that it is now being filled,

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> and he himself was upon the stern, upon
the pillow sleeping, and they wake him up, and say to him, \`Teacher,
art thou not caring that we perish?'

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> And having waked up, he rebuked the wind,
and said to the sea, \`Peace, be stilled;' and the wind did lull, and
there was a great calm:

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> and he said to them, \`Why are ye so
fearful? how have ye not faith?'

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> and they feared a great fear, and said
one to another, \`Who, then, is this, that even the wind and the sea do
obey him?'

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And they came to the other side of the sea,
to the region of the Gadarenes,

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> and he having come forth out of the boat,
immediately there met him out of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit,

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> who had his dwelling in the tombs, and not
even with chains was any one able to bind him,

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> because that he many times with fetters and
chains had been bound, and pulled in pieces by him had been the chains,
and the fetters broken in pieces, and none was able to tame him,

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> and always, night and day, in the
mountains, and in the tombs he was, crying and cutting himself with
stones.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And, having seen Jesus from afar, he ran
and bowed before him,

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> and having called with a loud voice, he
said, \`What -- to me and to thee, Jesus, Son of God the Most High? I
adjure thee by God, mayest thou not afflict me!'

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> (for he said to him, \`Come forth, spirit
unclean, out of the man,')

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> and he was questioning him, \`What \[is\]
thy name?' and he answered, saying, \`Legion \[is\] my name, because we
are many;'

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> and he was calling on him much, that he
may not send them out of the region.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And there was there, near the mountains,
a great herd of swine feeding,

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> and all the demons did call upon him,
saying, \`Send us to the swine, that into them we may enter;'

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> and immediately Jesus gave them leave,
and having come forth, the unclean spirits did enter into the swine, and
the herd did rush down the steep place to the sea -- and they were about
two thousand -- and they were choked in the sea.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And those feeding the swine did flee, and
told in the city, and in the fields, and they came forth to see what it
is that hath been done;

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> and they come unto Jesus, and see the
demoniac, sitting, and clothed, and right-minded -- him having had the
legion -- and they were afraid;

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> and those having seen \[it\], declared to
them how it had come to pass to the demoniac, and about the swine;

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> and they began to call upon him to go
away from their borders.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And he having gone into the boat, the
demoniac was calling on him that he may be with him,

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> and Jesus did not suffer him, but saith
to him, \`Go away to thy house, unto thine own \[friends\], and tell
them how great things the Lord did to thee, and dealt kindly with thee;

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> and he went away, and began to proclaim
in the Decapolis how great things Jesus did to him, and all were
wondering.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> And Jesus having passed over in the boat
again to the other side, there was gathered a great multitude to him,
and he was near the sea,

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> and lo, there doth come one of the chiefs
of the synagogue, by name Jairus, and having seen him, he doth fall at
his feet,

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> and he was calling upon him much, saying
-- \`My little daughter is at the last extremity -- that having come,
thou mayest lay on her \[thy\] hands, so that she may be saved, and she
shall live;'

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> and he went away with him. And there was
following him a great multitude, and they were thronging him,

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> and a certain woman, having an issue of
blood twelve years,

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> and many things having suffered under
many physicians, and having spent all that she had, and having profited
nothing, but rather having come to the worse,

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> having heard about Jesus, having come in
the multitude behind, she touched his garment,

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> for she said -- \`If even his garments I
may touch, I shall be saved;'

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> and immediately was the fountain of her
blood dried up, and she knew in the body that she hath been healed of
the plague.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> And immediately Jesus having known in
himself that out of him power had gone forth, having turned about in the
multitude, said, \`Who did touch my garments?'

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> and his disciples said to him, \`Thou
seest the multitude thronging thee, and thou sayest, \`Who did touch
me!'

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> And he was looking round to see her who
did this,

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> and the woman, having been afraid, and
trembling, knowing what was done on her, came, and fell down before him,
and told him all the truth,

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> and he said to her, \`Daughter, thy faith
hath saved thee; go away in peace, and be whole from thy plague.'

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> As he is yet speaking, there come from
the chief of the synagogue's \[house, certain\], saying -- \`Thy
daughter did die, why still dost thou harass the Teacher?'

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> And Jesus immediately, having heard the
word that is spoken, saith to the chief of the synagogue, \`Be not
afraid, only believe.'

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> And he did not suffer any one to follow
with him, except Peter, and James, and John the brother of James;

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> and he cometh to the house of the chief
of the synagogue, and seeth a tumult, much weeping and wailing;

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> and having gone in he saith to them,
\`Why do ye make a tumult, and weep? the child did not die, but doth
sleep;

<span id="an_5:40">5:40</span> and they were laughing at him. And he,
having put all forth, doth take the father of the child, and the mother,
and those with him, and goeth in where the child is lying,

<span id="an_5:41">5:41</span> and, having taken the hand of the child,
he saith to her, \`Talitha cumi;' which is, being interpreted, \`Damsel
(I say to thee), arise.'

<span id="an_5:42">5:42</span> And immediately the damsel arose, and was
walking, for she was twelve years \[old\]; and they were amazed with a
great amazement,

<span id="an_5:43">5:43</span> and he charged them much, that no one may
know this thing, and he said that there be given to her to eat.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And he went forth thence, and came to his
own country, and his disciples do follow him,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> and sabbath having come, he began in the
synagogue to teach, and many hearing were astonished, saying, \`Whence
hath this one these things? and what the wisdom that was given to him,
that also such mighty works through his hands are done?

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary,
and brother of James, and Joses, and Judas, and Simon? and are not his
sisters here with us?' -- and they were being stumbled at him.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And Jesus said to them -- \`A prophet is
not without honor, except in his own country, and among his kindred, and
in his own house;'

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> and he was not able there any mighty work
to do, except on a few infirm people having put hands he did heal
\[them\];

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> and he wondered because of their unbelief.
And he was going round the villages, in a circle, teaching,

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> and he doth call near the twelve, and he
began to send them forth two by two, and he was giving them power over
the unclean spirits,

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> and he commanded them that they may take
nothing for the way, except a staff only -- no scrip, no bread, no brass
in the girdle,

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> but having been shod with sandals, and ye
may not put on two coats.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And he said to them, \`Whenever ye may
enter into a house, there remain till ye may depart thence,

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> and as many as may not receive you, nor
hear you, going out thence, shake off the dust that is under your feet
for a testimony to them; verily I say to you, It shall be more tolerable
for Sodom or Gomorrah in a day of judgment than for that city.'

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And having gone forth they were preaching
that \[men\] might reform,

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> and many demons they were casting out,
and they were anointing with oil many infirm, and they were healing
\[them\].

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And the king Herod heard, (for his name
became public,) and he said -- \`John the Baptist out of the dead was
raised, and because of this the mighty powers are working in him.'

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Others said -- \`It is Elijah,' and
others said -- \`It is a prophet, or as one of the prophets.'

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And Herod having heard, said -- \`He whom
I did behead -- John -- this is he; he was raised out of the dead.'

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> For Herod himself, having sent forth, did
lay hold on John, and bound him in the prison, because of Herodias the
wife of Philip his brother, because he married her,

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> for John said to Herod -- \`It is not
lawful to thee to have the wife of thy brother;'

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> and Herodias was having a quarrel with
him, and was willing to kill him, and was not able,

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> for Herod was fearing John, knowing him a
man righteous and holy, and was keeping watch over him, and having heard
him, was doing many things, and hearing him gladly.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And a seasonable day having come, when
Herod on his birthday was making a supper to his great men, and to the
chiefs of thousands, and to the first men of Galilee,

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> and the daughter of that Herodias having
come in, and having danced, and having pleased Herod and those reclining
(at meat) with him, the king said to the damsel, \`Ask of me whatever
thou wilt, and I will give to thee,'

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> and he sware to her -- \`Whatever thou
mayest ask me, I will give to thee -- unto the half of my kingdom.'

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> And she, having gone forth, said to her
mother, \`What shall I ask for myself?' and she said, \`The head of John
the Baptist;'

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> and having come in immediately with haste
unto the king, she asked, saying, \`I will that thou mayest give me
presently, upon a plate, the head of John the Baptist.'

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> And the king -- made very sorrowful --
because of the oaths and of those reclining (at meat) with him, would
not put her away,

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> and immediately the king having sent a
guardsman, did command his head to be brought,

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> and he having gone, beheaded him in the
prison, and brought his head upon a plate, and did give it to the
damsel, and the damsel did give it to her mother;

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> and having heard, his disciples came and
took up his corpse, and laid it in the tomb.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> And the apostles are gathered together
unto Jesus, and they told him all, and how many things they did, and how
many things they taught,

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> and he said to them, \`Come ye yourselves
apart to a desert place, and rest a little,' for those coming and those
going were many, and not even to eat had they opportunity,

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> and they went away to a desert place, in
the boat, by themselves.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> And the multitudes saw them going away,
and many recognised him, and by land from all the cities they ran
thither, and went before them, and came together to him,

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> and having come forth, Jesus saw a great
multitude, and was moved with compassion on them, that they were as
sheep not having a shepherd, and he began to teach many things.

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> And now the hour being advanced, his
disciples having come near to him, say, -- \`The place is desolate, and
the hour is now advanced,

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> let them away, that, having gone away to
the surrounding fields and villages, they may buy to themselves loaves,
for what they may eat they have not.'

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> And he answering said to them, \`Give ye
them to eat,' and they say to him, \`Having gone away, may we buy two
hundred denaries' worth of loaves, and give to them to eat?'

<span id="an_6:38">6:38</span> And he saith to them, \`How many loaves
have ye? go and see;' and having known, they say, \`Five, and two
fishes.'

<span id="an_6:39">6:39</span> And he commanded them to make all recline
in companies upon the green grass,

<span id="an_6:40">6:40</span> and they sat down in squares, by
hundreds, and by fifties.

<span id="an_6:41">6:41</span> And having taken the five loaves and the
two fishes, having looked up to the heaven, he blessed, and brake the
loaves, and was giving to his disciples, that they may set before them,
and the two fishes divided he to all,

<span id="an_6:42">6:42</span> and they did all eat, and were filled,

<span id="an_6:43">6:43</span> and they took up of broken pieces twelve
hand-baskets full, and of the fishes,

<span id="an_6:44">6:44</span> and those eating of the loaves were about
five thousand men.

<span id="an_6:45">6:45</span> And immediately he constrained his
disciples to go into the boat, and to go before to the other side, unto
Bethsaida, till he may let the multitude away,

<span id="an_6:46">6:46</span> and having taken leave of them, he went
away to the mountain to pray.

<span id="an_6:47">6:47</span> And evening having come, the boat was in
the midst of the sea, and he alone upon the land;

<span id="an_6:48">6:48</span> and he saw them harassed in the rowing,
for the wind was against them, and about the fourth watch of the night
he doth come to them walking on the sea, and wished to pass by them.

<span id="an_6:49">6:49</span> And they having seen him walking on the
sea, thought \[it\] to be an apparition, and cried out,

<span id="an_6:50">6:50</span> for they all saw him, and were troubled,
and immediately he spake with them, and saith to them, \`Take courage, I
am \[he\], be not afraid.'

<span id="an_6:51">6:51</span> And he went up unto them to the boat, and
the wind lulled, and greatly out of measure were they amazed in
themselves, and were wondering,

<span id="an_6:52">6:52</span> for they understood not concerning the
loaves, for their heart hath been hard.

<span id="an_6:53">6:53</span> And having passed over, they came upon
the land of Gennesaret, and drew to the shore,

<span id="an_6:54">6:54</span> and they having come forth out of the
boat, immediately having recognised him,

<span id="an_6:55">6:55</span> having run about through all that region
round about, they began upon the couches to carry about those ill, where
they were hearing that he is,

<span id="an_6:56">6:56</span> and wherever he was going, to villages,
or cities, or fields, in the market-places they were laying the infirm,
and were calling upon him, that they may touch if it were but the fringe
of his garment, and as many as were touching him were saved.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And gathered together unto him are the
Pharisees, and certain of the scribes, having come from Jerusalem,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> and having seen certain of his disciples
with defiled hands -- that is, unwashed -- eating bread, they found
fault;

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> for the Pharisees, and all the Jews, if
they do not wash the hands to the wrist, do not eat, holding the
tradition of the elders,

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> and, \[coming\] from the market-place, if
they do not baptize themselves, they do not eat; and many other things
there are that they received to hold, baptisms of cups, and pots, and
brazen vessels, and couches.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Then question him do the Pharisees and the
scribes, \`Wherefore do thy disciples not walk according to the
tradition of the elders, but with unwashed hands do eat the bread?'

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> and he answering said to them -- \`Well did
Isaiah prophesy concerning you, hypocrites, as it hath been written,
This people with the lips doth honor Me, and their heart is far from Me;

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> and in vain do they worship Me, teaching
teachings, commands of men;

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> for, having put away the command of God, ye
hold the tradition of men, baptisms of pots and cups; and many other
such like things ye do.'

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And he said to them, \`Well do ye put away
the command of God that your tradition ye may keep;

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> for Moses said, Honour thy father and thy
mother; and, He who is speaking evil of father or mother -- let him die
the death;

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> and ye say, If a man may say to father or
to mother, Korban (that is, a gift), \[is\] whatever thou mayest be
profited out of mine,

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> and no more do ye suffer him to do
anything for his father or for his mother,

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> setting aside the word of God for your
tradition that ye delivered; and many such like things ye do.'

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And having called near all the multitude,
he said to them, \`Hearken to me, ye all, and understand;

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> there is nothing from without the man
entering into him that is able to defile him, but the things coming out
from him, those are the things defiling the man.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> If any hath ears to hear -- let him
hear.'

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> And when he entered into a house from the
multitude, his disciples were questioning him about the simile,

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> and he saith to them, \`So also ye are
without understanding! Do ye not perceive that nothing from without
entering into the man is able to defile him?

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> because it doth not enter into his heart,
but into the belly, and into the drain it doth go out, purifying all the
meats.'

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And he said -- \`That which is coming out
from the man, that doth defile the man;

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> for from within, out of the heart of men,
the evil reasonings do come forth, adulteries, whoredoms, murders,

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> thefts, covetous desires, wickedness,
deceit, arrogance, an evil eye, evil speaking, pride, foolishness;

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> all these evils do come forth from
within, and they defile the man.'

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And from thence having risen, he went
away to the borders of Tyre and Sidon, and having entered into the
house, he wished none to know, and he was not able to be hid,

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> for a woman having heard about him, whose
little daughter had an unclean spirit, having come, fell at his feet, --

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> and the woman was a Greek, a
Syro-Phenician by nation -- and was asking him, that the demon he may
cast forth out of her daughter.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> And Jesus said to her, \`Suffer first the
children to be filled, for it is not good to take the children's bread,
and to cast \[it\] to the little dogs.'

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> And she answered and saith to him, \`Yes,
sir; for the little dogs also under the table do eat of the children's
crumbs.'

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> And he said to her, \`Because of this
word go; the demon hath gone forth out of thy daughter;'

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> and having come away to her house, she
found the demon gone forth, and the daughter laid upon the couch.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> And again, having gone forth from the
coasts of Tyre and Sidon, he came unto the sea of Galilee, through the
midst of the coasts of Decapolis,

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> and they bring to him a deaf, stuttering
man, and they call on him that he may put the hand on him.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> And having taken him away from the
multitude by himself, he put his fingers to his ears, and having spit,
he touched his tongue,

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> and having looked to the heaven, he
sighed, and saith to him, \`Ephphatha,' that is, \`Be thou opened;'

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> and immediately were his ears opened, and
the string of his tongue was loosed, and he was speaking plain.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> And he charged them that they may tell no
one, but the more he was charging them, the more abundantly they were
proclaiming \[it\],

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> and they were being beyond measure
astonished, saying, \`Well hath he done all things; both the deaf he
doth make to hear, and the dumb to speak.'

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> In those days the multitude being very
great, and not having what they may eat, Jesus having called near his
disciples, saith to them,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> \`I have compassion upon the multitude,
because now three days they do continue with me, and they have not what
they may eat;

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> and if I shall let them away fasting to
their home, they will faint in the way, for certain of them are come
from far.'

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And his disciples answered him, \`Whence
shall any one be able these here to feed with bread in a wilderness?'

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And he was questioning them, \`How many
loaves have ye?' and they said, \`Seven.'

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And he commanded the multitude to sit down
upon the ground, and having taken the seven loaves, having given thanks,
he brake, and was giving to his disciples that they may set before
\[them\]; and they did set before the multitude.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And they had a few small fishes, and having
blessed, he said to set them also before \[them\];

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> and they did eat and were filled, and they
took up that which was over of broken pieces -- seven baskets;

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> and those eating were about four thousand.
And he let them away,

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> and immediately having entered into the
boat with his disciples, he came to the parts of Dalmanutha,

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> and the Pharisees came forth, and began
to dispute with him, seeking from him a sign from the heaven, tempting
him;

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> and having sighed deeply in his spirit,
he saith, \`Why doth this generation seek after a sign? Verily I say to
you, no sign shall be given to this generation.'

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And having left them, having entered
again into the boat, he went away to the other side;

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> and they forgot to take loaves, and
except one loaf they had nothing with them in the boat,

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> and he was charging them, saying, \`Take
heed, beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the leaven of
Herod,'

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> and they were reasoning with one another,
saying -- \`Because we have no loaves.'

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And Jesus having known, saith to them,
\`Why do ye reason, because ye have no loaves? do ye not yet perceive,
nor understand, yet have ye your heart hardened?

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Having eyes, do ye not see? and having
ears, do ye not hear? and do ye not remember?

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> When the five loaves I did brake to the
five thousand, how many hand-baskets full of broken pieces took ye up?'
they say to him, \`Twelve.'

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> \`And when the seven to the four
thousand, how many hand-baskets full of broken pieces took ye up?' and
they said, \`Seven.'

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And he said to them, \`How do ye not
understand?'

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And he cometh to Bethsaida, and they
bring to him one blind, and call upon him that he may touch him,

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> and having taken the hand of the blind
man, he led him forth without the village, and having spit on his eyes,
having put \[his\] hands on him, he was questioning him if he doth
behold anything:

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> and he, having looked up, said, \`I
behold men, as I see trees, walking.'

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> Afterwards again he put \[his\] hands on
his eyes, and made him look up, and he was restored, and discerned all
things clearly,

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> and he sent him away to his house,
saying, \`Neither to the village mayest thou go, nor tell \[it\] to any
in the village.'

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> And Jesus went forth, and his disciples,
to the villages of Cesarea Philippi, and in the way he was questioning
his disciples, saying to them, \`Who do men say me to be?'

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And they answered, \`John the Baptist,
and others Elijah, but others one of the prophets.'

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> And he saith to them, \`And ye -- who do
ye say me to be?' and Peter answering saith to him, \`Thou art the
Christ.'

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And he strictly charged them that they
may tell no one about it,

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> and began to teach them, that it behoveth
the Son of Man to suffer many things, and to be rejected by the elders,
and chief priests, and scribes, and to be killed, and after three days
to rise again;

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> and openly he was speaking the word. And
Peter having taken him aside, began to rebuke him,

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> and he, having turned, and having looked
on his disciples, rebuked Peter, saying, \`Get behind me, Adversary,
because thou dost not mind the things of God, but the things of men.'

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> And having called near the multitude,
with his disciples, he said to them, \`Whoever doth will to come after
me -- let him disown himself, and take up his cross, and follow me;

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> for whoever may will to save his life
shall lose it; and whoever may lose his life for my sake and for the
good news' sake, he shall save it;

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> for what shall it profit a man, if he may
gain the whole world, and forfeit his life?

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> Or what shall a man give as an exchange
for his life?

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> for whoever may be ashamed of me, and of
my words, in this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of Man also
shall be ashamed of him, when he may come in the glory of his Father,
with the holy messengers.'

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And he said to them, \`Verily I say to you,
That there are certain of those standing here, who may not taste of
death till they see the reign of God having come in power.'

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And after six days doth Jesus take Peter,
and James, and John, and bringeth them up to a high mount by themselves,
alone, and he was transfigured before them,

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> and his garments became glittering, white
exceedingly, as snow, so as a fuller upon the earth is not able to
whiten \[them\].

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And there appeared to them Elijah with
Moses, and they were talking with Jesus.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And Peter answering saith to Jesus,
\`Rabbi, it is good to us to be here; and we may make three booths, for
thee one, and for Moses one, and for Elijah one:'

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> for he was not knowing what he might say,
for they were greatly afraid.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And there came a cloud overshadowing them,
and there came a voice out of the cloud, saying, \`This is My Son -- the
Beloved, hear ye him;'

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> and suddenly, having looked around, they
saw no one any more, but Jesus only with themselves.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And as they are coming down from the mount,
he charged them that they may declare to no one the things that they
saw, except when the Son of Man may rise out of the dead;

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> and the thing they kept to themselves,
questioning together what the rising out of the dead is.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And they were questioning him, saying,
that the scribes say that Elijah it behoveth to come first.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And he answering said to them, \`Elijah
indeed, having come first, doth restore all things; and how hath it been
written concerning the Son of Man, that many things he may suffer, and
be set at nought?

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> But I say to you, That also Elijah hath
come, and they did to him what they willed, as it hath been written of
him.'

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And having come unto the disciples, he
saw a great multitude about them, and scribes questioning with them,

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> and immediately, all the multitude having
seen him, were amazed, and running near, were saluting him.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And he questioned the scribes, \`What
dispute ye with them?'

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> and one out of the multitude answering
said, \`Teacher, I brought my son unto thee, having a dumb spirit;

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> and wherever it doth seize him, it doth
tear him, and he foameth, and gnasheth his teeth, and pineth away; and I
spake to thy disciples that they may cast it out, and they were not
able.'

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And he answering him, said, \`O
generation unbelieving, till when shall I be with you? till when shall I
suffer you? bring him unto me;'

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> and they brought him unto him, and he
having seen him, immediately the spirit tare him, and he, having fallen
upon the earth, was wallowing -- foaming.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And he questioned his father, \`How long
time is it since this came to him?' and he said, \`From childhood,

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> and many times also it cast him into
fire, and into water, that it might destroy him; but if thou art able to
do anything, help us, having compassion on us.'

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And Jesus said to him, \`If thou art able
to believe! all things are possible to the one that is believing;'

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> and immediately the father of the child,
having cried out, with tears said, \`I believe, sir; be helping mine
unbelief.'

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> Jesus having seen that a multitude doth
run together, rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to it, \`Spirit -- dumb
and deaf -- I charge thee, come forth out of him, and no more thou
mayest enter into him;'

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> and having cried, and rent him much, it
came forth, and he became as dead, so that many said that he was dead,

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> but Jesus, having taken him by the hand,
lifted him up, and he arose.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And he having come into the house, his
disciples were questioning him by himself -- \`Why were we not able to
cast it forth?'

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> And he said to them, \`This kind is able
to come forth with nothing except with prayer and fasting.'

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> And having gone forth thence, they were
passing through Galilee, and he did not wish that any may know,

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> for he was teaching his disciples, and he
said to them, \`The Son of Man is being delivered to the hands of men,
and they shall kill him, and having been killed the third day he shall
rise,'

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> but they were not understanding the
saying, and they were afraid to question him.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> And he came to Capernaum, and being in
the house, he was questioning them, \`What were ye reasoning in the way
among yourselves?'

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> and they were silent, for with one
another they did reason in the way who is greater;

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> and having sat down he called the twelve,
and he saith to them, \`If any doth will to be first, he shall be last
of all, and minister of all.'

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> And having taken a child, he set him in
the midst of them, and having taken him in his arms, said to them,

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> \`Whoever may receive one of such
children in my name, doth receive me, and whoever may receive me, doth
not receive me, but Him who sent me.'

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> And John did answer him, saying,
\`Teacher, we saw a certain one in thy name casting out demons, who doth
not follow us, and we forbade him, because he doth not follow us.'

<span id="an_9:39">9:39</span> And Jesus said, \`Forbid him not, for
there is no one who shall do a mighty work in my name, and shall be able
readily to speak evil of me:

<span id="an_9:40">9:40</span> for he who is not against us is for us;

<span id="an_9:41">9:41</span> for whoever may give you to drink a cup
of water in my name, because ye are Christ's, verily I say to you, he
may not lose his reward;

<span id="an_9:42">9:42</span> and whoever may cause to stumble one of
the little ones believing in me, better is it for him if a millstone is
hanged about his neck, and he hath been cast into the sea.

<span id="an_9:43">9:43</span> \`And if thy hand may cause thee to
stumble, cut it off; it is better for thee maimed to enter into the
life, than having the two hands, to go away to the gehenna, to the fire
-- the unquenchable --

<span id="an_9:44">9:44</span> where there worm is not dying, and the
fire is not being quenched.

<span id="an_9:45">9:45</span> \`And if thy foot may cause thee to
stumble, cut it off; it is better for thee to enter into the life lame,
than having the two feet to be cast to the gehenna, to the fire -- the
unquenchable --

<span id="an_9:46">9:46</span> where there worm is not dying, and the
fire is not being quenched.

<span id="an_9:47">9:47</span> And if thine eye may cause thee to
stumble, cast it out; it is better for thee one-eyed to enter into the
reign of God, than having two eyes, to be cast to the gehenna of the
fire --

<span id="an_9:48">9:48</span> where their worm is not dying, and the
fire is not being quenched;

<span id="an_9:49">9:49</span> for every one with fire shall be salted,
and every sacrifice with salt shall be salted.

<span id="an_9:50">9:50</span> The salt \[is\] good, but if the salt may
become saltless, in what will ye season \[it\]? Have in yourselves salt,
and have peace in one another.'

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And having risen thence, he doth come to
the coasts of Judea, through the other side of the Jordan, and again do
multitudes come together unto him, and, as he had been accustomed, again
he was teaching them.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And the Pharisees, having come near,
questioned him, if it is lawful for a husband to put away a wife,
tempting him,

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> and he answering said to them, \`What did
Moses command you?'

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> and they said, \`Moses suffered to write
a bill of divorce, and to put away.'

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And Jesus answering said to them, \`For
the stiffness of your heart he wrote you this command,

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> but from the beginning of the creation, a
male and a female God did make them;

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> on this account shall a man leave his
father and mother, and shall cleave unto his wife,

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> and they shall be -- the two -- for one
flesh; so that they are no more two, but one flesh;

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> what therefore God did join together, let
not man put asunder.'

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And in the house again his disciples of
the same thing questioned him,

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> and he saith to them, \`Whoever may put
away his wife, and may marry another, doth commit adultery against her;

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> and if a woman may put away her
husband, and is married to another, she committeth adultery.'

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And they were bringing to him children,
that he might touch them, and the disciples were rebuking those bringing
them,

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> and Jesus having seen, was much
displeased, and he said to them, \`Suffer the children to come unto me,
and forbid them not, for of such is the reign of God;

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> verily I say to you, whoever may not
receive the reign of God, as a child -- he may not enter into it;'

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> and having taken them in his arms,
having put \[his\] hands upon them, he was blessing them.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And as he is going forth into the way,
one having run and having kneeled to him, was questioning him, \`Good
teacher, what may I do, that life age-during I may inherit?'

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And Jesus said to him, \`Why me dost
thou call good? no one \[is\] good except One -- God;

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> the commands thou hast known: Thou
mayest not commit adultery, Thou mayest do no murder, Thou mayest not
steal, Thou mayest not bear false witness, Thou mayest not defraud,
Honour thy father and mother.'

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> And he answering said to him,
\`Teacher, all these did I keep from my youth.'

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And Jesus having looked upon him, did
love him, and said to him, \`One thing thou dost lack; go away, whatever
thou hast -- sell, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in
heaven, and come, be following me, having taken up the cross.'

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And he -- gloomy at the word -- went
away sorrowing, for he was having many possessions.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> And Jesus having looked round, saith to
his disciples, \`How hardly shall they who have riches enter into the
reign of God!'

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And the disciples were astonished at
his words, and Jesus again answering saith to them, \`Children, how hard
is it to those trusting on the riches to enter into the reign of God!

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> It is easier for a camel through the
eye of the needle to enter, than for a rich man to enter into the reign
of God.'

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> And they were astonished beyond
measure, saying unto themselves, \`And who is able to be saved?'

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And Jesus, having looked upon them,
saith, \`With men it is impossible, but not with God; for all things are
possible with God.'

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And Peter began to say to him, \`Lo, we
left all, and we followed thee.'

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> And Jesus answering said, \`Verily I
say to you, there is no one who left house, or brothers, or sisters, or
father, or mother, or wife, or children, or fields, for my sake, and for
the good news',

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> who may not receive an hundredfold now
in this time, houses, and brothers, and sisters, and mothers, and
children, and fields, with persecutions, and in the age that is coming,
life age-during;

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> and many first shall be last, and the
last first.'

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> And they were in the way going up to
Jerusalem, and Jesus was going before them, and they were amazed, and
following they were afraid. And having again taken the twelve, he began
to tell them the things about to happen to him,

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> -- \`Lo, we go up to Jerusalem, and the
Son of Man shall be delivered to the chief priests, and to the scribes,
and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him to the
nations,

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> and they shall mock him, and scourge
him, and spit on him, and kill him, and the third day he shall rise
again.'

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> And there come near to him James and
John, the sons of Zebedee, saying, \`Teacher, we wish that whatever we
may ask for ourselves, thou mayest do for us;'

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> and he said to them, \`What do ye wish
me to do for you?'

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> and they said to him, \`Grant to us
that, one on thy right hand and one on thy left, we may sit in thy
glory;'

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> and Jesus said to them, \`Ye have not
known what ye ask; are ye able to drink of the cup that I drink of, and
with the baptism that I am baptized with -- to be baptized?'

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> And they said to him, \`We are able;'
and Jesus said to them, \`Of the cup indeed that I drink of, ye shall
drink, and with the baptism that I am baptized with, ye shall be
baptized;

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> but to sit on my right and on my left,
is not mine to give, but -- to those for whom it hath been prepared.'

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> And the ten having heard, began to be
much displeased at James and John,

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> but Jesus having called them near,
saith to them, \`Ye have known that they who are considered to rule the
nations do exercise lordship over them, and their great ones do exercise
authority upon them;

<span id="an_10:43">10:43</span> but not so shall it be among you; but
whoever may will to become great among you, he shall be your minister,

<span id="an_10:44">10:44</span> and whoever of you may will to become
first, he shall be servant of all;

<span id="an_10:45">10:45</span> for even the Son of Man came not to be
ministered to, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.'

<span id="an_10:46">10:46</span> And they come to Jericho, and as he is
going forth from Jericho, with his disciples and a great multitude, a
son of Timaeus -- Bartimaeus the blind -- was sitting beside the way
begging,

<span id="an_10:47">10:47</span> and having heard that it is Jesus the
Nazarene, he began to cry out, and to say, \`The Son of David -- Jesus!
deal kindly with me;'

<span id="an_10:48">10:48</span> and many were rebuking him, that he
might keep silent, but the more abundantly he cried out, \`Son of David,
deal kindly with me.'

<span id="an_10:49">10:49</span> And Jesus having stood, he commanded
him to be called, and they call the blind man, saying to him, \`Take
courage, rise, he doth call thee;'

<span id="an_10:50">10:50</span> and he, having cast away his garment,
having risen, did come unto Jesus.

<span id="an_10:51">10:51</span> And answering, Jesus saith to him,
\`What wilt thou I may do to thee?' and the blind man said to him,
\`Rabboni, that I may see again;'

<span id="an_10:52">10:52</span> and Jesus said to him, \`Go, thy faith
hath saved thee:' and immediately he saw again, and was following Jesus
in the way.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And when they come nigh to Jerusalem, to
Bethphage, and Bethany, unto the mount of the Olives, he sendeth forth
two of his disciples,

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> and saith to them, \`Go away to the
village that is over-against you, and immediately, entering into it, ye
shall find a colt tied, on which no one of men hath sat, having loosed
it, bring \[it\]:

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> and if any one may say to you, Why do ye
this? say ye that the lord hath need of it, and immediately he will send
it hither.'

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And they went away, and found the colt
tied at the door without, by the two ways, and they loose it,

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> and certain of those standing there said
to them, \`What do ye -- loosing the colt?'

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> and they said to them as Jesus commanded,
and they suffered them.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And they brought the colt unto Jesus, and
did cast upon it their garments, and he sat upon it,

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> and many did spread their garments in the
way, and others were cutting down branches from the trees, and were
strewing in the way.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And those going before and those
following were crying out, saying, \`Hosanna! blessed \[is\] he who is
coming in the name of the Lord;

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> blessed is the coming reign, in the
name of the Lord, of our father David; Hosanna in the highest.'

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And Jesus entered into Jerusalem, and
into the temple, and having looked round on all things, it being now
evening, he went forth to Bethany with the twelve.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And on the morrow, they having come
forth from Bethany, he hungered,

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> and having seen a fig-tree afar off
having leaves, he came, if perhaps he shall find anything in it, and
having come to it, he found nothing except leaves, for it was not a time
of figs,

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> and Jesus answering said to it, \`No
more from thee -- to the age -- may any eat fruit;' and his disciples
were hearing.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And they come to Jerusalem, and Jesus
having gone into the temple, began to cast forth those selling and
buying in the temple, and the tables of the money-changers and the seats
of those selling the doves, he overthrew,

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> and he did not suffer that any might
bear a vessel through the temple,

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> and he was teaching, saying to them,
\`Hath it not been written -- My house a house of prayer shall be called
for all the nations, and ye did make it a den of robbers?'

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And the scribes and the chief priests
heard, and they were seeking how they shall destroy him, for they were
afraid of him, because all the multitude was astonished at his teaching;

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> and when evening came, he was going
forth without the city.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> And in the morning, passing by, they
saw the fig-tree having been dried up from the roots,

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> and Peter having remembered saith to
him, \`Rabbi, lo, the fig-tree that thou didst curse is dried up.'

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> And Jesus answering saith to them,
\`Have faith of God;

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> for verily I say to you, that whoever
may say to this mount, Be taken up, and be cast into the sea, and may
not doubt in his heart, but may believe that the things that he saith do
come to pass, it shall be to him whatever he may say.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Because of this I say to you, all
whatever -- praying -- ye do ask, believe that ye receive, and it shall
be to you.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> \`And whenever ye may stand praying,
forgive, if ye have anything against any one, that your Father also who
is in the heavens may forgive you your trespasses;

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> and, if ye do not forgive, neither will
your Father who is in the heavens forgive your trespasses.'

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> And they come again to Jerusalem, and
in the temple, as he is walking, there come unto him the chief priests,
and the scribes, and the elders,

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> and they say to him, \`By what
authority dost thou these things? and who gave thee this authority that
these things thou mayest do?'

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> And Jesus answering said to them, \`I
will question you -- I also -- one word; and answer me, and I will tell
you by what authority I do these things;

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> the baptism of John -- from heaven was
it? or from men? answer me.'

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> And they were reasoning with
themselves, saying, \`If we may say, From heaven, he will say,
Wherefore, then, did ye not believe him?

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> But if we may say, From men,' -- they
were fearing the people, for all were holding John that he was indeed a
prophet;

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> and answering they say to Jesus, \`We
have not known;' and Jesus answering saith to them, \`Neither do I tell
you by what authority I do these things.'

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And he began to speak to them in similes:
\`A man planted a vineyard, and put a hedge around, and digged an
under-winevat, and built a tower, and gave it out to husbandmen, and
went abroad;

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> and he sent unto the husbandmen at the
due time a servant, that from the husbandmen he may receive from the
fruit of the vineyard,

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> and they, having taken him, did severely
beat \[him\], and did send him away empty.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> \`And again he sent unto them another
servant, and at that one having cast stones, they wounded \[him\] in the
head, and sent away -- dishonoured.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> \`And again he sent another, and that one
they killed; and many others, some beating, and some killing.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> \`Having yet therefore one son -- his
beloved -- he sent also him unto them last, saying -- They will
reverence my son;

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> and those husbandmen said among
themselves -- This is the heir, come, we may kill him, and ours shall be
the inheritance;

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> and having taken him, they did kill, and
cast \[him\] forth without the vineyard.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> \`What therefore shall the lord of the
vineyard do? he will come and destroy the husbandmen, and will give the
vineyard to others.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And this Writing did ye not read: A
stone that the builders rejected, it did become the head of a corner:

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> from the Lord was this, and it is
wonderful in our eyes.'

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And they were seeking to lay hold on
him, and they feared the multitude, for they knew that against them he
spake the simile, and having left him, they went away;

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> and they send unto him certain of the
Pharisees and of the Herodians, that they may ensnare him in discourse,

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> and they having come, say to him,
\`Teacher, we have known that thou art true, and thou art not caring for
any one, for thou dost not look to the face of men, but in truth the way
of God dost teach; is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar or not? may we
give, or may we not give?'

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And he, knowing their hypocrisy, said
to them, \`Why me do ye tempt? bring me a denary, that I may see;'

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> and they brought, and he saith to them,
\`Whose \[is\] this image, and the inscription?' and they said to him,
\`Caesar's;'

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> and Jesus answering said to them,
\`Give back the things of Caesar to Caesar, and the things of God to
God;' and they did wonder at him.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> And the Sadducees come unto him, who
say there is not a rising again, and they questioned him, saying,

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> \`Teacher, Moses wrote to us, that if
any one's brother may die, and may leave a wife, and may leave no
children, that his brother may take his wife, and raise up seed to his
brother.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> \`There were then seven brothers, and
the first took a wife, and dying, he left no seed;

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> and the second took her, and died,
neither left he seed, and the third in like manner,

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> and the seven took her, and left no
seed, last of all died also the woman;

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> in the rising again, then, whenever
they may rise, of which of them shall she be wife -- for the seven had
her as wife?'

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> And Jesus answering said to them, \`Do
ye not because of this go astray, not knowing the Writings, nor the
power of God?

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> for when they may rise out of the dead,
they neither marry nor are they given in marriage, but are as messengers
who are in the heavens.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> \`And concerning the dead, that they
rise: have ye not read in the Book of Moses (at The Bush), how God spake
to him, saying, I \[am\] the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob;

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> he is not the God of dead men, but a
God of living men; ye then go greatly astray.'

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> And one of the scribes having come
near, having heard them disputing, knowing that he answered them well,
questioned him, \`Which is the first command of all?'

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> and Jesus answered him -- \`The first
of all the commands \[is\], Hear, O Israel, the Lord is our God, the
Lord is one;

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> and thou shalt love the Lord thy God
out of all thy heart, and out of thy soul, and out of all thine
understanding, and out of all thy strength -- this \[is\] the first
command;

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> and the second \[is\] like \[it\],
this, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself; -- greater than these
there is no other command.'

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> And the scribe said to him, \`Well,
Teacher, in truth thou hast spoken that there is one God, and there is
none other but He;

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> and to love Him out of all the heart,
and out of all the understanding, and out of all the soul, and out of
all the strength, and to love one's neighbor as one's self, is more than
all the whole burnt-offerings and the sacrifices.'

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> And Jesus, having seen him that he
answered with understanding, said to him, \`Thou art not far from the
reign of God;' and no one any more durst question him.

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> And Jesus answering said, teaching in
the temple, \`How say the scribes that the Christ is son of David?

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> for David himself said in the Holy
Spirit, The Lord said to my lord, Sit thou on My right hand, till I
place thine enemies -- thy footstool;

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> therefore David himself saith of him
Lord, and whence is he his son?' And the great multitude were hearing
him gladly,

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> and he was saying to them in his
teaching, \`Beware of the scribes, who will in long robes to walk, and
love salutations in the market-places,

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> and first seats in the synagogues, and
first couches in suppers,

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> who are devouring the widows' houses,
and for a pretense are making long prayers; these shall receive more
abundant judgment.'

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> And Jesus having sat down over-against
the treasury, was beholding how the multitude do put brass into the
treasury, and many rich were putting in much,

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> and having come, a poor widow did put
in two mites, which are a farthing.

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> And having called near his disciples,
he saith to them, \`Verily I say to you, that this poor widow hath put
in more than all those putting into the treasury;

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> for all, out of their abundance, put
in, but she, out of her want, all that she had put in -- all her
living.'

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And as he is going forth out of the
temple, one of his disciples saith to him, \`Teacher, see! what stones!
and what buildings!'

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> and Jesus answering said to him, \`Seest
thou these great buildings? there may not be left a stone upon a stone,
that may not be thrown down.'

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And as he is sitting at the mount of the
Olives, over-against the temple, Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew,
were questioning him by himself,

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> \`Tell us when these things shall be? and
what \[is\] the sign when all these may be about to be fulfilled?'

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And Jesus answering them, began to say,
\`Take heed lest any one may lead you astray,

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> for many shall come in my name, saying --
I am \[he\], and many they shall lead astray;

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> and when ye may hear of wars and reports
of wars, be not troubled, for these behove to be, but the end \[is\] not
yet;

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> for nation shall rise against nation, and
kingdom against kingdom, and there shall be earthquakes in divers
places, and there shall be famines and troubles; beginnings of sorrows
\[are\] these.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> \`And take ye heed to yourselves, for
they shall deliver you up to sanhedrims, and to synagogues, ye shall be
beaten, and before governors and kings ye shall be set for my sake, for
a testimony to them;

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> and to all the nations it behoveth
first that the good news be proclaimed.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> \`And when they may lead you,
delivering up, be not anxious beforehand what ye may speak, nor
premeditate, but whatever may be given to you in that hour, that speak
ye, for it is not ye who are speaking, but the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> \`And brother shall deliver up brother
to death, and father child, and children shall rise up against parents,
and shall put them to death,

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> and ye shall be hated by all because of
my name, but he who hath endured to the end -- he shall be saved.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> \`And when ye may see the abomination
of the desolation, that was spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing
where it ought not, (whoever is reading let him understand), then those
in Judea, let them flee to the mountains;

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> and he upon the house-top, let him not
come down to the house, nor come in to take anything out of his house;

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> and he who is in the field, let him not
turn to the things behind, to take up his garment.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> \`And wo to those with child, and to
those giving suck, in those days;

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> and pray ye that your flight may not be
in winter,

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> for those days shall be tribulation,
such as hath not been from the beginning of the creation that God
created, till now, and may not be;

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> and if the Lord did not shorten the
days, no flesh had been saved; but because of the chosen, whom He did
choose to Himself, He did shorten the days.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> \`And then, if any may say to you, Lo,
here \[is\] the Christ, or, Lo, there, ye may not believe;

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> for there shall rise false Christs and
false prophets, and they shall give signs and wonders, to seduce, if
possible, also the chosen;

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> and ye, take heed; lo, I have foretold
you all things.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> \`But in those days, after that
tribulation, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her
light,

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> and the stars of the heaven shall be
falling, and the powers that are in the heavens shall be shaken.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> \`And then they shall see the Son of
Man coming in clouds with much power and glory,

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> and then he shall send his messengers,
and gather together his chosen from the four winds, from the end of the
earth unto the end of heaven.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> \`And from the fig-tree learn ye the
simile: when the branch may already become tender, and may put forth the
leaves, ye know that nigh is the summer;

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> so ye, also, when these ye may see
coming to pass, ye know that it is nigh, at the doors.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> Verily I say to you, that this
generation may not pass away till all these things may come to pass;

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> the heaven and the earth shall pass
away, but my words shall not pass away.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> \`And concerning that day and the hour
no one hath known -- not even the messengers who are in the heaven, not
even the Son -- except the Father.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> Take heed, watch and pray, for ye have
not known when the time is;

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> as a man who is gone abroad, having
left his house, and given to his servants the authority, and to each one
his work, did command also the porter that he may watch;

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> watch ye, therefore, for ye have not
known when the lord of the house doth come, at even, or at midnight, or
at cock-crowing, or at the morning;

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> lest, having come suddenly, he may find
you sleeping;

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> and what I say to you, I say to all,
Watch.'

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> And the passover and the unleavened food
were after two days, and the chief priests and the scribes were seeking
how, by guile, having taken hold of him, they might kill him;

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> and they said, \`Not in the feast, lest
there shall be a tumult of the people.'

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And he, being in Bethany, in the house of
Simon the leper, at his reclining (at meat), there came a woman having
an alabaster box of ointment, of spikenard, very precious, and having
broken the alabaster box, did pour on his head;

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> and there were certain much displeased
within themselves, and saying, \`For what hath this waste of the
ointment been made?

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> for this could have been sold for more
than three hundred denaries, and given to the poor;' and they were
murmuring at her.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And Jesus said, \`Let her alone; why are
ye giving her trouble? a good work she wrought on me;

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> for the poor always ye have with you, and
whenever ye may will ye are able to do them good, but me ye have not
always;

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> what she could she did, she anticipated
to anoint my body for the embalming.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Verily I say to you, wherever this good
news may be proclaimed in the whole world, what also this woman did
shall be spoken of -- for a memorial of her.'

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And Judas the Iscariot, one of the
twelve, went away unto the chief priests that he might deliver him up to
them,

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> and having heard, they were glad, and
promised to give him money, and he was seeking how, conveniently, he
might deliver him up.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And the first day of the unleavened
food, when they were killing the passover, his disciples say to him,
\`Where wilt thou, \[that,\] having gone, we may prepare, that thou
mayest eat the passover?'

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And he sendeth forth two of his
disciples, and saith to them, \`Go ye away to the city, and there shall
meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water, follow him;

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> and wherever he may go in, say ye to
the master of the house -- The Teacher saith, Where is the
guest-chamber, where the passover, with my disciples, I may eat?

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> and he will shew you a large upper
room, furnished, prepared -- there make ready for us.'

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And his disciples went forth, and came
to the city, and found as he said to them, and they made ready the
passover.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And evening having come, he cometh with
the twelve,

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> and as they are reclining, and eating,
Jesus said, \`Verily I say to you -- one of you, who is eating with me
-- shall deliver me up.'

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And they began to be sorrowful, and to
say to him, one by one, \`Is it I?' and another, \`Is it I?'

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> And he answering said to them, \`One of
the twelve who is dipping with me in the dish;

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> the Son of Man doth indeed go, as it
hath been written concerning him, but wo to that man through whom the
Son of Man is delivered up; good were it to him if that man had not been
born.'

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And as they are eating, Jesus having
taken bread, having blessed, brake, and gave to them, and said, \`Take,
eat; this is my body.'

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And having taken the cup, having given
thanks, he gave to them, and they drank of it -- all;

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> and he said to them, \`This is my blood
of the new covenant, which for many is being poured out;

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> verily I say to you, that no more may I
drink of the produce of the vine till that day when I may drink it new
in the reign of God.'

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> And having sung an hymn, they went
forth to the mount of the Olives,

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> and Jesus saith to them -- \`All ye
shall be stumbled at me this night, because it hath been written, I will
smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered abroad,

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> but after my having risen I will go
before you to Galilee.'

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> And Peter said to him, \`And if all
shall be stumbled, yet not I;'

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> And Jesus said to him, \`Verily I say
to thee, that to-day, this night, before a cock shall crow twice, thrice
thou shalt deny me.'

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> And he spake the more vehemently, \`If
it may be necessary for me to die with thee -- I will in nowise deny
thee;' and in like manner also said they all.

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> And they come to a spot, the name of
which \[is\] Gethsemane, and he saith to his disciples, \`Sit ye here
till I may pray;'

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> and he taketh Peter, and James, and
John with him, and began to be amazed, and to be very heavy,

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> and he saith to them, \`Exceeding
sorrowful is my soul -- to death; remain here, and watch.'

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> And having gone forward a little, he
fell upon the earth, and was praying, that, if it be possible the hour
may pass from him,

<span id="an_14:36">14:36</span> and he said, \`Abba, Father; all things
are possible to Thee; make this cup pass from me; but, not what I will,
but what Thou.'

<span id="an_14:37">14:37</span> And he cometh, and findeth them
sleeping, and saith to Peter, \`Simon, thou dost sleep! thou wast not
able to watch one hour!

<span id="an_14:38">14:38</span> Watch ye and pray, that ye may not
enter into temptation; the spirit indeed is forward, but the flesh
weak.'

<span id="an_14:39">14:39</span> And again having gone away, he prayed,
the same word saying;

<span id="an_14:40">14:40</span> and having returned, he found them
again sleeping, for their eyes were heavy, and they had not known what
they might answer him.

<span id="an_14:41">14:41</span> And he cometh the third time, and saith
to them, \`Sleep on henceforth, and rest -- it is over; the hour did
come; lo, the Son of Man is delivered up to the hands of the sinful;

<span id="an_14:42">14:42</span> rise, we may go, lo, he who is
delivering me up hath come nigh.'

<span id="an_14:43">14:43</span> And immediately -- while he is yet
speaking -- cometh near Judas, one of the twelve, and with him a great
multitude, with swords and sticks, from the chief priests, and the
scribes, and the elders;

<span id="an_14:44">14:44</span> and he who is delivering him up had
given a token to them, saying, \`Whomsoever I shall kiss, he it is, lay
hold on him, and lead him away safely,'

<span id="an_14:45">14:45</span> and having come, immediately, having
gone near him, he saith, \`Rabbi, Rabbi,' and kissed him.

<span id="an_14:46">14:46</span> And they laid on him their hands, and
kept hold on him;

<span id="an_14:47">14:47</span> and a certain one of those standing by,
having drawn the sword, struck the servant of the chief priest, and took
off his ear.

<span id="an_14:48">14:48</span> And Jesus answering said to them, \`As
against a robber ye came out, with swords and sticks, to take me!

<span id="an_14:49">14:49</span> daily I was with you in the temple
teaching, and ye did not lay hold on me -- but that the Writings may be
fulfilled.'

<span id="an_14:50">14:50</span> And having left him they all fled;

<span id="an_14:51">14:51</span> and a certain young man was following
him, having put a linen cloth about \[his\] naked body, and the young
men lay hold on him,

<span id="an_14:52">14:52</span> and he, having left the linen cloth,
did flee from them naked.

<span id="an_14:53">14:53</span> And they led away Jesus unto the chief
priest, and come together to him do all the chief priests, and the
elders, and the scribes;

<span id="an_14:54">14:54</span> and Peter afar off did follow him, to
the inside of the hall of the chief priest, and he was sitting with the
officers, and warming himself near the fire.

<span id="an_14:55">14:55</span> And the chief priests and all the
sanhedrim were seeking against Jesus testimony -- to put him to death,
and they were not finding,

<span id="an_14:56">14:56</span> for many were bearing false testimony
against him, and their testimonies were not alike.

<span id="an_14:57">14:57</span> And certain having risen up, were
bearing false testimony against him, saying --

<span id="an_14:58">14:58</span> \`We heard him saying -- I will throw
down this sanctuary made with hands, and by three days, another made
without hands I will build;'

<span id="an_14:59">14:59</span> and neither so was their testimony
alike.

<span id="an_14:60">14:60</span> And the chief priest, having risen up
in the midst, questioned Jesus, saying, \`Thou dost not answer anything!
what do these testify against thee?'

<span id="an_14:61">14:61</span> and he was keeping silent, and did not
answer anything. Again the chief priest was questioning him, and saith
to him, \`Art thou the Christ -- the Son of the Blessed?'

<span id="an_14:62">14:62</span> and Jesus said, \`I am; and ye shall
see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of the power, and coming
with the clouds, of the heaven.'

<span id="an_14:63">14:63</span> And the chief priest, having rent his
garments, saith, \`What need have we yet of witnesses?

<span id="an_14:64">14:64</span> Ye heard the evil speaking, what
appeareth to you?' and they all condemned him to be worthy of death,

<span id="an_14:65">14:65</span> and certain began to spit on him, and
to cover his face, and to buffet him, and to say to him, \`Prophesy;'
and the officers were striking him with their palms.

<span id="an_14:66">14:66</span> And Peter being in the hall beneath,
there doth come one of the maids of the chief priest,

<span id="an_14:67">14:67</span> and having seen Peter warming himself,
having looked on him, she said, \`And thou wast with Jesus of Nazareth!'

<span id="an_14:68">14:68</span> and he denied, saying, \`I have not
known \[him\], neither do I understand what thou sayest;' and he went
forth without to the porch, and a cock crew.

<span id="an_14:69">14:69</span> And the maid having seen him again,
began to say to those standing near -- \`This is of them;'

<span id="an_14:70">14:70</span> and he was again denying. And after a
little again, those standing near said to Peter, \`Truly thou art of
them, for thou also art a Galilean, and thy speech is alike;'

<span id="an_14:71">14:71</span> and he began to anathematize, and to
swear -- \`I have not known this man of whom ye speak;'

<span id="an_14:72">14:72</span> and a second time a cock crew, and
Peter remembered the saying that Jesus said to him -- \`Before a cock
crow twice, thou mayest deny me thrice;' and having thought thereon --
he was weeping.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And immediately, in the morning, the
chief priests having made a consultation, with the elders, and scribes,
and the whole sanhedrim, having bound Jesus, did lead away, and
delivered \[him\] to Pilate;

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> and Pilate questioned him, \`Art thou the
king of the Jews?' and he answering said to him, \`Thou dost say
\[it\].'

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And the chief priests were accusing him
of many things, \[but he answered nothing.\]

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And Pilate again questioned him, saying,
\`Thou dost not answer anything! lo, how many things they do testify
against thee!'

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> and Jesus did no more answer anything, so
that Pilate wondered.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> And at every feast he was releasing to
them one prisoner, whomsoever they were asking;

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> and there was \[one\] named Barabbas,
bound with those making insurrection with him, who had in the
insurrection committed murder.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And the multitude having cried out, began
to ask for themselves as he was always doing to them,

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> and Pilate answered them, saying, \`Will
ye \[that\] I shall release to you the king of the Jews?'

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> for he knew that because of envy the
chief priests had delivered him up;

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> and the chief priests did move the
multitude, that he might rather release Barabbas to them.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And Pilate answering, again said to
them, \`What, then, will ye \[that\] I shall do to him whom ye call king
of the Jews?'

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> and they again cried out, \`Crucify
him.'

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And Pilate said to them, \`Why -- what
evil did he?' and they cried out the more vehemently, \`Crucify him;'

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> and Pilate, wishing to content the
multitude, released to them Barabbas, and delivered up Jesus -- having
scourged \[him\] -- that he might be crucified.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And the soldiers led him away into the
hall, which is Praetorium, and call together the whole band,

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> and clothe him with purple, and having
plaited a crown of thorns, they put \[it\] on him,

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> and began to salute him, \`Hail, King
of the Jews.'

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> And they were smiting him on the head
with a reed, and were spitting on him, and having bent the knee, were
bowing to him,

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> and when they \[had\] mocked him, they
took the purple from off him, and clothed him in his own garments, and
they led him forth, that they may crucify him.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And they impress a certain one passing
by -- Simon, a Cyrenian, coming from the field, the father of Alexander
and Rufus -- that he may bear his cross,

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> and they bring him to the place
Golgotha, which is, being interpreted, \`Place of a skull;'

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> and they were giving him to drink wine
mingled with myrrh, and he did not receive.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> And having crucified him, they were
dividing his garments, casting a lot upon them, what each may take;

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> and it was the third hour, and they
crucified him;

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> and the inscription of his accusation
was written above -- \`The King of the Jews.'

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And with him they crucify two robbers,
one on the right hand, and one on his left,

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> and the Writing was fulfilled that is
saying, \`And with lawless ones he was numbered.'

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> And those passing by were speaking evil
of him, shaking their heads, and saying, \`Ah, the thrower down of the
sanctuary, and in three days the builder!

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> save thyself, and come down from the
cross!'

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> And in like manner also the chief
priests, mocking with one another, with the scribes, said, \`Others he
saved; himself he is not able to save.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> The Christ! the king of Israel -- let
him come down now from the cross, that we may see and believe;' and
those crucified with him were reproaching him.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> And the sixth hour having come,
darkness came over the whole land till the ninth hour,

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> and at the ninth hour Jesus cried with
a great voice, saying, \`Eloi, Eloi, lamma sabachthani?' which is, being
interpreted, \`My God, my God, why didst Thou forsake me?'

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> And certain of those standing by,
having heard, said, \`Lo, Elijah he doth call;'

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> and one having run, and having filled a
spunge with vinegar, having put \[it\] also on a reed, was giving him to
drink, saying, \`Let alone, let us see if Elijah doth come to take him
down.'

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> And Jesus having uttered a loud cry,
yielded the spirit,

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> and the veil of the sanctuary was rent
in two, from top to bottom,

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> and the centurion who was standing
over-against him, having seen that, having so cried out, he yielded the
spirit, said, \`Truly this man was Son of God.'

<span id="an_15:40">15:40</span> And there were also women afar off
beholding, among whom was also Mary the Magdalene, and Mary of James the
less, and of Joses, and Salome,

<span id="an_15:41">15:41</span> (who also, when he was in Galilee, were
following him, and were ministering to him,) and many other women who
came up with him to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:42">15:42</span> And now evening having come, seeing it
was the preparation, that is, the fore-sabbath,

<span id="an_15:43">15:43</span> Joseph of Arimathea, an honourable
counsellor, who also himself was waiting for the reign of God, came,
boldly entered in unto Pilate, and asked the body of Jesus.

<span id="an_15:44">15:44</span> And Pilate wondered if he were already
dead, and having called near the centurion, did question him if he were
long dead,

<span id="an_15:45">15:45</span> and having known \[it\] from the
centurion, he granted the body to Joseph.

<span id="an_15:46">15:46</span> And he, having brought fine linen, and
having taken him down, wrapped him in the linen, and laid him in a
sepulchre that had been hewn out of a rock, and he rolled a stone unto
the door of the sepulchre,

<span id="an_15:47">15:47</span> and Mary the Magdalene, and Mary of
Joses, were beholding where he is laid.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And the sabbath having past, Mary the
Magdalene, and Mary of James, and Salome, bought spices, that having
come, they may anoint him,

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> and early in the morning of the first of
the sabbaths, they come unto the sepulchre, at the rising of the sun,

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> and they said among themselves, \`Who
shall roll away for us the stone out of the door of the sepulchre?'

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And having looked, they see that the
stone hath been rolled away -- for it was very great,

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> and having entered into the sepulchre,
they saw a young man sitting on the right hand, arrayed in a long white
robe, and they were amazed.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And he saith to them, \`Be not amazed, ye
seek Jesus the Nazarene, the crucified: he did rise -- he is not here;
lo, the place where they laid him!

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> and go, say to his disciples, and Peter,
that he doth go before you to Galilee; there ye shall see him, as he
said to you.'

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And, having come forth quickly, they fled
from the sepulchre, and trembling and amazement had seized them, and to
no one said they anything, for they were afraid.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And he, having risen in the morning of
the first of the sabbaths, did appear first to Mary the Magdalene, out
of whom he had cast seven demons;

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> she having gone, told those who had
been with him, mourning and weeping;

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> and they, having heard that he is
alive, and was seen by her, did not believe.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And after these things, to two of them,
as they are going into a field, walking, he was manifested in another
form,

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> and they having gone, told to the rest;
not even them did they believe.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Afterwards, as they are reclining (at
meat), he was manifested to the eleven, and did reproach their unbelief
and stiffness of heart, because they believed not those having seen him
being raised;

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> and he said to them, \`Having gone to
all the world, proclaim the good news to all the creation;

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> he who hath believed, and hath been
baptized, shall be saved; and he who hath not believed, shall be
condemned.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> \`And signs shall accompany those
believing these things; in my name demons they shall cast out; with new
tongues they shall speak;

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> serpents they shall take up; and if any
deadly thing they may drink, it shall not hurt them; on the ailing they
shall lay hands, and they shall be well.'

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> The Lord, then, indeed, after speaking
to them, was received up to the heaven, and sat on the right hand of
God;

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> and they, having gone forth, did preach
everywhere, the Lord working with \[them\], and confirming the word,
through the signs following. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke](luk.md)
