[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mal)  [Next](mar) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Matthew

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> A roll of the birth of Jesus Christ, son of
David, son of Abraham.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob,
and Jacob begat Judah and his brethren,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> and Judah begat Pharez and Zarah of Tamar,
and Pharez begat Hezron, and Hezron begat Ram,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> and Ram begat Amminadab, and Amminadab
begat Nahshon, and Nahshon begat Salmon,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> and Salmon begat Boaz of Rahab, and Boaz
begat Obed of Ruth, and Obed begat Jesse,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> and Jesse begat David the king. And David
the king begat Solomon, of her \[who had been\] Uriah's,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> and Solomon begat Rehoboam, and Rehoboam
begat Abijah, and Abijah begat Asa,

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> and Asa begat Jehoshaphat, and Jehoshaphat
begat Joram, and Joram begat Uzziah,

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> and Uzziah begat Jotham, and Jotham begat
Ahaz, and Ahaz begat Hezekiah,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> and Hezekiah begat Manasseh, and Manasseh
begat Amon, and Amon begat Josiah,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> and Josiah begat Jeconiah and his
brethren, at the Babylonian removal.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And after the Babylonian removal,
Jeconiah begat Shealtiel, and Shealtiel begat Zerubbabel,

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> and Zerubbabel begat Abiud, and Abiud
begat Eliakim, and Eliakim begat Azor,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> and Azor begat Sadok, and Sadok begat
Achim, and Achim begat Eliud,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> and Eliud begat Eleazar, and Eleazar
begat Matthan, and Matthan begat Jacob,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> and Jacob begat Joseph, the husband of
Mary, of whom was begotten Jesus, who is named Christ.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> All the generations, therefore, from
Abraham unto David \[are\] fourteen generations, and from David unto the
Babylonian removal fourteen generations, and from the Babylonian removal
unto the Christ, fourteen generations.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And of Jesus Christ, the birth was thus:
For his mother Mary having been betrothed to Joseph, before their coming
together she was found to have conceived from the Holy Spirit,

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> and Joseph her husband being righteous,
and not willing to make her an example, did wish privately to send her
away.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And on his thinking of these things, lo,
a messenger of the Lord in a dream appeared to him, saying, \`Joseph,
son of David, thou mayest not fear to receive Mary thy wife, for that
which in her was begotten \[is\] of the Holy Spirit,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> and she shall bring forth a son, and thou
shalt call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their
sins.'

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And all this hath come to pass, that it
may be fulfilled that was spoken by the Lord through the prophet,
saying,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> \`Lo, the virgin shall conceive, and she
shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel,' which
is, being interpreted \`With us \[he is\] God.'

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And Joseph, having risen from the sleep,
did as the messenger of the Lord directed him, and received his wife,

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> and did not know her till she brought
forth her son -- the first-born, and he called his name Jesus.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And Jesus having been born in Beth-Lehem of
Judea, in the days of Herod the king, lo, mages from the east came to
Jerusalem,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> saying, \`Where is he who was born king of
the Jews? for we saw his star in the east, and we came to bow to him.'

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And Herod the king having heard, was
stirred, and all Jerusalem with him,

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> and having gathered all the chief priests
and scribes of the people, he was inquiring from them where the Christ
is born.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And they said to him, \`In Beth-Lehem of
Judea, for thus it hath been written through the prophet,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And thou, Beth-Lehem, the land of Judah,
thou art by no means the least among the leaders of Judah, for out of
thee shall come one leading, who shall feed My people Israel.'

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Then Herod, privately having called the
mages, did inquire exactly from them the time of the appearing star,

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> and having sent them to Beth-Lehem, he
said, \`Having gone -- inquire ye exactly for the child, and whenever ye
may have found, bring me back word, that I also having come may bow to
him.'

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And they, having heard the king, departed,
and lo, the star, that they did see in the east, did go before them,
till, having come, it stood over where the child was.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And having seen the star, they rejoiced
with exceeding great joy,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> and having come to the house, they found
the child with Mary his mother, and having fallen down they bowed to
him, and having opened their treasures, they presented to him gifts,
gold, and frankincense, and myrrh,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> and having been divinely warned in a
dream not to turn back unto Herod, through another way they withdrew to
their own region.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And on their having withdrawn, lo, a
messenger of the Lord doth appear in a dream to Joseph, saying, \`Having
risen, take the child and his mother, and flee to Egypt, and be thou
there till I may speak to thee, for Herod is about to seek the child to
destroy him.'

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And he, having risen, took the child and
his mother by night, and withdrew to Egypt,

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> and he was there till the death of Herod,
that it might be fulfilled that was spoken by the Lord through the
prophet, saying, \`Out of Egypt I did call My Son.'

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Then Herod, having seen that he was
deceived by the mages, was very wroth, and having sent forth, he slew
all the male children in Beth-Lehem, and in all its borders, from two
years and under, according to the time that he inquired exactly from the
mages.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Then was fulfilled that which was spoken
by Jeremiah the prophet, saying,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> \`A voice in Ramah was heard --
lamentation and weeping and much mourning -- Rachel weeping \[for\] her
children, and she would not be comforted because they are not.'

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And Herod having died, lo, a messenger of
the Lord in a dream doth appear to Joseph in Egypt,

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> saying, \`Having risen, take the child
and his mother, and be going to the land of Israel, for they have died
-- those seeking the life of the child.'

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And he, having risen, took the child and
his mother, and came to the land of Israel,

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> and having heard that Archelaus doth
reign over Judea instead of Herod his father, he was afraid to go
thither, and having been divinely warned in a dream, he withdrew to the
parts of Galilee,

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> and coming, he dwelt in a city named
Nazareth, that it might be fulfilled that was spoken through the
prophets, that \`A Nazarene he shall be called.'

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And in those days cometh John the Baptist,
proclaiming in the wilderness of Judea,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> and saying, \`Reform, for come nigh hath
the reign of the heavens,'

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> for this is he who was spoken of by Isaiah
the prophet, saying, \`A voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare
ye the way of the Lord, straight make ye His paths.'

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And this John had his clothing of camel's
hair, and a girdle of skin round his loins, and his nourishment was
locusts and honey of the field.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Then were going forth unto him Jerusalem,
and all Judea, and all the region round about the Jordan,

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> and they were baptized in the Jordan by
him, confessing their sins.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And having seen many of the Pharisees and
Sadducees coming about his baptism, he said to them, \`Brood of vipers!
who did shew you to flee from the coming wrath?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> bear, therefore, fruits worthy of the
reformation,

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> and do not think to say in yourselves, A
father we have -- Abraham, for I say to you, that God is able out of
these stones to raise children to Abraham,

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> and now also, the axe unto the root of
the trees is laid, every tree therefore not bearing good fruit is hewn
down, and to fire is cast.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> \`I indeed do baptize you with water to
reformation, but he who after me is coming is mightier than I, of whom I
am not worthy to bear the sandals, he shall baptize you with the Holy
Spirit and with fire,

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> whose fan \[is\] in his hand, and he will
thoroughly cleanse his floor, and will gather his wheat to the
storehouse, but the chaff he will burn with fire unquenchable.'

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Then cometh Jesus from Galilee upon the
Jordan, unto John to be baptized by him,

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> but John was forbidding him, saying, \`I
have need by thee to be baptized -- and thou dost come unto me!'

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> But Jesus answering said to him, \`Suffer
now, for thus it is becoming to us to fulfill all righteousness,' then
he doth suffer him.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And having been baptized, Jesus went up
immediately from the water, and lo, opened to him were the heavens, and
he saw the Spirit of God descending as a dove, and coming upon him,

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> and lo, a voice out of the heavens,
saying, \`This is My Son -- the Beloved, in whom I did delight.'

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Then Jesus was led up to the wilderness by
the Spirit, to be tempted by the Devil,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> and having fasted forty days and forty
nights, afterwards he did hunger.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And the Tempter having come to him said,
\`If Son thou art of God -- speak that these stones may become loaves.'

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> But he answering said, \`It hath been
written, Not upon bread alone doth man live, but upon every word coming
forth from the mouth of God.'

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Then doth the Devil take him to the
\[holy\] city, and doth set him on the pinnacle of the temple,

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> and saith to him, \`If Son thou art of God
-- cast thyself down, for it hath been written, that, His messengers He
shall charge concerning thee, and on hands they shall bear thee up, that
thou mayest not dash on a stone thy foot.'

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Jesus said to him again, \`It hath been
written, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.'

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Again doth the Devil take him to a very
high mount, and doth shew to him all the kingdoms of the world and the
glory of them,

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> and saith to him, \`All these to thee I
will give, if falling down thou mayest bow to me.'

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Then saith Jesus to him, \`Go --
Adversary, for it hath been written, The Lord thy God thou shalt bow to,
and Him only thou shalt serve.'

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Then doth the Devil leave him, and lo,
messengers came and were ministering to him.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And Jesus having heard that John was
delivered up, did withdraw to Galilee,

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> and having left Nazareth, having come, he
dwelt at Capernaum that is by the sea, in the borders of Zebulun and
Naphtalim,

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> that it might be fulfilled that was
spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying,

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> \`Land of Zebulun and land of Naphtali,
way of the sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the nations! --

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> the people that is sitting in darkness
saw a great light, and to those sitting in a region and shadow of death
-- light arose to them.'

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> From that time began Jesus to proclaim
and to say, \`Reform ye, for come nigh hath the reign of the heavens.'

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And Jesus, walking by the sea of Galilee,
saw two brothers, Simon named Peter and Andrew his brother, casting a
drag into the sea -- for they were fishers --

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> and he saith to them, \`Come ye after me,
and I will make you fishers of men,'

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> and they, immediately, having left the
nets, did follow him.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And having advanced thence, he saw other
two brothers, James of Zebedee, and John his brother, in the boat with
Zebedee their father, refitting their nets, and he called them,

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> and they, immediately, having left the
boat and their father, did follow him.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And Jesus was going about all Galilee
teaching in their synagogues, and proclaiming the good news of the
reign, and healing every disease, and every malady among the people,

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> and his fame went forth to all Syria, and
they brought to him all having ailments, pressed with manifold
sicknesses and pains, and demoniacs, and lunatics, and paralytics, and
he healed them.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> And there followed him many multitudes
from Galilee, and Decapolis, and Jerusalem, and Judea, and beyond the
Jordan.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And having seen the multitudes, he went up
to the mount, and he having sat down, his disciples came to him,

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> and having opened his mouth, he was
teaching them, saying:

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> \`Happy the poor in spirit -- because
theirs is the reign of the heavens.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> \`Happy the mourning -- because they shall
be comforted.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> \`Happy the meek -- because they shall
inherit the land.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> \`Happy those hungering and thirsting for
righteousness -- because they shall be filled.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> \`Happy the kind -- because they shall find
kindness.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> \`Happy the clean in heart -- because they
shall see God.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> \`Happy the peacemakers -- because they
shall be called Sons of God.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> \`Happy those persecuted for
righteousness' sake -- because theirs is the reign of the heavens.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> \`Happy are ye whenever they may reproach
you, and may persecute, and may say any evil thing against you falsely
for my sake --

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> rejoice ye and be glad, because your
reward \[is\] great in the heavens, for thus did they persecute the
prophets who were before you.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> \`Ye are the salt of the land, but if the
salt may lose savour, in what shall it be salted? for nothing is it good
henceforth, except to be cast without, and to be trodden down by men.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> \`Ye are the light of the world, a city
set upon a mount is not able to be hid;

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> nor do they light a lamp, and put it
under the measure, but on the lamp-stand, and it shineth to all those in
the house;

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> so let your light shine before men, that
they may see your good works, and may glorify your Father who \[is\] in
the heavens.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> \`Do not suppose that I came to throw
down the law or the prophets -- I did not come to throw down, but to
fulfill;

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> for, verily I say to you, till that the
heaven and the earth may pass away, one iota or one tittle may not pass
away from the law, till that all may come to pass.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> \`Whoever therefore may loose one of
these commands -- the least -- and may teach men so, least he shall be
called in the reign of the heavens, but whoever may do and may teach
\[them\], he shall be called great in the reign of the heavens.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> \`For I say to you, that if your
righteousness may not abound above that of the scribes and Pharisees, ye
may not enter to the reign of the heavens.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> \`Ye heard that it was said to the
ancients: Thou shalt not kill, and whoever may kill shall be in danger
of the judgment;

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> but I -- I say to you, that every one who
is angry at his brother without cause, shall be in danger of the
judgment, and whoever may say to his brother, Empty fellow! shall be in
danger of the sanhedrim, and whoever may say, Rebel! shall be in danger
of the gehenna of the fire.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> \`If, therefore, thou mayest bring thy
gift to the altar, and there mayest remember that thy brother hath
anything against thee,

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> leave there thy gift before the altar,
and go -- first be reconciled to thy brother, and then having come bring
thy gift.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> \`Be agreeing with thy opponent quickly,
while thou art in the way with him, that the opponent may not deliver
thee to the judge, and the judge may deliver thee to the officer, and to
prison thou mayest be cast,

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> verily I say to thee, thou mayest not
come forth thence till that thou mayest pay the last farthing.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> \`Ye heard that it was said to the
ancients: Thou shalt not commit adultery;

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> but I -- I say to you, that every one who
is looking on a woman to desire her, did already commit adultery with
her in his heart.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> \`But, if thy right eye doth cause thee
to stumble, pluck it out and cast from thee, for it is good to thee that
one of thy members may perish, and not thy whole body be cast to
gehenna.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> \`And, if thy right hand doth cause thee
to stumble, cut it off, and cast from thee, for it is good to thee that
one of thy members may perish, and not thy whole body be cast to
gehenna.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> \`And it was said, That whoever may put
away his wife, let him give to her a writing of divorce;

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> but I -- I say to you, that whoever may
put away his wife, save for the matter of whoredom, doth make her to
commit adultery; and whoever may marry her who hath been put away doth
commit adultery.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> \`Again, ye heard that it was said to the
ancients: Thou shalt not swear falsely, but thou shalt pay to the Lord
thine oaths;

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> but I -- I say to you, not to swear at
all; neither by the heaven, because it is the throne of God,

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> nor by the earth, because it is His
footstool, nor by Jerusalem, because it is a city of a great king,

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> nor by thy head mayest thou swear,
because thou art not able one hair to make white or black;

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> but let your word be, Yes, Yes, No, No,
and that which is more than these is of the evil.

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> \`Ye heard that it was said: Eye for eye,
and tooth for tooth;

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> but I -- I say to you, not to resist the
evil, but whoever shall slap thee on thy right cheek, turn to him also
the other;

<span id="an_5:40">5:40</span> and whoever is willing to take thee to
law, and thy coat to take -- suffer to him also the cloak.

<span id="an_5:41">5:41</span> \`And whoever shall impress thee one
mile, go with him two,

<span id="an_5:42">5:42</span> to him who is asking of thee be giving,
and him who is willing to borrow from thee thou mayest not turn away.

<span id="an_5:43">5:43</span> \`Ye heard that it was said: Thou shalt
love thy neighbor, and shalt hate thine enemy;

<span id="an_5:44">5:44</span> but I -- I say to you, Love your enemies,
bless those cursing you, do good to those hating you, and pray for those
accusing you falsely, and persecuting you,

<span id="an_5:45">5:45</span> that ye may be sons of your Father in the
heavens, because His sun He doth cause to rise on evil and good, and He
doth send rain on righteous and unrighteous.

<span id="an_5:46">5:46</span> \`For, if ye may love those loving you,
what reward have ye? do not also the tax-gatherers the same?

<span id="an_5:47">5:47</span> and if ye may salute your brethren only,
what do ye abundant? do not also the tax-gatherers so?

<span id="an_5:48">5:48</span> ye shall therefore be perfect, as your
Father who \[is\] in the heavens is perfect.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> \`Take heed your kindness not to do before
men, to be seen by them, and if not -- reward ye have not from your
Father who \[is\] in the heavens;

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> whenever, therefore, thou mayest do
kindness, thou mayest not sound a trumpet before thee as the hypocrites
do, in the synagogues, and in the streets, that they may have glory from
men; verily I say to you -- they have their reward!

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> \`But thou, doing kindness, let not thy
left hand know what thy right hand doth,

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> that thy kindness may be in secret, and thy
Father who is seeing in secret Himself shall reward thee manifestly.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> \`And when thou mayest pray, thou shalt not
be as the hypocrites, because they love in the synagogues, and in the
corners of the broad places -- standing -- to pray, that they may be
seen of men; verily I say to you, that they have their reward.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> \`But thou, when thou mayest pray, go into
thy chamber, and having shut thy door, pray to thy Father who \[is\] in
secret, and thy Father who is seeing in secret, shall reward thee
manifestly.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> \`And -- praying -- ye may not use vain
repetitions like the nations, for they think that in their much speaking
they shall be heard,

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> be ye not therefore like to them, for your
Father doth know those things that ye have need of before your asking
him;

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> thus therefore pray ye: \`Our Father who
\[art\] in the heavens! hallowed be Thy name.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> \`Thy reign come: Thy will come to pass,
as in heaven also on the earth.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> \`Our appointed bread give us to-day.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> \`And forgive us our debts, as also we
forgive our debtors.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> \`And mayest Thou not lead us to
temptation, but deliver us from the evil, because Thine is the reign,
and the power, and the glory -- to the ages. Amen.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> \`For, if ye may forgive men their
trespasses He also will forgive you -- your Father who \[is\] in the
heavens;

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> but if ye may not forgive men their
trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> \`And when ye may fast, be ye not as the
hypocrites, of sour countenances, for they disfigure their faces, that
they may appear to men fasting; verily I say to you, that they have
their reward.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> \`But thou, fasting, anoint thy head, and
wash thy face,

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> that thou mayest not appear to men
fasting, but to thy Father who \[is\] in secret, and thy Father, who is
seeing in secret, shall reward thee manifestly.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> \`Treasure not up to yourselves treasures
on the earth, where moth and rust disfigure, and where thieves break
through and steal,

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> but treasure up to yourselves treasures
in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth disfigure, and where thieves
do not break through nor steal,

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> for where your treasure is, there will be
also your heart.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> \`The lamp of the body is the eye, if,
therefore, thine eye may be perfect, all thy body shall be enlightened,

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> but if thine eye may be evil, all thy
body shall be dark; if, therefore, the light that \[is\] in thee is
darkness -- the darkness, how great!

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> \`None is able to serve two lords, for
either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will hold to the
one, and despise the other; ye are not able to serve God and Mammon.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> \`Because of this I say to you, be not
anxious for your life, what ye may eat, and what ye may drink, nor for
your body, what ye may put on. Is not the life more than the
nourishment, and the body than the clothing?

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> look to the fowls of the heaven, for they
do not sow, nor reap, nor gather into storehouses, and your heavenly
Father doth nourish them; are not ye much better than they?

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> \`And who of you, being anxious, is able
to add to his age one cubit?

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> and about clothing why are ye anxious?
consider well the lilies of the field; how do they grow? they do not
labour, nor do they spin;

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> and I say to you, that not even Solomon
in all his glory was arrayed as one of these.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> \`And if the herb of the field, that
to-day is, and to-morrow is cast to the furnace, God doth so clothe --
not much more you, O ye of little faith?

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> therefore ye may not be anxious, saying,
What may we eat? or, What may we drink? or, What may we put round?

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> for all these do the nations seek for,
for your heavenly Father doth know that ye have need of all these;

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> but seek ye first the reign of God and
His righteousness, and all these shall be added to you.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> Be not therefore anxious for the morrow,
for the morrow shall be anxious for its own things; sufficient for the
day \[is\] the evil of it.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> \`Judge not, that ye may not be judged,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> for in what judgment ye judge, ye shall be
judged, and in what measure ye measure, it shall be measured to you.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> \`And why dost thou behold the mote that
\[is\] in thy brother's eye, and the beam that \[is\] in thine own eye
dost not consider?

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> or, how wilt thou say to thy brother,
Suffer I may cast out the mote from thine eye, and lo, the beam \[is\]
in thine own eye?

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of
thine own eye, and then thou shalt see clearly to cast out the mote out
of thy brother's eye.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> \`Ye may not give that which is \[holy\] to
the dogs, nor cast your pearls before the swine, that they may not
trample them among their feet, and having turned -- may rend you.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> \`Ask, and it shall be given to you; seek,
and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened to you;

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> for every one who is asking doth receive,
and he who is seeking doth find, and to him who is knocking it shall be
opened.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> \`Or what man is of you, of whom, if his
son may ask a loaf -- a stone will he present to him?

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> and if a fish he may ask -- a serpent
will he present to him?

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> if, therefore, ye being evil, have known
good gifts to give to your children, how much more shall your Father who
\[is\] in the heavens give good things to those asking him?

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> \`All things, therefore, whatever ye may
will that men may be doing to you, so also do to them, for this is the
law and the prophets.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> \`Go ye in through the strait gate,
because wide \[is\] the gate, and broad the way that is leading to the
destruction, and many are those going in through it;

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> how strait \[is\] the gate, and
compressed the way that is leading to the life, and few are those
finding it!

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> \`But, take heed of the false prophets,
who come unto you in sheep's clothing, and inwardly are ravening wolves.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> From their fruits ye shall know them; do
\[men\] gather from thorns grapes? or from thistles figs?

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> so every good tree doth yield good
fruits, but the bad tree doth yield evil fruits.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> A good tree is not able to yield evil
fruits, nor a bad tree to yield good fruits.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Every tree not yielding good fruit is cut
down and is cast to fire:

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> therefore from their fruits ye shall know
them.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> \`Not every one who is saying to me Lord,
lord, shall come into the reign of the heavens; but he who is doing the
will of my Father who is in the heavens.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Many will say to me in that day, Lord,
lord, have we not in thy name prophesied? and in thy name cast out
demons? and in thy name done many mighty things?

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> and then I will acknowledge to them, that
-- I never knew you, depart from me ye who are working lawlessness.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> \`Therefore, every one who doth hear of
me these words, and doth do them, I will liken him to a wise man who
built his house upon the rock;

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> and the rain did descend, and the streams
came, and the winds blew, and they beat on that house, and it fell not,
for it had been founded on the rock.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> \`And every one who is hearing of me
these words, and is not doing them, shall be likened to a foolish man
who built his house upon the sand;

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> and the rain did descend, and the streams
came, and the winds blew, and they beat on that house, and it fell, and
its fall was great.'

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> And it came to pass, when Jesus ended
these words, the multitudes were astonished at his teaching,

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> for he was teaching them as having
authority, and not as the scribes.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And when he came down from the mount, great
multitudes did follow him,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> and lo, a leper having come, was bowing to
him, saying, \`Sir, if thou art willing, thou art able to cleanse me;'

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> and having stretched forth the hand, Jesus
touched him, saying, \`I will, be thou cleansed,' and immediately his
leprosy was cleansed.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And Jesus saith to him, \`See, thou mayest
tell no one, but go, thyself shew to the priest, and bring the gift that
Moses commanded for a testimony to them.'

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And Jesus having entered into Capernaum,
there came to him a centurion calling upon him,

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> and saying, \`Sir, my young man hath been
laid in the house a paralytic, fearfully afflicted,'

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> and Jesus saith to him, \`I, having come,
will heal him.'

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And the centurion answering said, \`Sir, I
am not worthy that thou mayest enter under my roof, but only say a word,
and my servant shall be healed;

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> for I also am a man under authority, having
under myself soldiers, and I say to this one, Go, and he goeth, and to
another, Be coming, and he cometh, and to my servant, Do this, and he
doth \[it\].'

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And Jesus having heard, did wonder, and
said to those following, \`Verily I say to you, not even in Israel so
great faith have I found;

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> and I say to you, that many from east and
west shall come and recline (at meat) with Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob, in the reign of the heavens,

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> but the sons of the reign shall be cast
forth to the outer darkness -- there shall be the weeping and the
gnashing of the teeth.'

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And Jesus said to the centurion, \`Go,
and as thou didst believe let it be to thee;' and his young man was
healed in that hour.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And Jesus having come into the house of
Peter, saw his mother-in-law laid, and fevered,

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> and he touched her hand, and the fever
left her, and she arose, and was ministering to them.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And evening having come, they brought to
him many demoniacs, and he did cast out the spirits with a word, and did
heal all who were ill,

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> that it might be fulfilled that was
spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying, \`Himself took our
infirmities, and the sicknesses he did bear.'

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And Jesus having seen great multitudes
about him, did command to depart to the other side;

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> and a certain scribe having come, said to
him, \`Teacher, I will follow thee wherever thou mayest go;'

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> and Jesus saith to him, \`The foxes have
holes, and the birds of the heaven places of rest, but the Son of Man
hath not where he may lay the head.'

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And another of his disciples said to him,
\`Sir, permit me first to depart and to bury my father;'

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> and Jesus said to him, \`Follow me, and
suffer the dead to bury their own dead.'

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And when he entered into the boat his
disciples did follow him,

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> and lo, a great tempest arose in the sea,
so that the boat was being covered by the waves, but he was sleeping,

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> and his disciples having come to him,
awoke him, saying, \`Sir, save us; we are perishing.'

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And he saith to them, \`Why are ye
fearful, O ye of little faith?' Then having risen, he rebuked the winds
and the sea, and there was a great calm;

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> and the men wondered, saying, \`What kind
-- is this, that even the wind and the sea do obey him?'

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And he having come to the other side, to
the region of the Gergesenes, there met him two demoniacs, coming forth
out of the tombs, very fierce, so that no one was able to pass over by
that way,

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> and lo, they cried out, saying, \`What --
to us and to thee, Jesus, Son of God? didst thou come hither, before the
time, to afflict us?'

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And there was far off from them a herd of
many swine feeding,

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> and the demons were calling on him,
saying, \`If thou dost cast us forth, permit us to go away to the herd
of the swine;'

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> and he saith to them, \`Go.' And having
come forth, they went to the herd of the swine, and lo, the whole herd
of the swine rushed down the steep, to the sea, and died in the waters,

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> and those feeding did flee, and, having
gone to the city, they declared all, and the matter of the demoniacs.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> And lo, all the city came forth to meet
Jesus, and having seen him, they called on \[him\] that he might depart
from their borders.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And having gone to the boat, he passed
over, and came to his own city,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> and lo, they were bringing to him a
paralytic, laid upon a couch, and Jesus having seen their faith, said to
the paralytic, \`Be of good courage, child, thy sins have been forgiven
thee.'

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And lo, certain of the scribes said within
themselves, \`This one doth speak evil.'

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And Jesus, having known their thoughts,
said, \`Why think ye evil in your hearts?

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> for which is easier? to say, The sins have
been forgiven to thee; or to say, Rise, and walk?

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> \`But, that ye may know that the Son of Man
hath power upon the earth to forgive sins -- (then saith he to the
paralytic) -- having risen, take up thy couch, and go to thy house.'

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And he, having risen, went to his house,

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> and the multitudes having seen, wondered,
and glorified God, who did give such power to men.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And Jesus passing by thence, saw a man
sitting at the tax-office, named Matthew, and saith to him, \`Be
following me,' and he, having risen, did follow him.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And it came to pass, he reclining (at
meat) in the house, that lo, many tax-gatherers and sinners having come,
were lying (at meat) with Jesus and his disciples,

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> and the Pharisees having seen, said to
his disciples, \`Wherefore with the tax-gatherers and sinners doth your
teacher eat?'

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And Jesus having heard, said to them,
\`They who are whole have no need of a physician, but they who are ill;

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> but having gone, learn ye what is,
Kindness I will, and not sacrifice, for I did not come to call righteous
men, but sinners, to reformation.'

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Then come to him do the disciples of
John, saying, \`Wherefore do we and the Pharisees fast much, and thy
disciples fast not?'

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And Jesus said to them, \`Can the sons of
the bride-chamber mourn, so long as the bridegroom is with them? but
days shall come when the bridegroom may be taken from them, and then
they shall fast.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> \`And no one doth put a patch of
undressed cloth on an old garment, for its filling up doth take from the
garment, and a worse rent is made.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> \`Nor do they put new wine into old
skins, and if not -- the skins burst, and the wine doth run out, and the
skins are destroyed, but they put new wine into new skins, and both are
preserved together.'

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> While he is speaking these things to
them, lo, a ruler having come, was bowing to him, saying that \`My
daughter just now died, but, having come, lay thy hand upon her, and she
shall live.'

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And Jesus having risen, did follow him,
also his disciples,

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> and lo, a woman having an issue of blood
twelve years, having come to him behind, did touch the fringe of his
garments,

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> for she said within herself, \`If only I
may touch his garment, I shall be saved.'

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And Jesus having turned about, and having
seen her, said, \`Be of good courage, daughter, thy faith hath saved
thee,' and the woman was saved from that hour.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And Jesus having come to the house of the
ruler, and having seen the minstrels and the multitude making tumult,

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> he saith to them, \`Withdraw, for the
damsel did not die, but doth sleep,' and they were deriding him;

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> but, when the multitude was put forth,
having gone in, he took hold of her hand, and the damsel arose,

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> and the fame of this went forth to all
the land.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And Jesus passing on thence, two blind
men followed him, calling and saying, \`Deal kindly with us, Son of
David.'

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And he having come to the house, the
blind men came to him, and Jesus saith to them, \`Believe ye that I am
able to do this?' They say to him, \`Yes, sir.'

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> Then touched he their eyes, saying,
\`According to your faith let it be to you,'

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> and their eyes were opened, and Jesus
strictly charged them, saying, \`See, let no one know;'

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> but they, having gone forth, did spread
his fame in all that land.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> And as they are coming forth, lo, they
brought to him a man dumb, a demoniac,

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> and the demon having been cast out, the
dumb spake, and the multitude did wonder, saying that \`It was never so
seen in Israel:'

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> but the Pharisees said, \`By the ruler of
the demons he doth cast out the demons.'

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And Jesus was going up and down all the
cities and the villages, teaching in their synagogues, and proclaiming
the good news of the reign, and healing every sickness and every malady
among the people.

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> And having seen the multitudes, he was
moved with compassion for them, that they were faint and cast aside, as
sheep not having a shepherd,

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> then saith he to his disciples, \`The
harvest indeed \[is\] abundant, but the workmen few;

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> beseech ye therefore the Lord of the
harvest, that he may put forth workmen to His harvest.'

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And having called to him his twelve
disciples, he gave to them power over unclean spirits, so as to be
casting them out, and to be healing every sickness, and every malady.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And of the twelve apostles the names are
these: first, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother; James
of Zebedee, and John his brother;

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Philip, and Bartholomew; Thomas, and
Matthew the tax-gatherer; James of Alpheus, and Lebbeus who was surnamed
Thaddeus;

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Simon the Cananite, and Judas Iscariot,
who did also deliver him up.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> These twelve did Jesus send forth, having
given command to them, saying, \`To the way of the nations go not away,
and into a city of the Samaritans go not in,

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> and be going rather unto the lost sheep
of the house of Israel.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> \`And, going on, proclaim saying that,
the reign of the heavens hath come nigh;

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> infirm ones be healing, lepers be
cleansing, dead be raising, demons be casting out -- freely ye did
receive, freely give.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> \`Provide not gold, nor silver, nor brass
in your girdles,

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> nor scrip for the way, nor two coats,
nor sandals, nor staff -- for the workman is worthy of his nourishment.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> \`And into whatever city or village ye
may enter, inquire ye who in it is worthy, and there abide, till ye may
go forth.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And coming to the house salute it,

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> and if indeed the house be worthy, let
your peace come upon it; and if it be not worthy, let your peace turn
back to you.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> \`And whoever may not receive you nor
hear your words, coming forth from that house or city, shake off the
dust of your feet,

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> verily I say to you, It shall be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than
for that city.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> \`Lo, I do send you forth as sheep in
the midst of wolves, be ye therefore wise as the serpents, and simple as
the doves.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And, take ye heed of men, for they will
give you up to sanhedrims, and in their synagogues they will scourge
you,

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> and before governors and kings ye shall
be brought for my sake, for a testimony to them and to the nations.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> \`And whenever they may deliver you up,
be not anxious how or what ye may speak, for it shall be given you in
that hour what ye shall speak;

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> for ye are not the speakers, but the
Spirit of your Father that is speaking in you.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> \`And brother shall deliver up brother
to death, and father child, and children shall rise up against parents,
and shall put them to death,

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> and ye shall be hated by all because of
my name, but he who hath endured to the end, he shall be saved.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> \`And whenever they may persecute you
in this city, flee to the other, for verily I say to you, ye may not
have completed the cities of Israel till the Son of Man may come.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> \`A disciple is not above the teacher,
nor a servant above his lord;

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> sufficient to the disciple that he may
be as his teacher, and the servant as his lord; if the master of the
house they did call Beelzeboul, how much more those of his household?

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> \`Ye may not, therefore, fear them, for
there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed, and hid, that
shall not be known;

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> that which I tell you in the darkness,
speak in the light, and that which you hear at the ear, proclaim on the
house-tops.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> \`And be not afraid of those killing
the body, and are not able to kill the soul, but fear rather Him who is
able both soul and body to destroy in gehenna.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> \`Are not two sparrows sold for an
assar? and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father;

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> and of you -- even the hairs of the
head are all numbered;

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> be not therefore afraid, than many
sparrows ye are better.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> \`Every one, therefore, who shall
confess in me before men, I also will confess in him before my Father
who is in the heavens;

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> and whoever shall deny me before men, I
also will deny him before my Father who is in the heavens.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> \`Ye may not suppose that I came to put
peace on the earth; I did not come to put peace, but a sword;

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> for I came to set a man at variance
against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a
daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law,

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> and the enemies of a man are those of
his household.

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> \`He who is loving father or mother
above me, is not worthy of me, and he who is loving son or daughter
above me, is not worthy of me,

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> and whoever doth not receive his cross
and follow after me, is not worthy of me.

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> \`He who found his life shall lose it,
and he who lost his life for my sake shall find it.

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> \`He who is receiving you doth receive
me, and he who is receiving me doth receive Him who sent me,

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> he who is receiving a prophet in the
name of a prophet, shall receive a prophet's reward, and he who is
receiving a righteous man in the name of a righteous man, shall receive
a righteous man's reward,

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> and whoever may give to drink to one of
these little ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple,
verily I say to you, he may not lose his reward.'

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And it came to pass, when Jesus ended
directing his twelve disciples, he departed thence to teach and to
preach in their cities.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And John having heard in the prison the
works of the Christ, having sent two of his disciples,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> said to him, \`Art thou He who is coming,
or for another do we look?'

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And Jesus answering said to them,
\`Having gone, declare to John the things that ye hear and see,

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> blind receive sight, and lame walk,
lepers are cleansed, and deaf hear, dead are raised, and poor have good
news proclaimed,

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> and happy is he who may not be stumbled
in me.'

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And as they are going, Jesus began to say
to the multitudes concerning John, \`What went ye out to the wilderness
to view? -- a reed shaken by the wind?

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> \`But what went ye out to see? -- a man
clothed in soft garments? lo, those wearing the soft things are in the
kings' houses.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> \`But what went ye out to see? -- a
prophet? yes, I say to you, and more than a prophet,

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> for this is he of whom it hath been
written, Lo, I do send My messenger before thy face, who shall prepare
thy way before thee.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Verily I say to you, there hath not
risen, among those born of women, a greater than John the Baptist, but
he who is least in the reign of the heavens is greater than he.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> \`And, from the days of John the
Baptist till now, the reign of the heavens doth suffer violence, and
violent men do take it by force,

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> for all the prophets and the law till
John did prophesy,

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> and if ye are willing to receive
\[it\], he is Elijah who was about to come;

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> he who is having ears to hear -- let
him hear.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> \`And to what shall I liken this
generation? it is like little children in market-places, sitting and
calling to their comrades,

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> and saying, We piped unto you, and ye
did not dance, we lamented to you, and ye did not smite the breast.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> \`For John came neither eating nor
drinking, and they say, He hath a demon;

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> the Son of Man came eating and
drinking, and they say, Lo, a man, a glutton, and a wine-drinker, a
friend of tax-gatherers and sinners, and wisdom was justified of her
children.'

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> Then began he to reproach the cities in
which were done most of his mighty works, because they did not reform.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> \`Wo to thee, Chorazin! wo to thee,
Bethsaida! because, if in Tyre and Sidon had been done the mighty works
that were done in you, long ago in sackcloth and ashes they had
reformed;

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> but I say to you, to Tyre and Sidon it
shall be more tolerable in a day of judgment than for you.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> \`And thou, Capernaum, which unto the
heaven wast exalted, unto hades shalt be brought down, because if in
Sodom had been done the mighty works that were done in thee, it had
remained unto this day;

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> but I say to you, to the land of Sodom
it shall be more tolerable in a day of judgment than to thee.'

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> At that time Jesus answering said, \`I
do confess to Thee, Father, Lord of the heavens and of the earth, that
thou didst hide these things from wise and understanding ones, and didst
reveal them to babes.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> Yes, Father, because so it was good
pleasure before Thee.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> \`All things were delivered to me by my
Father, and none doth know the Son, except the Father, nor doth any know
the Father, except the Son, and he to whom the Son may wish to reveal
\[Him\].

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> \`Come unto me, all ye labouring and
burdened ones, and I will give you rest,

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> take up my yoke upon you, and learn
from me, because I am meek and humble in heart, and ye shall find rest
to your souls,

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> for my yoke \[is\] easy, and my burden
is light.'

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> At that time did Jesus go on the sabbaths
through the corn, and his disciples were hungry, and they began to pluck
ears, and to eat,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> and the Pharisees having seen, said to
him, \`Lo, thy disciples do that which it is not lawful to do on a
sabbath.'

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And he said to them, \`Did ye not read
what David did, when he was hungry, himself and those with him --

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> how he went into the house of God, and
the loaves of the presentation did eat, which it is not lawful to him to
eat, nor to those with him, except to the priests alone?

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> \`Or did ye not read in the Law, that on
the sabbaths the priests in the temple do profane the sabbath, and are
blameless?

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> and I say to you, that a greater than the
temple is here;

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> and if ye had known what is: Kindness I
will, and not sacrifice -- ye had not condemned the blameless,

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> for the son of man is lord even of the
sabbath.'

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And having departed thence, he went to
their synagogue,

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> and lo, there was a man having the hand
withered, and they questioned him, saying, \`Is it lawful to heal on the
sabbaths?' that they might accuse him.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And he said to them, \`What man shall
be of you, who shall have one sheep, and if this may fall on the
sabbaths into a ditch, will not lay hold on it and raise \[it\]?

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> How much better, therefore, is a man
than a sheep? -- so that it is lawful on the sabbaths to do good.'

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Then saith he to the man, \`Stretch
forth thy hand,' and he stretched \[it\] forth, and it was restored
whole as the other.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And the Pharisees having gone forth,
held a consultation against him, how they might destroy him,

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> and Jesus having known, withdrew
thence, and there followed him great multitudes, and he healed them all,

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> and did charge them that they might not
make him manifest,

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> that it might be fulfilled that was
spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying,

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> \`Lo, My servant, whom I did choose, My
beloved, in whom My soul did delight, I will put My Spirit upon him, and
judgment to the nations he shall declare,

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> he shall not strive nor cry, nor shall
any hear in the broad places his voice,

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> a bruised reed he shall not break, and
smoking flax he shall not quench, till he may put forth judgment to
victory,

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> and in his name shall nations hope.'

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Then was brought to him a demoniac,
blind and dumb, and he healed him, so that the blind and dumb both spake
and saw.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> And all the multitudes were amazed, and
said, \`Is this the Son of David?'

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> but the Pharisees having heard, said,
\`This one doth not cast out demons, except by Beelzeboul, ruler of the
demons.'

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> And Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said
to them, \`Every kingdom having been divided against itself is
desolated, and no city or house having been divided against itself, doth
stand,

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> and if the Adversary doth cast out the
Adversary, against himself he was divided, how then doth his kingdom
stand?

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> \`And if I, by Beelzeboul, do cast out
the demons, your sons -- by whom do they cast out? because of this they
-- they shall be your judges.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> \`But if I, by the Spirit of God, do
cast out the demons, then come already unto you did the reign of God.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> \`Or how is one able to go into the
house of the strong man, and to plunder his goods, if first he may not
bind the strong man? and then his house he will plunder.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> \`He who is not with me is against me,
and he who is not gathering with me, doth scatter.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> Because of this I say to you, all sin
and evil speaking shall be forgiven to men, but the evil speaking of the
Spirit shall not be forgiven to men.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> And whoever may speak a word against
the Son of Man it shall be forgiven to him, but whoever may speak
against the Holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this
age, nor in that which is coming.

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> \`Either make the tree good, and its
fruit good, or make the tree bad, and its fruit bad, for from the fruit
is the tree known.

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> \`Brood of vipers! how are ye able to
speak good things -- being evil? for out of the abundance of the heart
doth the mouth speak.

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> The good man out of the good treasure
of the heart doth put forth the good things, and the evil man out of the
evil treasure doth put forth evil things.

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> \`And I say to you, that every idle
word that men may speak, they shall give for it a reckoning in a day of
judgment;

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> for from thy words thou shalt be
declared righteous, and from thy words thou shalt be declared
unrighteous.'

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> Then answered certain of the scribes
and Pharisees, saying, \`Teacher, we will to see a sign from thee.'

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> And he answering said to them, \`A
generation, evil and adulterous, doth seek a sign, and a sign shall not
be given to it, except the sign of Jonah the prophet;

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> for, as Jonah was in the belly of the
fish three days and three nights, so shall the Son of Man be in the
heart of the earth three days and three nights.

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> \`Men of Nineveh shall stand up in the
judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it, for they reformed
at the proclamation of Jonah, and lo, a greater than Jonah here!

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> \`A queen of the south shall rise up in
the judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it, for she came
from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and lo, a
greater than Solomon here!

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> \`And, when the unclean spirit may go
forth from the man, it doth walk through dry places seeking rest, and
doth not find;

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> then it saith, I will turn back to my
house whence I came forth; and having come, it findeth \[it\]
unoccupied, swept, and adorned:

<span id="an_12:45">12:45</span> then doth it go, and take with itself
seven other spirits more evil than itself, and having gone in they dwell
there, and the last of that man doth become worse than the first; so
shall it be also to this evil generation.'

<span id="an_12:46">12:46</span> And while he was yet speaking to the
multitudes, lo, his mother and brethren had stood without, seeking to
speak to him,

<span id="an_12:47">12:47</span> and one said to him, \`Lo, thy mother
and thy brethren do stand without, seeking to speak to thee.'

<span id="an_12:48">12:48</span> And he answering said to him who spake
to him, \`Who is my mother? and who are my brethren?'

<span id="an_12:49">12:49</span> And having stretched forth his hand
toward his disciples, he said, \`Lo, my mother and my brethren!

<span id="an_12:50">12:50</span> for whoever may do the will of my
Father who is in the heavens, he is my brother, and sister, and mother.'

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And in that day Jesus, having gone forth
from the house, was sitting by the sea,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> and gathered together unto him were many
multitudes, so that he having gone into the boat did sit down, and all
the multitude on the beach did stand,

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> and he spake to them many things in
similes, saying: \`Lo, the sower went forth to sow,

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> and in his sowing, some indeed fell by
the way, and the fowls did come and devour them,

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> and others fell upon the rocky places,
where they had not much earth, and immediately they sprang forth,
through not having depth of earth,

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> and the sun having risen they were
scorched, and through not having root, they withered,

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> and others fell upon the thorns, and the
thorns did come up and choke them,

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> and others fell upon the good ground, and
were giving fruit, some indeed a hundredfold, and some sixty, and some
thirty.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> He who is having ears to hear -- let him
hear.'

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> And the disciples having come near,
said to him, \`Wherefore in similes dost thou speak to them?'

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And he answering said to them that --
\`To you it hath been given to know the secrets of the reign of the
heavens, and to these it hath not been given,

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> for whoever hath, it shall be given to
him, and he shall have overabundance, and whoever hath not, even that
which he hath shall be taken from him.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> \`Because of this, in similes do I
speak to them, because seeing they do not see, and hearing they do not
hear, nor understand,

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> and fulfilled on them is the prophecy
of Isaiah, that saith, With hearing ye shall hear, and ye shall not
understand, and seeing ye shall see, and ye shall not perceive,

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> for made gross was the heart of this
people, and with the ears they heard heavily, and their eyes they did
close, lest they might see with the eyes, and with the ears might hear,
and with the heart understand, and turn back, and I might heal them.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> \`And happy are your eyes because they
see, and your ears because they hear,

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> for verily I say to you, that many
prophets and righteous men did desire to see that which ye look on, and
they did not see, and to hear that which ye hear, and they did not hear.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> \`Ye, therefore, hear ye the simile of
the sower:

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> Every one hearing the word of the
reign, and not understanding -- the evil one doth come, and doth catch
that which hath been sown in his heart; this is that sown by the way.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> \`And that sown on the rocky places,
this is he who is hearing the word, and immediately with joy is
receiving it,

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> and he hath not root in himself, but is
temporary, and persecution or tribulation having happened because of the
word, immediately he is stumbled.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> \`And that sown toward the thorns, this
is he who is hearing the word, and the anxiety of this age, and the
deceitfulness of the riches, do choke the word, and it becometh
unfruitful.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> \`And that sown on the good ground:
this is he who is hearing the word, and is understanding, who indeed
doth bear fruit, and doth make, some indeed a hundredfold, and some
sixty, and some thirty.'

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Another simile he set before them,
saying: \`The reign of the heavens was likened to a man sowing good seed
in his field,

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> and, while men are sleeping, his enemy
came and sowed darnel in the midst of the wheat, and went away,

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> and when the herb sprang up, and
yielded fruit, then appeared also the darnel.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> \`And the servants of the householder,
having come near, said to him, Sir, good seed didst thou not sow in thy
field? whence then hath it the darnel?

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> And he saith to them, A man, an enemy,
did this; and the servants said to him, Wilt thou, then, \[that\] having
gone away we may gather it up?

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> \`And he said, No, lest -- gathering up
the darnel -- ye root up with it the wheat,

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> suffer both to grow together till the
harvest, and in the time of the harvest I will say to the reapers,
Gather up first the darnel, and bind it in bundles, to burn it, and the
wheat gather up into my storehouse.'

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> Another simile he set before them,
saying: \`The reign of the heavens is like to a grain of mustard, which
a man having taken, did sow in his field,

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> which less, indeed, is than all the
seeds, but when it may be grown, is greatest of the herbs, and becometh
a tree, so that the birds of the heaven do come and rest in its
branches.'

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> Another simile spake he to them: \`The
reign of the heavens is like to leaven, which a woman having taken, hid
in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.'

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> All these things spake Jesus in similes
to the multitudes, and without a simile he was not speaking to them,

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> that it might be fulfilled that was
spoken through the prophet, saying, \`I will open in similes my mouth, I
will utter things having been hidden from the foundation of the world.'

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> Then having let away the multitudes,
Jesus came to the house, and his disciples came near to him, saying,
\`Explain to us the simile of the darnel of the field.'

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> And he answering said to them, \`He who
is sowing the good seed is the Son of Man,

<span id="an_13:38">13:38</span> and the field is the world, and the
good seed, these are the sons of the reign, and the darnel are the sons
of the evil one,

<span id="an_13:39">13:39</span> and the enemy who sowed them is the
devil, and the harvest is a full end of the age, and the reapers are
messengers.

<span id="an_13:40">13:40</span> \`As, then, the darnel is gathered up,
and is burned with fire, so shall it be in the full end of this age,

<span id="an_13:41">13:41</span> the Son of Man shall send forth his
messengers, and they shall gather up out of his kingdom all the
stumbling-blocks, and those doing the unlawlessness,

<span id="an_13:42">13:42</span> and shall cast them to the furnace of
the fire; there shall be the weeping and the gnashing of the teeth.

<span id="an_13:43">13:43</span> \`Then shall the righteous shine forth
as the sun in the reign of their Father. He who is having ears to hear
-- let him hear.

<span id="an_13:44">13:44</span> \`Again, the reign of the heavens is
like to treasure hid in the field, which a man having found did hide,
and from his joy goeth, and all, as much as he hath, he selleth, and
buyeth that field.

<span id="an_13:45">13:45</span> \`Again, the reign of the heavens is
like to a man, a merchant, seeking goodly pearls,

<span id="an_13:46">13:46</span> who having found one pearl of great
price, having gone away, hath sold all, as much as he had, and bought
it.

<span id="an_13:47">13:47</span> \`Again, the reign of the heavens is
like to a net that was cast into the sea, and did gather together of
every kind,

<span id="an_13:48">13:48</span> which, when it was filled, having drawn
up again upon the beach, and having sat down, they gathered the good
into vessels, and the bad they did cast out,

<span id="an_13:49">13:49</span> so shall it be in the full end of the
age, the messengers shall come forth and separate the evil out of the
midst of the righteous,

<span id="an_13:50">13:50</span> and shall cast them to the furnace of
the fire, there shall be the weeping and the gnashing of the teeth.'

<span id="an_13:51">13:51</span> Jesus saith to them, \`Did ye
understand all these?' They say to him, \`Yes, sir.'

<span id="an_13:52">13:52</span> And he said to them, \`Because of this
every scribe having been discipled in regard to the reign of the
heavens, is like to a man, a householder, who doth bring forth out of
his treasure things new and old.'

<span id="an_13:53">13:53</span> And it came to pass, when Jesus
finished these similes, he removed thence,

<span id="an_13:54">13:54</span> and having come to his own country, he
was teaching them in their synagogue, so that they were astonished, and
were saying, \`Whence to this one this wisdom and the mighty works?

<span id="an_13:55">13:55</span> is not this the carpenter's son? is not
his mother called Mary, and his brethren James, and Joses, and Simon,
and Judas?

<span id="an_13:56">13:56</span> and his sisters -- are they not all
with us? whence, then, to this one all these?'

<span id="an_13:57">13:57</span> and they were stumbled at him. And
Jesus said to them, \`A prophet is not without honor except in his own
country, and in his own house:'

<span id="an_13:58">13:58</span> and he did not there many mighty works,
because of their unbelief.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> At that time did Herod the tetrarch hear
the fame of Jesus,

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> and said to his servants, \`This is John
the Baptist, he did rise from the dead, and because of this the mighty
energies are working in him.'

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> For Herod having laid hold on John, did
bind him, and did put him in prison, because of Herodias his brother
Philip's wife,

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> for John was saying to him, \`It is not
lawful to thee to have her,'

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> and, willing to kill him, he feared the
multitude, because as a prophet they were holding him.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> But the birthday of Herod being kept, the
daughter of Herodias danced in the midst, and did please Herod,

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> whereupon with an oath he professed to
give her whatever she might ask.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And she having been instigated by her
mother -- \`Give me (says she) here upon a plate the head of John the
Baptist;

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> and the king was grieved, but because of
the oaths and of those reclining with him, he commanded \[it\] to be
given;

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> and having sent, he beheaded John in
the prison,

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> and his head was brought upon a plate,
and was given to the damsel, and she brought \[it\] nigh to her mother.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And his disciples having come, took up
the body, and buried it, and having come, they told Jesus,

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> and Jesus having heard, withdrew thence
in a boat to a desolate place by himself, and the multitudes having
heard did follow him on land from the cities.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And Jesus having come forth, saw a
great multitude, and was moved with compassion upon them, and did heal
their infirm;

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> and evening having come, his disciples
came to him, saying, \`The place is desolate, and the hour hath now
past, let away the multitudes that, having gone to the villages, they
may buy to themselves food.'

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And Jesus said to them, \`They have no
need to go away -- give ye them to eat.'

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And they say to him, \`We have not here
except five loaves, and two fishes.'

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And he said, \`Bring ye them to me
hither.'

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And having commanded the multitudes to
recline upon the grass, and having taken the five loaves and the two
fishes, having looked up to the heaven, he did bless, and having broken,
he gave the loaves to the disciples, and the disciples to the
multitudes,

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> and they did all eat, and were filled,
and they took up what was over of the broken pieces twelve hand-baskets
full;

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> and those eating were about five
thousand men, apart from women and children.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And immediately Jesus constrained his
disciples to go into the boat, and to go before him to the other side,
till he might let away the multitudes;

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> and having let away the multitudes, he
went up to the mountain by himself to pray, and evening having come, he
was there alone,

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> and the boat was now in the midst of
the sea, distressed by the waves, for the wind was contrary.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> And in the fourth watch of the night
Jesus went away to them, walking upon the sea,

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> and the disciples having seen him
walking upon the sea, were troubled saying -- \`It is an apparition,'
and from the fear they cried out;

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> and immediately Jesus spake to them,
saying, \`Be of good courage, I am \[he\], be not afraid.'

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> And Peter answering him said, \`Sir, if
it is thou, bid me come to thee upon the waters;'

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> and he said, \`Come;' and having gone
down from the boat, Peter walked upon the waters to come unto Jesus,

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> but seeing the wind vehement, he was
afraid, and having begun to sink, he cried out, saying, \`Sir, save me.'

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> And immediately Jesus, having stretched
forth the hand, laid hold of him, and saith to him, \`Little faith! for
what didst thou waver?'

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> and they having gone to the boat the
wind lulled,

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> and those in the boat having come, did
bow to him, saying, \`Truly -- God's Son art thou.'

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> And having passed over, they came to
the land of Gennesaret,

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> and having recognized him, the men of
that place sent forth to all that region round about, and they brought
to him all who were ill,

<span id="an_14:36">14:36</span> and were calling on him that they might
only touch the fringe of his garment, and as many as did touch were
saved.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Then come unto Jesus do they from
Jerusalem -- scribes and Pharisees -- saying,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> \`Wherefore do thy disciples transgress
the tradition of the elders? for they do not wash their hands when they
may eat bread.'

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And he answering said to them,
\`Wherefore also do ye transgress the command of God because of your
tradition?

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> for God did command, saying, Honour thy
father and mother; and, He who is speaking evil of father or mother --
let him die the death;

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> but ye say, Whoever may say to father or
mother, An offering \[is\] whatever thou mayest be profited by me; --

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> and he may not honour his father or his
mother, and ye did set aside the command of God because of your
tradition.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> \`Hypocrites, well did Isaiah prophesy of
you, saying,

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> This people doth draw nigh to Me with
their mouth, and with the lips it doth honour Me, but their heart is far
off from Me;

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> and in vain do they worship Me, teaching
teachings -- commands of men.'

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> And having called near the multitude,
he said to them, \`Hear and understand:

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> not that which is coming into the mouth
doth defile the man, but that which is coming forth from the mouth, this
defileth the man.'

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Then his disciples having come near,
said to him, \`Hast thou known that the Pharisees, having heard the
word, were stumbled?'

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And he answering said, \`Every plant
that my heavenly Father did not plant shall be rooted up;

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> let them alone, guides they are --
blind of blind; and if blind may guide blind, both into a ditch shall
fall.'

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And Peter answering said to him,
\`Explain to us this simile.'

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And Jesus said, \`Are ye also yet
without understanding?

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> do ye not understand that all that is
going into the mouth doth pass into the belly, and into the drain is
cast forth?

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> but the things coming forth from the
mouth from the heart do come forth, and these defile the man;

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> for out of the heart come forth evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, whoredoms, thefts, false witnessings,
evil speakings:

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> these are the things defiling the man;
but to eat with unwashen hands doth not defile the man.'

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And Jesus having come forth thence,
withdrew to the parts of Tyre and Sidon,

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> and lo, a woman, a Canaanitess, from
those borders having come forth, did call to him, saying, \`Deal kindly
with me, Sir -- Son of David; my daughter is miserably demonized.'

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> And he did not answer her a word; and
his disciples having come to him, were asking him, saying -- \`Let her
away, because she crieth after us;'

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> and he answering said, \`I was not sent
except to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.'

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> And having come, she was bowing to him,
saying, \`Sir, help me;'

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> and he answering said, \`It is not good
to take the children's bread, and to cast to the little dogs.'

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And she said, \`Yes, sir, for even the
little dogs do eat of the crumbs that are falling from their lords'
table;'

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> then answering, Jesus said to her, \`O
woman, great \[is\] thy faith, let it be to thee as thou wilt;' and her
daughter was healed from that hour.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> And Jesus having passed thence, came
nigh unto the sea of Galilee, and having gone up to the mountain, he was
sitting there,

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> and there came to him great multitudes,
having with them lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and many others, and they
did cast them at the feet of Jesus, and he healed them,

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> so that the multitudes did wonder,
seeing dumb ones speaking, maimed whole, lame walking, and blind seeing;
and they glorified the God of Israel.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> And Jesus having called near his
disciples, said, \`I have compassion upon the multitude, because now
three days they continue with me, and they have not what they may eat;
and to let them away fasting I will not, lest they faint in the way.'

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> And his disciples say to him, \`Whence
to us, in a wilderness, so many loaves, as to fill so great a
multitude?'

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> And Jesus saith to them, \`How many
loaves have ye?' and they said, \`Seven, and a few little fishes.'

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> And he commanded the multitudes to sit
down upon the ground,

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> and having taken the seven loaves and
the fishes, having given thanks, he did break, and gave to his
disciples, and the disciples to the multitude.

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> And they did all eat, and were filled,
and they took up what was over of the broken pieces seven baskets full,

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> and those eating were four thousand
men, apart from women and children.

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> And having let away the multitudes, he
went into the boat, and did come to the borders of Magdala.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And the Pharisees and Sadducees having
come, tempting, did question him, to shew to them a sign from the
heaven,

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> and he answering said to them, \`Evening
having come, ye say, Fair weather, for the heaven is red,

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> and at morning, Foul weather to-day, for
the heaven is red -- gloomy; hypocrites, the face of the heavens indeed
ye do know to discern, but the signs of the times ye are not able!

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> \`A generation evil and adulterous doth
seek a sign, and a sign shall not be given to it, except the sign of
Jonah the prophet;' and having left them he went away.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And his disciples having come to the
other side, forgot to take loaves,

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> and Jesus said to them, \`Beware, and
take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees;'

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> and they were reasoning in themselves,
saying, \`Because we took no loaves.'

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And Jesus having known, said to them,
\`Why reason ye in yourselves, ye of little faith, because ye took no
loaves?

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> do ye not yet understand, nor remember
the five loaves of the five thousand, and how many hand-baskets ye took
up?

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> nor the seven loaves of the four
thousand, and how many baskets ye took up?

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> how do ye not understand that I did not
speak to you of bread -- to take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees and
Sadducees?'

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> Then they understood that he did not
say to take heed of the leaven of the bread, but of the teaching, of the
Pharisees and Sadducees.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And Jesus, having come to the parts of
Cesarea Philippi, was asking his disciples, saying, \`Who do men say me
to be -- the Son of Man?'

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> and they said, \`Some, John the
Baptist, and others, Elijah, and others, Jeremiah, or one of the
prophets.'

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> He saith to them, \`And ye -- who do ye
say me to be?'

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> and Simon Peter answering said, \`Thou
art the Christ, the Son of the living God.'

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And Jesus answering said to him,
\`Happy art thou, Simon Bar-Jona, because flesh and blood did not reveal
\[it\] to thee, but my Father who is in the heavens.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> \`And I also say to thee, that thou art
a rock, and upon this rock I will build my assembly, and gates of Hades
shall not prevail against it;

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> and I will give to thee the keys of the
reign of the heavens, and whatever thou mayest bind upon the earth shall
be having been bound in the heavens, and whatever thou mayest loose upon
the earth shall be having been loosed in the heavens.'

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Then did he charge his disciples that
they may say to no one that he is Jesus the Christ.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> From that time began Jesus to shew to
his disciples that it is necessary for him to go away to Jerusalem, and
to suffer many things from the elders, and chief priests, and scribes,
and to be put to death, and the third day to rise.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And having taken him aside, Peter began
to rebuke him, saying, \`Be kind to thyself, sir; this shall not be to
thee;'

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> and he having turned, said to Peter,
\`Get thee behind me, adversary! thou art a stumbling-block to me, for
thou dost not mind the things of God, but the things of men.'

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> Then said Jesus to his disciples, \`If
any one doth will to come after me, let him disown himself, and take up
his cross, and follow me,

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> for whoever may will to save his life,
shall lose it, and whoever may lose his life for my sake shall find it,

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> for what is a man profited if he may
gain the whole world, but of his life suffer loss? or what shall a man
give as an exchange for his life?

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> \`For, the Son of Man is about to come
in the glory of his Father, with his messengers, and then he will reward
each, according to his work.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> Verily I say to you, there are certain
of those standing here who shall not taste of death till they may see
the Son of Man coming in his reign.'

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And after six days Jesus taketh Peter,
and James, and John his brother, and doth bring them up to a high mount
by themselves,

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> and he was transfigured before them, and
his face shone as the sun, and his garments did become white as the
light,

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> and lo, appear to them did Moses and
Elijah, talking together with him.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And Peter answering said to Jesus, \`Sir,
it is good to us to be here; if thou wilt, we may make here three booths
-- for thee one, and for Moses one, and one for Elijah.'

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> While he is yet speaking, lo, a bright
cloud overshadowed them, and lo, a voice out of the cloud, saying,
\`This is My Son, -- the Beloved, in whom I did delight; hear him.'

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And the disciples having heard, did fall
upon their face, and were exceedingly afraid,

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> and Jesus having come near, touched them,
and said, \`Rise, be not afraid,'

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> and having lifted up their eyes, they saw
no one, except Jesus only.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And as they are coming down from the
mount, Jesus charged them, saying, \`Say to no one the vision, till the
Son of Man out of the dead may rise.'

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And his disciples questioned him,
saying, \`Why then do the scribes say that Elijah it behoveth to come
first?'

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And Jesus answering said to them,
\`Elijah doth indeed come first, and shall restore all things,

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> and I say to you -- Elijah did already
come, and they did not know him, but did with him whatever they would,
so also the Son of Man is about to suffer by them.'

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> Then understood the disciples that
concerning John the Baptist he spake to them.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> And when they came unto the multitude,
there came to him a man, kneeling down to him,

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> and saying, \`Sir, deal kindly with my
son, for he is lunatic, and doth suffer miserably, for often he doth
fall into the fire, and often into the water,

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> and I brought him near to thy
disciples, and they were not able to heal him.'

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> And Jesus answering said, \`O
generation, unstedfast and perverse, till when shall I be with you? till
when shall I bear you? bring him to me hither;'

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> and Jesus rebuked him, and the demon
went out of him, and the lad was healed from that hour.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> Then the disciples having come to Jesus
by himself, said, \`Wherefore were we not able to cast him out?'

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> And Jesus said to them, \`Through your
want of faith; for verily I say to you, if ye may have faith as a grain
of mustard, ye shall say to this mount, Remove hence to yonder place,
and it shall remove, and nothing shall be impossible to you,

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> and this kind doth not go forth except
in prayer and fasting.'

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> And while they are living in Galilee,
Jesus said to them, \`The Son of Man is about to be delivered up to the
hands of men,

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> and they shall kill him, and the third
day he shall rise,' and they were exceeding sorry.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> And they having come to Capernaum,
those receiving the didrachms came near to Peter, and said, \`Your
teacher -- doth he not pay the didrachms?' He saith, \`Yes.'

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> And when he came into the house, Jesus
anticipated him, saying, \`What thinkest thou, Simon? the kings of the
earth -- from whom do they receive custom or poll-tax? from their sons
or from the strangers?'

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> Peter saith to him, \`From the
strangers.' Jesus said to him, \`Then are the sons free;

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> but, that we may not cause them to
stumble, having gone to the sea, cast a hook, and the fish that hath
come up first take thou up, and having opened its mouth, thou shalt find
a stater, that having taken, give to them for me and thee.'

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> At that hour came the disciples near to
Jesus, saying, \`Who, now, is greater in the reign of the heavens?'

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> And Jesus having called near a child, did
set him in the midst of them,

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> and said, \`Verily I say to you, if ye
may not be turned and become as the children, ye may not enter into the
reign of the heavens;

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> whoever then may humble himself as this
child, he is the greater in the reign of the heavens.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> \`And he who may receive one such child
in my name, doth receive me,

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> and whoever may cause to stumble one of
those little ones who are believing in me, it is better for him that a
weighty millstone may be hanged upon his neck, and he may be sunk in the
depth of the sea.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> \`Wo to the world from the
stumbling-blocks! for there is a necessity for the stumbling-blocks to
come, but wo to that man through whom the stumbling-block doth come!

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> \`And if thy hand or thy foot doth cause
thee to stumble, cut them off and cast from thee; it is good for thee to
enter into the life lame or maimed, rather than having two hands or two
feet, to be cast to the fire the age-during.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> \`And if thine eye doth cause thee to
stumble, pluck it out and cast from thee; it is good for thee one-eyed
to enter into the life, rather than having two eyes to be cast to the
gehenna of the fire.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> \`Beware! -- ye may not despise one of
these little ones, for I say to you, that their messengers in the
heavens do always behold the face of my Father who is in the heavens,

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> for the Son of Man did come to save the
lost.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> \`What think ye? if a man may have an
hundred sheep, and there may go astray one of them, doth he not --
having left the ninety-nine, having gone on the mountains -- seek that
which is gone astray?

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> and if it may come to pass that he doth
find it, verily I say to you, that he doth rejoice over it more than
over the ninety-nine that have not gone astray;

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> so it is not will in presence of your
Father who is in the heavens, that one of these little ones may perish.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> \`And if thy brother may sin against
thee, go and show him his fault between thee and him alone, if he may
hear thee, thou didst gain thy brother;

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> and if he may not hear, take with thee
yet one or two, that by the mouth of two witnesses or three every word
may stand.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> \`And if he may not hear them, say
\[it\] to the assembly, and if also the assembly he may not hear, let
him be to thee as the heathen man and the tax-gatherer.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> \`Verily I say to you, Whatever things
ye may bind upon the earth shall be having been bound in the heavens,
and whatever things ye may loose on the earth shall be having been
loosed in the heavens.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> \`Again, I say to you, that, if two of
you may agree on the earth concerning anything, whatever they may ask --
it shall be done to them from my Father who is in the heavens,

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> for where there are two or three
gathered together -- to my name, there am I in the midst of them.'

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Then Peter having come near to him,
said, \`Sir, how often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive
him -- till seven times?'

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Jesus saith to him, \`I do not say to
thee till seven times, but till seventy times seven.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> \`Because of this was the reign of the
heavens likened to a man, a king, who did will to take reckoning with
his servants,

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> and he having begun to take account,
there was brought near to him one debtor of a myriad of talents,

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> and he having nothing to pay, his lord
did command him to be sold, and his wife, and the children, and all,
whatever he had, and payment to be made.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> The servant then, having fallen down,
was bowing to him, saying, Sir, have patience with me, and I will pay
thee all;

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> and the lord of that servant having
been moved with compassion did release him, and the debt he forgave him.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> \`And, that servant having come forth,
found one of his fellow-servants who was owing him an hundred denaries,
and having laid hold, he took him by the throat, saying, Pay me that
which thou owest.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> His fellow-servant then, having fallen
down at his feet, was calling on him, saying, Have patience with me, and
I will pay thee all;

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> and he would not, but having gone away,
he cast him into prison, till he might pay that which was owing.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> \`And his fellow-servants having seen
the things that were done, were grieved exceedingly, and having come,
shewed fully to their lord all the things that were done;

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> then having called him, his lord saith
to him, Evil servant! all that debt I did forgive thee, seeing thou
didst call upon me,

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> did it not behove also thee to have
dealt kindly with thy fellow-servant, as I also dealt kindly with thee?

<span id="an_18:34">18:34</span> \`And having been wroth, his lord
delivered him to the inquisitors, till he might pay all that was owing
to him;

<span id="an_18:35">18:35</span> so also my heavenly Father will do to
you, if ye may not forgive each one his brother from your hearts their
trespasses.'

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And it came to pass, when Jesus finished
these words, he removed from Galilee, and did come to the borders of
Judea, beyond the Jordan,

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> and great multitudes followed him, and he
healed them there.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And the Pharisees came near to him,
tempting him, and saying to him, \`Is it lawful for a man to put away
his wife for every cause?'

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And he answering said to them, \`Did ye
not read, that He who made \[them\], from the beginning a male and a
female made them,

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> and said, For this cause shall a man
leave father and mother, and cleave to his wife, and they shall be --
the two -- for one flesh?

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> so that they are no more two, but one
flesh; what therefore God did join together, let no man put asunder.'

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> They say to him, \`Why then did Moses
command to give a roll of divorce, and to put her away?'

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> He saith to them -- \`Moses for your
stiffness of heart did suffer you to put away your wives, but from the
beginning it hath not been so.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> \`And I say to you, that, whoever may put
away his wife, if not for whoredom, and may marry another, doth commit
adultery; and he who did marry her that hath been put away, doth commit
adultery.'

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> His disciples say to him, \`If the case
of the man with the woman is so, it is not good to marry.'

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And he said to them, \`All do not
receive this word, but those to whom it hath been given;

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> for there are eunuchs who from the
mother's womb were so born; and there are eunuchs who were made eunuchs
by men; and there are eunuchs who kept themselves eunuchs because of the
reign of the heavens: he who is able to receive \[it\] -- let him
receive.'

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Then were brought near to him children
that he might put hands on them and pray, and the disciples rebuked
them.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> But Jesus said, \`Suffer the children,
and forbid them not, to come unto me, for of such is the reign of the
heavens;'

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> and having laid on them \[his\] hands,
he departed thence.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And lo, one having come near, said to
him, \`Good teacher, what good thing shall I do, that I may have life
age-during?'

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And he said to him, \`Why me dost thou
call good? no one \[is\] good except One -- God; but if thou dost will
to enter into the life, keep the commands.'

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> He saith to him, \`What kind?' And
Jesus said, \`Thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not commit adultery, thou
shalt not steal, thou shalt not bear false witness,

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> honour thy father and mother, and, thou
shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.'

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> The young man saith to him, \`All these
did I keep from my youth; what yet do I lack?'

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> Jesus said to him, \`If thou dost will
to be perfect, go away, sell what thou hast, and give to the poor, and
thou shalt have treasure in heaven, and come, follow me.'

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> And the young man, having heard the
word, went away sorrowful, for he had many possessions;

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> and Jesus said to his disciples,
\`Verily I say to you, that hardly shall a rich man enter into the reign
of the heavens;

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> and again I say to you, it is easier
for a camel through the eye of a needle to go, than for a rich man to
enter into the reign of God.'

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> And his disciples having heard, were
amazed exceedingly, saying, \`Who, then, is able to be saved?'

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> And Jesus having earnestly beheld, said
to them, \`With men this is impossible, but with God all things are
possible.'

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> Then Peter answering said to him, \`Lo,
we did leave all, and follow thee, what then shall we have?'

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> And Jesus said to them, \`Verily I say
to you, that ye who did follow me, in the regeneration, when the Son of
Man may sit upon a throne of his glory, shall sit -- ye also -- upon
twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel;

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> and every one who left houses, or
brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or
fields, for my name's sake, an hundredfold shall receive, and life
age-during shall inherit;

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> and many first shall be last, and last
first.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> \`For the reign of the heavens is like to
a man, a householder, who went forth with the morning to hire workmen
for his vineyard,

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> and having agreed with the workmen for a
denary a day, he sent them into his vineyard.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> \`And having gone forth about the third
hour, he saw others standing in the market-place idle,

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> and to these he said, Go ye -- also ye --
to the vineyard, and whatever may be righteous I will give you;

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> and they went away. \`Again, having gone
forth about the sixth and the ninth hour, he did in like manner.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And about the eleventh hour, having gone
forth, he found others standing idle, and saith to them, Why here have
ye stood all the day idle?

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> they say to him, Because no one did hire
us; he saith to them, Go ye -- ye also -- to the vineyard, and whatever
may be righteous ye shall receive.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> \`And evening having come, the lord of
the vineyard saith to his steward, Call the workmen, and pay them the
reward, having begun from the last -- unto the first.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And they of about the eleventh hour
having come, did receive each a denary.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> \`And the first having come, did
suppose that they shall receive more, and they received, they also, each
a denary,

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> and having received \[it\], they were
murmuring against the householder, saying,

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> that These, the last, wrought one hour,
and thou didst make them equal to us, who were bearing the burden of the
day -- and the heat.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> \`And he answering said to one of them,
Comrade, I do no unrighteousness to thee; for a denary didst not thou
agree with me?

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> take that which is thine, and go; and I
will to give to this, the last, also as to thee;

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> is it not lawful to me to do what I
will in mine own? is thine eye evil because I am good?

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> So the last shall be first, and the
first last, for many are called, and few chosen.'

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> And Jesus going up to Jerusalem, took
the twelve disciples by themselves in the way, and said to them,

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> \`Lo, we go up to Jerusalem, and the
Son of Man shall be delivered to the chief priests and scribes,

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> and they shall condemn him to death,
and shall deliver him to the nations to mock, and to scourge, and to
crucify, and the third day he will rise again.'

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> Then came near to him the mother of the
sons of Zebedee, with her sons, bowing and asking something from him,

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> and he said to her, \`What wilt thou?'
She saith to him, \`Say, that they may sit -- these my two sons -- one
on thy right hand, and one on the left, in thy reign.'

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> And Jesus answering said, \`Ye have not
known what ye ask for yourselves; are ye able to drink of the cup that I
am about to drink? and with the baptism that I am baptized with, to be
baptized?' They say to him, \`We are able.'

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> And he saith to them, \`Of my cup
indeed ye shall drink, and with the baptism that I am baptized with ye
shall be baptized; but to sit on my right hand and on my left is not
mine to give, but -- to those for whom it hath been prepared by my
father.'

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> And the ten having heard, were much
displeased with the two brothers,

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> and Jesus having called them near,
said, \`Ye have known that the rulers of the nations do exercise
lordship over them, and those great do exercise authority over them,

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> but not so shall it be among you, but
whoever may will among you to become great, let him be your ministrant;

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> and whoever may will among you to be
first, let him be your servant;

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> even as the Son of Man did not come to
be ministered to, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for
many.'

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> And they going forth from Jericho,
there followed him a great multitude,

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> and lo, two blind men sitting by the
way, having heard that Jesus doth pass by, cried, saying, \`Deal kindly
with us, sir -- Son of David.'

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> And the multitude charged them that
they might be silent, and they cried out the more, saying, \`Deal kindly
with us sir -- Son of David.'

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> And having stood, Jesus called them,
and said, \`What will ye \[that\] I may do to you?'

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> they say to him, \`Sir, that our eyes
may be opened;'

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> and having been moved with compassion,
Jesus touched their eyes, and immediately their eyes received sight, and
they followed him.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And when they came nigh to Jerusalem, and
came to Bethphage, unto the mount of the Olives, then Jesus sent two
disciples,

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> saying to them, \`Go on to the village
over-against you, and immediately ye shall find an ass bound, and a colt
with her -- having loosed, bring ye to me;

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> and if any one may say anything to you,
ye shall say, that the lord hath need of them, and immediately he will
send them.'

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And all this came to pass, that it might
be fulfilled that was spoken through the prophet, saying,

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> \`Tell ye the daughter of Zion, Lo, thy
king doth come to thee, meek, and mounted on an ass, and a colt, a foal
of a beast of burden.'

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And the disciples having gone and having
done as Jesus commanded them,

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> brought the ass and the colt, and did put
on them their garments, and set \[him\] upon them;

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> and the very great multitude spread their
own garments in the way, and others were cutting branches from the
trees, and were strewing in the way,

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> and the multitudes who were going before,
and who were following, were crying, saying, \`Hosanna to the Son of
David, blessed is he who is coming in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in
the highest.'

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> And he having entered into Jerusalem,
all the city was moved, saying, \`Who is this?'

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And the multitudes said, \`This is
Jesus the prophet, who \[is\] from Nazareth of Galilee.'

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> And Jesus entered into the temple of
God, and did cast forth all those selling and buying in the temple, and
the tables of the money-changers he overturned, and the seats of those
selling the doves,

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> and he saith to them, \`It hath been
written, My house a house of prayer shall be called, but ye did make it
a den of robbers.'

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And there came to him blind and lame
men in the temple, and he healed them,

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> and the chief priests and the scribes
having seen the wonderful things that he did, and the children crying in
the temple, and saying, \`Hosanna to the Son of David,' were much
displeased;

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> and they said to him, \`Hearest thou
what these say?' And Jesus saith to them, \`Yes, did ye never read,
that, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings Thou didst prepare
praise?'

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And having left them, he went forth out
of the city to Bethany, and did lodge there,

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> and in the morning turning back to the
city, he hungered,

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> and having seen a certain fig-tree on
the way, he came to it, and found nothing in it except leaves only, and
he saith to it, \`No more from thee may fruit be -- to the age;' and
forthwith the fig-tree withered.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And the disciples having seen, did
wonder, saying, \`How did the fig-tree forthwith wither?'

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> And Jesus answering said to them,
\`Verily I say to you, If ye may have faith, and may not doubt, not only
this of the fig-tree shall ye do, but even if to this mount ye may say,
Be lifted up and be cast into the sea, it shall come to pass;

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> and all -- as much as ye may ask in the
prayer, believing, ye shall receive.'

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> And he having come to the temple, there
came to him when teaching the chief priests and the elders of the
people, saying, \`By what authority dost thou do these things? and who
gave thee this authority?'

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> And Jesus answering said to them, \`I
will ask you -- I also -- one word, which if ye may tell me, I also will
tell you by what authority I do these things;

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> the baptism of John, whence was it? --
from heaven, or from men?' And they were reasoning with themselves,
saying, \`If we should say, From heaven; he will say to us, Wherefore,
then, did ye not believe him?

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> and if we should say, From men, we fear
the multitude, for all hold John as a prophet.'

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> And answering Jesus they said, \`We
have not known.' He said to them -- he also -- \`Neither do I tell you
by what authority I do these things.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> \`And what think ye? A man had two
children, and having come to the first, he said, Child, go, to-day be
working in my vineyard.'

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> And he answering said, \`I will not,'
but at last, having repented, he went.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> \`And having come to the second, he
said in the same manner, and he answering said, I \[go\], sir, and went
not;

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> which of the two did the will of the
father?' They say to him, \`The first.' Jesus saith to them, \`Verily I
say to you, that the tax-gatherers and the harlots do go before you into
the reign of God,

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> for John came unto you in the way of
righteousness, and ye did not believe him, and the tax-gatherers and the
harlots did believe him, and ye, having seen, repented not at last -- to
believe him.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> \`Hear ye another simile: There was a
certain man, a householder, who planted a vineyard, and did put a hedge
round it, and digged in it a wine-press, and built a tower, and gave it
out to husbandmen, and went abroad.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> \`And when the season of the fruits
came nigh, he sent his servants unto the husbandmen, to receive the
fruits of it,

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> and the husbandmen having taken his
servants, one they scourged, and one they killed, and one they stoned.

<span id="an_21:36">21:36</span> \`Again he sent other servants more
than the first, and they did to them in the same manner.

<span id="an_21:37">21:37</span> \`And at last he sent unto them his
son, saying, They will reverence my son;

<span id="an_21:38">21:38</span> and the husbandmen having seen the son,
said among themselves, This is the heir, come, we may kill him, and may
possess his inheritance;

<span id="an_21:39">21:39</span> and having taken him, they cast \[him\]
out of the vineyard, and killed him;

<span id="an_21:40">21:40</span> whenever therefore the lord of the
vineyard may come, what will he do to these husbandmen?'

<span id="an_21:41">21:41</span> They say to him, \`Evil men -- he will
evilly destroy them, and the vineyard will give out to other husbandmen,
who will give back to him the fruits in their seasons.'

<span id="an_21:42">21:42</span> Jesus saith to them, \`Did ye never
read in the Writings, A stone that the builders disallowed, it became
head of a corner; from the Lord hath this come to pass, and it is
wonderful in our eyes.

<span id="an_21:43">21:43</span> \`Because of this I say to you, that
the reign of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing
forth its fruit;

<span id="an_21:44">21:44</span> and he who is falling on this stone
shall be broken, and on whomsoever it may fall it will crush him to
pieces.'

<span id="an_21:45">21:45</span> And the chief priests and the Pharisees
having heard his similes, knew that of them he speaketh,

<span id="an_21:46">21:46</span> and seeking to lay hold on him, they
feared the multitudes, seeing they were holding him as a prophet.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> And Jesus answering, again spake to them
in similes, saying,

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> \`The reign of the heavens was likened to
a man, a king, who made marriage-feasts for his son,

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> and he sent forth his servants to call
those having been called to the marriage-feasts, and they were not
willing to come.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> \`Again he sent forth other servants,
saying, Say to those who have been called: Lo, my dinner I prepared, my
oxen and the fatlings have been killed, and all things \[are\] ready,
come ye to the marriage-feasts;

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> and they, having disregarded \[it\], went
away, the one to his own field, and the other to his merchandise;

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> and the rest, having laid hold on his
servants, did insult and slay \[them\].

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> \`And the king having heard, was wroth,
and having sent forth his soldiers, he destroyed those murderers, and
their city he set on fire;

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> then saith he to his servants, The
marriage-feast indeed is ready, and those called were not worthy,

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> be going, then, on to the cross-ways, and
as many as ye may find, call ye to the marriage-feasts.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> \`And those servants, having gone forth
to the ways, did gather all, as many as they found, both bad and good,
and the marriage-feast apartment was filled with those reclining.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> \`And the king having come in to view
those reclining, saw there a man not clothed with clothing of the
marriage-feast,

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> and he saith to him, Comrade, how didst
thou come in hither, not having clothing of the marriage-feast? and he
was speechless.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> \`Then said the king to the
ministrants, Having bound his feet and hands, take him up and cast forth
to the outer darkness, there shall be the weeping and the gnashing of
the teeth;

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> for many are called, and few chosen.'

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Then the Pharisees having gone, took
counsel how they might ensnare him in words,

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> and they send to him their disciples
with the Herodians, saying, \`Teacher, we have known that thou art true,
and the way of God in truth thou dost teach, and thou art not caring for
any one, for thou dost not look to the face of men;

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> tell us, therefore, what dost thou
think? is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar or not?'

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> And Jesus having known their
wickedness, said, \`Why me do ye tempt, hypocrites?

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> show me the tribute-coin?' and they
brought to him a denary;

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> and he saith to them, \`Whose \[is\]
this image and the inscription?'

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> they say to him, \`Caesar's;' then
saith he to them, \`Render therefore the things of Caesar to Caesar, and
the things of God to God;'

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> and having heard they wondered, and
having left him they went away.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> In that day there came near to him
Sadducees, who are saying there is not a rising again, and they
questioned him, saying,

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> \`Teacher, Moses said, If any one may
die not having children, his brother shall marry his wife, and shall
raise up seed to his brother.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> \`And there were with us seven
brothers, and the first having married did die, and not having seed, he
left his wife to his brother;

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> in like manner also the second, and the
third, unto the seventh,

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> and last of all died also the woman;

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> therefore in the rising again, of which
of the seven shall she be wife -- for all had her?'

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> And Jesus answering said to them, \`Ye
go astray, not knowing the Writings, nor the power of God;

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> for in the rising again they do not
marry, nor are they given in marriage, but are as messengers of God in
heaven.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> \`And concerning the rising again of
the dead, did ye not read that which was spoken to you by God, saying,

<span id="an_22:32">22:32</span> I am the God of Abraham, and the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not a God of dead men, but of
living.'

<span id="an_22:33">22:33</span> And having heard, the multitudes were
astonished at his teaching;

<span id="an_22:34">22:34</span> and the Pharisees, having heard that he
did silence the Sadducees, were gathered together unto him;

<span id="an_22:35">22:35</span> and one of them, a lawyer, did
question, tempting him, and saying,

<span id="an_22:36">22:36</span> \`Teacher, which \[is\] the great
command in the Law?'

<span id="an_22:37">22:37</span> And Jesus said to him, \`Thou shalt
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thine understanding --

<span id="an_22:38">22:38</span> this is a first and great command;

<span id="an_22:39">22:39</span> and the second \[is\] like to it, Thou
shalt love thy neighbor as thyself;

<span id="an_22:40">22:40</span> on these -- the two commands -- all the
law and the prophets do hang.'

<span id="an_22:41">22:41</span> And the Pharisees having been gathered
together, Jesus did question them,

<span id="an_22:42">22:42</span> saying, \`What do ye think concerning
the Christ? of whom is he son?' They say to him, \`Of David.'

<span id="an_22:43">22:43</span> He saith to them, \`How then doth David
in the Spirit call him lord, saying,

<span id="an_22:44">22:44</span> The Lord said to my lord, Sit at my
right hand, till I may make thine enemies thy footstool?

<span id="an_22:45">22:45</span> If then David doth call him lord, how
is he his son?'

<span id="an_22:46">22:46</span> And no one was able to answer him a
word, nor durst any from that day question him any more.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> Then Jesus spake to the multitudes, and
to his disciples,

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> saying, \`On the seat of Moses sat down
the scribes and the Pharisees;

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> all, then, as much as they may say to you
to observe, observe and do, but according to their works do not, for
they say, and do not;

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> for they bind together burdens heavy and
grievous to be borne, and lay upon the shoulders of men, but with their
finger they will not move them.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> \`And all their works they do to be seen
by men, and they make broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the fringes
of their garments,

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> they love also the chief couches in the
supper, and the chief seats in the synagogues,

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> and the salutations in the market-places,
and to be called by men, Rabbi, Rabbi.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> \`And ye -- ye may not be called Rabbi,
for one is your director -- the Christ, and all ye are brethren;

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> and ye may not call \[any\] your father
on the earth, for one is your Father, who is in the heavens,

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> nor may ye be called directors, for one
is your director -- the Christ.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> And the greater of you shall be your
ministrant,

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> and whoever shall exalt himself shall
be humbled, and whoever shall humble himself shall be exalted.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> \`Wo to you, Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! because ye shut up the reign of the heavens before men, for
ye do not go in, nor those going in do ye suffer to enter.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> \`Wo to you, Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! because ye eat up the houses of the widows, and for a
pretence make long prayers, because of this ye shall receive more
abundant judgment.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> \`Wo to you, Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! because ye go round the sea and the dry land to make one
proselyte, and whenever it may happen -- ye make him a son of gehenna
twofold more than yourselves.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> \`Wo to you, blind guides, who are
saying, Whoever may swear by the sanctuary, it is nothing, but whoever
may swear by the gold of the sanctuary -- is debtor!

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> Fools and blind! for which \[is\]
greater, the gold, or the sanctuary that is sanctifying the gold?

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> \`And, whoever may swear by the altar,
it is nothing; but whoever may swear by the gift that is upon it -- is
debtor!

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Fools and blind! for which \[is\]
greater, the gift, or the altar that is sanctifying the gift?

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> \`He therefore who did swear by the
altar, doth swear by it, and by all things on it;

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> and he who did swear by the sanctuary,
doth swear by it, and by Him who is dwelling in it;

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> and he who did swear by the heaven,
doth swear by the throne of God, and by Him who is sitting upon it.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> \`Wo to you, Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! because ye give tithe of the mint, and the dill, and the
cumin, and did neglect the weightier things of the Law -- the judgment,
and the kindness, and the faith; these it behoved \[you\] to do, and
those not to neglect.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> \`Blind guides! who are straining out
the gnat, and the camel are swallowing.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> \`Wo to you, Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! because ye make clean the outside of the cup and the plate,
and within they are full of rapine and incontinence.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> \`Blind Pharisee! cleanse first the
inside of the cup and the plate, that the outside of them also may
become clean.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> \`Wo to you, Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! because ye are like to whitewashed sepulchres, which
outwardly indeed do appear beautiful, and within are full of bones of
dead men, and of all uncleanness;

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> so also ye outwardly indeed do appear
to men righteous, and within ye are full of hypocrisy and lawlessness.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> \`Wo to you, Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! because ye build the sepulchres of the prophets, and adorn
the tombs of the righteous,

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> and say, If we had been in the days of
our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of
the prophets.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> So that ye testify to yourselves, that
ye are sons of them who did murder the prophets;

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> and ye -- ye fill up the measure of
your fathers.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> \`Serpents! brood of vipers! how may ye
escape from the judgment of the gehenna?

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> \`Because of this, lo, I send to you
prophets, and wise men, and scribes, and of them ye will kill and
crucify, and of them ye will scourge in your synagogues, and will pursue
from city to city;

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> that on you may come all the righteous
blood being poured out on the earth from the blood of Abel the
righteous, unto the blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, whom ye slew
between the sanctuary and the altar:

<span id="an_23:36">23:36</span> verily I say to you, all these things
shall come upon this generation.

<span id="an_23:37">23:37</span> \`Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that art
killing the prophets, and stoning those sent unto thee, how often did I
will to gather thy children together, as a hen doth gather her own
chickens under the wings, and ye did not will.

<span id="an_23:38">23:38</span> Lo, left desolate to you is your house;

<span id="an_23:39">23:39</span> for I say to you, ye may not see me
henceforth, till ye may say, Blessed \[is\] he who is coming in the name
of the Lord.'

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> And having gone forth, Jesus departed
from the temple, and his disciples came near to show him the buildings
of the temple,

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> and Jesus said to them, \`Do ye not see
all these? verily I say to you, There may not be left here a stone upon
a stone, that shall not be thrown down.'

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And when he is sitting on the mount of
the Olives, the disciples came near to him by himself, saying, \`Tell
us, when shall these be? and what \[is\] the sign of thy presence, and
of the full end of the age?'

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> And Jesus answering said to them, \`Take
heed that no one may lead you astray,

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> for many shall come in my name, saying, I
am the Christ, and they shall lead many astray,

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> and ye shall begin to hear of wars, and
reports of wars; see, be not troubled, for it behoveth all \[these\] to
come to pass, but the end is not yet.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> \`For nation shall rise against nation,
and kingdom against kingdom, and there shall be famines, and
pestilences, and earthquakes, in divers places;

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> and all these \[are\] the beginning of
sorrows;

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> then they shall deliver you up to
tribulation, and shall kill you, and ye shall be hated by all the
nations because of my name;

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> and then shall many be stumbled, and
they shall deliver up one another, and shall hate one another.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> \`And many false prophets shall arise,
and shall lead many astray;

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> and because of the abounding of the
lawlessness, the love of the many shall become cold;

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> but he who did endure to the end, he
shall be saved;

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> and this good news of the reign shall
be proclaimed in all the world, for a testimony to all the nations; and
then shall the end arrive.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> \`Whenever, therefore, ye may see the
abomination of the desolation, that was spoken of through Daniel the
prophet, standing in the holy place (whoever is reading let him observe)

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> then those in Judea -- let them flee to
the mounts;

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> he on the house-top -- let him not come
down to take up any thing out of his house;

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> and he in the field -- let him not turn
back to take his garments.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> \`And wo to those with child, and to
those giving suck in those days;

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> and pray ye that your flight may not be
in winter, nor on a sabbath;

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> for there shall be then great
tribulation, such as was not from the beginning of the world till now,
no, nor may be.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And if those days were not shortened,
no flesh would have been saved; but because of the chosen, shall those
days be shortened.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> \`Then if any one may say to you, Lo,
here \[is\] the Christ! or here! ye may not believe;

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> for there shall arise false Christs,
and false prophets, and they shall give great signs and wonders, so as
to lead astray, if possible, also the chosen.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> Lo, I did tell you beforehand.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> \`If therefore they may say to you, Lo,
in the wilderness he is, ye may not go forth; lo, in the inner chambers,
ye may not believe;

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> for as the lightning doth come forth
from the east, and doth appear unto the west, so shall be also the
presence of the Son of Man;

<span id="an_24:28">24:28</span> for wherever the carcase may be, there
shall the eagles be gathered together.

<span id="an_24:29">24:29</span> \`And immediately after the tribulation
of those days, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give
her light, and the stars shall fall from the heaven, and the powers of
the heavens shall be shaken;

<span id="an_24:30">24:30</span> and then shall appear the sign of the
Son of Man in the heaven; and then shall all the tribes of the earth
smite the breast, and they shall see the Son of Man coming upon the
clouds of the heaven, with power and much glory;

<span id="an_24:31">24:31</span> and he shall send his messengers with a
great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his chosen from
the four winds, from the ends of the heavens unto the ends thereof.

<span id="an_24:32">24:32</span> \`And from the fig-tree learn ye the
simile: When already its branch may have become tender, and the leaves
it may put forth, ye know that summer \[is\] nigh,

<span id="an_24:33">24:33</span> so also ye, when ye may see all these,
ye know that it is nigh -- at the doors.

<span id="an_24:34">24:34</span> Verily I say to you, this generation
may not pass away till all these may come to pass.

<span id="an_24:35">24:35</span> The heaven and the earth shall pass
away, but my words shall not pass away.

<span id="an_24:36">24:36</span> \`And concerning that day and the hour
no one hath known -- not even the messengers of the heavens -- except my
Father only;

<span id="an_24:37">24:37</span> and as the days of Noah -- so shall be
also the presence of the Son of Man;

<span id="an_24:38">24:38</span> for as they were, in the days before
the flood, eating, and drinking, marrying, and giving in marriage, till
the day Noah entered into the ark,

<span id="an_24:39">24:39</span> and they did not know till the flood
came and took all away; so shall be also the presence of the Son of Man.

<span id="an_24:40">24:40</span> Then two men shall be in the field, the
one is received, and the one is left;

<span id="an_24:41">24:41</span> two women shall be grinding in the
mill, one is received, and one is left.

<span id="an_24:42">24:42</span> \`Watch ye therefore, because ye have
not known in what hour your Lord doth come;

<span id="an_24:43">24:43</span> and this know, that if the master of
the house had known in what watch the thief doth come, he had watched,
and not suffered his house to be broken through;

<span id="an_24:44">24:44</span> because of this also ye, become ye
ready, because in what hour ye do not think, the Son of Man doth come.

<span id="an_24:45">24:45</span> \`Who, then, is the servant, faithful
and wise, whom his lord did set over his household, to give them the
nourishment in season?

<span id="an_24:46">24:46</span> Happy that servant, whom his lord,
having come, shall find doing so;

<span id="an_24:47">24:47</span> verily I say to you, that over all his
substance he will set him.

<span id="an_24:48">24:48</span> \`And, if that evil servant may say in
his heart, My Lord doth delay to come,

<span id="an_24:49">24:49</span> and may begin to beat the
fellow-servants, and to eat and to drink with the drunken,

<span id="an_24:50">24:50</span> the lord of that servant will arrive in
a day when he doth not expect, and in an hour of which he doth not know,

<span id="an_24:51">24:51</span> and will cut him off, and his portion
with the hypocrites will appoint; there shall be the weeping and the
gnashing of the teeth.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> \`Then shall the reign of the heavens be
likened to ten virgins, who, having taken their lamps, went forth to
meet the bridegroom;

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> and five of them were prudent, and five
foolish;

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> they who were foolish having taken their
lamps, did not take with themselves oil;

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> and the prudent took oil in their
vessels, with their lamps.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> \`And the bridegroom tarrying, they all
nodded and were sleeping,

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> and in the middle of the night a cry was
made, Lo, the bridegroom doth come; go ye forth to meet him.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> \`Then rose all those virgins, and
trimmed their lamps,

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> and the foolish said to the prudent, Give
us of your oil, because our lamps are going out;

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> and the prudent answered, saying -- Lest
there may not be sufficient for us and you, go ye rather unto those
selling, and buy for yourselves.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> \`And while they are going away to buy,
the bridegroom came, and those ready went in with him to the
marriage-feasts, and the door was shut;

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> and afterwards come also do the rest of
the virgins, saying, Sir, sir, open to us;

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> and he answering said, Verily I say to
you, I have not known you.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> \`Watch therefore, for ye have not
known the day nor the hour in which the Son of Man doth come.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> \`For -- as a man going abroad did call
his own servants, and did deliver to them his substance,

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> and to one he gave five talents, and to
another two, and to another one, to each according to his several
ability, went abroad immediately.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> \`And he who did receive the five
talents, having gone, wrought with them, and made other five talents;

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> in like manner also he who \[received\]
the two, he gained, also he, other two;

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> and he who did receive the one, having
gone away, digged in the earth, and hid his lord's money.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> \`And after a long time cometh the lord
of those servants, and taketh reckoning with them;

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> and he who did receive the five talents
having come, brought other five talents, saying, \`Sir, five talents
thou didst deliver to me; lo, other five talents did I gain besides
them.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> \`And his lord said to him, Well done,
servant, good and faithful, over a few things thou wast faithful, over
many things I will set thee; enter into the joy of thy lord.

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> \`And he who also did receive the two
talents having come, said, Sir, two talents thou didst deliver to me;
lo, other two talents I did gain besides them.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> \`His lord said to him, Well done,
servant, good and faithful, over a few things thou wast faithful, over
many things I will set thee; enter into the joy of thy lord.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> \`And he also who hath received the one
talent having come, said, Sir, I knew thee, that thou art a hard man,
reaping where thou didst not sow, and gathering from whence thou didst
not scatter;

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> and having been afraid, having gone
away, I hid thy talent in the earth; lo, thou hast thine own!

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> \`And his lord answering said to him,
Evil servant, and slothful, thou hadst known that I reap where I did not
sow, and I gather whence I did not scatter!

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> it behoved thee then to put my money to
the money-lenders, and having come I had received mine own with
increase.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> \`Take therefore from him the talent,
and give to him having the ten talents,

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> for to every one having shall be given,
and he shall have overabundance, and from him who is not having, even
that which he hath shall be taken from him;

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> and the unprofitable servant cast ye
forth to the outer darkness; there shall be the weeping and the gnashing
of the teeth.

<span id="an_25:31">25:31</span> \`And whenever the Son of Man may come
in his glory, and all the holy messengers with him, then he shall sit
upon a throne of his glory;

<span id="an_25:32">25:32</span> and gathered together before him shall
be all the nations, and he shall separate them from one another, as the
shepherd doth separate the sheep from the goats,

<span id="an_25:33">25:33</span> and he shall set the sheep indeed on
his right hand, and the goats on the left.

<span id="an_25:34">25:34</span> \`Then shall the king say to those on
his right hand, Come ye, the blessed of my Father, inherit the reign
that hath been prepared for you from the foundation of the world;

<span id="an_25:35">25:35</span> for I did hunger, and ye gave me to
eat; I did thirst, and ye gave me to drink; I was a stranger, and ye
received me;

<span id="an_25:36">25:36</span> naked, and ye put around me; I was
infirm, and ye looked after me; in prison I was, and ye came unto me.

<span id="an_25:37">25:37</span> \`Then shall the righteous answer him,
saying, Lord, when did we see thee hungering, and we nourished? or
thirsting, and we gave to drink?

<span id="an_25:38">25:38</span> and when did we see thee a stranger,
and we received? or naked, and we put around?

<span id="an_25:39">25:39</span> and when did we see thee infirm, or in
prison, and we came unto thee?

<span id="an_25:40">25:40</span> \`And the king answering, shall say to
them, Verily I say to you, Inasmuch as ye did \[it\] to one of these my
brethren -- the least -- to me ye did \[it\].

<span id="an_25:41">25:41</span> Then shall he say also to those on the
left hand, Go ye from me, the cursed, to the fire, the age-during, that
hath been prepared for the Devil and his messengers;

<span id="an_25:42">25:42</span> for I did hunger, and ye gave me not to
eat; I did thirst, and ye gave me not to drink;

<span id="an_25:43">25:43</span> a stranger I was, and ye did not
receive me; naked, and ye put not around me; infirm, and in prison, and
ye did not look after me.

<span id="an_25:44">25:44</span> \`Then shall they answer, they also,
saying, Lord, when did we see thee hungering, or thirsting, or a
stranger, or naked, or infirm, or in prison, and we did not minister to
thee?

<span id="an_25:45">25:45</span> \`Then shall he answer them, saying,
Verily I say to you, Inasmuch as ye did \[it\] not to one of these, the
least, ye did \[it\] not to me.

<span id="an_25:46">25:46</span> And these shall go away to punishment
age-during, but the righteous to life age-during.'

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> And it came to pass, when Jesus finished
all these words, he said to his disciples,

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> \`Ye have known that after two days the
passover cometh, and the Son of Man is delivered up to be crucified.'

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> Then were gathered together the chief
priests, and the scribes, and the elders of the people, to the court of
the chief priest who was called Caiaphas;

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> and they consulted together that they
might take Jesus by guile, and kill \[him\],

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> and they said, \`Not in the feast, that
there may not be a tumult among the people.'

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> And Jesus having been in Bethany, in the
house of Simon the leper,

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> there came to him a woman having an
alabaster box of ointment, very precious, and she poured on his head as
he is reclining (at meat).

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> And having seen \[it\], his disciples
were much displeased, saying, \`To what purpose \[is\] this waste?

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> for this ointment could have been sold
for much, and given to the poor.'

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> And Jesus having known, said to them,
\`Why do ye give trouble to the woman? for a good work she wrought for
me;

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> for the poor always ye have with you,
and me ye have not always;

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> for she having put this ointment on my
body -- for my burial she did \[it\].

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> Verily I say to you, Wherever this good
news may be proclaimed in the whole world, what this \[one\] did shall
also be spoken of -- for a memorial of her.'

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> Then one of the twelve, who is called
Judas Iscariot, having gone unto the chief priests, said,

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> \`What are ye willing to give me, and I
will deliver him up to you?' and they weighed out to him thirty
silverlings,

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> and from that time he was seeking a
convenient season to deliver him up.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> And on the first \[day\] of the
unleavened food came the disciples near to Jesus, saying to him, \`Where
wilt thou \[that\] we may prepare for thee to eat the passover?'

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> and he said, \`Go away to the city,
unto such a one, and say to him, The Teacher saith, My time is nigh;
near thee I keep the passover, with my disciples;'

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> and the disciples did as Jesus
appointed them, and prepared the passover.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> And evening having come, he was
reclining (at meat) with the twelve,

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> and while they are eating, he said,
\`Verily I say to you, that one of you shall deliver me up.'

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> And being grieved exceedingly, they
began to say to him, each of them, \`Is it I, Sir?'

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> And he answering said, \`He who did dip
with me the hand in the dish, he will deliver me up;

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> the Son of Man doth indeed go, as it
hath been written concerning him, but wo to that man through whom the
Son of Man is delivered up! good it were for him if that man had not
been born.'

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> And Judas -- he who delivered him up --
answering said, \`Is it I, Rabbi?' He saith to him, \`Thou hast said.'

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> And while they were eating, Jesus
having taken the bread, and having blessed, did brake, and was giving to
the disciples, and said, \`Take, eat, this is my body;'

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> and having taken the cup, and having
given thanks, he gave to them, saying, \`Drink ye of it -- all;

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> for this is my blood of the new
covenant, that for many is being poured out -- to remission of sins;

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> and I say to you, that I may not drink
henceforth on this produce of the vine, till that day when I may drink
it with you new in the reign of my Father.'

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> And having sung a hymn, they went forth
to the mount of the Olives;

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> then saith Jesus to them, \`All ye
shall be stumbled at me this night; for it hath been written, I will
smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered
abroad;

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> but, after my having risen, I will go
before you to Galilee.'

<span id="an_26:33">26:33</span> And Peter answering said to him, \`Even
if all shall be stumbled at thee, I will never be stumbled.'

<span id="an_26:34">26:34</span> Jesus said to him, \`Verily I say to
thee, that, this night, before cock-crowing, thrice thou wilt deny me.'

<span id="an_26:35">26:35</span> Peter saith to him, \`Even if it may be
necessary for me to die with thee, I will not deny thee;' in like manner
also said all the disciples.

<span id="an_26:36">26:36</span> Then come with them doth Jesus to a
place called Gethsemane, and he saith to the disciples, \`Sit ye here,
till having gone away, I shall pray yonder.'

<span id="an_26:37">26:37</span> And having taken Peter, and the two
sons of Zebedee, he began to be sorrowful, and to be very heavy;

<span id="an_26:38">26:38</span> then saith he to them, \`Exceedingly
sorrowful is my soul -- unto death; abide ye here, and watch with me.'

<span id="an_26:39">26:39</span> And having gone forward a little, he
fell on his face, praying, and saying, \`My Father, if it be possible,
let this cup pass from me; nevertheless, not as I will, but as Thou.'

<span id="an_26:40">26:40</span> And he cometh unto the disciples, and
findeth them sleeping, and he saith to Peter, \`So! ye were not able one
hour to watch with me!

<span id="an_26:41">26:41</span> watch, and pray, that ye may not enter
into temptation: the spirit indeed is forward, but the flesh weak.'

<span id="an_26:42">26:42</span> Again, a second time, having gone away,
he prayed, saying, \`My Father, if this cup cannot pass away from me
except I drink it, Thy will be done;'

<span id="an_26:43">26:43</span> and having come, he findeth them again
sleeping, for their eyes were heavy.

<span id="an_26:44">26:44</span> And having left them, having gone away
again, he prayed a third time, saying the same word;

<span id="an_26:45">26:45</span> then cometh he unto his disciples, and
saith to them, \`Sleep on henceforth, and rest! lo, the hour hath come
nigh, and the Son of Man is delivered up to the hands of sinners.

<span id="an_26:46">26:46</span> Rise, let us go; lo, he hath come nigh
who is delivering me up.'

<span id="an_26:47">26:47</span> And while he is yet speaking, lo,
Judas, one of the twelve did come, and with him a great multitude, with
swords and sticks, from the chief priests and elders of the people.

<span id="an_26:48">26:48</span> And he who did deliver him up did give
them a sign, saying, \`Whomsoever I will kiss, it is he: lay hold on
him;'

<span id="an_26:49">26:49</span> and immediately, having come to Jesus,
he said, \`Hail, Rabbi,' and kissed him;

<span id="an_26:50">26:50</span> and Jesus said to him, \`Comrade, for
what art thou present?' Then having come near, they laid hands on Jesus,
and took hold on him.

<span id="an_26:51">26:51</span> And lo, one of those with Jesus, having
stretched forth the hand, drew his sword, and having struck the servant
of the chief priest, he took off his ear.

<span id="an_26:52">26:52</span> Then saith Jesus to him, \`Turn back
thy sword to its place; for all who did take the sword, by the sword
shall perish;

<span id="an_26:53">26:53</span> dost thou think that I am not able now
to call upon my Father, and He will place beside me more than twelve
legions of messengers?

<span id="an_26:54">26:54</span> how then may the Writings be fulfilled,
that thus it behoveth to happen?'

<span id="an_26:55">26:55</span> In that hour said Jesus to the
multitudes, \`As against a robber ye did come forth, with swords and
sticks, to take me! daily with you I was sitting teaching in the temple,
and ye did not lay hold on me;

<span id="an_26:56">26:56</span> but all this hath come to pass, that
the Writings of the prophets may be fulfilled;' then all the disciples,
having left him, fled.

<span id="an_26:57">26:57</span> And those laying hold on Jesus led
\[him\] away unto Caiaphas the chief priest, where the scribes and the
elders were gathered together,

<span id="an_26:58">26:58</span> and Peter was following him afar off,
unto the court of the chief priest, and having gone in within, he was
sitting with the officers, to see the end.

<span id="an_26:59">26:59</span> And the chief priests, and the elders,
and all the council, were seeking false witness against Jesus, that they
might put him to death,

<span id="an_26:60">26:60</span> and they did not find; and many false
witnesses having come near, they did not find; and at last two false
witnesses having come near,

<span id="an_26:61">26:61</span> said, \`This one said, I am able to
throw down the sanctuary of God, and after three days to build it.'

<span id="an_26:62">26:62</span> And the chief priest having stood up,
said to him, \`Nothing thou dost answer! what do these witness against
thee?

<span id="an_26:63">26:63</span> and Jesus was silent. And the chief
priest answering said to him, \`I adjure thee, by the living God, that
thou mayest say to us, if thou art the Christ -- the Son of God.'

<span id="an_26:64">26:64</span> Jesus saith to him, \`Thou hast said;
nevertheless I say to you, hereafter ye shall see the Son of Man sitting
on the right hand of the power, and coming upon the clouds, of the
heaven.'

<span id="an_26:65">26:65</span> Then the chief priest rent his
garments, saying, -- \`He hath spoken evil; what need have we yet of
witnesses? lo, now ye heard his evil speaking;

<span id="an_26:66">26:66</span> what think ye?' and they answering
said, \`He is worthy of death.'

<span id="an_26:67">26:67</span> Then did they spit in his face and
buffet him, and others did slap,

<span id="an_26:68">26:68</span> saying, \`Declare to us, O Christ, who
he is that struck thee?'

<span id="an_26:69">26:69</span> And Peter without was sitting in the
court, and there came near to him a certain maid, saying, \`And thou
wast with Jesus of Galilee!'

<span id="an_26:70">26:70</span> And he denied before all, saying, \`I
have not known what thou sayest.'

<span id="an_26:71">26:71</span> And he having gone forth to the porch,
another female saw him, and saith to those there, \`And this one was
with Jesus of Nazareth;'

<span id="an_26:72">26:72</span> and again did he deny with an oath --
\`I have not known the man.'

<span id="an_26:73">26:73</span> And after a little those standing near
having come, said to Peter, \`Truly thou also art of them, for even thy
speech doth make thee manifest.'

<span id="an_26:74">26:74</span> Then began he to anathematise, and to
swear -- \`I have not known the man;' and immediately did a cock crow,

<span id="an_26:75">26:75</span> and Peter remembered the saying of
Jesus, he having said to him -- \`Before cock-crowing, thrice thou wilt
deny me;' and having gone without, he did weep bitterly.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> And morning having come, all the chief
priests and the elders of the people took counsel against Jesus, so as
to put him to death;

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> and having bound him, they did lead away,
and delivered him up to Pontius Pilate, the governor.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> Then Judas -- he who delivered him up --
having seen that he was condemned, having repented, brought back the
thirty silverlings to the chief priests, and to the elders, saying,

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> \`I did sin, having delivered up innocent
blood;' and they said, \`What -- to us? thou shalt see!'

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> and having cast down the silverlings in
the sanctuary, he departed, and having gone away, he did strangle
himself.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> And the chief priests having taken the
silverlings, said, \`It is not lawful to put them to the treasury,
seeing it is the price of blood;'

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> and having taken counsel, they bought
with them the field of the potter, for the burial of strangers;

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> therefore was that field called, \`Field
of blood,' unto this day.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Then was fulfilled that spoken through
Jeremiah the prophet, saying, \`And I took the thirty silverlings, the
price of him who hath been priced, whom they of the sons of Israel did
price,

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> and gave them for the field of the
potter, as the Lord did appoint to me.'

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> And Jesus stood before the governor,
and the governor did question him, saying, \`Art thou the king of the
Jews!' And Jesus said to him, \`Thou sayest.'

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> And in his being accused by the chief
priests and the elders, he did not answer any thing,

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> then saith Pilate to him, \`Dost thou
not hear how many things they witness against thee?'

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> And he did not answer him, not even to
one word, so that the governor did wonder greatly.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> And at the feast the governor had been
accustomed to release one to the multitude, a prisoner, whom they
willed,

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> and they had then a noted prisoner,
called Barabbas,

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> they therefore having been gathered
together, Pilate said to them, \`Whom will ye I shall release to you?
Barabbas or Jesus who is called Christ?'

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> for he had known that because of envy
they had delivered him up.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> And as he is sitting on the tribunal,
his wife sent unto him, saying, \`Nothing -- to thee and to that
righteous one, for many things did I suffer to-day in a dream because of
him.'

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> And the chief priests and the elders
did persuade the multitudes that they might ask for themselves Barabbas,
and might destroy Jesus;

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> and the governor answering said to
them, \`Which of the two will ye \[that\] I shall release to you?' And
they said, \`Barabbas.'

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> Pilate saith to them, \`What then shall
I do with Jesus who is called Christ?' They all say to him, \`Let be
crucified!'

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> And the governor said, \`Why, what evil
did he?' and they were crying out the more, saying, \`Let be crucified.'

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> And Pilate having seen that it
profiteth nothing, but rather a tumult is made, having taken water, he
did wash the hands before the multitude, saying, \`I am innocent from
the blood of this righteous one; ye -- ye shall see;'

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> and all the people answering said,
\`His blood \[is\] upon us, and upon our children!'

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> Then did he release to them Barabbas,
and having scourged Jesus, he delivered \[him\] up that he may be
crucified;

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> then the soldiers of the governor
having taken Jesus to the Praetorium, did gather to him all the band;

<span id="an_27:28">27:28</span> and having unclothed him, they put
around him a crimson cloak,

<span id="an_27:29">27:29</span> and having plaited him a crown out of
thorns they put \[it\] on his head, and a reed in his right hand, and
having kneeled before him, they were mocking him, saying, \`Hail, the
king of the Jews.'

<span id="an_27:30">27:30</span> And having spit on him, they took the
reed, and were smiting on his head;

<span id="an_27:31">27:31</span> and when they had mocked him, they took
off from him the cloak, and put on him his own garments, and led him
away to crucify \[him\].

<span id="an_27:32">27:32</span> And coming forth, they found a man, a
Cyrenian, by name Simon: him they impressed that he might bear his
cross;

<span id="an_27:33">27:33</span> and having come to a place called
Golgotha, that is called Place of a Skull,

<span id="an_27:34">27:34</span> they gave him to drink vinegar mixed
with gall, and having tasted, he would not drink.

<span id="an_27:35">27:35</span> And having crucified him, they divided
his garments, casting a lot, that it might be fulfilled that was spoken
by the prophet, \`They divided my garments to themselves, and over my
vesture they cast a lot;'

<span id="an_27:36">27:36</span> and sitting down, they were watching
him there,

<span id="an_27:37">27:37</span> and they put up over his head, his
accusation written, \`This is Jesus, the king of the Jews.'

<span id="an_27:38">27:38</span> Then crucified with him are two
robbers, one on the right hand, and one on the left,

<span id="an_27:39">27:39</span> and those passing by were speaking evil
of him, wagging their heads,

<span id="an_27:40">27:40</span> and saying, \`Thou that art throwing
down the sanctuary, and in three days building \[it\], save thyself; if
Son thou art of God, come down from the cross.'

<span id="an_27:41">27:41</span> And in like manner also the chief
priests mocking, with the scribes and elders, said,

<span id="an_27:42">27:42</span> \`Others he saved; himself he is not
able to save! If he be King of Israel, let him come down now from the
cross, and we will believe him;

<span id="an_27:43">27:43</span> he hath trusted on God, let Him now
deliver him, if He wish him, because he said -- Son of God I am;'

<span id="an_27:44">27:44</span> with the same also the robbers, who
were crucified with him, were reproaching him.

<span id="an_27:45">27:45</span> And from the sixth hour darkness came
over all the land unto the ninth hour,

<span id="an_27:46">27:46</span> and about the ninth hour Jesus cried
out with a great voice, saying, \`Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani?' that is,
\`My God, my God, why didst Thou forsake me?'

<span id="an_27:47">27:47</span> And certain of those standing there
having heard, said -- \`Elijah he doth call;'

<span id="an_27:48">27:48</span> and immediately, one of them having
run, and having taken a spunge, having filled \[it\] with vinegar, and
having put \[it\] on a reed, was giving him to drink,

<span id="an_27:49">27:49</span> but the rest said, \`Let alone, let us
see if Elijah doth come -- about to save him.'

<span id="an_27:50">27:50</span> And Jesus having again cried with a
great voice, yielded the spirit;

<span id="an_27:51">27:51</span> and lo, the vail of the sanctuary was
rent in two from top unto bottom, and the earth did quake, and the rocks
were rent,

<span id="an_27:52">27:52</span> and the tombs were opened, and many
bodies of the saints who have fallen asleep, arose,

<span id="an_27:53">27:53</span> and having come forth out of the tombs
after his rising, they went into the holy city, and appeared to many.

<span id="an_27:54">27:54</span> And the centurion, and those with him
watching Jesus, having seen the earthquake, and the things that were
done, were exceedingly afraid, saying, \`Truly this was God's Son.'

<span id="an_27:55">27:55</span> And there were there many women
beholding from afar, who did follow Jesus from Galilee, ministering to
him,

<span id="an_27:56">27:56</span> among whom was Mary the Magdalene, and
Mary the mother of James and of Joses, and the mother of the sons of
Zebedee.

<span id="an_27:57">27:57</span> And evening having come, there came a
rich man, from Arimathea, named Joseph, who also himself was discipled
to Jesus,

<span id="an_27:58">27:58</span> he having gone near to Pilate, asked
for himself the body of Jesus; then Pilate commanded the body to be
given back.

<span id="an_27:59">27:59</span> And having taken the body, Joseph
wrapped it in clean linen,

<span id="an_27:60">27:60</span> and laid it in his new tomb, that he
hewed in the rock, and having rolled a great stone to the door of the
tomb, he went away;

<span id="an_27:61">27:61</span> and there were there Mary the
Magdalene, and the other Mary, sitting over-against the sepulchre.

<span id="an_27:62">27:62</span> And on the morrow that is after the
preparation, were gathered together the chief priests, and the
Pharisees, unto Pilate,

<span id="an_27:63">27:63</span> saying, \`Sir, we have remembered that
that deceiver said while yet living, After three days I do rise;

<span id="an_27:64">27:64</span> command, then, the sepulchre to be made
secure till the third day, lest his disciples, having come by night, may
steal him away, and may say to the people, He rose from the dead, and
the last deceit shall be worse than the first.'

<span id="an_27:65">27:65</span> And Pilate said to them, \`Ye have a
watch, go away, make secure -- as ye have known;'

<span id="an_27:66">27:66</span> and they, having gone, did make the
sepulchre secure, having sealed the stone, together with the watch.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> And on the eve of the sabbaths, at the
dawn, toward the first of the sabbaths, came Mary the Magdalene, and the
other Mary, to see the sepulchre,

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> and lo, there came a great earthquake,
for a messenger of the Lord, having come down out of heaven, having
come, did roll away the stone from the door, and was sitting upon it,

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> and his countenance was as lightning, and
his clothing white as snow,

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> and from the fear of him did the keepers
shake, and they became as dead men.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> And the messenger answering said to the
women, \`Fear not ye, for I have known that Jesus, who hath been
crucified, ye seek;

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> he is not here, for he rose, as he said;
come, see the place where the Lord was lying;

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> and having gone quickly, say ye to his
disciples, that he rose from the dead; and lo, he doth go before you to
Galilee, there ye shall see him; lo, I have told you.'

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> And having gone forth quickly from the
tomb, with fear and great joy, they ran to tell to his disciples;

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> and as they were going to tell to his
disciples, then lo, Jesus met them, saying, \`Hail!' and they having
come near, laid hold of his feet, and did bow to him.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Then saith Jesus to them, \`Fear ye
not, go away, tell to my brethren that they may go away to Galilee, and
there they shall see me.'

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> And while they are going on, lo,
certain of the watch having come to the city, told to the chief priests
all the things that happened,

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> and having been gathered together with
the elders, counsel also having taken, they gave much money to the
soldiers,

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> saying, \`Say ye, that his disciples
having come by night, stole him -- we being asleep;

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> and if this be heard by the governor,
we will persuade him, and you keep free from anxiety.'

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> And they, having received the money,
did as they were taught, and this account was spread abroad among Jews
till this day.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> And the eleven disciples went to
Galilee, to the mount where Jesus appointed them,

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> and having seen him, they bowed to him,
but some did waver.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> And having come near, Jesus spake to
them, saying, \`Given to me was all authority in heaven and on earth;

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> having gone, then, disciple all the
nations, (baptizing them -- to the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Spirit,

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> teaching them to observe all, whatever
I did command you,) and lo, I am with you all the days -- till the full
end of the age.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark](mar)
