[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mic)  [Next](hab) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Nahum

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Burden of Nineveh. The Book of the Vision
of Nahum the Elkoshite.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> A God zealous and avenging \[is\] Jehovah,
An avenger \[is\] Jehovah, and possessing fury. An avenger \[is\]
Jehovah on His adversaries, And He is watching for His enemies.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Jehovah \[is\] slow to anger, and great in
power, And Jehovah doth not entirely acquit, In a hurricane and in a
tempest \[is\] His way, And a cloud \[is\] the dust of His feet.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> He is pushing against a sea, and drieth it
up, Yea, all the floods He hath made dry, Languishing \[are\] Bashan and
Carmel, Yea, the flower of Lebanon \[is\] languishing.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Mountains have shaken because of Him, And
the hills have been melted; And lifted up \[is\] the earth at His
presence, And the world and all dwelling in it.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Before His indignation who doth stand? And
who riseth up in the heat of His anger? His fury hath been poured out
like fire, And the rocks have been broken by Him.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Good \[is\] Jehovah for a strong place in a
day of distress. And He knoweth those trusting in Him.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And with a flood passing over, An end He
maketh of its place, And His enemies doth darkness pursue.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> What do we devise against Jehovah? An end
He is making, arise not twice doth distress.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> For while princes \[are\] perplexed, And
with their drink are drunken, They have been consumed as stubble fully
dried.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> From thee hath come forth a deviser of
evil Against Jehovah -- a worthless counsellor.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Thus said Jehovah: Though complete, and
thus many, Yet thus they have been cut off, And he hath passed away. And
I afflicted thee, I afflict thee no more.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And now I break his rod from off thee,
And thy bands I do draw away.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And commanded concerning thee hath
Jehovah, \`No more of thy name doth spread abroad, From the house of thy
gods I cut off graven and molten image, I appoint thy grave, for thou
hast been vile.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Lo, on the mountains the feet of one
proclaiming tidings, sounding peace! Celebrate, O Judah, thy festivals,
complete thy vows, For add no more to pass over into thee doth the
worthless, He hath been completely cut off!

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Come up hath a scatterer to thy face, Keep
the bulwark, watch the way, Strengthen the loins, strengthen power
mightily.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> For turned back hath Jehovah to the
excellency of Jacob, As \[to\] the excellency of Israel, For emptied
them out have emptiers, And their branches they have marred.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> The shield of his mighty ones is become
red, Men of might \[are in\] scarlet, With fiery torches \[is\] the
chariot in a day of his preparation, And the firs have been caused to
tremble.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> In out-places shine do the chariots, They
go to and fro in broad places, Their appearances \[are\] like torches,
As lightnings they run.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> He doth remember his honourable ones, They
stumble in their goings, They hasten \[to\] its wall, and prepared is
the covering.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Gates of the rivers have been opened, And
the palace is dissolved.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And it is established -- she hath removed,
She hath been brought up, And her handmaids are leading as the voice of
doves, Tabering on their hearts.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And Nineveh \[is\] as a pool of waters,
From of old it \[is\] -- and they are fleeing! \`Stand ye, stand;' and
none is turning!

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Seize ye silver, seize ye gold, And there
is no end to the prepared things, \[To\] the abundance of all desirable
vessels.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> She is empty, yea, emptiness and waste,
And the heart hath melted, And the knees have smitten together, And
great pain \[is\] in all loins, And the faces of all of them have
gathered paleness.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Where \[is\] the habitation of lionesses?
And a feeding-place it \[is\] for young lions Where walked hath a lion,
an old lion, A lion's whelp, and there is none troubling.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> The lion is tearing parts \[for\] his
whelps, And is strangling for his lionesses, And he doth fill \[with\]
prey his holes, And his habitations \[with\] rapine.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Lo, I \[am\] against thee, An affirmation
of Jehovah of Hosts, And I have burned in smoke its chariot, And thy
young lions consume doth a sword, And I have cut off from the land thy
prey, And not heard any more is the voice of thy messengers!

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Wo \[to\] the city of blood, She is all
with lies -- burglary -- full, Prey doth not depart.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> The sound of a whip, And the sound of the
rattling of a wheel, And of a prancing horse, and of a bounding chariot,
Of a horseman mounting.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And the flame of a sword, and the lightning
of a spear, And the abundance of the wounded, And the weight of
carcases, Yea, there is no end to the bodies, They stumble over their
bodies.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Because of the abundance of the
fornications of an harlot, The goodness of the grace of the lady of
witchcrafts, Who is selling nations by her fornications, And families by
her witchcrafts.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Lo, I \[am\] against thee, An affirmation
of Jehovah of Hosts, And have removed thy skirts before thy face, And
have shewed nations thy nakedness, And kingdoms thy shame,

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And I have cast upon thee abominations, And
dishonoured thee, and made thee as a sight.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And it hath come to pass, Each of thy
beholders fleeth from thee, And hath said: \`Spoiled is Nineveh, Who
doth bemoan for her?' Whence do I seek comforters for thee?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Art thou better than No-Ammon, That is
dwelling among brooks? Waters she hath round about her, Whose bulwark
\[is\] the sea, waters her wall.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Cush her might, and Egypt, and there is no
end. Put and Lubim have been for thy help.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Even she doth become an exile, She hath
gone into captivity, Even her sucklings are dashed to pieces At the top
of all out-places, And for her honoured ones they cast a lot, And all
her great ones have been bound in fetters.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Even thou art drunken, thou art hidden,
Even thou dost seek a strong place, because of an enemy.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> All thy fortresses \[are\] fig-trees with
first-fruits, If they are shaken, They have fallen into the mouth of the
eater.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Lo, thy people \[are\] women in thy
midst, To thine enemies thoroughly opened Have been the gates of thy
land, Consumed hath fire thy bars.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Waters of a siege draw for thyself,
Strengthen thy fortresses, Enter into mire, and tread on clay, Make
strong a brick-kiln.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> There consume thee doth a fire, Cut thee
off doth a sword, It doth consume thee as a cankerworm! Make thyself
heavy as the cankerworm, Make thyself heavy as the locust.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Multiply thy merchants above the stars of
the heavens, The cankerworm hath stripped off, and doth flee away.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Thy crowned ones \[are\] as a locust, And
thy princes as great grasshoppers, That encamp in hedges in a day of
cold, The sun hath risen, and it doth flee away, And not known is its
place where they are.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Slumbered have thy friends, king of
Asshur, Rest do thine honourable ones, Scattered have been thy people on
the mountains, And there is none gathering.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> There is no weakening of thy destruction,
Grievous \[is\] thy smiting, All hearing thy fame have clapped the hand
at thee, For over whom did not thy wickedness pass continually?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Habakkuk](hab)
