[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](amo)  [Next](jon.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Obadiah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Thus said the Lord Jehovah to Edom, A
report we have heard from Jehovah, And an ambassador among nations was
sent, \`Rise, yea, let us rise against her for battle.'

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Lo, little I have made thee among nations,
Despised \[art\] thou exceedingly.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> The pride of thy heart hath lifted thee up,
O dweller in clifts of a rock, (A high place \[is\] his habitation, He
is saying in his heart, \`Who doth bring me down \[to\] earth?')

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> If thou dost go up high as an eagle, And if
between stars thou dost set thy nest, From thence I bring thee down, An
affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> If thieves have come in to thee, If
spoilers of the night, How hast thou been cut off! Do they not steal
their sufficiency? If gatherers have come in to thee, Do they not leave
gleanings?

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> How hath Esau been searched out! Flowed out
have his hidden things,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Unto the border sent thee have all thine
allies, Forgotten thee, prevailed over thee, have thy friends, Thy bread
they make a snare under thee, There is no understanding in him!

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Is it not in that day -- an affirmation of
Jehovah, That I have destroyed the wise out of Edom, And understanding
out of the mount of Esau?

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And broken down have been thy mighty ones,
O Teman, So that every one of the mount of Esau is cut off.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> For slaughter, for violence \[to\] thy
brother Jacob, Cover thee doth shame, And thou hast been cut off -- to
the age.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> In the day of thy standing over-against,
In the day of strangers taking captive his force, And foreigners have
entered his gates, And for Jerusalem have cast a lot, Even thou \[art\]
as one of them!

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And -- thou dost not look on the day of
thy brother, On the day of his alienation, Nor dost thou rejoice over
sons of Judah, In the day of their destruction, Nor make great thy mouth
in a day of distress.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Nor come into a gate of My people in a
day of their calamity, Nor look, even thou, on its misfortune in a day
of its calamity, Nor send forth against its force in a day of its
calamity,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Nor stand by the breach to cut off its
escaped, Nor deliver up its remnant in a day of distress.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> For near \[is\] the day of Jehovah, on
all the nations, As thou hast done, it is done to thee, Thy deed doth
turn back on thine own head.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For -- as ye have drunk on My holy mount,
Drink do all the nations continually, And they have drunk and have
swallowed, And they have been as they have not been.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And in mount Zion there is an escape, And
it hath been holy, And the house of Jacob have possessed their
possessions.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And the house of Jacob hath been a fire,
And the house of Joseph a flame, And the house of Esau for stubble, And
they have burned among them, And they have consumed them, And there is
not a remnant to the house of Esau, For Jehovah hath spoken.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And they have possessed the south with
the mount of Esau, And the low country with the Philistines, And they
have possessed the field of Ephraim, And the field of Samaria, And
Benjamin with Gilead.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And the removed of this force of the sons
of Israel, That \[is with\] the Canaanites unto Zarephat, And the
removed of Jerusalem that \[is\] with the Sepharad, Possess the cities
of the south.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And gone up have saviours on mount Zion,
To judge the mount of Esau, And the kingdom hath been to Jehovah!'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jonah](jon.md)
