[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pe1)  [Next](jo1.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: 2 Peter

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Simeon Peter, a servant and an apostle of
Jesus Christ, to those who did obtain a like precious faith with us in
the righteousness of our God and Saviour Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace to you, and peace be multiplied in
the acknowledgement of God and of Jesus our Lord!

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> As all things to us His divine power (the
things pertaining unto life and piety) hath given, through the
acknowledgement of him who did call us through glory and worthiness,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> through which to us the most great and
precious promises have been given, that through these ye may become
partakers of a divine nature, having escaped from the corruption in the
world in desires.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And this same also -- all diligence having
brought in besides, superadd in your faith the worthiness, and in the
worthiness the knowledge,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> and in the knowledge the temperance, and in
the temperance the endurance, and in the endurance the piety,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> and in the piety the brotherly kindness,
and in the brotherly kindness the love;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> for these things being to you and
abounding, do make \[you\] neither inert nor unfruitful in regard to the
acknowledging of our Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> for he with whom these things are not
present is blind, dim-sighted, having become forgetful of the cleansing
of his old sins;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> wherefore, the rather, brethren, be
diligent to make stedfast your calling and choice, for these things
doing, ye may never stumble,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> for so, richly shall be superadded to you
the entrance into the age-during reign of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Wherefore, I will not be careless always
to remind you concerning these things, though, having known them, and
having been established in the present truth,

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> and I think right, so long as I am in
this tabernacle, to stir you up in reminding \[you\],

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> having known that soon is the laying
aside of my tabernacle, even as also our Lord Jesus Christ did shew to
me,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> and I will be diligent that also at every
time ye have, after my outgoing, power to make to yourselves the
remembrance of these things.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For, skilfully devised fables not having
followed out, we did make known to you the power and presence of our
Lord Jesus Christ, but eye-witnesses having become of his majesty --

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> for having received from God the Father
honour and glory, such a voice being borne to him by the excellent
glory: \`This is My Son -- the beloved, in whom I was well pleased;'

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> and this voice we -- we did hear, out of
heaven borne, being with him in the holy mount.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And we have more firm the prophetic word,
to which we do well giving heed, as to a lamp shining in a dark place,
till day may dawn, and a morning star may arise -- in your hearts;

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> this first knowing, that no prophecy of
the Writing doth come of private exposition,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> for not by will of man did ever prophecy
come, but by the Holy Spirit borne on holy men of God spake.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And there did come also false prophets
among the people, as also among you there shall be false teachers, who
shall bring in besides destructive sects, and the Master who bought them
denying, bringing to themselves quick destruction,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> and many shall follow out their destructive
ways, because of whom the way of the truth shall be evil spoken of,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> and in covetousness, with moulded words, of
you they shall make merchandise, whose judgment of old is not idle, and
their destruction doth not slumber.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> For if God messengers who sinned did not
spare, but with chains of thick gloom, having cast \[them\] down to
Tartarus, did deliver \[them\] to judgment, having been reserved,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> and the old world did not spare, but the
eighth person, Noah, of righteousness a preacher, did keep, a flood on
the world of the impious having brought,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> and the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah having
turned to ashes, with an overthrow did condemn, an example to those
about to be impious having set \[them\];

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> and righteous Lot, worn down by the conduct
in lasciviousness of the impious, He did rescue,

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> for in seeing and hearing, the righteous
man, dwelling among them, day by day the righteous soul with unlawful
works was harassing.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> The Lord hath known to rescue pious ones
out of temptation, and unrighteous ones to a day of judgment, being
punished, to keep,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> and chiefly those going behind the flesh
in desire of uncleanness, and lordship despising; presumptuous,
self-complacent, dignities they are not afraid to speak evil of,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> whereas messengers, in strength and power
being greater, do not bear against them before the Lord an evil speaking
judgment;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> and these, as irrational natural beasts,
made to be caught and destroyed -- in what things they are ignorant of,
speaking evil -- in their destruction shall be destroyed,

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> about to receive a reward of
unrighteousness, pleasures counting the luxury in the day, spots and
blemishes, luxuriating in their deceits, feasting with you,

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> having eyes full of adultery, and unable
to cease from sin, enticing unstable souls, having an heart exercised in
covetousnesses, children of a curse,

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> having forsaken a right way, they did go
astray, having followed in the way of Balaam the \[son\] of Bosor, who a
reward of unrighteousness did love,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> and had a rebuke of his own iniquity -- a
dumb ass, in man's voice having spoken, did forbid the madness of the
prophet.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> These are wells without water, and clouds
by a tempest driven, to whom the thick gloom of the darkness to the age
hath been kept;

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> for overswellings of vanity speaking,
they do entice in desires of the flesh -- lasciviousnesses, those who
had truly escaped from those conducting themselves in error,

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> liberty to them promising, themselves
being servants of the corruption, for by whom any one hath been
overcome, to this one also he hath been brought to servitude,

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> for, if having escaped from the
pollutions of the world, in the acknowledging of the Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ, and by these again being entangled, they have been
overcome, become to them hath the last things worse than the first,

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> for it were better to them not to have
acknowledged the way of the righteousness, than having acknowledged
\[it\], to turn back from the holy command delivered to them,

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> and happened to them hath that of the
true similitude; \`A dog did turn back upon his own vomit,' and, \`A sow
having bathed herself -- to rolling in mire.'

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> This, now, beloved, a second letter to you
I write, in both which I stir up your pure mind in reminding \[you\],

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> to be mindful of the sayings said before by
the holy prophets, and of the command of us the apostles of the Lord and
Saviour,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> this first knowing, that there shall come
in the latter end of the days scoffers, according to their own desires
going on,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> and saying, \`Where is the promise of his
presence? for since the fathers did fall asleep, all things so remain
from the beginning of the creation;'

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> for this is unobserved by them willingly,
that the heavens were of old, and the earth out of water and through
water standing together by the word of God,

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> through which the then world, by water
having been deluged, was destroyed;

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> and the present heavens and the earth, by
the same word are treasured, for fire being kept to a day of judgment
and destruction of the impious men.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And this one thing let not be unobserved by
you, beloved, that one day with the Lord \[is\] as a thousand years, and
a thousand years as one day;

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> the Lord is not slow in regard to the
promise, as certain count slowness, but is long-suffering to us, not
counselling any to be lost but all to pass on to reformation,

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> and it will come -- the day of the Lord
-- as a thief in the night, in which the heavens with a rushing noise
will pass away, and the elements with burning heat be dissolved, and
earth and the works in it shall be burnt up.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> All these, then, being dissolved, what
kind of persons doth it behove you to be in holy behaviours and pious
acts?

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> waiting for and hasting to the presence
of the day of God, by which the heavens, being on fire, shall be
dissolved, and the elements with burning heat shall melt;

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> and for new heavens and a new earth
according to His promise we do wait, in which righteousness doth dwell;

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> wherefore, beloved, these things waiting
for, be diligent, spotless and unblameable, by Him to be found in peace,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> and the long-suffering of our Lord count
ye salvation, according as also our beloved brother Paul -- according to
the wisdom given to him -- did write to you,

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> as also in all the epistles, speaking in
them concerning these things, among which things are certain hard to be
understood, which the untaught and unstable do wrest, as also the other
Writings, unto their own destruction.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Ye, then, beloved, knowing before, take
heed, lest, together with the error of the impious being led away, ye
may fall from your own stedfastness,

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> and increase ye in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; to him \[is\] the glory
both now, and to the day of the age! Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John](jo1.md)
