[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eph)  [Next](col.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Philippians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul and Timotheus, servants of Jesus
Christ, to all the saints in Christ Jesus who are in Philippi, with
overseers and ministrants;

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace to you, and peace from God our
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> I give thanks to my God upon all the
remembrance of you,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> always, in every supplication of mine for
you all, with joy making the supplication,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> for your contribution to the good news from
the first day till now,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> having been confident of this very thing,
that He who did begin in you a good work, will perform \[it\] till a day
of Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> according as it is righteous for me to
think this in behalf of you all, because of my having you in the heart,
both in my bonds, and \[in\] the defence and confirmation of the good
news, all of you being fellow-partakers with me of grace.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> For God is my witness, how I long for you
all in the bowels of Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> and this I pray, that your love yet more
and more may abound in full knowledge, and all judgment,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> for your proving the things that differ,
that ye may be pure and offenceless -- to a day of Christ,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> being filled with the fruit of
righteousness, that \[is\] through Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise
of God.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And I wish you to know, brethren, that
the things concerning me, rather to an advancement of the good news have
come,

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> so that my bonds have become manifest in
Christ in the whole praetorium, and to the other places -- all,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> and the greater part of the brethren in
the Lord, having confidence by my bonds, are more abundantly bold --
fearlessly to speak the word.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Certain, indeed, even through envy and
contention, and certain also through good-will, do preach the Christ;

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> the one, indeed, of rivalry the Christ do
proclaim, not purely, supposing to add affliction to my bonds,

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> and the other out of love, having known
that for defence of the good news I am set:

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> what then? in every way, whether in
pretence or in truth, Christ is proclaimed -- and in this I rejoice,
yea, and shall rejoice.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> For I have known that this shall fall out
to me for salvation, through your supplication, and the supply of the
Spirit of Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> according to my earnest expectation and
hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed, and in all freedom, as always,
also now Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether through life or
through death,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> for to me to live \[is\] Christ, and to
die gain.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And if to live in the flesh \[is\] to me
a fruit of work, then what shall I choose? I know not;

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> for I am pressed by the two, having the
desire to depart, and to be with Christ, for it is far better,

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> and to remain in the flesh is more
necessary on your account,

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> and of this being persuaded, I have known
that I shall remain and continue with you all, to your advancement and
joy of the faith,

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> that your boasting may abound in Christ
Jesus in me through my presence again to you.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> Only worthily of the good news of the
Christ conduct ye yourselves, that, whether having come and seen you,
whether being absent I may hear of the things concerning you, that ye
stand fast in one spirit, with one soul, striving together for the faith
of the good news,

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> and not terrified in anything by those
opposing, which to them indeed is a token of destruction, and to you of
salvation, and that from God;

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> because to you it was granted, on behalf
of Christ, not only to believe in him, but also on behalf of him to
suffer;

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> the same conflict having, such as ye saw
in me, and now hear of in me.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> If, then, any exhortation \[is\] in Christ,
if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of spirit, if any bowels and
mercies,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> fulfil ye my joy, that ye may mind the same
thing -- having the same love -- of one soul -- minding the one thing,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> nothing in rivalry or vain-glory, but in
humility of mind one another counting more excellent than yourselves --

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> each not to your own look ye, but each also
to the things of others.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For, let this mind be in you that \[is\]
also in Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> who, being in the form of God, thought
\[it\] not robbery to be equal to God,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> but did empty himself, the form of a
servant having taken, in the likeness of men having been made,

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> and in fashion having been found as a man,
he humbled himself, having become obedient unto death -- death even of a
cross,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> wherefore, also, God did highly exalt him,
and gave to him a name that \[is\] above every name,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> that in the name of Jesus every knee may
bow -- of heavenlies, and earthlies, and what are under the earth --

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> and every tongue may confess that Jesus
Christ \[is\] Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> So that, my beloved, as ye always obey,
not as in my presence only, but now much more in my absence, with fear
and trembling your own salvation work out,

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> for God it is who is working in you both
to will and to work for His good pleasure.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> All things do without murmurings and
reasonings,

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> that ye may become blameless and
harmless, children of God, unblemished in the midst of a generation
crooked and perverse, among whom ye do appear as luminaries in the
world,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> the word of life holding forth, for
rejoicing to me in regard to a day of Christ, that not in vain did I
run, nor in vain did I labour;

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> but if also I am poured forth upon the
sacrifice and service of your faith, I rejoice and joy with you all,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> because of this do ye also rejoice and
joy with me.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And I hope, in the Lord Jesus, Timotheus
to send quickly to you, that I also may be of good spirit, having known
the things concerning you,

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> for I have no one like-minded, who
sincerely for the things concerning you will care,

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> for the whole seek their own things, not
the things of the Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> and the proof of him ye know, that as a
child \[serveth\] a father, with me he did serve in regard to the good
news;

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> him, indeed, therefore, I hope to send,
when I may see through the things concerning me -- immediately;

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> and I trust in the Lord that I myself
also shall quickly come.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And I thought \[it\] necessary
Epaphroditus -- my brother, and fellow-workman, and fellow-soldier, and
your apostle and servant to my need -- to send unto you,

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> seeing he was longing after you all, and
in heaviness, because ye heard that he ailed,

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> for he also ailed nigh to death, but God
did deal kindly with him, and not with him only, but also with me, that
sorrow upon sorrow I might not have.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> The more eagerly, therefore, I did send
him, that having seen him again ye may rejoice, and I may be the less
sorrowful;

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> receive him, therefore, in the Lord, with
all joy, and hold such in honour,

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> because on account of the work of the
Christ he drew near to death, having hazarded the life that he might
fill up your deficiency of service unto me.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> As to the rest, my brethren, rejoice in the
Lord; the same things to write to you to me indeed is not tiresome, and
for you \[is\] sure;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> look to the dogs, look to the evil-workers,
look to the concision;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> for we are the circumcision, who by the
Spirit are serving God, and glorying in Christ Jesus, and in flesh
having no trust,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> though I also have \[cause of\] trust in
flesh. If any other one doth think to have trust in flesh, I more;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> circumcision on the eighth day! of the race
of Israel! of the tribe of Benjamin! a Hebrew of Hebrews! according to
law a Pharisee!

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> according to zeal persecuting the assembly!
according to righteousness that is in law becoming blameless!

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But what things were to me gains, these I
have counted, because of the Christ, loss;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> yes, indeed, and I count all things to be
loss, because of the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my
Lord, because of whom of the all things I suffered loss, and do count
them to be refuse, that Christ I may gain, and be found in him,

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> not having my righteousness, which \[is\]
of law, but that which \[is\] through faith of Christ -- the
righteousness that is of God by the faith,

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> to know him, and the power of his rising
again, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being conformed to his
death,

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> if anyhow I may attain to the rising
again of the dead.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Not that I did already obtain, or have
been already perfected; but I pursue, if also I may lay hold of that for
which also I was laid hold of by the Christ Jesus;

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> brethren, I do not reckon myself to have
laid hold; and one thing -- the things behind indeed forgetting, and to
the things before stretching forth --

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> to the mark I pursue for the prize of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> As many, therefore, as \[are\] perfect --
let us think this, and if \[in\] anything ye think otherwise, this also
shall God reveal to you,

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> but to what we have come -- by the same
rule walk, the same thing think;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> become followers together of me,
brethren, and observe those thus walking, according as ye have us -- a
pattern;

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> for many walk of whom many times I told
you -- and now also weeping tell -- the enemies of the cross of the
Christ!

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> whose end \[is\] destruction, whose god
\[is\] the belly, and whose glory \[is\] in their shame, who the things
on earth are minding.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> For our citizenship is in the heavens,
whence also a Saviour we await -- the Lord Jesus Christ --

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> who shall transform the body of our
humiliation to its becoming conformed to the body of his glory,
according to the working of his power, even to subject to himself the
all things.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> So then, my brethren, beloved and longed
for, my joy and crown, so stand ye in the Lord, beloved.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Euodia I exhort, and Syntyche I exhort, to
be of the same mind in the Lord;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> and I ask also thee, genuine yoke-fellow,
be assisting those women who in the good news did strive along with me,
with Clement also, and the others, my fellow-workers, whose names
\[are\] in the book of life.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Rejoice in the Lord always; again I will
say, rejoice;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> let your forbearance be known to all men;
the Lord \[is\] near;

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> for nothing be anxious, but in everything
by prayer, and by supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests be
made known unto God;

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> and the peace of God, that is surpassing
all understanding, shall guard your hearts and your thoughts in Christ
Jesus.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> As to the rest, brethren, as many things as
are true, as many as \[are\] grave, as many as \[are\] righteous, as
many as \[are\] pure, as many as \[are\] lovely, as many as \[are\] of
good report, if any worthiness, and if any praise, these things think
upon;

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> the things that also ye did learn, and
receive, and hear, and saw in me, those do, and the God of the peace
shall be with you.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And I rejoiced in the Lord greatly, that
now at length ye flourished again in caring for me, for which also ye
were caring, and lacked opportunity;

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> not that in respect of want I say \[it\],
for I did learn in the things in which I am -- to be content;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> I have known both to be abased, and I
have known to abound; in everything and in all things I have been
initiated, both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to be in
want.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> For all things I have strength, in
Christ's strengthening me;

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> but ye did well, having communicated with
my tribulation;

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> and ye have known, even ye Philippians,
that in the beginning of the good news when I went forth from Macedonia,
no assembly did communicate with me in regard to giving and receiving
except ye only;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> because also in Thessalonica, both once
and again to my need ye sent;

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> not that I seek after the gift, but I
seek after the fruit that is overflowing to your account;

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> and I have all things, and abound; I am
filled, having received from Epaphroditus the things from you -- an
odour of a sweet smell -- a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God:

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> and my God shall supply all your need,
according to His riches in glory in Christ Jesus;

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> and to God, even our Father, \[is\] the
glory -- to the ages of the ages. Amen.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Salute ye every saint in Christ Jesus;
there salute you the brethren with me;

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> there salute you all the saints, and
specially those of Caesar's house;

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ \[is\]
with you all. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians](col.md)
