[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rut)  [Next](sa2.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: 1 Samuel

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> And there is a certain man of
Ramathaim-Zophim, of the hill-country of Ephraim, and his name \[is\]
Elkanah, son of Jeroham, son of Elihu, son of Tohu, son of Zuph, and
Ephrathite,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> and he hath two wives, the name of the one
\[is\] Hannah, and the name of the second Peninnah, and Peninnah hath
children, and Hannah hath no children.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And that man hath gone up out of his city
from time to time, to bow himself, and to sacrifice, before Jehovah of
Hosts, in Shiloh, and there \[are\] two sons of Eli, Hophni and
Phinehas, priests to Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And the day cometh, and Elkanah
sacrificeth, and he hath given to Peninnah his wife, and to all her sons
and her daughters, portions,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> and to Hannah he giveth a certain portion
-- double, for he hath loved Hannah, and Jehovah hath shut her womb;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> and her adversity hath also provoked her
greatly, so as to make her tremble, for Jehovah hath shut up her womb.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And so he doth year by year, from the time
of her going up into the house of Jehovah, so it provoketh her, and she
weepeth, and doth not eat.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And Elkanah her husband saith to her,
\`Hannah, why weepest thou? and why dost thou not eat? and why is thy
heart afflicted? am I not better to thee than ten sons?'

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And Hannah riseth after eating in Shiloh,
and after drinking, and Eli the priest is sitting on the throne by the
side-post of the temple of Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And she is bitter in soul, and prayeth
unto Jehovah, and weepeth greatly,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> and voweth a vow, and saith, \`Jehovah of
Hosts, if Thou dost certainly look on the affliction of Thy handmaid,
and hast remembered me, and dost not forget Thy handmaid, and hast given
to Thy handmaid seed of men -- then I have given him to Jehovah all days
of his life, and a razor doth not go up upon his head.'

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And it hath been, when she multiplied
praying before Jehovah, that Eli is watching her mouth,

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> and Hannah, she is speaking to her heart,
only her lips are moving, and her voice is not heard, and Eli reckoneth
her to be drunken.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And Eli saith unto her, \`Until when are
thou drunken? turn aside thy wine from thee.'

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And Hannah answereth and saith, \`No, my
lord, A woman sharply pained in spirit I \[am\], and wine and strong
drink I have not drunk, and I pour out my soul before Jehovah;

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> put not thy handmaid before a daughter of
worthlessness, for from the abundance of my meditation, and of my
provocation, I have spoken hitherto.'

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And Eli answereth and saith, \`Go in
peace, and the God of Israel doth give thy petition which thou hast
asked of Him.'

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And she saith, \`Let thy handmaid find
grace in thine eyes;' and the woman goeth on her way, and eateth, and
her countenance hath not been \[sad\] for it any more.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And they rise early in the morning, and
bow themselves before Jehovah, and turn back, and come in unto their
house in Ramah, and Elkanah knoweth Hannah his wife, and Jehovah
remembereth her;

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> and it cometh to pass, at the revolution
of the days, that Hannah conceiveth, and beareth a son, and calleth his
name Samuel, \`for, from Jehovah I have asked him.'

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And the man Elkanah goeth up, and all his
house, to sacrifice to Jehovah the sacrifice of the days, and his vow.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And Hannah hath not gone up, for she said
to her husband, \`Till the youth is weaned -- then I have brought him
in, and he hath appeared before the face of Jehovah, and dwelt there --
unto the age.'

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And Elkanah her husband saith to her,
\`Do that which is good in thine eyes; abide till thy weaning him; only,
Jehovah establish His word;' and the woman abideth and suckleth her son
till she hath weaned him,

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> and she causeth him to go up with her
when she hath weaned him, with three bullocks, and one ephah of flour,
and a bottle of wine, and she bringeth him into the house of Jehovah at
Shiloh, and the youth \[is but\] a youth.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And they slaughter the bullock, and bring
in the youth unto Eli,

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> and she saith, \`O, my lord, thy soul
liveth! my lord, I \[am\] the woman who stood with thee in this
\[place\], to pray unto Jehovah;

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> for this youth I prayed, and Jehovah doth
give to me my petition which I asked of Him;

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> and also I have caused him to be asked
for Jehovah, all the days that he hath lived -- he is asked for
Jehovah;' and he boweth himself there before Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And Hannah prayeth, and saith: \`My heart
hath exulted in Jehovah, My horn hath been high in Jehovah, My mouth
hath been large over mine enemies, For I have rejoiced in Thy salvation.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> There is none holy like Jehovah, For there
is none save Thee, And there is no rock like our God.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Ye multiply not -- ye speak haughtily --
The old saying goeth out from your mouth, For a God of knowledge \[is\]
Jehovah, And by Him actions are weighed.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Bows of the mighty are broken, And the
stumbling have girded on strength.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> The satiated for bread hired themselves,
And the hungry have ceased. While the barren hath borne seven, And she
abounding with sons hath languished.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Jehovah putteth to death, and keepeth
alive, He bringeth down to Sheol, and bringeth up.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Jehovah dispossesseth, and He maketh rich,
He maketh low, yea, He maketh high.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> He raiseth from the dust the poor, From a
dunghill He lifteth up the needy, To cause \[them\] to sit with nobles,
Yea, a throne of honour He doth cause them to inherit, For to Jehovah
\[are\] the fixtures of earth, And He setteth on them the habitable
world.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> The feet of His saints He keepeth, And the
wicked in darkness are silent, For not by power doth man become mighty.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Jehovah -- broken down are His
adversaries, Against them in the heavens He thundereth: Jehovah judgeth
the ends of earth, And giveth strength to His king, And exalteth the
horn of His anointed.'

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And Elkanah goeth to Ramath, unto his
house, and the youth hath been serving Jehovah, \[in\] the presence of
Eli the priest;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> and the sons of Eli \[are\] sons of
worthlessness, they have not known Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And the custom of the priests with the
people \[is\]: any man sacrificing a sacrifice -- then hath the servant
of the priest come in when the flesh is boiling, and the hook of three
teeth in his hand,

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> and hath struck \[it\] into the pan, or
kettle, or caldron, or pot; all that the hook bringeth up doth the
priest take for himself; thus they do to all Israel who are coming in,
there, in Shiloh.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Also before they make perfume with the
fat -- then hath the priest's servant come in, and said to the man who
is sacrificing, \`Give flesh to roast for the priest, and he doth not
take of thee flesh boiled, but raw;'

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> and the man saith unto him, \`Let them
surely make a perfume (as to-day) with the fat, then take to thee as thy
soul desireth;' and he hath said to him, \`Surely now thou dost give;
and if not -- I have taken by strength.'

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And the sin of the young men is very
great \[in\] the presence of Jehovah, for the men have despised the
offering of Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And Samuel is ministering \[in\] the
presence of Jehovah, a youth girt \[with\] an ephod of linen;

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> and a small upper coat doth his mother
make to him, and she hath brought it up to him from time to time, in her
coming up with her husband to sacrifice the sacrifice of the time.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And Eli blessed Elkanah, and his wife,
and said, \`Jehovah doth appoint for thee seed of this woman, for the
petition which she asked for Jehovah;' and they have gone to their
place.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> When Jehovah hath looked after Hannah,
then she conceiveth and beareth three sons and two daughters; and the
youth Samuel groweth up with Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And Eli \[is\] very old, and hath heard
all that his sons do to all Israel, and how that they lie with the women
who are assembling \[at\] the opening of the tent of meeting,

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> and he saith to them, \`Why do ye things
like these? for I am hearing of your evil words from all the people --
these!

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> Nay, my sons; for the report which I am
hearing is not good causing the people of Jehovah to transgress. --

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> If a man sin against a man, then hath God
judged him; but if against Jehovah a man sin, who doth pray for him?'
and they hearken not to the voice of their father, though Jehovah hath
delighted to put them to death.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> And the youth Samuel is going on and
growing up, and \[is\] good both with Jehovah, and also with men.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> And there cometh a man of God unto Eli,
and saith unto him, \`Thus said Jehovah, Was I really revealed unto the
house of thy father in their being in Egypt, before Pharaoh's house,

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> even to choose him out of all the tribes
of Israel to Me for a priest, to go up on Mine altar, to make a perfume,
to bear an ephod before Me, and I give to the house of thy father all
the fire-offerings of the sons of Israel?

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Why do ye kick at My sacrifice, and at
Mine offering which I commanded \[in\] My habitation, and dost honour
thy sons above Me, to make yourselves fat from the first part of every
offering of Israel, of My people?

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> \`Therefore -- the affirmation of
Jehovah, God of Israel -- I certainly said, Thy house and the house of
thy father, do walk up and down before Me to the age; and now -- the
affirmation of Jehovah -- Far be it from Me! for he who is honouring Me,
I honour, and those despising Me, are lightly esteemed.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> \`Lo, days \[are\] coming, and I have cut
off thine arm, and the arm of the house of thy father, that an old man
is not in thy house;

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> and thou hast beheld an adversary \[in
My\] habitation, in all that He doth good with Israel, and there is not
an old man in thy house all the days.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> \`And the man I cut not off of thine from
Mine altar, \[is\] to consume thine eyes, and to grieve thy soul; and
all the increase of thy house do die men;

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> and this \[is\] to thee the sign that
cometh unto thy two sons, unto Hophni and Phinehas -- in one day they
die both of them;

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> and I have raised up for Me a stedfast
priest; as in My heart and in My soul he doth do; and I have built for
him a stedfast house, and he hath walked up and down before Mine
anointed all the days;

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> and it hath been, every one who is left
in thy house doth come in to bow himself to him, for a wage of silver,
and a cake of bread, and hath said, Admit me, I pray thee, unto one of
the priest's offices, to eat a morsel of bread.'

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And the youth Samuel is serving Jehovah
before Eli, and the word of Jehovah hath been precious in those days --
there is no vision broken forth.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And it cometh to pass, at that time, that
Eli is lying down in his place, and his eyes have begun to be dim -- he
is not able to see.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And the lamp of God is not yet
extinguished, and Samuel is lying down in the temple of Jehovah, where
the ark of God \[is\],

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> and Jehovah calleth unto Samuel, and he
saith, \`Here \[am\] I.'

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And he runneth unto Eli, and saith, \`Here
\[am\] I, for thou hast called for me;' and he saith, \`I called not;
turn back, lie down;' and he goeth and lieth down.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And Jehovah addeth to call again Samuel,
and Samuel riseth and goeth unto Eli, and saith, \`Here \[am\] I, for
thou hast called for me;' and he saith, \`I have not called, my son,
turn back, lie down.'

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And Samuel hath not yet known Jehovah, and
the word of Jehovah is not yet revealed unto him.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And Jehovah addeth to call Samuel the third
time, and he riseth and goeth unto Eli, and saith, \`Here \[am\] I, for
thou hast called for me;' and Eli understandeth that Jehovah is calling
to the youth.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And Eli saith to Samuel, \`Go, lie down,
and it hath been, if He doth call unto thee, that thou hast said, Speak,
Jehovah, for Thy servant is hearing;' and Samuel goeth and lieth down in
his place.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And Jehovah cometh, and stationeth
Himself, and calleth as time by time, \`Samuel, Samuel;' and Samuel
saith, \`Speak, for Thy servant if hearing.'

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And Jehovah saith unto Samuel, \`Lo, I am
doing a thing in Israel, at which the two ears of every one hearing it
do tingle.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> In that day I establish unto Eli all that
I have spoken unto his house, beginning and completing;

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> and I have declared to him that I am
judging his house -- to the age, for the iniquity which he hath known,
for his sons are making themselves vile, and he hath not restrained
them,

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> and therefore I have sworn to the house
of Eli: the iniquity of the house of Eli is not atoned for, by
sacrifice, and by offering -- unto the age.'

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And Samuel lieth till the morning, and
openeth the doors of the house of Jehovah, and Samuel is afraid of
declaring the vision unto Eli.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And Eli calleth Samuel, and saith,
\`Samuel, my son;' and he saith, \`Here \[am\] I.'

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And he saith, \`What \[is\] the word
which He hath spoken unto thee? I pray thee, hide it not from me; so
doth God do to thee, and so doth He add, if thou hidest from me a word
of all the words that He hath spoken unto thee.'

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And Samuel declareth to him the whole of
the words, and hath not hid from him; and he saith, \`It \[is\] Jehovah;
that which is good in His eyes He doth.'

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And Samuel groweth up, and Jehovah hath
been with him, and hath not let fall any of his words to the earth;

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> and all Israel know, from Dan even unto
Beer-Sheba, that Samuel is established for a prophet to Jehovah.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And Jehovah addeth to appear in Shiloh,
for Jehovah hath been revealed unto Samuel, in Shiloh, by the word of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And the word of Samuel is to all Israel,
and Israel goeth out to meet the Philistines for battle, and they encamp
by Eben-Ezer, and the Philistines have encamped in Aphek,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> and the Philistines set themselves in array
to meet Israel, and the battle spreadeth itself, and Israel is smitten
before the Philistines, and they smite among the ranks in the field
about four thousand men.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And the people cometh in unto the camp, and
the elders of Israel say, \`Why hath Jehovah smitten us to-day before
the Philistines? we take unto us from Shiloh the ark of the covenant of
Jehovah, and it cometh into our midst, and He doth save us out of the
hand of our enemies.'

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And the people sendeth to Shiloh, and they
take up thence the ark of the covenant of Jehovah of Hosts, inhabiting
the cherubs, and there \[are\] two sons of Eli, with the ark of the
covenant of God, Hophni and Phinehas.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And it cometh to pass, at the coming in of
the ark of the covenant of Jehovah unto the camp, that all Israel shout
-- a great shout -- and the earth is moved.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And the Philistines hear the noise of the
shouting, and say, \`What \[is\] the noise of this great shout in the
camp of the Hebrews?' and they perceive that the ark of Jehovah hath
come in unto the camp.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And the Philistines are afraid, for they
said, \`God hath come in unto the camp;' and they say, \`Wo to us, for
there hath not been like this heretofore.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Wo to us, who doth deliver us out of the
hand of these honourable gods? these \[are\] the gods who are smiting
the Egyptians with every plague in the wilderness.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Strengthen yourselves, and become men, O
Philistines, lest ye do service to Hebrews, as they have done to you --
then ye have become men, and have fought.'

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And the Philistines fight, and Israel is
smitten, and they flee each to his tents, and the blow is very great,
and there fall of Israel thirty thousand footmen;

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> and the ark of God hath been taken, and
the two sons of Eli have died, Hophni and Phinehas.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And a man of Benjamin runneth out of the
ranks, and cometh into Shiloh, on that day, and his long robes \[are\]
rent, and earth on his head;

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> and he cometh in, and lo, Eli is sitting
on the throne by the side of the way, watching, for his heart hath been
trembling for the ark of God, and the man hath come in to declare \[it\]
in the city, and all the city crieth out.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And Eli heareth the noise of the cry, and
saith, \`What -- the noise of this tumult!' And the man hasted, and
cometh in, and declareth to Eli.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And Eli is a son of ninety and eight
years, and his eyes have stood, and he hath not been able to see.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And the man saith unto Eli, \`I \[am\] he
who hath come out of the ranks, and I out of the ranks have fled
to-day;' and he saith, \`What hath been the matter, my son?'

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And he who is bearing tidings answereth
and saith, \`Israel hath fled before the Philistines, and also a great
slaughter hath been among the people, and also thy two sons have died --
Hophni and Phinehas -- and the ark of God hath been captured.'

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And it cometh to pass, at his mentioning
the ark of God, that he falleth from off the throne backward, by the
side of the gate, and his neck is broken, and he dieth, for the man
\[is\] old and heavy, and he hath judged Israel forty years.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And his daughter-in-law, wife of
Phinehas, \[is\] pregnant, about to bear, and she heareth the report of
the taking of the ark of God, that her father-in-law and her husband
have died, and she boweth, and beareth, for her pains have turned upon
her.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And at the time of her death, when the
women who are standing by her say, \`Fear not, for a son thou hast
borne,' she hath not answered, nor set her heart \[to it\];

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> and she calleth the youth I-Chabod,
saying, \`Honour hath removed from Israel,' because of the taking of the
ark of God, and because of her father-in-law and her husband.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> And she saith, \`Honour hath removed from
Israel, for the ark of God hath been taken.'

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And the Philistines have taken the ark of
God, and bring it in from Eben-Ezer to Ashdod,

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> and the Philistines take the ark of God and
bring it into the house of Dagon, and set it near Dagon.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And the Ashdodites rise early on the
morrow, and lo, Dagon is fallen on its face to the earth, before the ark
of Jehovah; and they take Dagon, and put it back to its place.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And they rise early in the morning on the
morrow, and lo, Dagon is fallen on its face to the earth, before the ark
of Jehovah, and the head of Dagon, and the two palms of its hands are
cut off at the threshold, only the fishy part hath been left to him;

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> therefore the priests of Dagon, and all
those coming into the house of Dagon, tread not on the threshold of
Dagon, in Ashdod, till this day.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And the hand of Jehovah is heavy on the
Ashdodites, and He maketh them desolate, and smiteth them with emerods,
Ashdod and its borders.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And the men of Ashdod see that \[it is\]
so, and have said, \`The ark of the God of Israel doth not abide with
us, for hard hath been His hand upon us, and upon Dagon our god.'

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And they send and gather all the princes of
the Philistines unto them, and say, \`What do we do to the ark of the
God of Israel?' and they say, \`To Gath let the ark of the God of Israel
be brought round;' and they bring round the ark of the God of Israel;

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> and it cometh to pass after they have
brought it round, that the hand of Jehovah is against the city -- a very
great destruction; and He smiteth the men of the city, from small even
unto great; and break forth on them do emerods.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And they send the ark of God to Ekron,
and it cometh to pass, at the coming in of the ark of God to Ekron, that
the Ekronites cry out, saying, \`They have brought round unto us the ark
of the God of Israel, to put us to death -- and our people.'

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And they send and gather all the princes
of the Philistines, and say, \`Send away the ark of the God of Israel,
and it turneth back to its place, and it doth not put us to death -- and
our people;' for there hath been a deadly destruction throughout all the
city, very heavy hath the hand of God been there,

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> and the men who have not died have been
smitten with emerods, and the cry of the city goeth up into the heavens.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And the ark of Jehovah is in the field of
the Philistines seven months,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> and the Philistines call for priests and
for diviners, saying, \`What do we do to the ark of Jehovah? let us know
wherewith we send it to its place?'

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And they say, \`If ye are sending away the
ark of the God of Israel, ye do not send it away empty; for ye do
certainly send back to Him a guilt-offering; then ye are healed, and it
hath been known to you why His hand doth not turn aside from you.'

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And they say, \`What \[is\] the
guilt-offering which we send back to Him?' and they say, \`The number of
the princes of the Philistines -- five golden emerods, and five golden
mice -- for one plague \[is\] to you all, and to your princes,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> and ye have made images of your emerods,
and images of your mice that are corrupting the land, and have given
honour to the God of Israel; it may be He doth lighten His hand from off
you, and from off your gods, and from off your land;

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> and why do ye harden your heart as the
Egyptians and Pharaoh hardened their heart? do they not -- when He hath
rolled Himself upon them -- send them away, and they go?

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> \`And now, take and make one new cart, and
two suckling kine, on which a yoke hath not gone up, and ye have bound
the kine in the cart, and caused their young ones to turn back from
after them to the house,

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> and ye have taken the ark of Jehovah, and
put it on the cart, and the vessels of gold which ye have returned to
Him -- a guilt-offering -- ye put in a coffer on its side, and have sent
it away, and it hath gone;

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> and ye have seen, if the way of its own
border it goeth up to Beth-Shemesh -- He hath done to us this great
evil; and if not, then we have known that His hand hath not come against
us; an accident it hath been to us.'

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And the men do so, and take two suckling
kine, and bind them in the cart, and their young ones they have shut up
in the house;

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> and they place the ark of Jehovah upon
the cart, and the coffer, and the golden mice, and the images of their
emerods.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And the kine go straight in the way, on
the way to Beth-Shemesh, in one highway they have gone, going and
lowing, and have not turned aside right or left; and the princes of the
Philistines are going after them unto the border of Beth-Shemesh.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And the Beth-Shemeshites are reaping
their wheat-harvest in the valley, and they lift up their eyes, and see
the ark, and rejoice to see \[it\].

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And the cart hath come in unto the field
of Joshua the Beth-Shemeshite, and standeth there, and there \[is\] a
great stone, and they cleave the wood of the cart, and the kine they
have caused to ascend -- a burnt-offering to Jehovah.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And the Levites have taken down the ark
of Jehovah, and the coffer which \[is\] with it, in which \[are\] the
vessels of gold, and place \[them\] on the great stone; and the men of
Beth-Shemesh have caused to ascend burnt-offerings and sacrifice
sacrifices in that day to Jehovah;

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> and the five princes of the Philistines
have seen \[it\], and turn back \[to\] Ekron, on that day.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And these \[are\] the golden emerods
which the Philistines have sent back -- a guilt-offering to Jehovah: for
Ashdod one, for Gaza one, for Ashkelon one, for Gath one, for Ekron one;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> and the golden mice -- the number of all
the cities of the Philistines -- for the five princes, from the fenced
city even unto the hamlet of the villages, even unto the great meadow on
which they placed the ark of Jehovah -- \[are\] unto this day in the
field of Joshua the Beth-Shemeshite.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And He smiteth among the men of
Beth-Shemesh, for they looked into the ark of Jehovah, yea, He smiteth
among the people seventy men -- fifty chief men; and the people mourn,
because Jehovah smote among the people -- a great smiting.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> And the men of Beth-Shemesh say, \`Who is
able to stand before Jehovah, this holy God? and unto whom doth He go up
from us?'

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And they send messengers unto the
inhabitants of Kirjath-Jearim, saying, \`The Philistines have sent back
the ark of Jehovah; come down, take it up unto you.'

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And the men of Kirjath-Jearim come and
bring up the ark of Jehovah, and bring it in unto the house of Abinadab,
in the height, and Eleazar his son they have sanctified to keep the ark
of Jehovah.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And it cometh to pass, from the day of the
dwelling of the ark in Kirjath-Jearim, that the days are multiplied --
yea, they are twenty years -- and wail do all the house of Israel after
Jehovah.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And Samuel speaketh unto all the house of
Israel, saying, \`If with all your heart ye are turning back unto
Jehovah -- turn aside the gods of the stranger from your midst, and
Ashtaroth; and prepare your heart unto Jehovah, and serve Him only, and
He doth deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines.'

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> And the sons of Israel turn aside the
Baalim and Ashtaroth, and serve Jehovah alone;

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> and Samuel saith, \`Gather all Israel to
Mizpeh, and I pray for you unto Jehovah.'

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And they are gathered to Mizpeh, and draw
water, and pour out before Jehovah, and fast on that day, and say there,
\`We have sinned against Jehovah;' and Samuel judgeth the sons of Israel
in Mizpeh.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And the Philistines hear that the sons of
Israel have gathered themselves to Mizpeh; and the princes of the
Philistines go up against Israel, and the sons of Israel hear, and are
afraid of the presence of the Philistines.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And the sons of Israel say unto Samuel,
\`Keep not silent for us from crying unto Jehovah our God, and He doth
save us out of the hand of the Philistines.'

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And Samuel taketh a fat lamb, and causeth
it to go up -- a burnt-offering whole to Jehovah; and Samuel crieth unto
Jehovah for Israel, and Jehovah answereth him;

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> and Samuel is causing the burnt-offering
to go up -- and the Philistines have drawn nigh to battle against Israel
-- and Jehovah doth thunder with a great noise, on that day, upon the
Philistines, and troubleth them, and they are smitten before Israel.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And the men of Israel go out from Mizpeh,
and pursue the Philistines, and smite them unto the place of Beth-Car.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And Samuel taketh a stone, and setteth
\[it\] between Mizpeh and Shen, and calleth its name Eben-Ezer, saying,
\`Hitherto hath Jehovah helped us.'

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And the Philistines are humbled, and have
not added any more to come into the border of Israel, and the hand of
Jehovah is on the Philistines all the days of Samuel.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And the cities which the Philistines have
taken from Israel are restored to Israel -- from Ekron even unto Gath --
and their border hath Israel delivered out of the hand of the
Philistines; and there is peace between Israel and the Amorite.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And Samuel judgeth Israel all the days of
his life,

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> and he hath gone from year to year, and
gone round Beth-El, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and judged Israel \[in\] all
these places;

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> and his returning \[is\] to Ramath, for
there \[is\] his house, and there he hath judged Israel, and he buildeth
there an altar to Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And it cometh to pass, when Samuel \[is\]
aged, that he maketh his sons judges over Israel.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And the name of his first-born son is Joel,
and the name of his second Abiah, judges in Beer-Sheba:

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> and his sons have not walked in his ways,
and turn aside after the dishonest gain, and take a bribe, and turn
aside judgment.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And all the elders of Israel gather
themselves together, and come in unto Samuel to Ramath,

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> and say unto him, \`Lo, thou hast become
aged, and thy sons have not walked in thy ways; now, appoint to us a
king, to judge us, like all the nations.'

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And the thing is evil in the eyes of
Samuel, when they have said, \`Give to us a king to judge us;' and
Samuel prayeth unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And Jehovah saith unto Samuel, \`Hearken to
the voice of the people, to all that they say unto thee, for thee they
have not rejected, but Me they have rejected, from reigning over them.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> According to all the works that they have
done from the day of My bringing them up out of Egypt, even unto this
day, when they forsake Me, and serve other gods -- so they are doing
also to thee.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And now, hearken to their voice; only,
surely thou dost certainly protest to them, and hast declared to them
the custom of the king who doth reign over them.'

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And Samuel speaketh all the words of
Jehovah unto the people who are asking from him a king,

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> and saith, \`This is the custom of the
king who doth reign over you: Your sons he doth take, and hath appointed
for himself among his chariots, and among his horsemen, and they have
run before his chariots;

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> also to appoint for himself heads of
thousands, and heads of fifties; also to plow his plowing, and to reap
his reaping; and to make instruments of his war, and instruments of his
charioteer.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> \`And your daughters he doth take for
perfumers, and for cooks, and for bakers;

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> and your fields, and your vineyards, and
your olive-yards -- the best -- he doth take, and hath given to his
servants.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And your seed and your vineyards he doth
tithe, and hath given to his eunuchs, and to his servants.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And your men-servants, and your
maid-servants, and your young men -- the best, and your asses, he doth
take, and hath prepared for his own work;

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> your flock he doth tithe, and ye are to
him for servants.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And ye have cried out in that day because
of the king whom ye have chosen for yourselves, and Jehovah doth not
answer you in that day.'

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And the people refuse to hearken to the
voice of Samuel, and say, \`Nay, but a king is over us,

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> and we have been, even we, like all the
nations; and our king hath judged us, and gone out before us, and fought
our battles.'

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And Samuel heareth all the words of the
people, and speaketh them in the ears of Jehovah;

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> and Jehovah saith unto Samuel, \`Hearken
to their voice, and thou hast caused to reign over them a king.' And
Samuel saith unto the men of Israel, \`Go ye each to his city.'

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And there is a man of Benjamin, and his
name \[is\] Kish, son of Abiel, son of Zeror, son of Bechorath, son of
Aphiah, a Benjamite, mighty of valour,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> and he hath a son, and his name \[is\]
Saul, a choice youth and goodly, and there is not a man among the sons
of Israel goodlier than he -- from his shoulder and upward, higher than
any of the people.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And the asses of Kish, father of Saul, are
lost, and Kish saith unto Saul his son, \`Take, I pray thee, with thee,
one of the young men, and rise, go, seek the asses.'

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And he passeth over through the
hill-country of Ephraim, and passeth over through the land of Shalisha,
and they have not found; and they pass over through the land of Shaalim,
and they are not; and he passeth over through the land of Benjamin, and
they have not found.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> They have come in unto the land of Zuph,
and Saul hath said to his young man who \[is\] with him, \`Come, and we
turn back, lest my father leave off from the asses, and hath been
sorrowful for us.'

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And he saith to him, \`Lo, I pray thee, a
man of God \[is\] in this city, and the man is honoured; all that he
speaketh doth certainly come; now, we go there, it may be he doth
declare to us our way on which we have gone.'

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And Saul saith to his young man, \`And lo,
we go, and what do we bring in to the man? for the bread hath gone from
our vessels, and a present there is not to bring in to the man of God --
what \[is\] with us?'

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And the young man addeth to answer Saul,
and saith, \`Lo, there is found with me a fourth of a shekel of silver:
and I have given to the man of God, and he hath declared to us our way.'

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Formerly in Israel, thus said the man in
his going to seek God, \`Come and we go unto the seer,' for the
\`prophet' of to-day is called formerly \`the seer.'

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And Saul saith to his young man, \`Thy
word \[is\] good; come, we go;' and they go unto the city where the man
of God \[is\].

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> They are going up in the ascent of the
city, and have found young women going out to draw water, and say to
them, \`Is the seer in this \[place\]?'

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And they answer them and say, \`He is;
lo, before thee! haste, now, for to-day he hath come in to the city, for
the people hath a stated sacrifice in a high place.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> At your going in to the city so ye do
find him, before he doth go up in to the high place to eat; for the
people do not eat till his coming, for he doth bless the sacrifice;
afterwards they eat, who are called, and now, go up, for at this time ye
find him.'

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And they go up in to the city; they are
coming in to the midst of the city, and lo, Samuel is coming out to meet
them, to go up to the high place;

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> and Jehovah had uncovered the ear of
Samuel one day before the coming of Saul, saying,

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> \`At this time tomorrow, I send unto thee
a man out of the land of Benjamin -- and thou hast anointed him for
leader over My people Israel, and he hath saved My people out of the
hand of the Philistines; for I have seen My people, for its cry hath
come in unto Me.'

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> When Samuel hath seen Saul, then hath
Jehovah answered him, \`Lo, the man of whom I have spoken unto thee;
this \[one\] doth restrain My people.'

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And Saul draweth nigh to Samuel in the
midst of the gate, and saith, \`Declare, I pray thee, to me, where
\[is\] this -- the seer's house?'

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And Samuel answereth Saul and saith, \`I
\[am\] the seer; go up before me into the high place, and ye have eaten
with me to-day, and I have sent thee away in the morning, and all that
\[is\] in thy heart I declare to thee.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> As to the asses which are lost to thee
this day three days, set not thy heart to them, for they have been
found; and to whom \[is\] all the desire of Israel?' is it not to thee
and to all thy father's house?'

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And Saul answereth and saith, \`Am not I
a Benjamite -- of the smallest of the tribes of Israel? and my family
the least of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin? and why hast
thou spoken unto me according to this word?'

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And Samuel taketh Saul, and his young
man, and bringeth them in to the chamber, and giveth to them a place at
the head of those called; and they \[are\] about thirty men.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And Samuel saith to the cook, \`Give the
portion which I gave to thee, of which I said unto thee, \`Set it by
thee?'

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> (and the cook lifteth up the leg, and
that which \[is\] on it, and setteth before Saul), and he saith, \`Lo,
that which is left; set \[it\] before thee -- eat, for to this appointed
season it is kept for thee, saying, The people I have called;' and Saul
eateth with Samuel on that day.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And they come down from the high place to
the city, and he speaketh with Saul on the roof.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And they rise early, and it cometh to
pass, at the ascending of the dawn, that Samuel calleth unto Saul, on
the roof, saying, \`Rise, and I send thee away;' and Saul riseth, and
they go out, both of them -- he and Samuel, without.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> They are going down in the extremity of
the city, and Samuel hath said unto Saul, \`Say to the young man that he
pass on before us (and he passeth on), and thou, stand at this time, and
I cause thee to hear the word of God.'

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And Samuel taketh the vial of the oil,
and poureth on his head, and kisseth him, and saith, \`Is it not because
Jehovah hath appointed thee over His inheritance for leader?

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> In thy going to-day from me -- then thou
hast found two men by the grave of Rachel, in the border of Benjamin, at
Zelzah, and they have said unto thee, The asses have been found which
thou hast gone to seek; and lo, thy father hath left the matter of the
asses, and hath sorrowed for you, saying, What do I do for my son?

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> \`And thou hast passed on thence, and
beyond, and hast come in unto the oak of Tabor, and found thee there
have three men going up unto God to Beth-El, one bearing three kids, and
one bearing three cakes of bread, and one bearing a bottle of wine,

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> and they have asked of thee of welfare,
and given to thee two loaves, and thou hast received from their hand.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> \`Afterwards thou dost come unto the hill
of God, where the garrison of the Philistines \[is\], and it cometh to
pass, at thy coming in thither to the city, that thou hast met a band of
prophets coming down from the high place, and before them psaltery, and
tabret, and pipe, and harp, and they are prophesying;

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> and prospered over thee hath the Spirit
of Jehovah, and thou hast prophesied with them, and hast been turned to
another man;

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> and it hath been, when these signs come
to thee -- do for thyself as thy hand findeth, for God \[is\] with thee.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> \`And thou hast gone down before me to
Gilgal, and lo, I am going down unto thee, to cause to ascend
burnt-offerings, to sacrifice sacrifices of peace-offerings; seven days
thou dost wait till my coming in unto thee, and I have made known to
thee that which thou dost do.'

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And it hath been, at his turning his
shoulder to go from Samuel, that God turneth to him another heart, and
all these signs come on that day,

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> and they come in thither to the height,
and lo, a band of prophets -- to meet him, and prosper over him doth the
Spirit of God, and he prophesieth in their midst.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And it cometh to pass, all his
acquaintance heretofore, see, and lo, with prophets he hath prophesied,
and the people say one unto another, \`What \[is\] this hath happened to
the son of Kish? is Saul also among the prophets?'

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And a man thence answereth and saith,
\`And who \[is\] their father?' therefore it hath been for a simile,
\`Is Saul also among the prophets?'

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And he ceaseth from prophesying, and
cometh in to the high place,

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> and the uncle of Saul saith unto him,
and unto his young man, \`Whither went ye?' and he saith, \`To seek the
asses; and we see that they are not, and we come in unto Samuel.'

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And the uncle of Saul saith, \`Declare,
I pray thee, to me, what Samuel said to you?'

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And Saul saith unto his uncle, \`He
certainly declared to us that the asses were found;' and of the matter
of the kingdom he hath not declared to him that which Samuel said.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And Samuel calleth the people unto
Jehovah to Mizpeh,

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> and saith unto the sons of Israel,
\`Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, I have brought up Israel out of
Egypt, and I deliver you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of
the hand of all the kingdoms who are oppressing you;

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> and ye to-day have rejected your God,
who \[is\] Himself your saviour out of all your evils and your
distresses, and ye say, \`Nay, but -- a king thou dost set over us; and
now, station yourselves before Jehovah, by your tribes, and by your
thousands.'

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> And Samuel bringeth near the whole
tribes of Israel, and the tribe of Benjamin is captured,

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> and he bringeth near the tribe of
Benjamin by its families, and the family of Matri is captured, and Saul
son of Kish is captured, and they seek him, and he hath not been found.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And they ask again at Jehovah, \`Hath
the man yet come hither?' and Jehovah saith, \`Lo, he hath been hidden
near the vessels.'

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> And they run and bring him thence, and
he stationed himself in the midst of the people, and he is higher than
any of the people from his shoulder and upward.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And Samuel saith unto all the people,
\`Have ye seen him on whom Jehovah hath fixed, for there is none like
him among all the people?' And all the people shout, and say, \`Let the
king live!'

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> And Samuel speaketh unto the people the
right of the kingdom, and writeth in a book, and placeth before Jehovah;
and Samuel sendeth all the people away, each to his house.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> And also Saul hath gone to his house,
to Gibeah, and the force go with him whose heart God hath touched;

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> and the sons of worthlessness have
said, \`What! this one doth save us!' and they despise him, and have not
brought to him a present; and he is as one deaf.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And Nahash the Ammonite cometh up, and
encampeth against Jabesh-Gilead, and all the men of Jabesh say unto
Nahash, \`Make with us a covenant, and we serve thee.'

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And Nahash the Ammonite saith unto them,
\`For this I covenant with you, by picking out to you every right eye --
and I have put it a reproach on all Israel.'

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And the elders of Jabesh say to him,
\`Let us alone seven days, and we send messengers into all the border of
Israel: and if there is none saving us -- then we have come out unto
thee.'

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And the messengers come to Gibeah of
Saul, and speak the words in the ears of the people, and all the people
lift up their voice and weep;

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> and lo, Saul hath come after the herd out
of the field, and Saul saith, \`What -- to the people, that they weep?'
and they recount to him the words of the men of Jabesh.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And the Spirit of God doth prosper over
Saul, in his hearing these words, and his anger burneth greatly,

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> and he taketh a couple of oxen, and
cutteth them in pieces, and sendeth through all the border of Israel, by
the hand of the messengers, saying, \`He who is not coming out after
Saul and after Samuel -- thus it is done to his oxen;' and the fear of
Jehovah falleth on the people, and they come out as one man.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And he inspecteth them in Bezek, and the
sons of Israel are three hundred thousand, and the men of Judah thirty
thousand.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And they say to the messengers who are
coming, \`Thus do ye say to the men of Jabesh-Gilead: To-morrow ye have
safety -- by the heat of the sun;' and the messengers come and declare
to the men of Jabesh, and they rejoice;

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> and the men of Jabesh say \[to the
Ammonites\], \`To-morrow we come out unto you, and ye have done to us
according to all that \[is\] good in your eyes.'

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And it cometh to pass, on the morrow,
that Saul putteth the people in three detachments, and they come into
the midst of the camp in the morning-watch, and smite Ammon till the
heat of the day; and it cometh to pass that those left are scattered,
and there have not been left of them two together.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And the people say unto Samuel, \`Who
is he that saith, Saul doth reign over us! give ye up the men, and we
put them to death.'

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And Saul saith, \`There is no man put
to death on this day, for to-day hath Jehovah wrought salvation in
Israel.'

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And Samuel saith unto the people,
\`Come and we go to Gilgal, and renew the kingdom there;'

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> and all the people go to Gilgal, and
cause Saul to reign there before Jehovah in Gilgal, and sacrifice there
sacrifices of peace-offerings before Jehovah, and there Saul rejoiceth
-- and all the men of Israel -- very greatly.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And Samuel saith unto all Israel, \`Lo, I
have hearkened to your voice, to all that ye said to me, and I cause to
reign over you a king,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> and now, lo, the king is walking
habitually before you, and I have become aged and gray-headed, and my
sons, lo, they \[are\] with you, and I have walked habitually before you
from my youth till this day.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> \`Lo, here \[am\] I; testify against me,
over-against Jehovah, and over-against His anointed; whose ox have I
taken, and whose ass have I taken, and whom have I oppressed; whom have
I bruised, and of whose hand have I taken a ransom, and hide mine eyes
with it? -- and I restore to you.'

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And they say, \`Thou hast not oppressed
us, nor hast thou crushed us, nor hast thou taken from the hand of any
one anything.'

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And he saith unto them, \`A witness
\[is\] Jehovah against you: and a witness \[is\] His anointed this day,
that ye have not found anything in my hand;' and they say, \`A witness.'

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And Samuel saith unto the people,
\`Jehovah -- He who made Moses and Aaron, and who brought up your
fathers out of the land of Egypt!

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> and, now, station yourselves, and I judge
you before Jehovah, with all the righteous acts of Jehovah, which He did
with you, and with your fathers.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> \`When Jacob hath come in to Egypt, and
your fathers cry unto Jehovah, then Jehovah sendeth Moses and Aaron, and
they bring out your fathers from Egypt, and cause them to dwell in this
place,

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> and they forget Jehovah their God, and He
selleth them into the hand of Sisera, head of the host of Hazor, and
into the hand of the Philistines, and into the hand of the king of Moab,
and they fight against them,

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> and they cry unto Jehovah, and say, We
have sinned, because we have forsaken Jehovah, and serve the Baalim, and
Ashtaroth, and now, deliver us out of the hand of our enemies, and we
serve Thee.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> \`And Jehovah sendeth Jerubbaal, and
Bedan, and Jephthah, and Samuel, and delivereth you out of the hand of
your enemies round about, and ye dwell confidently.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> \`And ye see that Nahash king of the
Bene-Ammon hath come against you, and ye say to me, Nay, but a king doth
reign over us; and Jehovah your God \[is\] your king!

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And, now, lo, the king whom ye have
chosen -- whom ye have asked! and lo, Jehovah hath placed over you a
king.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> \`If ye fear Jehovah, and have served
Him, and hearkened to His voice, then ye do not provoke the mouth of
Jehovah, and ye have been -- both ye and the king who hath reigned over
you -- after Jehovah your God.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> \`And if ye do not hearken to the voice
of Jehovah -- then ye have provoked the mouth of Jehovah, and the hand
of Jehovah hath been against you, and against your fathers.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> \`Also now, station yourselves and see
this great thing which Jehovah is doing before your eyes;

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> is it not wheat-harvest to-day? I call
unto Jehovah, and He doth give voices and rain; and know ye and see that
your evil is great which ye have done in the eyes of Jehovah, to ask for
you a king.'

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> And Samuel calleth unto Jehovah, and
Jehovah giveth voices and rain, on that day, and all the people greatly
fear Jehovah and Samuel;

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> and all the people say unto Samuel,
\`Pray for thy servants unto Jehovah thy God, and we do not die, for we
have added to all our sins evil to ask for us a king.'

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> And Samuel saith unto the people,
\`Fear not; ye have done all this evil; only, turn not aside from after
Jehovah -- and ye have served Jehovah with all your heart,

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> and ye do not turn aside after the vain
things which do not profit nor deliver, for they \[are\] vain,

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> for Jehovah doth not leave His people,
on account of His great name; for Jehovah hath been pleased to make you
to Him for a people.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> \`I, also, far be it from me to sin
against Jehovah, by ceasing to pray for you, and I have directed you in
the good and upright way;

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> only, fear ye Jehovah, and ye have
served Him in truth with all your heart, for see that which He hath made
great with you;

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> and if ye really do evil, both ye and
your king are consumed.'

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> A son of a year \[is\] Saul in his
reigning, yea, two years he hath reigned over Israel,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> and Saul chooseth for himself three
thousand \[men\] out of Israel; and two thousand are with Saul in
Michmash, and in the hill-country of Beth-El; and a thousand have been
with Jonathan in Gibeah of Benjamin; and the remnant of the people he
hath sent each to his tents.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And Jonathan smiteth the garrison of the
Philistines which \[is\] in Geba, and the Philistines hear, and Saul
hath blown with a trumpet through all the land, saying, \`Let the
Hebrews hear.'

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> And all Israel have heard, saying, \`Saul
hath smitten the garrison of the Philistines,' and also, \`Israel hath
been abhorred by the Philistines;' and the people are called after Saul
to Gilgal.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And the Philistines have been gathered to
fight with Israel; thirty thousand chariots, and six thousand horsemen,
and a people as the sand which \[is\] on the sea-shore for multitude;
and they come up and encamp in Michmash, east of Beth-Aven.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And the men of Israel have seen that they
are distressed, that the people hath been oppressed, and the people hide
themselves in caves, and in thickets, and in rocks, and in high places,
and in pits.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And Hebrews have passed over the Jordan
to the land of Gad and Gilead; and Saul \[is\] yet in Gilgal, and all
the people have trembled after him.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And he waiteth seven days, according to
the appointment with Samuel, and Samuel hath not come to Gilgal, and the
people are scattered from off him.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> And Saul saith, \`Bring nigh unto me the
burnt-offering, and the peace-offerings;' and he causeth the
burnt-offering to ascend.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> And it cometh to pass at his completing
to cause the burnt-offering to ascend, that lo, Samuel hath come, and
Saul goeth out to meet him, to bless him;

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> and Samuel saith, \`What hast thou
done?' And Saul saith, \`Because I saw that the people were scattered
from off me, and thou hadst not come at the appointment of the days, and
the Philistines are gathered to Michmash,

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> and I say, Now do the Philistines come
down unto me to Gilgal, and the face of Jehovah I have not appeased; and
I force myself, and cause the burnt-offering to ascend.'

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And Samuel saith unto Saul, \`Thou hast
been foolish; thou hast not kept the command of Jehovah thy God, which
He commanded thee, for now had Jehovah established thy kingdom over
Israel unto the age;

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> and, now, thy kingdom doth not stand,
Jehovah hath sought for Himself a man according to His own heart, and
Jehovah chargeth him for leader over His people, for thou hast not kept
that which Jehovah commanded thee.'

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> And Samuel riseth, and goeth up from
Gilgal to Gibeah of Benjamin; and Saul inspecteth the people who are
found with him, about six hundred men,

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> and Saul, and Jonathan his son, and the
people who are found with them, are abiding in Gibeah of Benjamin, and
the Philistines have encamped in Michmash.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> And the destroyer goeth out from the
camp of the Philistines -- three detachments; the one detachment turneth
unto the way of Ophrah, unto the land of Shual;

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> and the one detachment turneth the way
of Beth-Horon, and the one detachment turneth the way of the border
which is looking on the valley of the Zeboim, toward the wilderness.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And an artificer is not found in all
the land of Israel, for the Philistines said, \`Lest the Hebrews make
sword or spear;'

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> and all Israel go down to the
Philistines, to sharpen each his ploughshare, and his coulter, and his
axe, and his mattock;

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> and there hath been the file for
mattocks, and for coulters, and for three-pronged rakes, and for the
axes, and to set up the goads.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And it hath been, in the day of battle,
that there hath not been found sword and spear in the hand of any of the
people who \[are\] with Saul and with Jonathan -- and there is found to
Saul and to Jonathan his son.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> And the station of the Philistines
goeth out unto the passage of Michmash.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> And the day cometh that Jonathan son of
Saul saith unto the young man bearing his weapons, \`Come, and we pass
over unto the station of the Philistines, which \[is\] on the other side
of this;' and to his father he hath not declared \[it\].

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And Saul is abiding at the extremity of
Gibeah, under the pomegranate which \[is\] in Migron, and the people who
\[are\] with him, about six hundred men,

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> and Ahiah, son of Ahitub, brother of
I-Chabod, son of Phinehas son of Eli priest of Jehovah in Shiloh,
bearing an ephod; and the people knew not that Jonathan hath gone.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> And between the passages where Jonathan
sought to pass over unto the station of the Philistines \[is\] the edge
of a rock on the one side, and the edge of a rock on the other side, and
the name of the one is Bozez, and the name of the other Seneh.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> The one edge \[is\] fixed on the north
over-against Michmash, and the one on the south over-against Gibeah.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And Jonathan saith unto the young man
bearing his weapons, \`Come, and we pass over unto the station of these
uncircumcised; it may be Jehovah doth work for us, for there is no
restraint to Jehovah to save by many or by few.'

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> And the bearer of his weapons saith to
him, \`Do all that \[is\] in thy heart; turn for thee; lo, I \[am\] with
thee, as thine own heart.'

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And Jonathan saith, \`Lo, we are passing
over unto the men, and are revealed unto them;

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> if thus they say unto us, \`Stand still
till we have come unto you,' then we have stood in our place, and do not
go up unto them;

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> and if thus they say, \`Come up against
us,' then we have gone up, for Jehovah hath given them into our hand,
and this to us \[is\] the sign.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And revealed are both of them unto the
station of the Philistines, and the Philistines say, \`Lo, Hebrews are
coming out of the holes where they have hid themselves.'

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And the men of the station answer
Jonathan, and the bearer of his weapons, and say, \`Come up unto us, and
we cause you to know something.' And Jonathan saith unto the bearer of
his weapons, \`Come up after me, for Jehovah hath given them into the
hand of Israel.'

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And Jonathan goeth up on his hands, and
on his feet, and the bearer of his weapons after him; and they fall
before Jonathan, and the bearer of his weapons is putting to death after
him.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And the first smiting which Jonathan
and the bearer of his weapons have smitten is of about twenty men, in
about half a furrow of a yoke of a field,

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> and there is a trembling in the camp,
in the field, and among all the people, the station and the destroyers
have trembled -- even they, and the earth shaketh, and it becometh a
trembling of God.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And the watchmen of Saul in Gibeah of
Benjamin see, and lo, the multitude hath melted away, and it goeth on,
and is beaten down.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And Saul saith to the people who
\[are\] with him, \`Inspect, I pray you, and see; who hath gone from
us?' and they inspect, and lo, Jonathan and the bearer of his weapons
are not.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And Saul saith to Ahiah, \`Bring nigh
the ark of God;' for the ark of God hath been on that day with the sons
of Israel.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And it cometh to pass, while Saul spake
unto the priest, that the noise which \[is\] in the camp of the
Philistines goeth on, going on and becoming great, and Saul saith unto
the priest, \`Remove thy hand.'

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> And Saul is called, and all the people
who \[are\] with him, and they come in unto the battle, and, lo, the
sword of each hath been against his neighbour -- a very great
destruction.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And the Hebrews \[who\] have been for
the Philistines as heretofore, who had gone up with them into the camp,
have turned round, even they, to be with Israel who \[are\] with Saul
and Jonathan,

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> and all the men of Israel, who are
hiding themselves in the hill-country of Ephraim, have heard that the
Philistines have fled, and they pursue -- even they -- after them in
battle.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And Jehovah saveth Israel on that day,
and the battle hath passed over to Beth-Aven.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And the men of Israel have been
distressed on that day, and Saul adjureth the people, saying, \`Cursed
\[is\] the man who eateth food till the evening, and I have been avenged
of mine enemies;' and none of the people hath tasted food.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> And all \[they of\] the land have come
into a forest, and there is honey on the face of the field;

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> and the people come in unto the forest,
and lo, the honey dropped, and none is moving his hand unto his mouth,
for the people feared the oath.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And Jonathan hath not heard of his
father's adjuring the people, and putteth forth the end of the rod,
which \[is\] in his hand, and dippeth it in the honeycomb, and bringeth
back his hand unto his mouth -- and his eyes see!

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> And a man of the people answereth and
saith, \`Thy father certainly adjured the people, saying, Cursed \[is\]
the man who eateth food to-day; and the people are weary.'

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> And Jonathan saith, \`My father hath
troubled the land; see, I pray you, that mine eyes have become bright
because I tasted a little of this honey.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> How much more if the people had well
eaten to-day of the spoil of its enemies which it hath found, for now,
the smiting hath not been great among the Philistines.'

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> And they smite on that day among the
Philistines from Michmash to Aijalon, and the people are very weary,

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> and the people make unto the spoil, and
take sheep, and oxen, and sons of the herd, and slaughter on the earth,
and the people eat with the blood.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> And they declare to Saul, saying, \`Lo,
the people are sinning against Jehovah, to eat with the blood.' And he
saith, \`Ye have dealt treacherously, roll unto me to-day a great
stone.'

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> And Saul saith, \`Be ye scattered among
the people, and ye have said to them, Bring ye nigh unto me each his ox,
and each his sheep; and ye have slain \[them\] in this place, and eaten,
and ye do not sin against Jehovah to eat with the blood.' And all the
people bring nigh each his ox, in his hand, that night, and slaughter
\[them\] there.

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> And Saul buildeth an alter to Jehovah;
with it he hath begun to build altars to Jehovah.

<span id="an_14:36">14:36</span> And Saul saith, \`Let us go down after
the Philistines by night, and we prey upon them till the light of the
morning, and leave not a man of them.' And they say, \`All that is good
in thine eyes do.' And the priest saith, \`Let us draw near hither unto
God.'

<span id="an_14:37">14:37</span> And Saul asketh of God, \`Do I go down
after the Philistines? dost Thou give them into the hand of Israel?' and
He hath not answered him on that day.

<span id="an_14:38">14:38</span> And Saul saith, \`Draw ye nigh hither
all, the chiefs of the people, and know and see in what this sin hath
been to-day;

<span id="an_14:39">14:39</span> for, Jehovah liveth, who is saving
Israel: surely if it be in Jonathan my son, surely he doth certainly
die;' and none is answering him out of all the people.

<span id="an_14:40">14:40</span> And he saith unto all Israel, \`Ye --
ye are on one side, and I and Jonathan my son are on another side;' and
the people say unto Saul, \`That which is good in thine eyes do.'

<span id="an_14:41">14:41</span> And Saul saith unto Jehovah, God of
Israel, \`Give perfection;' and Jonathan and Saul are captured, and the
people went out.

<span id="an_14:42">14:42</span> And Saul saith, \`Cast between me and
Jonathan my son;' and Jonathan is captured.

<span id="an_14:43">14:43</span> And Saul saith unto Jonathan, \`Declare
to me, what hast thou done?' and Jonathan declareth to him, and saith,
\`I certainly tasted with the end of the rod that \[is\] in my hand a
little honey; lo, I die!'

<span id="an_14:44">14:44</span> And Saul saith, \`Thus doth God do, and
thus doth He add, for thou dost certainly die, Jonathan.'

<span id="an_14:45">14:45</span> And the people say unto Saul, \`Doth
Jonathan die who wrought this great salvation in Israel? -- a
profanation! Jehovah liveth, if there falleth from the hair of his head
to the earth, for with God he hath wrought this day;' and the people
rescue Jonathan, and he hath not died.

<span id="an_14:46">14:46</span> And Saul goeth up from after the
Philistines, and the Philistines have gone to their place;

<span id="an_14:47">14:47</span> and Saul captured the kingdom over
Israel, and he fighteth round about against all his enemies, against
Moab, and against the Bene-Ammon, and against Edom, and against the
kings of Zobah, and against the Philistines, and whithersoever he
turneth he doth vex \[them\].

<span id="an_14:48">14:48</span> And he maketh a force, and smiteth
Amalek, and delivereth Israel out of the hand of its spoiler.

<span id="an_14:49">14:49</span> And the sons of Saul are Jonathan, and
Ishui, and Melchi-Shua; as to the name of his two daughters, the name of
the first-born \[is\] Merab, and the name of the younger Michal;

<span id="an_14:50">14:50</span> and the name of the wife of Saul \[is\]
Ahinoam, daughter of Ahimaaz; and the name of the head of his host
\[is\] Abner son of Ner, uncle of Saul;

<span id="an_14:51">14:51</span> and Kish \[is\] father of Saul, and Ner
father of Abner \[is\] son of Ahiel.

<span id="an_14:52">14:52</span> And the war is severe against the
Philistines all the days of Saul; when Saul hath seen any mighty man,
and any son of valour, then he doth gather him unto himself.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And Samuel saith unto Saul, \`Me did
Jehovah send to anoint thee for king over His people, over Israel; and
now, hearken to the voice of the words of Jehovah:

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> \`Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, I have
looked after that which Amalek did to Israel, that which he laid for him
in the way in his going up out of Egypt.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Now, go, and thou hast smitten Amalek,
and devoted all that it hath, and thou hast no pity on it, and hast put
to death from man unto woman, from infant unto suckling, from ox unto
sheep, from camel unto ass.'

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And Saul summoneth the people, and
inspecteth them in Telaim, two hundred thousand footmen, and ten
thousand \[are\] men of Judah.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> And Saul cometh in unto a city of Amalek,
and layeth wait in a valley;

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> and Saul saith unto the Kenite, \`Go,
turn aside, go down from the midst of Amalek, lest I consume thee with
it, and thou didst kindness with all the sons of Israel, in their going
up out of Egypt;' and the Kenite turneth aside from the midst of Amalek.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And Saul smiteth Amalek from Havilah --
thy going in to Shur, which \[is\] on the front of Egypt,

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> and he catcheth Agag king of Amalek
alive, and all the people he hath devoted by the mouth of the sword;

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> and Saul hath pity -- also the people --
on Agag, and on the best of the flock, and of the herd, and of the
seconds, and on the lambs, and on all that \[is\] good, and have not
been willing to devote them; and all the work, despised and wasted -- it
they devoted.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> And the word of Jehovah is unto Samuel,
saying,

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> \`I have repented that I caused Saul to
reign for king, for he hath turned back from after Me, and My words he
hath not performed;' and it is displeasing to Samuel, and he crieth unto
Jehovah all the night.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And Samuel riseth early to meet Saul in
the morning, and it is declared to Samuel, saying, \`Saul hath come in
to Carmel, and lo, he is setting up to himself a monument, and goeth
round, and passeth over, and goeth down to Gilgal.'

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And Samuel cometh in unto Saul, and
Saul saith to him, \`Blessed \[art\] thou of Jehovah; I have performed
the word of Jehovah.'

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And Samuel saith, \`And what \[is\] the
noise of this flock in mine ears -- and the noise of the herd which I am
hearing?'

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And Saul saith, \`From Amalek they have
brought them, because the people had pity on the best of the flock, and
of the herd, in order to sacrifice to Jehovah thy God, and the remnant
we have devoted.'

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And Samuel saith unto Saul, \`Desist,
and I declare to thee that which Jehovah hath spoken unto me to-night;'
and he saith to him, \`Speak.'

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> And Samuel saith, \`Art not thou, if
thou \[art\] little in thine own eyes, head of the tribes of Israel? and
Jehovah doth anoint thee for king over Israel,

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> and Jehovah sendeth thee in the way,
and saith, Go, and thou hast devoted the sinners, the Amalekite, and
fought against them till they are consumed;

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> and why hast thou not hearkened to the
voice of Jehovah -- and dost fly unto the spoil, and dost do the evil
thing in the eyes of Jehovah?'

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And Saul saith unto Samuel, \`Because
-- I have hearkened to the voice of Jehovah, and I go in the way which
Jehovah hath sent me, and bring in Agag king of Amalek, and Amalek I
have devoted;

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> and the people taketh of the spoil of
the flock and herd, the first part of the devoted thing, for sacrifice
to Jehovah thy God in Gilgal.'

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> And Samuel saith, \`Hath Jehovah had
delight in burnt-offerings and sacrifices as \[in\] hearkening to the
voice of Jehovah? lo, hearkening than sacrifice is better; to give
attention than fat of rams;

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> for a sin of divination \[is\]
rebellion, and iniquity and teraphim \[is\] stubbornness; because thou
hast rejected the word of Jehovah, He also doth reject thee from
\[being\] king.'

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> And Saul saith unto Samuel, \`I have
sinned, for I passed over the command of Jehovah, and thy words; because
I have feared the people, I also hearken to their voice;

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> and now, bear, I pray thee, with my
sin, and turn back with me, and I bow myself to Jehovah.'

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> And Samuel saith unto Saul, \`I do not
turn back with thee; for thou hast rejected the word of Jehovah, and
Jehovah doth reject thee from being king over Israel.'

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And Samuel turneth round to go, and he
layeth hold on the skirt of his upper robe -- and it is rent!

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> And Samuel saith unto him, \`Jehovah
hath rent the kingdom of Israel from thee to-day, and given it to thy
neighbour who is better than thou;

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> and also, the Pre-eminence of Israel
doth not lie nor repent, for He \[is\] not a man to be penitent.'

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> And he saith, \`I have sinned; now,
honour me, I pray thee, before the elders of my people, and before
Israel, and turn back with me; and I have bowed myself to Jehovah thy
God.'

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> And Samuel turneth back after Saul, and
Saul boweth himself to Jehovah;

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> and Samuel saith, \`Bring ye nigh unto
me Agag king of Amalek,' and Agag cometh unto him daintily, and Agag
saith, \`Surely the bitterness of death hath turned aside.'

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> And Samuel saith, \`As thy sword
bereaved women -- so is thy mother bereaved above women;' and Samuel
heweth Agag in pieces before Jehovah in Gilgal.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> And Samuel goeth to Ramath, and Saul
hath gone unto his house -- to Gibeah of Saul.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> And Samuel hath not added to see Saul
till the day of his death, for Samuel mourned for Saul, and Jehovah
repented that He had caused Saul to reign over Israel.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And Jehovah saith unto Samuel, \`Till
when art thou mourning for Saul, and I have rejected him from reigning
over Israel? fill thy horn with oil, and go, I send thee unto Jesse the
Beth-Lehemite, for I have seen among his sons for Myself a king.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And Samuel saith, \`How do I go? when
Saul hath heard, then he hath slain me.' And Jehovah saith, \`A heifer
of the herd thou dost take in thy hand, and hast said, To sacrifice to
Jehovah I have come;

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> and thou hast called for Jesse in the
sacrifice, and I cause thee to know that which thou dost do, and thou
hast anointed to Me him of whom I speak unto thee.'

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And Samuel doth that which Jehovah hath
spoken, and cometh in to Beth-Lehem, and the elders of the city tremble
to meet him, and \[one\] saith, \`Is thy coming peace?'

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> and he saith, \`Peace; to sacrifice to
Jehovah I have come, sanctify yourselves, and ye have come in with me to
the sacrifice;' and he sanctifieth Jesse and his sons, and calleth them
to the sacrifice.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And it cometh to pass, in their coming
in, that he seeth Eliab, and saith, \`Surely, before Jehovah \[is\] His
anointed.'

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And Jehovah saith unto Samuel, \`Look not
unto his appearance, and unto the height of his stature, for I have
rejected him; for \[it is\] not as man seeth -- for man looketh at the
eyes, and Jehovah looketh at the heart.'

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And Jesse calleth unto Abinadab, and
causeth him to pass by before Samuel; and he saith, \`Also on this
Jehovah hath not fixed.'

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And Jesse causeth Shammah to pass by, and
he saith, \`Also on this Jehovah hath not fixed.'

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And Jesse causeth seven of his sons to
pass by before Samuel, and Samuel saith to Jesse, \`Jehovah hath not
fixed on these.'

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And Samuel saith unto Jesse, \`Are the
young men finished?' and he saith, \`Yet hath been left the youngest;
and lo, he delighteth himself among the flock;' and Samuel saith unto
Jesse, \`Send and take him, for we do not turn round till his coming in
hither.'

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And he sendeth, and bringeth him in,
and he \[is\] ruddy, with beauty of eyes, and of good appearance; and
Jehovah saith, \`Rise, anoint him, for this \[is\] he.'

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And Samuel taketh the horn of oil, and
anointeth him in the midst of his brethren, and prosper over David doth
the Spirit of Jehovah from that day and onwards; and Samuel riseth and
goeth to Ramath.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And the Spirit of Jehovah turned aside
from Saul, and a spirit of sadness from Jehovah terrified him;

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> and the servants of Saul say unto him,
\`Lo, we pray thee, a spirit of sadness \[from\] God is terrifying thee;

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> let our lord command, we pray thee, thy
servants before thee, they seek a skilful man, playing on a harp, and it
hath come to pass, in the spirit of sadness \[from\] God being upon
thee, that he hath played with his hand, and \[it is\] well with thee.'

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And Saul saith unto his servants,
\`Provide, I pray you, for me a man playing well -- then ye have brought
\[him\] in unto me.'

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And one of the servants answereth and
saith, \`Lo, I have seen a son of Jesse the Beth-Lehemite, skilful in
playing, and a mighty virtuous man, and a man of battle, and intelligent
in word, and a man of form, and Jehovah \[is\] with him.'

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> And Saul sendeth messengers unto Jesse,
and saith, \`Send unto me David thy son, who \[is\] with the flock.'

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And Jesse taketh an ass, \[with\]
bread, and a bottle of wine, and one kid of the goats, and sendeth by
the hand of David his son unto Saul.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> And David cometh in unto Saul, and
standeth before him, and he loveth him greatly; and he is a bearer of
his weapons.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And Saul sendeth unto Jesse, saying,
\`Let David, I pray thee, stand before me, for he hath found grace in
mine eyes.'

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And it hath come to pass, in the spirit
of \[sadness from\] God being on Saul, that David hath taken the harp,
and played with his hand, and Saul hath refreshment and gladness, and
the spirit of sadness hath turned aside from off him.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And the Philistines gather their camps to
battle, and are gathered to Shochoh, which \[is\] to Judah, and encamp
between Shochoh and Azekah, in Ephes-Dammim;

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> and Saul and the men of Israel have been
gathered, and encamp by the valley of Elah, and set the battle in array
to meet the Philistines.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> And the Philistines are standing on the
mountain on this side, and the Israelites are standing on the mountain
on that side, and the valley \[is\] between them.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And there goeth out a man of the
duellists from the camps of the Philistines, Goliath \[is\] his name,
from Gath; his height \[is\] six cubits and a span,

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> and a helmet of brass \[is\] on his head,
and \[with\] a scaled coat of mail he \[is\] clothed, and the weight of
the coat of mail \[is\] five thousand shekels of brass,

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> and a frontlet of brass \[is\] on his
feet, and a javelin of brass between his shoulders,

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> and the wood of his spear \[is\] like a
beam of weavers', and the flame of his spear \[is\] six hundred shekels
of iron, and the bearer of the buckler is going before him.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And he standeth and calleth unto the
ranks of Israel, and saith to them, \`Why are ye come out to set in
array the battle? \[am\] not I the Philistine, and ye servants to Saul?
choose for you a man, and let him come down unto me;

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> if he be able to fight with me, and have
smitten me, then we have been to you for servants; and if I am able for
him, and have smitten him, then ye have been to us for servants, and
have served us.'

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And the Philistine saith, \`I have
reproached the ranks of Israel this day; give to me a man, and we fight
together.'

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And Saul heareth -- and all Israel --
these words of the Philistine, and they are broken down and greatly
afraid.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> And David \[is\] son of this Ephrathite
of Beth-Lehem-Judah, whose name \[is\] Jesse, and he hath eight sons,
and the man in the days of Saul hath become aged among men;

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> and the three eldest sons of Jesse go,
they have gone after Saul to battle; and the name of his three sons who
have gone into battle \[are\] Eliab the first-born, and his second
Abinadab, and the third Shammah.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> And David is the youngest, and the
three eldest have gone after Saul,

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> and David is going and returning from
Saul, to feed the flock of his father at Beth-Lehem.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> And the Philistine draweth nigh,
morning and evening, and stationeth himself forty days.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> And Jesse saith to David his son,
\`Take, I pray thee, to thy brethren, an ephah of this roasted \[corn\],
and these ten loaves, and run to the camp to thy brethren;

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> and these ten cuttings of the cheese
thou dost take in to the head of the thousand, and thy brethren thou
dost inspect for welfare, and their pledge dost receive.'

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> And Saul, and they, and all the men of
Israel \[are\] in the valley of Elah, fighting with the Philistines.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> And David riseth early in the morning,
and leaveth the flock to a keeper, and lifteth up, and goeth, as Jesse
commanded him, and he cometh in to the path, and to the force which is
going out unto the rank, and they have shouted for battle;

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> and Israel and the Philistines set in
array rank to meet rank.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> And David letteth down the goods from
off him on the hand of a keeper of the goods, and runneth into the rank,
and cometh and asketh of his brethren of welfare.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> And he is speaking with them, and lo, a
man of the duellists is coming up, Goliath the Philistine \[is\] his
name, of Gath, out of the ranks of the Philistines, and he speaketh
according to those words, and David heareth;

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> and all the men of Israel when they see
the man flee from his presence, and are greatly afraid.

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> And the men of Israel say, \`Have ye
seen this man who is coming up? for, to reproach Israel he is coming up,
and it hath been -- the man who smiteth him, the king doth enrich him
with great riches, and his daughter he doth give to him, and his
father's house doth make free in Israel.'

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> And David speaketh unto the men who are
standing by him, saying, \`What is done to the man who smiteth this
Philistine, and hath turned aside reproach from Israel? for who \[is\]
this uncircumcised Philistine that he hath reproached the ranks of the
living God?'

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> And the people speak to him according
to this word, saying, \`Thus it is done to the man who smiteth him.'

<span id="an_17:28">17:28</span> And Eliab, his eldest brother, heareth
when he speaketh unto the men, and the anger of Eliab burneth against
David, and he saith, \`Why \[is\] this -- thou hast come down! and to
whom hast thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? I have known thy
pride, and the evil of thy heart -- for, to see the battle thou hast
come down.'

<span id="an_17:29">17:29</span> And David saith, \`What have I done
now? is it not a word?'

<span id="an_17:30">17:30</span> And he turneth round from him unto
another, and saith according to this word, and the people return him
word as the first word.

<span id="an_17:31">17:31</span> And the words which David hath spoken
are heard, and they declare before Saul, and he receiveth him;

<span id="an_17:32">17:32</span> and David saith unto Saul, \`Let no
man's heart fall because of him, thy servant doth go, and hath fought
with this Philistine.'

<span id="an_17:33">17:33</span> And Saul saith unto David, \`Thou art
not able to go unto this Philistine, to fight with him, for a youth thou
\[art\], and he a man of war from his youth.'

<span id="an_17:34">17:34</span> And David saith unto Saul, \`A shepherd
hath thy servant been to his father among the sheep, and the lion hath
come -- and the bear -- and hath taken away a sheep out of the drove,

<span id="an_17:35">17:35</span> and I have gone out after him, and
smitten him, and delivered out of his mouth, and he riseth against me,
and I have taken hold on his beard, and smitten him, and put him to
death.

<span id="an_17:36">17:36</span> Both the lion and the bear hath thy
servant smitten, and this uncircumcised Philistine hath been as one of
them, for he hath reproached the ranks of the living God.'

<span id="an_17:37">17:37</span> And David saith, \`Jehovah, who
delivered me out of the paw of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear,
He doth deliver me from the hand of this Philistine.' And Saul saith
unto David, \`Go, and Jehovah is with thee.'

<span id="an_17:38">17:38</span> And Saul clotheth David with his long
robe, and hath put a helmet of brass on his head, and doth clothe him
with a coat of mail.

<span id="an_17:39">17:39</span> And David girded his sword above his
long robe, and beginneth to go, for he hath not tried \[it\]; and David
saith unto Saul, \`I am not able to go with these, for I had not tried;'
and David turneth them aside from off him.

<span id="an_17:40">17:40</span> And he taketh his staff in his hand,
and chooseth for him five smooth stones from the brook, and putteth them
in the shepherds' habiliments that he hath, even in the scrip, and his
sling \[is\] in his hand, and he draweth nigh unto the Philistine.

<span id="an_17:41">17:41</span> And the Philistine goeth on, going and
drawing near unto David, and the man bearing the buckler \[is\] before
him,

<span id="an_17:42">17:42</span> and the Philistine looketh attentively,
and seeth David, and despiseth him, for he was a youth, and ruddy, with
a fair appearance.

<span id="an_17:43">17:43</span> And the Philistine saith unto David,
\`Am I a dog that thou art coming unto me with staves?' and the
Philistine revileth David by his gods,

<span id="an_17:44">17:44</span> and the Philistine saith unto David,
\`Come unto me, and I give thy flesh to the fowl of the heavens, and to
the beast of the field.'

<span id="an_17:45">17:45</span> And David saith unto the Philistine,
\`Thou art coming unto me with sword, and with spear, and with buckler,
and I am coming unto thee in the name of Jehovah of Hosts, God of the
ranks of Israel, which thou hast reproached.

<span id="an_17:46">17:46</span> This day doth Jehovah shut thee up into
my hand -- and I have smitten thee, and turned aside thy head from off
thee, and given the carcase of the camp of the Philistines this day to
the fowl of the heavens, and to the beast of the earth, and all the
earth do know that God is for Israel.

<span id="an_17:47">17:47</span> and all this assembly do know that not
by sword and by spear doth Jehovah save, that the battle \[is\]
Jehovah's, and He hath given you into our hand.'

<span id="an_17:48">17:48</span> And it hath come to pass, that the
Philistine hath risen, and goeth, and draweth near to meet David, and
David hasteth and runneth to the rank to meet the Philistine,

<span id="an_17:49">17:49</span> and David putteth forth his hand unto
the vessel, and taketh thence a stone, and slingeth, and smiteth the
Philistine on his forehead, and the stone sinketh into his forehead, and
he falleth on his face to the earth.

<span id="an_17:50">17:50</span> And David is stronger than the
Philistine with a sling and with a stone, and smiteth the Philistine,
and putteth him to death, and there is no sword in the hand of David,

<span id="an_17:51">17:51</span> and David runneth and standeth over the
Philistine, and taketh his sword, and draweth it out of its sheath, and
putteth him to death, and cutteth off with it his head; and the
Philistines see that their hero \[is\] dead, and flee.

<span id="an_17:52">17:52</span> And the men of Israel rise -- also
Judah -- and shout, and pursue the Philistines till thou enter the
valley, and unto the gates of Ekron, and the wounded of the Philistines
fall in the way of Shaaraim, even unto Gath, and unto Ekron,

<span id="an_17:53">17:53</span> and the sons of Israel turn back from
burning after the Philistines, and spoil their camps.

<span id="an_17:54">17:54</span> And David taketh the head of the
Philistine, and bringeth it in to Jerusalem, and his weapons he hath put
in his own tent.

<span id="an_17:55">17:55</span> And when Saul seeth David going out to
meet the Philistine, he hath said unto Abner, head of the host, \`Whose
son \[is\] this -- the youth, Abner?' and Abner saith, \`Thy soul
liveth, O king, I have not known.'

<span id="an_17:56">17:56</span> And the king saith, \`Ask thou whose
son this \[is\] -- the young man.'

<span id="an_17:57">17:57</span> And when David turneth back from
smiting the Philistine, then Abner taketh him and bringeth him in before
Saul, and the head of the Philistine in his hand;

<span id="an_17:58">17:58</span> and Saul saith unto him, \`Whose son
\[art\] thou, O youth?' and David saith, \`Son of thy servant Jesse, the
Beth-Lehemite.'

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> And it cometh to pass, when he finisheth
to speak unto Saul, that the soul of Jonathan hath been bound to the
soul of David, and Jonathan loveth him as his own soul.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> And Saul taketh him on that day, and hath
not permitted him to turn back to the house of his father.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And Jonathan maketh -- also David -- a
covenant, because he loveth him as his own soul,

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> and Jonathan strippeth himself of the
upper robe which \[is\] upon him, and giveth it to David, and his long
robe, even unto his sword, and unto his bow, and unto his girdle.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And David goeth out whithersoever Saul
doth send him; he acted wisely, and Saul setteth him over the men of
war, and it is good in the eyes of all the people, and also in the eyes
of the servants of Saul.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> And it cometh to pass, in their coming
in, in David's returning from smiting the Philistine, that the women
come out from all the cities of Israel to sing -- also the dancers -- to
meet Saul the king, with tabrets, with joy, and with three-stringed
instruments;

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> and the women answer -- those playing,
and say, \`Saul hath smitten among his thousands, And David among his
myriads.'

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> And it is displeasing to Saul
exceedingly, and this thing is evil in his eyes, and he saith, \`They
have given to David myriads, and to me they have given the thousands,
and more to him \[is\] only the kingdom;'

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> and Saul is eyeing David from that day
and thenceforth.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> And it cometh to pass, on the morrow,
that the spirit of sadness \[from\] God prospereth over Saul, and he
prophesieth in the midst of the house, and David is playing with his
hand, as day by day, and the javelin \[is\] in the hand of Saul,

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> and Saul casteth the javelin, and
saith, \`I smite through David, even through the wall;' and David
turneth round out of his presence twice.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> And Saul is afraid of the presence of
David, for Jehovah hath been with him, and from Saul He hath turned
aside;

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> and Saul turneth him aside from him,
and appointeth him to himself head of a thousand, and he goeth out an
cometh in, before the people.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> And David is in all his ways acting
wisely, and Jehovah \[is\] with him,

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> and Saul seeth that he is acting very
wisely, and is afraid of him,

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> and all Israel and Judah love David
when he is going out and coming in before them.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And Saul saith unto David, \`Lo, my
elder daughter Merab -- her I give to thee for a wife; only, be to me
for a son of valour, and fight the battles of Jehovah;' and Saul said,
\`Let not my hand be on him, but let the hand of the Philistines be upon
him.'

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> And David saith unto Saul, \`Who \[am\]
I? and what my life -- the family of my father in Israel -- that I am
son-in-law to the king?'

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> And it cometh to pass, at the time of
the giving of Merab daughter of Saul to David, that she hath been given
to Adriel the Meholathite for a wife.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> And Michal daughter of Saul loveth
David, and they declare to Saul, and the thing is right in his eyes,

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> and Saul saith, \`I give her to him,
and she is to him for a snare, and the hand of the Philistines is on
him;' and Saul saith unto David, \`By the second -- thou dost become my
son-in-law to-day.'

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> And Saul commandeth his servants,
\`Speak unto David gently, saying, Lo, the king hath delighted in thee,
and all his servants have loved thee, and now, be son-in-law to the
king.'

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> And the servants of Saul speak in the
ears of David these words, and David saith, \`Is it a light thing in
your eyes to be son-in-law to the king -- and I a poor man, and lightly
esteemed?'

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> And the servants of Saul declare to
him, saying, \`According to these words hath David spoken.'

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> And Saul saith, \`Thus do ye say to
David, There is no delight to the king in dowry, but in a hundred
foreskins of the Philistines -- to be avenged on the enemies of the
king;' and Saul thought to cause David to fall by the hand of the
Philistines.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> And his servants declare to David these
words, and the thing is right in the eyes of David, to be son-in-law to
the king; and the days have not been full,

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> and David riseth and goeth, he and his
men, and smiteth among the Philistines two hundred men, and David
bringeth in their foreskins, and they set them before the king, to be
son-in-law to the king; and Saul giveth to him Michal his daughter for a
wife.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> And Saul seeth and knoweth that Jehovah
\[is\] with David, and Michal daughter of Saul hath loved him,

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> and Saul addeth to be afraid of the
presence of David yet; and Saul is an enemy with David all the days.

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> And the princes of the Philistines come
out, and it cometh to pass from the time of their coming out, David hath
acted more wisely than any of the servants of Saul, and his name is very
precious.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And Saul speaketh unto Jonathan his son,
and unto all his servants, to put David to death,

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> and Jonathan son of Saul delighted
exceedingly in David, and Jonathan declareth to David, saying, \`Saul my
father is seeking to put thee to death, and, now, take heed, I pray
thee, in the morning, and thou hast abode in a secret place, and been
hidden,

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> and I -- I go out, and have stood by the
side of my father in the field where thou \[art\], and I speak of thee
unto my father, and have seen what \[is coming\], and have declared to
thee.'

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And Jonathan speaketh good of David unto
Saul his father, and saith unto him, \`Let not the king sin against his
servant, against David, because he hath not sinned against thee, and
because his works for thee \[are\] very good;

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> yea, he putteth his life in his hand, and
smiteth the Philistine, and Jehovah worketh a great salvation for all
Israel; thou hast seen, and dost rejoice, and why dost thou sin against
innocent blood, to put David to death for nought?'

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And Saul hearkeneth to the voice of
Jonathan, and Saul sweareth, \`Jehovah liveth -- he doth not die.'

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And Jonathan calleth for David, and
Jonathan declareth to him all these words, and Jonathan bringeth in
David unto Saul, and he is before him as heretofore.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And there addeth to be war, and David
goeth out and fighteth against the Philistines, and smiteth among them
-- a great smiting, and they flee from his face.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And a spirit of sadness \[from\] Jehovah
is unto Saul, and he is sitting in his house, and his javelin in his
hand, and David is playing with the hand,

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> and Saul seeketh to smite with the
javelin through David, and through the wall, and he freeth himself from
the presence of Saul, and he smiteth the javelin through the wall; and
David hath fled and escapeth during that night.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And Saul sendeth messengers unto the
house of David to watch him, and to put him to death in the morning; and
Michal his wife declareth to David, saying, \`If thou art not delivering
thy life to-night -- tomorrow thou art put to death.'

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> And Michal causeth David to go down
through the window, and he goeth on, and fleeth, and escapeth;

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> and Michal taketh the teraphim, and
layeth on the bed, and the mattress of goats' \[hair\] she hath put
\[for\] his pillows, and covereth with a garment.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And Saul sendeth messengers to take
David, and she saith, \`He \[is\] sick.'

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And Saul sendeth the messengers to see
David, saying, \`Bring him up in the bed unto me,' -- to put him to
death.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And the messengers come in, and lo, the
teraphim \[are\] on the bed, and the mattress of goats' \[hair\],
\[for\] his pillows.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And Saul saith unto Michal, \`Why thus
hast thou deceived me -- that thou dost send away mine enemy, and he is
escaped?' and Michal saith unto Saul, \`He said unto me, Send me away:
why do I put thee to death?'

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> And David hath fled, and is escaped,
and cometh in unto Samuel to Ramath, and declareth to him all that Saul
hath done to him, and he goeth, he and Samuel, and they dwell in Naioth.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> And it is declared to Saul, saying,
\`Lo, David \[is\] in Naioth in Ramah.'

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And Saul sendeth messengers to take
David, and they see the assembly of the prophets prophesying, and Samuel
standing, set over them, and the Spirit of God is on Saul's messengers,
and they prophesy -- they also.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And they declare \[it\] to Saul, and he
sendeth other messengers, and they prophesy -- they also; and Saul
addeth and sendeth messengers a third time, and they prophesy -- they
also.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> And he goeth -- he also -- to Ramath,
and cometh in unto the great well which \[is\] in Sechu, and asketh, and
saith, \`Where \[are\] Samuel and David?' and \[one\] saith, \`Lo, in
Naioth in Ramah.'

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> And he goeth thither -- unto Naioth in
Ramah, and the Spirit of God is upon him -- him also; and he goeth,
going on, and he prophesyeth till his coming in to Naioth in Ramah,

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> and he strippeth off -- he also -- his
garments, and prophesieth -- he also -- before Samuel, and falleth down
naked all that day and all the night; therefore they say, \`Is Saul also
among the prophets?'

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And David fleeth from Naioth in Ramah,
and cometh, and saith before Jonathan, \`What have I done? what \[is\]
mine iniquity? and what my sin before thy father, that he is seeking my
life?'

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And he saith to him, \`Far be it! thou
dost not die; lo, my father doth not do anything great or small and doth
not uncover mine ear; and wherefore doth my father hide from me this
thing? this \[thing\] is not.'

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And David sweareth again, and saith,
\`Thy father hath certainly known that I have found grace in thine eyes,
and he saith, Let not Jonathan know this, lest he be grieved; and yet,
Jehovah liveth, and thy soul liveth, but -- as a step between me and
death.'

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> And Jonathan saith to David, \`What doth
thy soul say? -- and I do it for thee.'

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And David saith unto Jonathan, \`Lo, the
new moon \[is\] to-morrow; and I do certainly sit with the king to eat;
and thou hast sent me away, and I have been hidden in a field till the
third evening;

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> if thy father at all look after me, and
thou hast said, David asked earnestly of me to run to Beth-Lehem his
city, for a sacrifice of the days \[is\] there for all the family.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> If thus he say: Good; peace \[is\] for
thy servant; and if it be very displeasing to him -- know that the evil
hath been determined by him;

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> and thou hast done kindness, to thy
servant, for into a covenant of Jehovah thou hast brought thy servant
with thee; -- and if there is in me iniquity, put thou me to death; and
unto thy father, why is this -- thou dost bring me in?'

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And Jonathan saith, \`Far be it from
thee! for I certainly do not know that the evil hath been determined by
my father to come upon thee, and I do not declare it to thee.'

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> And David saith unto Jonathan, \`Who
doth declare to me? or what \[if\] thy father doth answer thee sharply?'

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And Jonathan saith unto David, \`Come,
and we go out into the field;' and they go out both of them into the
field.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And Jonathan saith unto David,
\`Jehovah, God of Israel -- when I search my father, about \[this\] time
to-morrow \[or\] the third \[day\], and lo, good \[is\] towards David,
and I do not then send unto thee, and have uncovered thine ear --

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> thus doth Jehovah do to Jonathan, and
thus doth He add; when the evil concerning thee is good to my father,
then I have uncovered thine ear, and sent thee away, and thou hast gone
in peace, and Jehovah is with thee, as he was with my father;

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> and not only while I am alive dost thou
do with me the kindness of Jehovah, and I die not,

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> but thou dost not cut off thy kindness
from my house unto the age, nor in Jehovah's cutting off the enemies of
David, each one from off the face of the ground.'

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> And Jonathan covenanteth with the house
of David, and Jehovah hath sought \[it\] from the hand of the enemies of
David;

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> and Jonathan addeth to cause David to
swear, because he loveth him, for with the love of his own soul he hath
loved him.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> And Jonathan saith to him, \`To-morrow
\[is\] new moon, and thou hast been looked after, for thy seat is looked
after;

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> and on the third day thou dost
certainly come down, and hast come in unto the place where thou wast
hidden in the day of the work, and hast remained near the stone Ezel.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> \`And I shoot three of the arrows at
the side, sending out for myself at a mark;

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> and lo, I send the youth: Go, find the
arrows. If I at all say to the youth, Lo, the arrows \[are\] on this
side of thee -- take them, -- then come thou, for peace \[is\] for thee,
and there is nothing; Jehovah liveth.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> And if thus I say to the young man, Lo,
the arrows \[are\] beyond thee, -- go, for Jehovah hath sent thee away;

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> as to the thing which we have spoken, I
and thou, lo, Jehovah \[is\] between me and thee -- unto the age.'

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> And David is hidden in the field, and
it is the new moon, and the king sitteth down by the food to eat,

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> and the king sitteth on his seat, as
time by time, on a seat by the wall, and Jonathan riseth, and Abner
sitteth at the side of Saul, and David's place is looked after.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> And Saul hath not spoken anything on
that day, for he said, \`It \[is\] an accident; he is not clean --
surely not clean.'

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> And it cometh to pass on the second
morrow of the new moon, that David's place is looked after, and Saul
saith unto Jonathan his son, \`Wherefore hath the son of Jesse not come
in, either yesterday or to-day, unto the food?'

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> And Jonathan answereth Saul, \`David
hath been earnestly asked of me unto Beth-Lehem,

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> and he saith, Send me away, I pray
thee, for a family sacrifice we have in the city, and my brother himself
hath given command to me, and now, if I have found grace in thine eyes,
let me go away, I pray thee, and see my brethren; therefore he hath not
come unto the table of the king.'

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> And the anger of Saul burneth against
Jonathan, and he saith to him, \`Son of a perverse rebellious woman!
have I not known that thou art fixing on the son of Jesse to thy shame,
and to the shame of the nakedness of thy mother?

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> for all the days that the son of Jesse
liveth on the ground thou art not established, thou and thy kingdom; and
now, send and bring him unto me, for he \[is\] a son of death.'

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> And Jonathan answereth Saul his father,
and saith unto him, \`Why is he put to death? what hath he done?'

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> And Saul casteth the javelin at him to
smite him, and Jonathan knoweth that it hath been determined by his
father to put David to death.

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> And Jonathan riseth from the table in
the heat of anger, and hath not eaten food on the second day of the new
moon, for he hath been grieved for David, for his father put him to
shame.

<span id="an_20:35">20:35</span> And it cometh to pass in the morning,
that Jonathan goeth out into the field for the appointment with David,
and a little youth \[is\] with him.

<span id="an_20:36">20:36</span> And he saith to his youth, \`Run, find,
I pray thee, the arrows which I am shooting;' the youth is running, and
he hath shot the arrow, causing \[it\] to pass over him.

<span id="an_20:37">20:37</span> And the youth cometh unto the place of
the arrow which Jonathan hath shot, and Jonathan calleth after the
youth, and saith, \`Is not the arrow beyond thee?'

<span id="an_20:38">20:38</span> and Jonathan calleth after the youth,
\`Speed, haste, stand not;' and Jonathan's youth gathereth the arrows,
and cometh unto his lord.

<span id="an_20:39">20:39</span> And the youth hath not known anything,
only Jonathan and David knew the word.

<span id="an_20:40">20:40</span> And Jonathan giveth his weapons unto
the youth whom he hath, and saith to him, \`Go, carry into the city.'

<span id="an_20:41">20:41</span> The youth hath gone, and David hath
risen from Ezel, at the south, and falleth on his face to the earth, and
boweth himself three times, and they kiss one another, and they weep one
with another, till David exerted himself;

<span id="an_20:42">20:42</span> and Jonathan saith to David, \`Go in
peace, in that we have sworn -- we two -- in the name of Jehovah,
saying, Jehovah is between me and thee, and between my seed and thy seed
-- unto the age;' and he riseth and goeth; and Jonathan hath gone in to
the city.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And David cometh in to Nob, unto
Ahimelech the priest, and Ahimelech trembleth at meeting David, and
saith to him, \`Wherefore \[art\] thou thyself alone, and no man with
thee?'

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> And David saith to Ahimelech the priest,
\`The king hath commanded me a matter, and he saith unto me, Let no man
know anything of the matter about which I am sending thee, and which I
have commanded thee; and the young men I have caused to know at such and
such a place;

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> and now, what is there under thy hand?
five loaves give into my hand, or that which is found.'

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And the priest answereth David, and
saith, \`There is no common bread under my hand, but there is holy
bread; if the youths have been kept only from women.'

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> And David answereth the priest, and saith
to him, \`Surely, if women have been restrained from us as heretofore in
my going out, then the vessels of the young men are holy, and it \[is\]
a common way: and also, surely to-day it is sanctified in the vessel.'

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And the priest giveth to him the holy
thing, for there was no bread there except the bread of the Presence
which is turned aside from the presence of Jehovah to put hot bread in
the day of its being taken away.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And there \[is\] a man of the servants of
Saul on that day detained before Jehovah, and his name \[is\] Doeg the
Edomite, chief of the shepherds whom Saul hath.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And David saith to Ahimelech, \`And is
there not here under thy hand spear or sword? for neither my sword nor
my vessels have I taken in my hand, for the matter of the king was
urgent.'

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> And the priest saith, \`The sword of
Goliath the Philistine, whom thou didst smite in the valley of Elah, lo,
it is wrapt in a garment behind the ephod, if it thou dost take to
thyself, take; for there is none other save it in this \[place\].' And
David saith, \`There is none like it -- give it to me.'

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> And David riseth and fleeth on that day
from the face of Saul, and cometh in unto Achish king of Gath;

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> and the servants of Achish say unto
him, \`Is not this David king of the land? is it not of this one they
sing in dances, saying, \`Saul smote among his thousands, and David
among his myriads?'

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> And David layeth these words in his
heart, and is exceedingly afraid of the face of Achish king of Gath,

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> and changeth his behaviour before their
eyes, and feigneth himself mad in their hand, and scribbleth on the
doors of the gate, and letteth down his spittle unto his beard.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And Achish saith unto his servants,
\`Lo, ye see a man acting as a madman; why do ye bring him in unto me?

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> A lack of madmen \[have\] I, that ye
have brought in this one to act as a madman by me! doth this one come in
unto my house?'

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> And David goeth thence, and is escaped
unto the cave of Adullam, and his brethren hear, and all the house of
his father, and go down unto him thither;

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> and gather themselves unto him do every
man in distress, and every man who hath an exactor, and every man bitter
in soul, and he is over them for head, and there are with him about four
hundred men.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> And David goeth thence to Mizpeh of Moab,
and saith unto the king of Moab, \`Let, I pray thee, my father and my
mother go out with you, till that I know what God doth for me;'

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> and he leadeth them before the king of
Moab, and they dwell with him all the days of David's being in the
fortress.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> And Gad the prophet saith unto David,
\`Thou dost not abide in a fortress, go, and thou hast entered for thee
the land of Judah;' and David goeth and entereth the forest of Hareth.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> And Saul heareth that David hath become
known, and the men who \[are\] with him, and Saul is abiding in Gibeah,
under the grove in Ramah, and his spear \[is\] in his hand, and all his
servants standing by him.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> And Saul saith to his servants who are
standing by him, \`Hear, I pray you, ye Benjamites; also to all of you
doth the son of Jesse give fields and vineyards! all of you he doth
appoint heads of thousands and heads of hundreds!

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> for ye have conspired all of you against
me, and there is none uncovering mine ear about my son's covenanting
with the son of Jesse, and there is none of you grieving for me, and
uncovering mine ear, that my son hath raised up my servant against me,
to lie in wait as \[at\] this day.'

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> And answer doth Doeg the Edomite, who is
set over the servants of Saul, and saith, \`I have seen the son of Jesse
coming in to Nob, unto Ahimelech son of Ahitub,

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> and he asketh for him at Jehovah, and
provision hath given to him, and the sword of Goliath the Philistine
hath given to him.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And the king sendeth to call Ahimelech
son of Ahitub, the priest, and all the house of his father, the priests,
who \[are\] in Nob, and they come all of them unto the king;

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> and Saul saith, \`Hear, I pray thee,
son of Ahitub;' and he saith, \`Here \[am\] I, my lord.'

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> And Saul saith unto him, \`Why have ye
conspired against me, thou and the son of Jesse, by thy giving to him
bread and a sword, and to ask for him at God, to rise against me, to lie
in wait, as \[at\] this day?'

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And Ahimelech answereth the king and
saith, \`And who among all thy servants \[is\] as David -- faithful, and
son-in-law of the king, and hath turned aside unto thy council, and is
honoured in thy house?

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> To-day have I begun to ask for him at
God? far be it from me! let not the king lay anything against his
servant, against any of the house of my father, for thy servant hath
known nothing of all this, less or more.'

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> And the king saith, \`Thou dost surely
die, Ahimelech, thou, and all the house of thy father.'

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> And the king saith to runners, those
standing by him, \`Turn round, and put to death the priests of Jehovah,
because their hand also \[is\] with David, and because they have known
that he is fleeing, and have not uncovered mine ear;' and the servants
of the king have not been willing to put forth their hand to come
against the priests of Jehovah.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> And the king saith to Doeg, \`Turn
round thou, and come against the priests;' and Doeg the Edomite turneth
round, and cometh himself against the priests, and putteth to death in
that day eighty and five men bearing a linen ephod,

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> and Nob, the city of the priests, he
hath smitten by the mouth of the sword, from man even unto woman, from
infant even unto suckling, and ox, and ass, and sheep, by the mouth of
the sword.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> And there escapeth one son of
Ahimelech, son of Ahitub, and his name \[is\] Abiathar, and he fleeth
after David,

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> and Abiathar declareth to David that
Saul hath slain the priests of Jehovah.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> And David saith to Abiathar, \`I have
known on that day when Doeg the Edomite \[is\] there, that he doth
certainly declare \[it\] to Saul; I have brought \[it\] round to every
person of the house of thy father;

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> dwell with me; fear not; for he who
seeketh my life seeketh thy life; for a charge \[art\] thou with me.'

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> And they declare to David, saying, \`Lo,
the Philistines are fighting against Keilah, and they are spoiling the
threshing-floors.'

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> And David asketh at Jehovah, saying, \`Do
I go? -- and have I smitten among these Philistines?' And Jehovah saith
unto David, \`Go, and thou hast smitten among the Philistines, and saved
Keilah.'

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> And David's men say unto him, \`Lo, we
here in Judah are afraid; and how much more when we go to Keilah, unto
the ranks of the Philistines?'

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> And David addeth again to ask at Jehovah,
and Jehovah answereth him, and saith, \`Rise, go down to Keilah, for I
am giving the Philistines into thy hand.'

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> And David goeth, and his men, to Keilah,
and fighteth with the Philistines, and leadeth away their cattle, and
smiteth among them -- a great smiting, and David saveth the inhabitants
of Keilah.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> And it cometh to pass, in the fleeing of
Abiathar son of Ahimelech unto David, to Keilah, an ephod came down in
his hand.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> And it is declared to Saul that David
hath come in to Keilah, and Saul saith, \`God hath made him known for my
hand, for he hath been shut in, to enter into a city of doors and bar.'

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> And Saul summoneth the whole of the
people to battle, to go down to Keilah, to lay siege unto David and unto
his men.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> And David knoweth that against him Saul
is devising the evil, and saith unto Abiathar the priest, \`Bring nigh
the ephod.'

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> And David saith, \`Jehovah, God of
Israel, Thy servant hath certainly heard that Saul is seeking to come in
unto Keilah, to destroy the city on mine account.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> Do the possessors of Keilah shut me up
into his hand? doth Saul come down as Thy servant hath heard? Jehovah,
God of Israel, declare, I pray Thee, to Thy servant.' And Jehovah saith,
\`He doth come down.'

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> And David saith, \`Do the possessors of
Keilah shut me up, and my men, into the hand of Saul?' And Jehovah
saith, \`They shut \[thee\] up.'

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And David riseth -- and his men --
about six hundred men, and they go out from Keilah, and go up and down
where they go up and down; and to Saul it hath been declared that David
hath escaped from Keilah, and he ceaseth to go out.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> And David abideth in the wilderness, in
fortresses, and abideth in the hill-country, in the wilderness of Ziph;
and Saul seeketh him all the days, and God hath not given him into his
hand.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> And David seeth that Saul hath come out
to seek his life, and David \[is\] in the wilderness of Ziph, in a
forest.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> And Jonathan son of Saul riseth, and
goeth unto David to the forest, and strengtheneth his hand in God,

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> and saith unto him, \`Fear not, for the
hand of Saul my father doth not find thee, and thou dost reign over
Israel, and I am to thee for second, and also so knoweth Saul my
father.'

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> And they make a covenant both of them
before Jehovah; and David abideth in the forest, and Jonathan hath gone
to his house.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> And the Ziphites go up unto Saul to
Gibeah, saying, \`Is not David hiding himself with us in fortresses, in
the forest, in the height of Hachilah, which \[is\] on the south of the
desolate place?

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> And, now, by all the desire of thy
soul, O king, to come down, come down, and ours \[is\] to shut him up
into the hand of the king.'

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> And Saul saith, \`Blessed \[are\] ye of
Jehovah, for ye have pity on me;

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> go, I pray you, prepare yet, and know
and see his place where his foot is; who hath seen him there? for
\[one\] hath said unto me, He is very subtile.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> And see and know of all the
hiding-places where he hideth himself, and ye have turned back unto me
prepared, and I have gone with you, and it hath been, if he is in the
land, that I have searched him out through all the thousands of Judah.'

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> And they rise and go to Ziph before
Saul, and David and his men \[are\] in the wilderness of Maon, in the
plain, at the south of the desolate place.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> And Saul and his men go to seek, and
they declare to David, and he goeth down the rock, and abideth in the
wilderness of Maon; and Saul heareth, and pursueth after David \[to\]
the wilderness of Maon.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> And Saul goeth on this side of the
mountain, and David and his men on that side of the mountain, and David
is hastened to go from the face of Saul, and Saul and his men are
compassing David and his men, to catch them.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> And a messenger hath come in unto Saul,
saying, \`Haste, and come, for the Philistines have pushed against the
land.'

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> And Saul turneth back from pursuing
after David, and goeth to meet the Philistines, therefore they have
called that place \`The Rock of Divisions.'

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> And David goeth up thence, and abideth
in fortresses \[at\] En-gedi.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> And it cometh to pass when Saul hath
turned back from after the Philistines, that they declare to him,
saying, \`Lo, David \[is\] in the wilderness of En-gedi.'

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And Saul taketh three thousand chosen men
out of all Israel, and goeth to seek David and his men, on the front of
the rocks of the wild goats,

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> and he cometh in unto folds of the flock,
on the way, and there \[is\] a cave, and Saul goeth in to cover his
feet; and David and his men in the sides of the cave are abiding.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> And the men of David say unto him, \`Lo,
the day of which Jehovah said unto thee, Lo, I am giving thine enemy
into thy hand, and thou hast done to him as it is good in thine eyes;'
and David riseth and cutteth off the skirt of the upper robe which
\[is\] on Saul -- gently.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> And it cometh to pass afterwards that the
heart of David smiteth him, because that he hath cut off the skirt which
\[is\] on Saul,

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> and he saith to his men, \`Far be it from
me, by Jehovah; I do not do this thing to my lord -- to the anointed of
Jehovah -- to put forth my hand against him, for the anointed of Jehovah
he \[is\].'

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> And David subdueth his men by words, and
hath not permitted them to rise against Saul; and Saul hath risen from
the cave, and goeth on the way;

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> and David riseth afterwards, and goeth
out from the cave, and calleth after Saul, saying, \`My lord, O king!'
And Saul looketh attentively behind him, and David boweth -- face to the
earth -- and doth obeisance.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> And David saith to Saul, \`Why dost thou
hear the words of man, saying, Lo, David is seeking thine evil?

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> Lo, this day have thine eyes seen how
that Jehovah hath given thee to-day into my hand in the cave; and
\[one\] said to slay thee, and \[mine eye\] hath pity on thee, and I
say, I do not put forth my hand against my lord, for the anointed of
Jehovah he \[is\].

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> \`And, my father, see, yea see the
skirt of thine upper robe in my hand; for by cutting off the skirt of
thy upper robe, and I have not slain thee, know and see that there is
not in my hand evil and transgression, and I have not sinned against
thee, and thou art hunting my soul to take it!

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> \`Jehovah doth judge between me and
thee, and Jehovah hath avenged me of thee, and my hand is not on thee;

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> as saith the simile of the ancients,
From the wicked goeth out wickedness, and my hand is not on thee.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> \`After whom hath the king of Israel
come out? after whom art thou pursuing? -- after a dead dog! after one
flea!

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> And Jehovah hath been for judge, and
hath judged between me and thee, yea, he seeth and pleadeth my cause,
and doth deliver me out of thy hand.'

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> And it cometh to pass, when David
completeth to speak these words unto Saul, that Saul saith, \`Is this
thy voice, my son David?' and Saul lifteth up his voice, and weepeth.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> And he saith unto David, \`More
righteous thou \[art\] than I; for thou hast done me good, and I have
done thee evil;

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> and thou hast declared to-day how that
thou hast done good with me, how that Jehovah shut me up into thy hand,
and thou didst not slay me,

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> and that a man doth find his enemy, and
hath sent him away in a good manner; and Jehovah doth repay thee good
for that which thou didst to me this day.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> \`And, now, lo, I have known that thou
dost certainly reign, and the kingdom of Israel hath stood in thy hand;

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> and, now, swear to me by Jehovah --
thou dost not cut off my seed after me, nor dost thou destroy my name
from the house of my father.'

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And David sweareth to Saul, and Saul
goeth unto his house, and David and his men have gone up unto the
fortress.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> And Samuel dieth, and all Israel are
gathered, and mourn for him, and bury him in his house, in Ramah; and
David riseth and goeth down unto the wilderness of Paran.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> And \[there is\] a man in Maon, and his
work \[is\] in Carmel; and the man \[is\] very great, and he hath three
thousand sheep, and a thousand goats; and he is shearing his flock in
Carmel.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> And the name of the man \[is\] Nabal, and
the name of his wife Abigail, and the woman \[is\] of good
understanding, and of fair form, and the man \[is\] hard and evil \[in\]
doings; and he \[is\] a Calebite.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> And David heareth in the wilderness that
Nabal is shearing his flock,

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> and David sendeth ten young men, and
David saith to the young men, \`Go ye up to Carmel, and ye have come in
unto Nabal, and asked of him in my name of welfare,

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> and said thus: To life! and thou, peace;
and thy house, peace; and all that thou hast -- peace!

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> and, now, I have heard that thou hast
shearers; now, the shepherds whom thou hast have been with us, we have
not put them to shame, nor hath anything been looked after by them, all
the days of their being in Carmel.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> \`Ask thy young men, and they declare to
thee, and the young men find grace in thine eyes, for on a good day we
have come; give, I pray thee, that which thy hand findeth, to thy
servants, and to thy son, to David.'

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> And the young men of David come in, and
speak unto Nabal according to all these words, in the name of David --
and rest.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> And Nabal answereth the servants of
David and saith, \`Who \[is\] David, and who the son of Jesse? to-day
have servants been multiplied who are breaking away each from his
master;

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> and I have taken my bread, and my
water, and my flesh, which I slaughtered for my shearers, and have given
\[it\] to men whom I have not known whence they \[are\]!'

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> And the young men of David turn on
their way, and turn back, and come in, and declare to him according to
all these words.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> And David saith to his men, \`Gird ye
on each his sword;' and they gird on each his sword, and David also
girdeth on his sword, and there go up after David about four hundred
men, and two hundred have remained by the vessels.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> And to Abigail wife of Nabal hath one
young man of the youths declared, saying, \`Lo, David hath sent
messengers out of the wilderness to bless our lord, and he flieth upon
them;

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> and the men \[are\] very good to us,
and have not put us to shame, and we have not looked after anything all
the days we have gone up and down with them, in our being in the field;

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> a wall they have been unto us both by
night and by day, all the days of our being with them, feeding the
flock.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> \`And, now, know and consider what thou
dost; for evil hath been determined against our lord, and against all
his house, and he \[is\] too much a son of worthlessness to be spoken
to.'

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> And Abigail hasteth, and taketh two
hundred loaves, and two bottles of wine, and five sheep, prepared, and
five measures of roasted corn, and a hundred bunches of raisins, and two
hundred bunches of figs, and setteth \[them\] on the asses.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> And she saith to her young men, \`Pass
over before me; lo, after you I am coming;' and to her husband Nabal she
hath not declared \[it\];

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> and it hath come to pass, she is riding
on the ass and is coming down in the secret part of the hill-country,
and lo, David and his men are coming down to meet her, and she meeteth
them.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> And David said, \`Only, in vain I have
kept all that this \[one\] hath in the wilderness, and nothing hath been
looked after of all that he hath, and he turneth back to me evil for
good;

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> thus doth God do to the enemies of
David, and thus He doth add, if I leave of all that he hath till the
light of the morning -- of those sitting on the wall.'

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> And Abigail seeth David, and hasteth
and cometh down from off the ass, and falleth before David on her face,
and boweth herself to the earth,

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> and falleth at his feet and saith, \`On
me, my lord, the iniquity; and let, I pray thee, thy handmaid speak in
thine ear, and hear the words of thy handmaid.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> \`Let not, I pray thee, my lord set his
heart to this man of worthlessness, on Nabal, for as his name \[is\] so
\[is\] he; Nabal \[is\] his name, and folly \[is\] with him; and I,
thine handmaid, did not see the young men of my lord whom thou didst
send;

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> and now, my lord, Jehovah liveth, and
thy soul liveth, in that Jehovah hath withheld thee from coming in with
blood, and to save thy hand to thee -- now let thine enemies be as
Nabal, even those seeking evil unto my lord.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> \`And, now, this blessing which thy
maid-servant hath brought to my lord -- it hath been given to the young
men who are going up and down at the feet of my lord.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> \`Bear, I pray thee, with the
transgression of thy handmaid, for Jehovah doth certainly make to my
lord a stedfast house; for the battles of Jehovah hath my lord fought,
and evil is not found in thee \[all\] thy days.

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> And man riseth to pursue thee and to
seek thy soul, and the soul of my lord hath been bound in the bundle of
life with Jehovah thy God; as to the soul of thine enemies, He doth
sling them out in the midst of the hollow of the sling.

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> \`And it hath been, when Jehovah doth
to my lord according to all the good which He hath spoken concerning
thee, and appointed thee for leader over Israel,

<span id="an_25:31">25:31</span> that this is not to thee for a
stumbling-block, and for an offence of heart to my lord -- either to
shed blood for nought, or my lord's restraining himself; and Jehovah
hath done good to my lord, and thou hast remembered thy handmaid.'

<span id="an_25:32">25:32</span> And David saith to Abigail, \`Blessed
\[is\] Jehovah, God of Israel, who hath sent thee this day to meet me,

<span id="an_25:33">25:33</span> and blessed \[is\] thy discretion, and
blessed \[art\] thou in that thou hast restrained me this day from
coming in with blood, and to restrain my hand to myself.

<span id="an_25:34">25:34</span> And yet, Jehovah liveth, God of Israel,
who hath kept me back from doing evil with thee, for unless thou hadst
hasted, and dost come to meet me, surely there had not been left to
Nabal till the light of the morning, of those sitting on the wall.'

<span id="an_25:35">25:35</span> And David receiveth from her hand that
which she hath brought to him, and to her he hath said, \`Go up in peace
to thy house; see, I have hearkened to thy voice, and accept thy face.'

<span id="an_25:36">25:36</span> And Abigail cometh in unto Nabal, and
lo, he hath a banquet in his house, like a banquet of the king, and the
heart of Nabal \[is\] glad within him, and he \[is\] drunk unto excess,
and she hath not declared to him anything, less or more, till the light
of the morning.

<span id="an_25:37">25:37</span> And it cometh to pass in the morning,
when the wine is gone out from Nabal, that his wife declareth to him
these things, and his heart dieth within him, and he hath been as a
stone.

<span id="an_25:38">25:38</span> And it cometh to pass, \[in\] about ten
days, that Jehovah smiteth Nabal, and he dieth,

<span id="an_25:39">25:39</span> and David heareth that Nabal \[is\]
dead, and saith, \`Blessed \[is\] Jehovah who hath pleaded the cause of
my reproach from the hand of Nabal, and His servant hath kept back from
evil, and the wickedness of Nabal hath Jehovah turned back on his own
head;' and David sendeth and speaketh with Abigail, to take her to him
for a wife.

<span id="an_25:40">25:40</span> And the servants of David come in unto
Abigail at Carmel, and speak unto her, saying, \`David hath sent us unto
thee to take thee to him for a wife.'

<span id="an_25:41">25:41</span> And she riseth and boweth herself --
face to the earth -- and saith, \`Lo, thy handmaid \[is\] for a
maid-servant to wash the feet of the servants of my lord.'

<span id="an_25:42">25:42</span> And Abigail hasteth and riseth, and
rideth on the ass; and five of her young women who are going at her
feet; and she goeth after the messengers of David, and is to him for a
wife.

<span id="an_25:43">25:43</span> And Ahinoam hath David taken from
Jezreel, and they are -- even both of them -- to him for wives;

<span id="an_25:44">25:44</span> and Saul gave Michal his daughter, wife
to David, to Phalti son of Laish, who \[is\] of Gallim.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> And the Ziphites come in unto Saul, at
Gibeah, saying, \`Is not David hiding himself in the height of Hachilah,
on the front of the desert?'

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> And Saul riseth, and goeth down unto the
wilderness of Ziph, and with him three thousand men, chosen ones of
Israel, to seek David in the wilderness of Ziph.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> And Saul encampeth in the height of
Hachilah, which \[is\] on the front of the desert, by the way, and David
is abiding in the wilderness, and he seeth that Saul hath come after him
in to the wilderness;

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> and David sendeth spies, and knoweth that
Saul hath come unto Nachon,

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> and David riseth, and cometh in unto the
place where Saul hath encamped, and David seeth the place where Saul
hath lain, and Abner son of Ner, head of his host, and Saul is lying in
the path, and the people are encamping round about him.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> And David answereth and saith unto
Ahimelech the Hittite, and unto Abishai son of Zeruiah, brother of Joab,
saying, \`Who doth go down with me unto Saul, unto the camp?' and
Abishai saith, \`I -- I go down with thee.'

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> And David cometh -- and Abishai -- unto
the people by night, and lo, Saul is lying sleeping in the path, and his
spear struck into the earth at his pillow, and abner and the people are
lying round about him.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> And Abishai saith unto David, \`God hath
shut up to-day thine enemy into thy hand; and, now, let me smite him, I
pray thee, with a spear, even into the earth at once -- and I do repeat
\[it\] to him.'

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> And David saith unto Abishai, \`Destroy
him not; for who hath put forth his hand against the anointed of
Jehovah, and been acquitted?'

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> And David saith, \`Jehovah liveth;
except Jehovah doth smite him, or his day come that he hath died, or
into battle he go down, and hath been consumed --

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> far be it from me, by Jehovah, from
putting forth my hand against the anointed of Jehovah; and, now, take, I
pray thee, the spear which \[is\] at his pillow, and the cruse of water,
and we go away.'

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> And David taketh the spear, and the
cruse of water at the pillow of Saul, and they go away, and there is
none seeing, and there is none knowing, and there is none awaking, for
all of them are sleeping, for a deep sleep \[from\] Jehovah hath fallen
upon them.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> And David passeth over to the other
side, and standeth on the top of the hill afar off -- great \[is\] the
place between them;

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> and David calleth unto the people, and
unto Abner son of Ner, saying, \`Dost thou not answer, Abner?' and Abner
answereth and saith, \`Who \[art\] thou \[who\] hast called unto the
king?'

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> And David saith unto Abner, \`Art not
thou a man? and who \[is\] like thee in Israel? but why hast thou not
watched over thy lord the king? for one of the people had come in to
destroy the king, thy lord.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> Not good is this thing which thou hast
done; Jehovah liveth, but ye \[are\] sons of death, in that ye have not
watched over your lord, over the anointed of Jehovah; and now, see where
the king's spear \[is\], and the cruse of water which \[is\] at his
bolster.'

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> And Saul discerneth the voice of David,
and saith, \`Is this thy voice, my son David?' and David saith, \`My
voice, my lord, O king!'

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> and he saith, \`Why \[is\] this -- my
lord is pursuing after his servant? for what have I done, and what
\[is\] in my hand evil?

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> And, now, let, I pray thee, my lord the
king hear the words of his servant: if Jehovah hath moved thee against
me, let Him accept a present; and if the sons of men -- cursed \[are\]
they before Jehovah, for they have cast me out to-day from being
admitted into the inheritance of Jehovah, saying, Go, serve other gods.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> \`And now, let not my blood fall to the
earth over-against the face of Jehovah, for the king of Israel hath come
out to seek one flea, as \[one\] pursueth the partridge in mountains.'

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> And Saul saith, \`I have sinned; turn
back, my son David, for I do evil to thee no more, because that my soul
hath been precious in thine eyes this day; lo, I have acted foolishly,
and do err very greatly.'

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> And David answereth and saith, \`Lo,
the king's spear; and let one of the young men pass over, and receive
it;

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> and Jehovah doth turn back to each his
righteousness and his faithfulness, in that Jehovah hath given thee
to-day into \[my\] hand, and I have not been willing to put forth my
hand against the anointed of Jehovah,

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> and lo, as thy soul hath been great
this day in mine eyes, so is my soul great in the eyes of Jehovah, and
He doth deliver me out of all distress.'

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> And Saul saith unto David, \`Blessed
\[art\] thou, my son David, also working thou dost work, and also
prevailing thou dost prevail.' And David goeth on his way, and Saul hath
turned back to his place.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> And David saith unto his heart, \`Now am
I consumed one day by the hand of Saul; there is nothing for me better
than that I diligently escape unto the land of the Philistines, and Saul
hath been despairing of me -- of seeking me any more in all the border
of Israel, and I have escaped out of his hand.'

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And David riseth, and passeth over, he
and six hundred men who \[are\] with him, unto Achish son of Maoch king
of Gath;

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> and David dwelleth with Achish in Gath,
he and his men, each one with his household, \[even\] David and his two
wives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail wife of Nabal the
Carmelitess.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> And it is declared to Saul that David
hath fled to Gath, and he hath not added any more to seek him.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> And David saith unto Achish, \`If, I pray
thee, I have found grace in thine eyes, they give to me a place in one
of the cities of the field, and I dwell there, yea, why doth thy servant
dwell in the royal city with thee?'

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> And Achish giveth to him in that day
Ziklag, therefore hath Ziklag been to the kings of Judah till this day.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> And the number of the days which David
hath dwelt in the field of the Philistines \[is\] days and four months;

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> and David goeth up and his men, and they
push unto the Geshurite, and the Gerizite, and the Amalekite, (for they
are inhabitants of the land from of old), as thou comest in to Shur and
unto the land of Egypt,

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> and David hath smitten the land, and doth
not keep alive man and woman, and hath taken sheep, and oxen, and asses,
and camels, and garments, and turneth back, and cometh in unto Achish.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> And Achish saith, \`Whither have ye
pushed to-day?' and David saith, \`Against the south of Judah, and
against the south of the Jerahmeelite, and unto the south of the
Kenite.'

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> Neither man nor woman doth David keep
alive, to bring in \[word\] to Gath, saying, \`Lest they declare \[it\]
against us, saying, Thus hath David done, and thus \[is\] his custom all
the days that he hath dwelt in the fields of the Philistines.'

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> And Achish believeth in David, saying,
\`He hath made himself utterly abhorred among his people, in Israel, and
hath been to me for a servant age-during.'

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> And it cometh to pass in those days, that
the Philistines gather their camps for the war, to fight against Israel,
and Achish saith unto David, \`Thou dost certainly know that with me
thou dost go out into the camp, thou and thy men.'

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> And David saith unto Achish, \`Therefore
-- thou dost know that which thy servant dost do.' And Achish saith unto
David, \`Therefore -- keeper of my head I do appoint thee all the days.'

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> And Samuel hath died, and all Israel
mourn for him, and bury him in Ramah, even in his city, and Saul hath
turned aside those having familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the
land.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> And the Philistines are gathered, and
come in, and encamp in Shunem, and Saul gathereth all Israel, and they
encamp in Gilboa,

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> and Saul seeth the camp of the
Philistines, and feareth, and his heart trembleth greatly,

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> and Saul asketh at Jehovah, and Jehovah
hath not answered him, either by dreams, or by Urim, or by prophets.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> And Saul saith to his servants, \`Seek
for me a woman possessing a familiar spirit, and I go unto her, and
inquire of her;' and his servants say unto him, \`Lo, a woman possessing
a familiar spirit in En-dor.'

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> And Saul disguiseth himself and putteth
on other garments, and goeth, he and two of the men with him, and they
come in unto the woman by night, and he saith, \`Divine, I pray thee, to
me by the familiar spirit, and cause to come up to me him whom I say
unto thee.'

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> And the woman saith unto him, \`Lo, thou
hast known that which Saul hath done, that he hath cut off those having
familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land; and why art thou
laying a snare for my soul -- to put me to death?'

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> And Saul sweareth to her by Jehovah,
saying, \`Jehovah liveth, punishment doth not meet thee for this thing.'

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> And the woman saith, \`Whom do I bring
up to thee?' and he saith, \`Samuel -- bring up to me.'

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> And the woman seeth Samuel, and crieth
with a loud voice, and the woman speaketh unto Saul, saying, \`Why hast
thou deceived me -- and thou Saul?'

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> And the king saith to her, \`Do not
fear; for what hast thou seen?' and the woman saith unto Saul, \`Gods I
have seen coming up out of the earth.'

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> And he saith to her, \`What \[is\] his
form?' and she saith, \`An aged man is coming up, and he \[is\] covered
with an upper robe;' and Saul knoweth that he \[is\] Samuel, and boweth
-- face to thee earth -- and doth obeisance.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> And Samuel saith unto Saul, \`Why hast
thou troubled me, to bring me up?' And Saul saith, \`I have great
distress, and the Philistines are fighting against me, God hath turned
aside from me, and hath not answered me any more, either by the hand of
the prophets, or by dreams; and I call for thee to let me know what I
do.'

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> And Samuel saith, \`And why dost thou
ask me, and Jehovah hath turned aside from thee, and is thine enemy?

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> And Jehovah doth for Himself as He hath
spoken by my hand, and Jehovah rendeth the kingdom out of thy hand, and
giveth it to thy neighbour -- to David.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> Because thou hast not hearkened to the
voice of Jehovah, nor didst the fierceness of His anger on Amalek --
therefore this thing hath Jehovah done to thee this day;

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> yea, Jehovah giveth also Israel with
thee into the hand of the Philistines, and tomorrow thou and thy sons
\[are\] with me; also the camp of Israel doth Jehovah give into the hand
of the Philistines.'

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> And Saul hasteth and falleth -- the
fulness of his stature -- to the earth, and feareth greatly because of
the words of Samuel; also power was not in him, for he had not eaten
bread all the day, and all the night.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> And the woman cometh in unto Saul, and
seeth that he hath been greatly troubled, and saith unto him, \`Lo, thy
maid-servant hath hearkened to thy voice, and I put my soul in my hand,
and I obey thy words which thou hast spoken unto me;

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> and now, hearken, I pray thee, also
thou, to the voice of thy maid-servant, and I set before thee a morsel
of bread, and eat, and there is in thee power when thou goest in the
way.'

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> And he refuseth, and saith, \`I do not
eat;' and his servants urge on him, and also the woman, and he
hearkeneth to their voice, and riseth from the earth, and sitteth on the
bed.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> And the woman hath a calf of the stall
in the house, and she hasteth and slaughtereth it, and taketh flour, and
kneadeth, and baketh it unleavened things,

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> and bringeth nigh before Saul, and
before his servants, and they eat, and rise, and go on, during that
night.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> And the Philistines gather all their
camps to Aphek, and the Israelites are encamping at a fountain which
\[is\] in Jezreel,

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> and the princes of the Philistines are
passing on by hundreds, and by thousands, and David and his men are
passing on in the rear with Achish.

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> And the heads of the Philistines say,
\`What \[are\] these Hebrews?' and Achish saith unto the heads of the
Philistines, \`Is not this David servant of Saul king of Israel, who
hath been with me these days or these years, and I have not found in him
anything \[wrong\] from the day of his falling away till this day.'

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> And the heads of the Philistines are
wroth against him, and the heads of the Philistines say to him, \`Send
back the man, and he doth turn back unto his place whither thou hast
appointed him, and doth not go down with us into battle, and is not to
us for an adversary in battle; and wherewith doth this one reconcile
himself unto his lord -- is it not with the heads of those men?'

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> Is not this David, of whom they answer in
choruses, saying, Saul hath smitten among his thousands, and David among
his myriads?'

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> And Achish calleth unto David, and saith
unto him, \`Jehovah liveth, surely thou \[art\] upright, and good in
mine eyes is thy going out, and thy coming in, with me in the camp, for
I have not found in thee evil from the day of thy coming in unto me till
this day; and in the eyes of the princes thou art not good;

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> and now, turn back, and go in peace, and
thou dost do no evil in the eyes of the princes of the Philistines.'

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> And David saith unto Achish, \`But what
have I done? and what hast thou found in thy servant from the day that I
have been before thee till this day -- that I go not in and have fought
against the enemies of my lord the king?'

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> And Achish answereth and saith unto
David, \`I have known that thou \[art\] good in mine eyes as a messenger
of God; only, the princes of the Philistines have said, He doth not go
up with us into battle;

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> and now, rise thou early in the
morning, and the servants of thy lord who have come with thee, when ye
have risen early in the morning, and have light, then go ye.'

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> And David riseth early, he and his men,
to go in the morning, to turn back unto the land of the Philistines, and
the Philistines have gone up to Jezreel.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> And it cometh to pass, in the coming in
of David and his men to Ziklag, on the third day, that the Amalekites
have pushed unto the south, and unto Ziklag, and smite Ziklag, and burn
it with fire,

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> and they take captive the women who
\[are\] in it; from small unto great they have not put any one to death,
and they lead away, and go on their way.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> And David cometh in -- and his men --
unto the city, and lo, burnt with fire, and their wives, and their sons,
and their daughters have been taken captive!

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> And David lifteth up -- and the people
who \[are\] with him -- their voice and weep, till that they have no
power to weep.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> And the two wives of David have been
taken captive, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail wife of Nabal the
Carmelite;

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> and David hath great distress, for the
people have said to stone him, for the soul of all the people hath been
bitter, each for his sons and for his daughters; and David doth
strengthen himself in Jehovah his God.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> And David saith unto Abiathar the priest,
son of Ahimelech, \`Bring nigh, I pray thee, to me the ephod;' and
Abiathar bringeth nigh the ephod unto David,

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> and David asketh at Jehovah, saying, \`I
pursue after this troop -- do I overtake it?' And He saith to him,
\`Pursue, for thou dost certainly overtake, and dost certainly deliver.'

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> And David goeth on, he and six hundred
men who \[are\] with him, and they come in unto the brook of Besor, and
those left have stood still,

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> and David pursueth, he and four hundred
men, (and two hundred men stand still who have been too faint to pass
over the brook of Besor),

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> and they find a man, an Egyptian, in
the field, and take him unto David, and give to him bread, and he
eateth, and they cause him to drink water,

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> and give to him a piece of a bunch of
dried figs, and two bunches of raisins, and he eateth, and his spirit
returneth unto him, for he hath not eaten bread nor drunk water three
days and three nights.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> And David saith to him, \`Whose \[art\]
thou? and whence \[art\] thou?' And he saith, \`An Egyptian youth I
\[am\], servant to a man, an Amalekite, and my lord forsaketh me, for I
have been sick three days,

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> we pushed \[to\] the south of the
Cherethite, and against that which \[is\] to Judah, and against the
south of Caleb, and Ziklag we burned with fire.'

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> And David saith unto him, \`Dost thou
bring me down unto this troop?' and he saith, \`Swear to me by God --
thou dost not put me to death, nor dost thou shut me up into the hand of
my lord -- and I bring thee down unto this troop.'

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> And he bringeth him down, and lo, they
are spread out over the face of all the earth, eating, and drinking, and
feasting, with all the great spoil which they have taken out of the land
of the Philistines, and out of the land of Judah.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> And David smiteth them from the
twilight even unto the evening of the morrow, and there hath not escaped
of them a man, except four hundred young men who have ridden on the
camels, and are fled.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> And David delivereth all that the
Amalekites have taken; also his two wives hath David delivered.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> And there hath not lacked to them
\[anything\], from small unto great, and unto sons and daughters, and
from the spoil, even unto all that they had taken to themselves, the
whole hath David brought back,

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> and David taketh the whole of the
flock, and of the herd, they have led on before these cattle, and they
say, \`This \[is\] David's spoil.'

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> And David cometh in unto the two
hundred men who were too faint to go after David, and whom they cause to
abide at the brook of Besor, and they go out to meet David, and to meet
the people who \[are\] with him, and David approacheth the people, and
asketh of them of welfare.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> And every bad and worthless man, of the
men who have gone with David, answereth, yea, they say, \`Because that
they have not gone with us we do not give to them of the spoil which we
have delivered, except each his wife and his children, and they lead
away and go.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> And David saith, \`Ye do not do so, my
brethren, with that which Jehovah hath given to us, and He doth preserve
us, and doth give the troop which cometh against us into our hand;

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> and who doth hearken to you in this
thing? for as the portion of him who was brought down into battle, so
also \[is\] the portion of him who is abiding by the vessels -- alike
they share.'

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> And it cometh to pass from that day and
forward, that he appointeth it for a statute and for an ordinance for
Israel unto this day.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> And David cometh in unto Ziklag, and
sendeth of the spoil to the elders of Judah, to his friends, (saying,
\`Lo, for you a blessing, of the spoil of the enemies of Jehovah),'

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> to those in Beth-El, and to those in
South Ramoth, and to those in Jattir,

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> and to those in Aroer, and to those in
Siphmoth, and to those in Eshtemoa,

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> and to those in Rachal, and to those in
the cities of the Jerahmeelites, and to those in the cities of the
Kenites,

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> and to those in Hormah, and to those in
Chor-Ashan, and to those in Athach,

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> and to those in Hebron, and to all the
places where David had gone up and down, he and his men.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> And the Philistines are fighting against
Israel, and the men of Israel flee from the face of the Philistines, and
fall wounded in mount Gilboa,

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> and the Philistines follow Saul and his
sons, and the Philistines smite Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Malchishua,
sons of Saul.

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> And the battle is hard against Saul, and
the archers find him -- men with bow -- and he is pained greatly by the
archers;

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> and Saul saith to the bearer of his
weapons, \`Draw thy sword, and pierce me with it, lest they come --
these uncircumcised -- and have pierced me, and rolled themselves on
me;' and the bearer of his weapons hath not been willing, for he is
greatly afraid, and Saul taketh the sword, and falleth upon it.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> And the bearer of his weapons seeth that
Saul \[is\] dead, and he falleth -- he also -- on his sword, and dieth
with him;

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> and Saul dieth, and three of his sons,
and the bearer of his weapons, also all his men, on that day together.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> And they see -- the men of Israel, who
\[are\] beyond the valley, and who \[are\] beyond the Jordan -- that the
men of Israel have fled, and that Saul and his sons have died, and they
forsake the cities and flee, and Philistines come in, and dwell in them.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> And it cometh to pass on the morrow, that
the Philistines come to strip the wounded, and they find Saul and his
three sons fallen on mount Gilboa,

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> and they cut off his head, and strip off
his weapons, and send into the land of the Philistines round about, to
proclaim tidings \[in\] the house of their idols, and \[among\] the
people;

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> and they place his weapons \[in\] the
house of Ashtaroth, and his body they have fixed on the wall of
Beth-Shan.

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> And they hear regarding it -- the
inhabitants of Jabesh-Gilead -- that which the Philistines have done to
Saul,

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> and all the men of valour arise, and go
all the night, and take the body of Saul, and the bodies of his sons,
from the wall of Beth-Shan, and come in to Jabesh, and burn them there,

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> and they take their bones, and bury
\[them\] under the tamarisk in Jabesh, and fast seven days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Samuel](sa2.md)
