[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th1)  [Next](ti1) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: 2 Thessalonians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus, to the
assembly of Thessalonians in God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace to you, and peace, from God our
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ!

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> We ought to give thanks to God always for
you, brethren, as it is meet, because increase greatly doth your faith,
and abound doth the love of each one of you all, to one another;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> so that we ourselves do glory in you in the
assemblies of God, for your endurance and faith in all your persecutions
and tribulations that ye bear;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> a token of the righteous judgment of God,
for your being counted worthy of the reign of God, for which also ye
suffer,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> since \[it is\] a righteous thing with God
to give back to those troubling you -- trouble,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> and to you who are troubled -- rest with us
in the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven, with messengers of his
power,

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> in flaming fire, giving vengeance to those
not knowing God, and to those not obeying the good news of our Lord
Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> who shall suffer justice -- destruction
age-during -- from the face of the Lord, and from the glory of his
strength,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> when He may come to be glorified in his
saints, and to be wondered at in all those believing -- because our
testimony was believed among you -- in that day;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> for which also we do pray always for you,
that our God may count you worthy of the calling, and may fulfil all the
good pleasure of goodness, and the work of the faith in power,

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> that the name of our Lord Jesus Christ
may be glorified in you, and ye in him, according to the grace of our
God and Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And we ask you, brethren, in regard to the
presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of our gathering together unto
him,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> that ye be not quickly shaken in mind, nor
be troubled, neither through spirit, neither through word, neither
through letters as through us, as that the day of Christ hath arrived;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> let not any one deceive you in any manner,
because -- if the falling away may not come first, and the man of sin be
revealed -- the son of the destruction,

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> who is opposing and is raising himself up
above all called God or worshipped, so that he in the sanctuary of God
as God hath sat down, shewing himself off that he is God -- \[the day
doth not come\].

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Do ye not remember that, being yet with
you, these things I said to you?

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> and now, what is keeping down ye have
known, for his being revealed in his own time,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> for the secret of the lawlessness doth
already work, only he who is keeping down now \[will hinder\] -- till he
may be out of the way,

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> and then shall be revealed the Lawless One,
whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall
destroy with the manifestation of his presence,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> \[him,\] whose presence is according to the
working of the Adversary, in all power, and signs, and lying wonders,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> and in all deceitfulness of the
unrighteousness in those perishing, because the love of the truth they
did not receive for their being saved,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> and because of this shall God send to
them a working of delusion, for their believing the lie,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> that they may be judged -- all who did
not believe the truth, but were well pleased in the unrighteousness.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And we -- we ought to give thanks to God
always for you, brethren, beloved by the Lord, that God did choose you
from the beginning to salvation, in sanctification of the Spirit, and
belief of the truth,

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> to which He did call you through our good
news, to the acquiring of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> so, then, brethren, stand ye fast, and
hold the deliverances that ye were taught, whether through word, whether
through our letter;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> and may our Lord Jesus Christ himself,
and our God and Father, who did love us, and did give comfort
age-during, and good hope in grace,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> comfort your hearts, and establish you in
every good word and work.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> As to the rest, pray ye, brethren,
concerning us, that the word of the Lord may run and may be glorified,
as also with you,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> and that we may be delivered from the
unreasonable and evil men, for the faith \[is\] not of all;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> and stedfast is the Lord, who shall
establish you, and shall guard \[you\] from the evil;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> and we have confidence in the Lord touching
you, that the things that we command you ye both do and will do;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> and the Lord direct your hearts to the love
of God, and to the endurance of the Christ.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And we command you, brethren, in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to withdraw yourselves from every brother
disorderly walking, and not after the deliverance that ye received from
us,

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> for yourselves have known how it behoveth
\[you\] to imitate us, because we did not act disorderly among you;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> nor for nought did we eat bread of any one,
but in labour and in travail, night and day working, not to be
chargeable to any of you;

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> not because we have not authority, but that
ourselves a pattern we might give to you, to imitate us;

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> for even when we were with you, this we
did command you, that if any one is not willing to work, neither let him
eat,

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> for we hear of certain walking among you
disorderly, nothing working, but over working,

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> and such we command and exhort through
our Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness working, their own bread they
may eat;

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> and ye, brethren, may ye not be weary
doing well,

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> and if any one do not obey our word
through the letter, this one note ye, and have no company with him, that
he may be ashamed,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> and as an enemy count \[him\] not, but
admonish ye \[him\] as a brother;

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> and may the Lord of the peace Himself
give to you the peace always in every way; the Lord \[is\] with you all!

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> The salutation by the hand of me, Paul,
which is a sign in every letter; thus I write;

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ \[is\]
with you all! Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy](ti1)
