[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ti1)  [Next](tit.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: 2 Timothy

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ, through
the will of God, according to a promise of life that \[is\] in Christ
Jesus,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> to Timotheus, beloved child: Grace,
kindness, peace, from God the Father, and Christ Jesus our Lord!

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> I am thankful to God, whom I serve from
progenitors in a pure conscience, that unceasingly I have remembrance
concerning thee in my supplications night and day,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> desiring greatly to see thee, being mindful
of thy tears, that with joy I may be filled,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> taking remembrance of the unfeigned faith
that is in thee, that dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy
mother Eunice, and I am persuaded that also in thee.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> For which cause I remind thee to stir up
the gift of God that is in thee through the putting on of my hands,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> for God did not give us a spirit of fear,
but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> therefore thou mayest not be ashamed of the
testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner, but do thou suffer evil
along with the good news according to the power of God,

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> who did save us, and did call with an holy
calling, not according to our works, but according to His own purpose
and grace, that was given to us in Christ Jesus, before the times of the
ages,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> and was made manifest now through the
manifestation of our Saviour Jesus Christ, who indeed did abolish death,
and did enlighten life and immortality through the good news,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> to which I was placed a preacher and an
apostle, and a teacher of nations,

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> for which cause also these things I
suffer, but I am not ashamed, for I have known in whom I have believed,
and have been persuaded that he is able that which I have committed to
him to guard -- to that day.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> The pattern hold thou of sound words,
which from me thou didst hear, in faith and love that \[is\] in Christ
Jesus;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> the good thing committed guard thou
through the Holy Spirit that is dwelling in us;

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> thou hast known this, that they did turn
from me -- all those in Asia, of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes;

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> may the Lord give kindness to the house
of Onesiphorus, because many times he did refresh me, and of my chain
was not ashamed,

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> but being in Rome, very diligently he
sought me, and found;

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> may the Lord give to him to find kindness
from the Lord in that day; and how many things in Ephesus he did
minister thou dost very well know.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Thou, therefore, my child, be strong in the
grace that \[is\] in Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> and the things that thou didst hear from me
through many witnesses, these things be committing to stedfast men, who
shall be sufficient also others to teach;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> thou, therefore, suffer evil as a good
soldier of Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> no one serving as a soldier did entangle
himself with the affairs of life, that him who did enlist him he may
please;

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> and if also any one may strive, he is not
crowned, except he may strive lawfully;

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> the labouring husbandman it behoveth first
of the fruits to partake;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> be considering what things I say, for the
Lord give to thee understanding in all things.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Remember Jesus Christ, raised out of the
dead, of the seed of David, according to my good news,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> in which I suffer evil -- unto bonds, as an
evil-doer, but the word of God hath not been bound;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> because of this all things do I endure,
because of the choice ones, that they also salvation may obtain that
\[is\] in Christ Jesus, with glory age-during.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Stedfast \[is\] the word: For if we died
together -- we also shall live together;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> if we do endure together -- we shall also
reign together; if we deny \[him\], he also shall deny us;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> if we are not stedfast, he remaineth
stedfast; to deny himself he is not able.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> These things remind \[them\] of,
testifying fully before the Lord -- not to strive about words to nothing
profitable, but to the subversion of those hearing;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> be diligent to present thyself approved
to God -- a workman irreproachable, rightly dividing the word of the
truth;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> and the profane vain talkings stand aloof
from, for to more impiety they will advance,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> and their word as a gangrene will have
pasture, of whom is Hymenaeus and Philetus,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> who concerning the truth did swerve,
saying the rising again to have already been, and do overthrow the faith
of some;

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> sure, nevertheless, hath the foundation
of God stood, having this seal, \`The Lord hath known those who are
His,' and \`Let him depart from unrighteousness -- every one who is
naming the name of Christ.'

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And in a great house there are not only
vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth, and some
to honour, and some to dishonour:

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> if, then, any one may cleanse himself
from these, he shall be a vessel to honour, sanctified and profitable to
the master -- to every good work having been prepared,

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> and the youthful lusts flee thou, and
pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those calling upon the
Lord out of a pure heart;

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> and the foolish and uninstructed
questions be avoiding, having known that they beget strife,

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> and a servant of the Lord it behoveth not
to strive, but to be gentle unto all, apt to teach, patient under evil,

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> in meekness instructing those opposing --
if perhaps God may give to them repentance to an acknowledging of the
truth,

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> and they may awake out of the devil's
snare, having been caught by him at his will.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And this know thou, that in the last days
there shall come perilous times,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> for men shall be lovers of themselves,
lovers of money, boasters, proud, evil-speakers, to parents disobedient,
unthankful, unkind,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> without natural affection, implacable,
false accusers, incontinent, fierce, not lovers of those who are good,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> traitors, heady, lofty, lovers of pleasure
more than lovers of God,

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> having a form of piety, and its power
having denied; and from these be turning away,

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> for of these there are those coming into
the houses and leading captive the silly women, laden with sins, led
away with desires manifold,

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> always learning, and never to a knowledge
of truth able to come,

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> and, even as Jannes and Jambres stood
against Moses, so also these do stand against the truth, men corrupted
in mind, disapproved concerning the faith;

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> but they shall not advance any further, for
their folly shall be manifest to all, as theirs also did become.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And thou -- thou hast followed after my
teaching, manner of life, purpose, faith, long-suffering, love,
endurance,

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> the persecutions, the afflictions, that
befel me in Antioch, in Iconium, in Lystra; what persecutions I endured,
and out of all the Lord did deliver me,

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> and all also who will to live piously in
Christ Jesus shall be persecuted,

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> and evil men and impostors shall advance
to the worse, leading astray and being led astray.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And thou -- be remaining in the things
which thou didst learn and wast entrusted with, having known from whom
thou didst learn,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> and because from a babe the Holy Writings
thou hast known, which are able to make thee wise -- to salvation,
through faith that \[is\] in Christ Jesus;

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> every Writing \[is\] God-breathed, and
profitable for teaching, for conviction, for setting aright, for
instruction that \[is\] in righteousness,

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> that the man of God may be fitted -- for
every good work having been completed.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> I do fully testify, then, before God, and
the Lord Jesus Christ, who is about to judge living and dead at his
manifestation and his reign --

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> preach the word; be earnest in season, out
of season, convict, rebuke, exhort, in all long-suffering and teaching,

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> for there shall be a season when the sound
teaching they will not suffer, but according to their own desires to
themselves they shall heap up teachers -- itching in the hearing,

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> and indeed, from the truth the hearing they
shall turn away, and to the fables they shall be turned aside.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And thou -- watch in all things; suffer
evil; do the work of one proclaiming good news; of thy ministration make
full assurance,

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> for I am already being poured out, and the
time of my release hath arrived;

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> the good strife I have striven, the course
I have finished, the faith I have kept,

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> henceforth there is laid up for me the
crown of the righteousness that the Lord -- the Righteous Judge -- shall
give to me in that day, and not only to me, but also to all those loving
his manifestation.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Be diligent to come unto me quickly,

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> for Demas forsook me, having loved the
present age, and went on to Thessalonica, Crescens to Galatia, Titus to
Dalmatia,

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Lukas only is with me; Markus having
taken, bring with thyself, for he is profitable to me for ministration;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> and Tychicus I sent to Ephesus;

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> the cloak that I left in Troas with
Carpus, coming, bring thou and the books -- especially the parchments.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Alexander the coppersmith did me much
evil; may the Lord repay to him according to his works,

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> of whom also do thou beware, for greatly
hath he stood against our words;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> in my first defence no one stood with me,
but all forsook me, (may it not be reckoned to them!)

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> and the Lord stood by me, and did
strengthen me, that through me the preaching might be fully assured, and
all the nations might hear, and I was freed out of the mouth of a lion,

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> and the Lord shall free me from every
evil work, and shall save \[me\] -- to his heavenly kingdom; to whom
\[is\] the glory to the ages of the ages! Amen.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Salute Prisca and Aquilas, and
Onesiphorus' household;

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Erastus did remain in Corinth, and
Trophimus I left in Miletus infirm;

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> be diligent to come before winter. Salute
thee doth Eubulus, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the
brethren.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> The Lord Jesus Christ \[is\] with thy
spirit; the grace \[is\] with you! Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Titus](tit.md)
