[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hag)  [Next](mal) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Young's Literal Translation: Zechariah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> In the eighth month, in the second year of
Darius, hath a word of Jehovah been unto Zechariah, son of Berechiah,
son of Iddo, the prophet, saying:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> \`Jehovah was wroth against your fathers --
wrath!

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And thou hast said unto them, Thus said
Jehovah of Hosts, turn back unto Me, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts,
And I turn back unto you, said Jehovah of Hosts.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Ye shall not be as your fathers, To whom
the former prophets called, saying: Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, Turn
back I pray you, From your evil ways and from your evil doings, And they
did not hearken, Nor attend to Me -- an affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Your fathers -- where \[are\] they? And the
prophets -- to the age do they live?

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Only, My words, and My statutes, That I
commanded My servants the prophets, Have they not overtaken your
fathers, And they turn back and say: As Jehovah of Hosts designed to do
to us, According to our ways, and according to our doings, So He hath
done to us?'

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> On the twenty and fourth day of the
eleventh month, (it \[is\] the month of Sebat,) in the second year of
Darius, hath a word of Jehovah been unto Zechariah, son of Berechiah,
son of Iddo, the prophet, saying:

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> I have seen by night, and lo, one riding on
a red horse, and he is standing between the myrtles that \[are\] in the
shade, and behind him \[are\] horses, red, bay, and white.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And I say, \`What \[are\] these, my lord?'
And the messenger who is speaking with me saith unto me, \`I -- I do
shew thee what these \[are\].'

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And the one who is standing between the
myrtles doth answer and say, \`These \[are\] they whom Jehovah hath sent
to walk up and down in the land.'

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And they answer the messenger of Jehovah
who is standing between the myrtles, and say, \`We have walked up and
down in the land, and lo, all the land is sitting still, and at rest.'

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And the messenger of Jehovah answereth
and saith, \`Jehovah of Hosts! till when dost Thou not pity Jerusalem,
and the cities of Judah, that Thou hast abhorred these seventy years?'

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And Jehovah answereth the messenger, who
is speaking with me, good words, comfortable words.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And the messenger who is speaking with
me, saith unto me, \`Call, saying: Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: I have
been zealous for Jerusalem, and for Zion \[with\] great zeal.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And \[with\] great wrath I am wroth
against the nations who are at ease, For I was a little wroth, and they
assisted -- for evil.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Therefore, thus said Jehovah: I have
turned to Jerusalem with mercies, My house is built in it, An
affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts, And a line is stretched over Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Again call, saying: Thus said Jehovah of
Hosts, Again do my cities overflow from good, And Jehovah hath again
comforted Zion, And He hath fixed again on Jerusalem.'

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And I lift up mine eyes, and look, and
lo, four horns.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And I say unto the messenger who is
speaking with me, \`What \[are\] these?' And he saith unto me, \`These
\[are\] the horns that have scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem.'

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And Jehovah doth shew me four artizans.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And I say, \`What \[are\] these coming in
to do?' And He speaketh, saying: \`These \[are\] the horns that have
scattered Judah, so that no one hath lifted up his head, and these come
in to trouble them, to cast down the horns of the nations who are
lifting up a horn against the land of Judah -- to scatter it.'

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And I lift up mine eyes, and look, and lo,
a man, and in his hand a measuring line.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And I say, \`Whither are thou going?' And
he saith unto me, \`To measure Jerusalem, to see how much \[is\] its
breadth, and how much its length.'

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And lo, the messenger who is speaking with
me is going out, and another messenger is going out to meet him,

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> and he saith unto him, \`Run, speak unto
this young man, saying: Unwalled villages inhabit doth Jerusalem, From
the abundance of man and beast in her midst.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And I -- I am to her -- an affirmation of
Jehovah, A wall of fire round about, And for honour I am in her midst.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Ho, ho, and flee from the land of the
north, An affirmation of Jehovah, For, as the four winds of the heavens,
I have spread you abroad, An affirmation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Ho, Zion, be delivered who art dwelling
\[with\] the daughter of Babylon.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> For thus said Jehovah of Hosts: After
honour He hath sent me unto the nations who are spoiling you, For he who
is coming against you, Is coming against the daughter of His eye.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> For lo, I am waving my hand against them,
And they have been a spoil to their servants. And ye have known that
Jehovah of Hosts hath sent me.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Singe, and rejoice, O daughter of Zion,
For lo, I am coming, and have dwelt in thy midst, An affirmation of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And joined have been many nations unto
Jehovah in that day, And they have been to Me for a people, And I have
dwelt in thy midst, And thou hast known that Jehovah of Hosts hath sent
me unto thee.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And Jehovah hath inherited Judah, His
portion on the holy ground, And He hath fixed again on Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Hush, all flesh, because of Jehovah, For
He hath been roused up from His holy habitation!'

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And he sheweth me Joshua the high priest
standing before the messenger of Jehovah, and the Adversary standing at
his right hand, to be an adversary to him.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And Jehovah saith unto the Adversary:
\`Jehovah doth push against thee, O Adversary, Yea, push against thee
doth Jehovah, Who is fixing on Jerusalem, Is not this a brand delivered
from fire?'

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And Joshua was clothed with filthy
garments, and is standing before the messenger.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And he answereth and speaketh unto those
standing before him, saying: \`Turn aside the filthy garments from off
him.' And he saith unto him, \`See, I have caused thine iniquity to pass
away from off thee, so as to clothe thee with costly apparel.'

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> He also said, \`Let them set a pure diadem
on his head. And they set the pure diadem on his head, and clothe him
with garments. And the messenger of Jehovah is standing,

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> and the messenger of Jehovah doth protest
to Joshua, saying:

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> \`Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: If in My ways
thou dost walk, And if My charge thou dost keep, Then also thou dost
judge My house, And also thou dost keep My courts, And I have given to
thee conductors among these standing by.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Hear, I pray thee, Joshua, the high priest,
Thou and thy companions sitting before thee, (For men of type \[are\]
they,) For lo, I am bringing in My servant -- a Shoot.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> For lo, the stone that I put before Joshua,
On one stone \[are\] seven eyes, Lo, I am graving its graving, An
affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts, And I have removed the iniquity of that
land in one day.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> In that day -- an affirmation of Jehovah
of Hosts, Ye do call, each unto his neighbour, Unto the place of the
vine, And unto the place of the fig-tree!'

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And the messenger who is speaking with me
doth turn back, and stir me up as one who is stirred up out of his
sleep,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> and he saith unto me, \`What art thou
seeing?' And I say, \`I have looked, and lo, a candlestick of gold --
all of it, and its bowl \[is\] on its top, and its seven lamps \[are\]
upon it, and twice seven pipes \[are\] to the lights that \[are\] on its
top,

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> and two olive-trees \[are\] by it, one on
the right of the bowl, and one on its left.'

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And I answer and speak unto the messenger
who is speaking with me, saying, \`What \[are\] these, my lord?'

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And the messenger who is speaking with me
answereth and saith unto me, \`Hast thou not known what these \[are\]?'
And I say, \`No, my lord.'

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And he answereth and speaketh unto me,
saying: \`This \[is\] a word of Jehovah unto Zerubbabel, saying: Not by
a force, nor by power, But -- by My Spirit, said Jehovah of Hosts.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Who \[art\] thou, O great mountain Before
Zerubbabel -- for a plain! And he hath brought forth the top-stone,
Cries of Grace, grace -- \[are\] to it.'

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And there is a word of Jehovah to me,
saying,

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Hands of Zerubbabel did found this house,
And his hands do finish it, And thou hast known that Jehovah of Hosts
Hath sent me unto you.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> For who trampled on the day of small
things, They have rejoiced, And seen the tin weight in the hand of
Zerubbabel, These seven \[are\] the eyes of Jehovah, They are going to
and fro in all the land.'

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And I answer and say unto him, \`What
\[are\] these two olive-trees, on the right of the candlestick, and on
its left?'

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And I answer a second time, and say unto
him, \`What \[are\] the two branches of the olive trees that, by means
of the two golden pipes, are emptying out of themselves the oil?'

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And he speaketh unto me, saying, \`Hast
thou not known what these \[are\]?' And I say, \`No, my lord.'

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And he saith, \`These \[are\] the two
sons of the oil, who are standing by the Lord of the whole earth.'

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And I turn back, and lift up mine eyes, and
look, and lo, a flying roll.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And he saith unto me, \`What art thou
seeing?' And I say, \`I am seeing a flying roll, its length twenty by
the cubit, and its breadth ten by the cubit.'

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And he saith unto me, \`This \[is\] the
execration that is going forth over the face of all the land, for every
one who is stealing, on the one side, according to it, hath been
declared innocent, and every one who hath sworn, on the other side,
according to it, hath been declared innocent.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> \`I have brought it out -- an affirmation
of Jehovah of Hosts -- and it hath come in unto the house of the thief,
and unto the house of him who hath sworn in My name to a falsehood, and
it hath remained in the midst of his house, and hath consumed it, both
its wood and its stones.'

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And the messenger who is speaking with me
goeth forth, and saith unto me, \`Lift up, I pray thee, thine eyes, and
see what \[is\] this that is coming forth?'

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And I say, \`What \[is\] it?' And he saith,
\`This -- the ephah that is coming forth.' And he saith, \`This \[is\]
their aspect in all the land.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And lo, a cake of lead lifted up; and this
\[is\] a woman sitting in the midst of the ephah.'

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And he saith, \`This \[is\] the wicked
woman.' And he casteth her unto the midst of the ephah, and casteth the
weight of lead on its mouth.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And I lift up mine eyes, and see, and lo,
two women are coming forth, and wind in their wings; and they have wings
like wings of the stork, and they lift up the ephah between the earth
and the heavens.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And I say unto the messenger who is
speaking with me, \`Whither \[are\] they causing the ephah to go?'

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And he saith unto me, \`To build to it a
house in the land of Shinar.' And it hath been prepared and hath been
placed there on its base.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And I turn back, and lift up mine eyes, and
look, and lo, four chariots are coming forth from between two of the
mountains, and the mountains \[are\] mountains of brass.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> In the first chariot \[are\] red horses,
and in the second chariot brown horses,

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> and in the third chariot white horses, and
in the fourth chariot strong grisled horses.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And I answer and say unto the messenger who
is speaking with me, \`What \[are\] these, my lord?'

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And the messenger answereth and saith unto
me, \`These \[are\] four spirits of the heavens coming forth from
presenting themselves before the Lord of the whole earth.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> The brown horses that \[are\] therein, are
coming forth unto the land of the north; and the white have come forth
unto their hinder part; and the grisled have come forth unto the land of
the south;

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> and the strong ones have come forth, and
they seek to go to walk up and down in the earth;' and he saith, \`Go,
walk up and down in the earth;' and they walk up and down in the earth.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And he calleth me, and speaketh unto me,
saying, \`See, those coming forth unto the land of the north have caused
My Spirit to rest in the land of the north.'

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And there is a word of Jehovah unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> to take of the captivity (who came from
Babylon) from Heldai, from Tobijah, and from Jedaiah, \`and thou hast
come in -- thou, in that day, yea, thou hast come into the house of
Josiah son of Zephaniah,

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> and thou hast taken silver and gold, and
hast made a crown, and hast placed on the head of Joshua son of
Josedech, the high priest,

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> and hast spoken unto him, saying: Thus
spake Jehovah of Hosts, saying: Lo, a man! A Shoot -- \[is\] his name,
And from his place he doth shoot up, And he hath built the temple of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Yea, he doth build the temple of Jehovah,
And he doth bear away honour, And he hath sat and ruled on His throne,
And hath been a priest on His throne, And a counsel of peace is between
both.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And the crown is to Helem, and to
Tobijah, and to Jedaiah, and to Hen son of Zephaniah, for a memorial in
the temple of Jehovah.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And the far-off come in, and they have
built in the temple of Jehovah, and ye have known that Jehovah of Hosts
hath sent me unto you, yea, it hath come to pass, if ye do certainly
hearken to the voice of Jehovah your God.'

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And it cometh to pass, in the fourth year
of Darius the king hath a word of Jehovah been unto Zechariah, in the
fourth of the ninth month, in Chisleu.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And Beth-El sendeth Sherezer and
Regem-Melech, and its men, to appease the face of Jehovah,

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> speaking unto the priests who \[are\] at
the house of Jehovah of Hosts, and unto the prophets, saying, \`Do I
weep in the fifth month -- being separated -- as I have done these so
many years?'

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> And there is a word of Jehovah of Hosts
unto me, saying:

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> \`Speak unto all the people of the land,
and unto the priests, saying:

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> When ye fasted with mourning in the fifth
and in the seventh \[months\] -- even these seventy years -- did ye keep
the fast \[to\] Me -- Me? And when ye eat, and when ye drink, is it not
ye who are eating, and ye who are drinking?

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> \`Are not \[these\] the words that Jehovah
proclaimed by the hand of the former prophets, in Jerusalem's being
inhabited, and \[in\] safety, and its cities round about it, and the
south and the plain -- abiding?'

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And there is a word of Jehovah unto
Zechariah, saying:

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> \`Thus spake Jehovah of Hosts, saying: True
judgment judge ye, And kindness and mercy do one with another.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And widow, and fatherless, Sojourner, and
poor, ye do not oppress, And the calamity of one another ye do not
devise in your heart.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And they refuse to attend, And they give
a refractory shoulder, And their ears have made heavy against hearing.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And their heart they have made adamant,
Against hearing the law, and the words, That Jehovah of Hosts sent by
His Spirit, By the hand of the former prophets, And their is great wrath
from Jehovah of Hosts.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And it cometh to pass, as He called, And
they have not hearkened, So do they call, and I do not hearken, Said
Jehovah of Hosts.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And I toss them on all the nations, That
they have not known, The land hath been desolate behind them, Of any
passing by and turning back, And they set a desirable land for a
desolation!

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And there is a word of Jehovah of Hosts,
saying:

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> \`Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: I have been
zealous for Zion with great zeal, With great heat I have been zealous
for her.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Thus said Jehovah: I have turned back unto
Zion, And I have dwelt in the midst of Jerusalem, And Jerusalem hath
been called \`The city of truth,' And the mountain of Jehovah of Hosts,
\`The holy mountain.'

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Again dwell do
old men and old women, In broad places of Jerusalem, And each his staff
in his hand, Because of abundance of days.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And broad places of the city are full of
boys and girls, Playing in its broad places.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Surely it is
wonderful in the eyes of the remnant of this people in those days, Also
in Mine eyes it is wonderful, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Lo, I am saving
My people from the land of the rising, And from the land of the going
in, of the sun,

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And I have brought them in, They have dwelt
in the midst of Jerusalem, And they have been to Me for a people, And I
am to them for God, In truth and in righteousness.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Let your hands
be strong, Ye who are hearing in these days these words from the mouth
of the prophets, That in the day the house of Jehovah of Hosts Hath been
founded, the temple \[is\] to be built.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> For, before those days there hath been no
hiring of man, Yea, a hiring of beasts there is none; And to him who is
going out, And to him who is coming in, There is no peace because of the
adversary, And I send all men -- each against his neighbour.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And now, not as \[in\] the former days
\[am\] I to the remnant of this people, An affirmation of Jehovah of
Hosts.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Because of the sowing of peace, The vine
doth give her fruit, And the earth doth give her increase, And the
heavens do give their dew, And I have caused the remnant of this people
To inherit all these.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And it hath come to pass, As ye have been
a reviling among nations, O house of Judah, and house of Israel, So I
save you, and ye have been a blessing, Do not fear, let your hands be
strong.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> For, thus said Jehovah of Hosts, As I did
purpose to do evil to you, When your fathers made Me wroth, Said Jehovah
of Hosts, and I did not repent,

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> So I have turned back, I have purposed,
in these days, To do good with Jerusalem, And with the house of Judah --
fear not!

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> These \[are\] the things that ye do:
Speak ye truth each with his neighbour, Truth and peaceful judgment
judge in your gates,

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And each the evil of his neighbour ye do
not devise in your heart, And a false oath ye do not love, For all these
\[are\] things that I have hated, An affirmation of Jehovah.'

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And there is a word of Jehovah of Hosts
unto me, saying:

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> \`Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: The fast of
the fourth, and the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and
the fast of the tenth \[months\], are to the house of Judah for joy and
for rejoicing, and for pleasant appointed seasons, and the truth and the
peace they have loved.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Yet come do
peoples, and inhabitants of many cities,

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> Yea, gone have inhabitants of one To
another, saying: We go diligently, To appease the face of Jehovah, To
seek Jehovah of Hosts -- I go, even I.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> Yea, come in have many peoples, and
mighty nations, To seek Jehovah of Hosts in Jerusalem, And to appease
the face of Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: In those days
take hold do ten men of all languages of the nations, Yea, they have
taken hold on the skirt of a man, a Jew, saying: We go with you, for we
heard God \[is\] with you!

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> The burden of a word of Jehovah against the
land of Hadrach, and Demmeseh -- his place of rest: (When to Jehovah
\[is\] the eye of man, And of all the tribes of Israel.)

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And also Hamath doth border thereon, Tyre
and Zidon, for -- very wise!

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And Tyre doth build a bulwark to herself,
And doth heap silver as dust, And gold as mire of out-places.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Lo, the Lord doth dispossess her, And He
hath smitten in the sea her force, And she with fire is consumed.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> See doth Ashkelon and fear, Also Gaza, and
she is exceedingly pained, Also Ekron -- for her expectation dried up,
And perished hath a king from Gaza, And Ashkelon doth not remain,

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And dwelt hath a foreigner in Ashdod, And I
have cut off the excellency of the Philistines.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And turned aside his blood from his mouth,
His abominations from between his teeth, And he hath remained, even he,
to our God, And he hath been as a leader in Judah, And Ekron as a
Jebusite.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And I have pitched for My house a camp,
Because of the passer through, and of the returner, And pass not through
against them again doth an exactor, For, now, I have seen with My eyes.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Rejoice exceedingly, O daughter of Zion,
Shout, O daughter of Jerusalem, Lo, thy King doth come to thee,
Righteous -- and saved is He, Afflicted -- and riding on an ass, And on
a colt -- a son of she-asses.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And I have cut off the chariot from
Ephraim, And the horse from Jerusalem, Yea, cut off hath been the bow of
battle, And he hath spoken peace to nations, And his rule \[is\] from
sea unto sea, And from the river unto the ends of earth.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> Also thou -- by the blood of thy
covenant, I have sent thy prisoners out of the pit, There is no water in
it.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Turn back to a fenced place, Ye prisoners
of the hope, Even to-day a second announcer I restore to thee.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> For I have trodden for Me Judah, A bow I
have filled \[with\] Ephraim, And I have stirred up thy sons, O Zion,
Against thy sons, O Javan, And I have set thee as the sword of a hero.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And Jehovah doth appear for them, And
gone forth as lightning hath His arrow, And the Lord Jehovah with a
trumpet bloweth, And He hath gone with whirlwinds of the south.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Jehovah of Hosts doth cover them over,
And they consumed, and subdued sling-stones, Yea, they have drunk, They
have made a noise as wine, And they have been full as a bowl, As corners
of an altar.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And saved them hath Jehovah their God In
that day, as a flock of His people, For stones of a crown are displaying
themselves over His ground.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> For what His goodness! and what His
beauty! Corn the young men, And new wine the virgins -- make fruitful!

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> They asked of Jehovah rain in a time of
latter rain, Jehovah is making lightnings, And rain \[in\] showers He
doth give to them. To each -- the herb in the field.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Because the teraphim did speak iniquity,
And the diviners have seen a falsehood, And dreams of the vanity they
speak, \[With\] vanity they give comfort, Therefore they have journeyed
as a flock, They are afflicted, for there is no shepherd.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Against the shepherds did Mine anger
burn, And against the he-goats I lay a charge, For inspected hath
Jehovah of Hosts His flock, the house of Judah, And set them as His
beauteous horse in battle.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> From him \[is\] a corner-stone, From him
a nail, from him a battle-bow, From him goeth forth every exactor
together.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And they have been as heroes, Treading in
mire of out-places in battle, And they have fought, for Jehovah \[is\]
with them, And have put to shame riders of horses.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And I have made mighty the house of
Judah, And the house of Joseph I do save, And I have caused them to
dwell, for I have loved them, And they have been as \[if\] I had not
cast them off, For I \[am\] Jehovah their God, And I answer them.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And Ephraim hath been as a hero, And
rejoiced hath their heart as wine, And their sons see, and they have
rejoiced, Rejoice doth their heart in Jehovah.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> I hist for them, and I gather them, For I
have redeemed them, And they have multiplied as they did multiply.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And I sow them among peoples, And in
far-off places they remember Me, And they have lived with their sons,
And they have turned back.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And I have brought them back from the
land of Egypt, And from Asshur I do gather them, And unto the land of
Gilead and Lebanon I do bring them in, And there is not found for them
\[space\].

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And He hath passed over through the
sea, And hath pressed and smitten billows in the sea, And dried up have
been all depths of a flood, And brought down hath been the excellency of
Asshur, And the rod of Egypt doth turn aside.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And I have made them mighty in Jehovah,
And in His name they walk up and down, An affirmation of Jehovah!

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Open, O Lebanon, thy doors, And fire doth
devour among thy cedars.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Howl, O fir, for fallen hath the cedar,
For their honourable ones were destroyed, Howl, ye oaks of Bashan, For
come down hath the fenced forest,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> A voice of the howling of the shepherds!
For destroyed was their robe of honour, A voice of the roaring of young
lions! For destroyed was the excellency of Jordan.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Thus said Jehovah my God: \`Feed the
flock of the slaughter,

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> Whose buyers slay them, and are not
guilty, And their sellers say, Blessed \[is\] Jehovah, And I am rich,
And their shepherds have no pity on them.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> For I have pity no more on inhabitants of
the land, An affirmation of Jehovah, And lo, I am causing man to come
forth, Each into the hand of his neighbour, And into the hand of his
king, And they have beaten down the land, And I do not deliver out of
their hand.'

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And I feed the flock of slaughter, even
you, ye afflicted of the flock; and I take to me two staves, the one I
have called Pleasantness, and the other I have called Bands, and I feed
the flock.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And I cut off the three shepherds in one
month, and my soul is grieved with them, and also their soul hath
abhorred me.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And I say, \`I do not feed you, the
dying, let die; and the cut off, let be cut off; and the remaining ones,
let each eat the flesh of its neighbour.'

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And I take My staff Pleasantness, and
cut it asunder, to make void My covenant that I had made with all the
peoples:

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> and it is broken in that day, and know
well do the afflicted of the flock who are observing me, that it \[is\]
a word of Jehovah.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And I say unto them: \`If good in your
eyes, give my hire, and if not, forbear;' and they weigh out my hire --
thirty silverlings.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And Jehovah saith unto me, \`Cast it
unto the potter;' the goodly price that I have been prized at by them,
and I take the thirty silverlings, and cast them \[to\] the house of
Jehovah, unto the potter.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And I cut asunder my second staff,
Bands, to break the unity between Judah and Israel.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And Jehovah saith unto me, \`Again take
to thee the instrument of a foolish shepherd.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> For lo, I am raising up a shepherd in
the land, The cut off he doth not inspect, The shaken off he doth not
seek, And the broken he doth not heal, The standing he doth not sustain,
And the flesh of the fat he doth eat, And their hoofs he doth break off.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> Wo \[to\] the worthless shepherd,
forsaking the flock, A sword \[is\] on his arm, and on his right eye,
His arm is utterly dried up, And his right eye is very dim!'

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> The burden of a word of Jehovah on
Israel. An affirmation of Jehovah, Stretching out heaven, and founding
earth, And forming the spirit of man in his midst.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Lo, I am making Jerusalem a cup of
reeling To all the peoples round about, And also against Judah it is, In
the siege against Jerusalem.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And it hath come to pass, in that day, I
make Jerusalem a burdensome stone to all the peoples, All loading it are
completely pressed down, And gathered against it have been all nations
of the earth.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> In that day -- an affirmation of Jehovah,
I do smite every horse with astonishment, And its rider with madness,
And on the house of Judah I open My eyes, And every horse of the peoples
I smite with blindness.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And leaders of Judah have said in their
heart, \`Strength to me \[are\] the inhabitants of Jerusalem, In Jehovah
of Hosts their God.'

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> In that day I make the leaders of Judah
As a hearth of fire among trees, And as a torch of fire in a sheaf, And
they have consumed -- on the right and on the left -- all the peoples
round about, And Jerusalem hath inhabited again her place in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And saved hath Jehovah the tents of Judah
first, So that become not great against Judah Doth the beauty of the
house of David, And the beauty of the inhabitant of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> In that day cover over doth Jehovah the
inhabitant of Jerusalem, And the stumbling among them hath been in that
day as David, And the house of David as God -- As a messenger of Jehovah
-- before them.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And it hath come to pass, in that day, I
seek to destroy all the nations Who are coming in against Jerusalem,

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And I have poured on the house of
David, And on the inhabitant of Jerusalem, A spirit of grace and
supplications, And they have looked unto Me whom they pierced, And they
have mourned over it, Like a mourning over the only one, And they have
been in bitterness for it, Like a bitterness over the first-born.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> In that day, great is the mourning of
Jerusalem, As the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon,

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And mourned hath the land -- every
family apart, The family of the house of David apart, And their women
apart; The family of the house of Nathan apart, And their women apart;

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> The family of the house of Levi apart,
And their women apart; The family of Shimei apart, And their women
apart,

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> All the families that are left, Every
family apart, and their women apart!

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> In that day there is a fountain opened To
the house of David And to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, For sin and for
impurity.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And it hath come to pass, in that day, An
affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts, I cut off the names of the idols from
the land, And they are not remembered any more, And also the prophets
and the spirit of uncleanness I cause to pass away from the land.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And it hath been, when one prophesieth
again, That said unto him have his father and his mother, his parents,
\`Thou dost not live, For falsehood thou hast spoken in the name of
Jehovah,' And pierced him through have his father and his mother, his
parents, in his prophesying.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> And it hath come to pass, in that day,
Ashamed are the prophets, each of his vision, in his prophesying, And
they put not on a hairy robe to deceive.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And \[one\] hath said, \`I am not a
prophet, A man, a tiller of ground I am, For ground \[is\] my possession
from my youth.'

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And \[one\] hath said unto him, \`What
\[are\] these wounds in thy hands?' And he hath said, \`Because I was
smitten \[at\] home by my lovers.'

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Sword, awake against My shepherd, And
against a hero -- My fellow, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts. Smite
the shepherd, and scattered is the flock, And I have put back My hand on
the little ones.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And it hath come to pass, In all the
land, an affirmation of Jehovah, Two parts in it are cut off -- they
expire, And the third is left in it.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> And I have brought the third into fire,
And refined them like a refining of silver, And have tried them like a
trying of gold, It doth call in My name, and I answer it, I have said,
\`My people it \[is\],' And it saith, \`Jehovah \[is\] my God!'

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Lo, a day hath come to Jehovah, And
divided hath been thy spoil in thy midst.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And I have gathered all the nations unto
Jerusalem to battle, And captured hath been the city, And spoiled have
been the houses, And the women are lain with, Gone forth hath half the
city in a removal, And the remnant of the people are not cut off from
the city.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And gone forth hath Jehovah, And He hath
fought against those nations, As in the day of His fighting in a day of
conflict.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> And stood have His feet, in that day, On
the mount of Olives, That \[is\] before Jerusalem eastward, And cleft
hath been the mount of Olives at its midst, To the east, and to the
west, a very great valley, And removed hath the half of the mount
towards the north. And its half towards the south.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And ye have fled \[to\] the valley of My
mountains, For join doth the valley of the mountains to Azal, And ye
have fled as ye fled before the shaking, In the days of Uzziah king of
Judah, And come in hath Jehovah my God, All holy ones \[are\] with Thee.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And it hath come to pass, in that day,
The precious light is not, it is dense darkness,

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> And there hath been one day, It is known
to Jehovah, not day nor night, And it hath been at evening-time -- there
is light.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And it hath come to pass, in that day, Go
forth do living waters from Jerusalem, Half of them unto the eastern
sea, And half of them unto the western sea, In summer and in winter it
is.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And Jehovah hath become king over all the
land, In that day there is one Jehovah, and His name one.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> Changed is all the land as a plain,
From Gebo to Rimmon, south of Jerusalem, And she hath been high, and
hath dwelt in her place, Even from the gate of Benjamin To the place of
the first gate, unto the front gate, And from the tower of Hananeel,
Unto the wine-vats of the king.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And they have dwelt in her, And
destruction is no more, And Jerusalem hath dwelt confidently.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And this is the plague with which
Jehovah Doth plague all the peoples who have warred against Jerusalem,
He hath consumed away its flesh, And it is standing on its feet, And its
eyes are consumed in their holes, And its tongue is consumed in their
mouth.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And it hath come to pass, in that day,
A great destruction \[from\] Jehovah is among them, And they have seized
each the hand of his neighbour, And gone up hath his hand against the
hand of his neighbour.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And also Judah is fought with in
Jerusalem, And gathered hath been the force of all the nations round
about, Gold, and silver, and apparel, in great abundance.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And so is the plague of the horse, of
the mule, Of the camel, and of the ass, And of all the cattle that are
in these camps, As this plague.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And it hath come to pass, Every one who
hath been left of all the nations, Who are coming in against Jerusalem,
They have also gone up from year to year, To bow themselves to the King,
Jehovah of Hosts, And to celebrate the feast of the booths.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And it hath come to pass, That he who
doth not go up of the families of the land unto Jerusalem, To bow
himself to the King, Jehovah of Hosts, Even on them there is no shower.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And if the family of Egypt go not up,
nor come in, Then not on them is the plague With which Jehovah doth
plague the nations That go not up to celebrate the feast of booths.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> This is the punishment of the sin of
Egypt, And the punishment of the sin of all the nations, That go not up
to celebrate the feast of booths.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> In that day there is on bells of the
horse, \`Holy to Jehovah,' And the pots in the house of Jehovah Have
been as bowls before the altar.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And every pot in Jerusalem, and in
Judah, Have been holy to Jehovah of Hosts, And all those sacrificing
have come in, And have taken of them, and boiled in them, And there is
no merchant any more in the house of Jehovah of Hosts in that day!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Malachi](mal)
