[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lfic037)  [Next](lfic039.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE CAT OF THE CARMAN'S STAGE.

A carman was leaving Bunclody one morning for Dublin, when what should
he see but a neighbour's cat galloping along the side of the road, and
crying out every moment, "Tell Moll Browne, Tom Dunne is dead; tell Moll
Browne, Tom Dunne is dead." 'At last he got tired of this ditty, and
took up a stone and flung it at the cat, bidding himself, and Tom
Browne, and Moll Dunne, to go to Halifax, and not to be botherin' him.
When he got to Luke Byrne's in Francis Street, where all the Wicklow and
Wexford carmen used to stop, he was taking a pot of beer in the
tap-room, and began to tell the quare thing that happened on the road.
There was a comfortable looking gray cat sitting by the fire, and the
moment he mentioned what the Bunclody cat was saying, she cried out,
"That's my husband! that's my husband!" She made only one leap out
through the door, and no one ever saw her at Luke Byrne's again

 

The narrator of the following travelling sketch was a half-witted woman,
who, although she had heard it from some one else, was under the
impression that she had undergone part of the adventures in some form or
other. She was a very honest, inoffensive creature, and would do any
work assigned to her carefully enough; but she had a certain district of
the country under her supervision, and it was essential to her
well-being that she should perambulate (serenade was her term) this
portion about once in the year. She went by the name of Cauth
(Catherine) Morrisy, and this is the style in which she related her
juvenile experience:--

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cauth Morisy looking for Service](lfic039.md)
