[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic110)  [Next](lfic112) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# HOW ST. ELOI WAS CURED OF PRIDE.

Before St. Eloi \[a\] became religious, and while he was still but a
working goldsmith, he sometimes amused himself with shoeing horses. He
was very proud of his skill, and often boasted that he never saw that
thing, done by a man that he couldn't match. One day a mounted traveller
stopped at his forge, and asked leave to fasten a loosened shoe on his
horse. Eloi gave permission, and was very much surprised to see him
twist a fore leg of the beast out of the shoulder joint, bring it into
the forge, and fasten on the shoe. This being done, he rejointed the
leg, patted the beast on the shoulder, and asked the smith if he knew
any one who could do such a neat piece of work as that. "Yes, I do,"
said the conceited man; "I will do it myself." So he ordered one of his
horses to be brought, and the fore-leg twisted out. He was not able to
get this done so satisfactorily as was desirable. There was some
blood-shedding, and tearing of muscle, and skin. He made as nice a shoe
as could be seen however, and fastened it on in such style as elicited
even the applause of his rival; and here his triumph came to a close.
When he brought the leg into the yard, the poor animal to whom it
belonged was lying on his side expiring, and his tender-hearted though
conceited master burst into a passion of grief for what he had done.
"Oh, what a proud, worthless creature I am!" cried lie, "My poor beast
tortured and killed by my heartless presumption!" "Are you sure you are
cured of pride and vanity by this mischance?" said the stranger. "Oh, I
am, I am! at least I hope so. I will never again, with God's help,
indulge a proud thought. But why did you induce me to do this wicked
thing by setting me the example?' "My object was to root a strong vice
out of your heart. Give me the leg" So saying, he applied the broad end
of the limb to its place, tapped the animal on the shoulder, and the
next moment he was standing up strong and uninjured; but there was no
appearance of the stranger or his steed. While Eloi stood wrapped in joy
and surprise, he was sensible of these words distinctly uttered, but he
could not tell whether they were heard in his heart or his brain:--"
Eligius, remember the promise made to your Guardian Angel."

Some collectors or inventors of saintly legends could not divest
themselves of a taste for the grotesque in their misdirected zeal. We
quote a narrative of this class--that of -

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[a\] Eligius, called Eloi by the French, was born near Limoges, AD.
588. Having acquired the knowledge of working in metals, he was
distinguished by the patronage of Clothaire II. and his successor
Dagobert. His life at court was distinguished by works of charity; and
so great was his reputation fcir sanctity, that on the decease of the
Bishop of Noyon and Tournay he was elected his successor, and could
hardly obtain time for receiving the successive grades of holy orders.
It was the era of transition from Paganism to Christianity, and our
saint's efforts were attended by miracles of conversion and reformation
of morals. He died, universally regretted, AD. 659.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: St Lateerin of Cullin](lfic112)
