[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lfic053)  [Next](lfic055.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# FANN MAC CUlL AND THE SCOTCH GIANT.

The great Irish *joiant*, Fann Mac Cuil, lived to be a middle-aged man,
without ever meeting his match, and so he was as proud as a paycock. He
had a great fort in the Bog of Allen, and there himself and his warriors
would be playing soord' and pot-lid, or shootin' bowarras, or pitchin'
big stones twenty or thirty miles off, to make a quay for the harbour of
Dublin. One day he was quite down in the mouth, for his men were
scattered here and there, and he had no one to wrestle or hurl, or go
hunt along with him. So he was walking about very lonesome, when he sees
a foot-messenger he had, coming hot-foot across the bog. "What's in the
*win'* (wind)?" says he. "It's the great Scotch giant, *Far Rua*, that's
in it," says the other. "He's coming over the big stepping stones that
lead from Ireland to Scotland, \[a\] and you will have him here in less
than no time. He heard of the great Fann Mac Cuil, and he wants to see
which is the best man." "Oh, ho!"says Fann, "I hear that the Far Rua is
three foot taller nor me, and I'm three foot taller nor the tallest man
in Ireland. I must speak to Grainne about it."

Well, it wasn't long till the terrible Scotch fellow was getting along
the stony road that led across the bog, with a sword as big as three
scythe blades, and a spear the *lenth* of the house. "Is the great Irish
giant at home?" says he. "He is not," says Fann's messenger "he is
huntin' stags at Killarney; but the vanithee is within, and will be glad
to see you, Follow me if you please." In the hall they see a long *deal*
(fir) tree, with an iron head on it, and a round block of wood, with an
iron rim, as big as four cart wheels. "Them is the shield and spear of
Fann," says the messenger. "Ubbabow! says the giant to himself.

"You're welcome, Far Rua," says Grainne, as mild as the moon. "Sit down,
and take such fare as God sends." So she put before him a great big
griddle cake, with the griddle itself inside, that had a round piece cut
out at one part of the rim; and for a beefsteak, she gave him a piece of
a red deal plank, with a *skrimshin* of hard meat outside.' The first
bite the giant give at the cake, he broke three of his teeth; and when
he tried the beef the other ones stuck so fast in the deal, he could not
draw them out. "By me soord, ma'am," says he, "this is hard diet you
give your company." "Oh, Lord love you!" says she, "the children here
think nothing of it. Let us see if the infant would object." So she
takes the cake over where Fann was lying in the cradle, and offers him
the part where the piece was taken out of the griddle. Well, he bit off
the bread with the greatest ease, chawed it, and swallyed it, and
smacked his lips after it, and then he winked one eye at Far Rua. "Be
the laws!" says the Scotchman to himself, "these is wonderful people."

Well, they didn't *stent* him in the drink any way. The jug of beer they
laid before him would hold four gallons, and he emptied it out of spite
at one offer, as he didn't get fair play at the bread and mate. "I
think," says he, after his drink, "I'd like to see how Fann and his men
amuses themselves after dinner." "You must see that," says the
messenger. "Step out into the bawn, if it is agreeable to you." Well,
when they wor outside, the messenger pointed to four or five stones, the
size and shape of a gate post. "Them is their finger stones, that they
do be casting to see who'll throw them, farthest. It is a good throw
when one of them reaches Dublin. But Fann does *mooroon* (more than
enough) sometimes; and you'll see some of them sticking up out o' the
say where they light after a great fling. Maybe you'd like to try your
hand." He did try his hand, and after winding it round and round his
head he let fly, and it went half a mile whistling, through the air, and
broke in a hundred smithereens on a big stone in the bog. "You'll do
well," says the boy, when you come to your full' growth, and get a
year's practice or so with Fann." "To the d----I pitch Fann and his
finger stones!" says the big Red Man to himself.

"Well, is there any other way they divart themselves?" says the
stranger. "Oh, yes,' says the boy.' "Fann and his men does be throwing
that handball (the ball was a round stone that 'ud fill this' hearth up
to the mantel beam) from the bawn here, over the house, and running
round and catching it before it "comes to the ground. Every miss counts
one lost," .' "Wonderful quare people is the Irish," said the big man.
"Maybe if it wouldn't go over with me at the first offer, it might break
down the roof, and that 'ud annoy the vanithee. I'll pitch it up in the
air here, and you can mark." So he gave a heave. "How high is it gone?"
"Up to the window sill." "Now?" "Up to the eaves." "Dickens take it! Now
where is it!" "Oh, sir, it is on your head." And indeed so it was, and
levelled him also, and only he had a reasonable hard noggin of his own,
it would be cracked in two with the souse the big stone gave it again'
the ground.

He got up, and rubbed his poor skull, and looked very cross. "I suppose
Fann won't be home to-night." "Sir, he's not expected for a week."
"Well, give the vanithee my compliments, and tell her I must go back
without bidding her good bye, for fear the tide would overtake me
crossing the Causeway."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[a\] The Giant's Causeway, of which there are now visible only some
slices at the two extremities. Those trustworthy chroniclers, the
ancient bards, affirm that it is the work of the ancient Irish and
Scotch men of might, laid down to facilitate their mutual visits.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Fann Mac Cuil and his Men were Bewitched](lfic055.md)
