[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic095)  [Next](lfic097) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE DECISION OF THE CHARIOT.

St. Fiech, when a Druid at the court of the Ard Righ, was one of the two
who stood up to receive the saint. He assisted him afterwards in his
apostolic labours, and, becoming infirm, was indulged with a chariot.
St. Sechnal, or St. Secundus, from whom the old town of Dunshaughlin
received its name, and who was another of the saint's coadjutors,
considered himself as well entitled to the privilege as his brother
Fiech. "We shall," laid St. Patrick, "leave the decision to the beasts
themselves, or rather to Providence, whose favours are shown even to the
dumb animals." Next morning the two beasts were yoked and put on the
highway, and on they Went at their ease till evening. Being then near
St. Sechnal's home, they turned into his bawn; ate the provender offered
them, but would suffer no one to unyoke them. When daylight came, they
resumed their journey, entered another bishop's bawn in the evening,
took supper, and again objected to being unharnessed. The third evening
found them in St. Fiech's bawn, and most eager to be rid of their
trappings. St. Sechnal humbled himself, and no one afterwards grudged
St. Fiech his hard-seated, block-wheeled car, unprovided with springs,
for such was the vehicle to which the lofty name of chariot was given.
\[a\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[a\] Both saints left behind them hymns in honour of their great
patron. St. Sechnal composed his during St. Patrick's life, and rather
against the inclination of the humble servant of Christ.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conversion of the Robber Chief, Macaldus](lfic097)
