[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic023)  [Next](lfic025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Jemmy Doyle in the Fairy Palace

My father was once coming down Scollagh Gap on a dark night, and all at
once he saw, right before him, the lights coming from ever so many
windows of a castle, and heard the shouts and laughing of people within.
The door was wide open, and in he walked; and there on the spot where he
had often drunk a tumbler of bad beer, he found himself in a big hall,
and saw the king and queen of the fairies sitting at the head of a long
table, and hundreds of people, all grandly dressed, eating and drinking.
The clothes they had on them were of an old fashion, and there were
harpers and pipers by themselves up in a gallery, and playing the most
delightful old Irish airs. There was nothing to be seen but rich silk
dresses, and pearls, and diamonds on the gentlemen and ladies and rich
hangings on the walls, and lamps blazing.

 The queen, as soon as she saw my father, cried out, "Welcome, Mr.
Doyle; make room there for Mr. Doyle, and let him have the best at the
table. Hand Mr. Doyle a tumbler of punch, that will be strong and sweet.
Sit down, Mr. Doyle, and make yourself welcome." So he sat down, and
took the tumbler, and just as he was going to taste it, his eye fell on
the man next him, and he was an old neighbour that was dead twenty
years. Says the old neighbour, "For your life, don't touch bit nor sup."
The smell was very nice, but he was frightened by what the dead
neighbour said, and he began to notice how ghastly some of the fine
people looked when they thought he was not minding them.

 So his health was drunk, and he was pressed by the queen to fall to,
but he had the sense to take the neigh­bour's advice, and only spilled
the drink down between his coat and waistcoat.

 At last the queen called for a song, and one of the guests sang a very
indecent one in Irish. He often re­peated a verse of it for us, but we
didn't know the sense. At last he got sleepy, and recollected nothing
more only the rubbing of his legs against the bushes in the knoc (field
of gorse) above our place in Cromogue; and we found him asleep next
morning in the haggard, with a scent of punch from his mouth. He told us
that we would get his knee-buckles on the path at the upper end of the
knoc, and there, sure enough, they were found. Heaven be his bed!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fairy Cure](lfic025)
