[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic034)  [Next](lfic036) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE PROPHET BEFORE HIS TIME.

About a hundred years ago lived Mr. Diarmuidh K., a strong
gentleman-farmer of this family. His place was not far from *Slieve
Buie* (Yellow Hill). He was much

addicted to the study of astrology, and the occult works of Cornelius
Agrippa. When his only son was about a month old, one of his servant
boys ran into the parlour one day to tell him a circumstance that had
greatly astonished himself: "Oh, master," said he, "the black cow was
just while ago under the old thom-tree in the meadow, and all of a
sudden a fog came round herself and the tree, while all the rest of the
field was in the sunshine. I was going over to try what was the matter,
when what should I see but a big sea-gull flying into the fog, and
making ever so much noise with his wings. For fear he'd pick out the
poor beast's eyes I ran over, but just as I got to the edge of the fog
it all cleared as if there was some magic in it, and Blacky was walking
away on the other side." "Oh, ho!" said the master; "what I have been
long wishing for has happened at last. Now, Pat, attend to what I say.
Watch that cow close; and when she calves, be sure to bring me some of
the first beestings, and I'll give you more money than you have ever
seen at once in your own possession."

The boy did his duty, such as it was. He brought the first beestings to
his master, and received 10*l* for his pains; and Mr. K. ordering the
child to be brought to him, made it take a spoonful or two of this first
milk of the black cow. When the child began to speak intelligibly, the
master of the house called all the family together one day, and charged
them as they valued his favour, or dreaded his resentment, never to ask
his son a question till he was full fourteen years of age. "The
questions, I mean," said he, "are such as he could not answer without
being a prophet. He is gifted with a spirit of prophecy, and when he
reaches his fifteenth birthday, you will be at liberty to get all the
information you please from him, concerning anything that is passing
anywhere in any part of the world at the moment, or to ask about things
lost or stolen, or your own future destiny. But attend to what I say. If
you ask a question of him before he is full fourteen years of age,
something terrible shall happen to him and you; take timely warning."

The boy had a wonderful capacity for science and language, but seldom
spoke to those about him. He was very amiable, however, and every one
anxious for some favour from his father always got him to be their
spokesman. Strange to say, he reached to within a few days of the fatal
time without being asked an improper question by any one.

He would occasionally when in company start. and begin to talk of what
was passing at the moment in the town of Wexford, or the cities of
Dublin or London, as if the people about him were aware of these matters
as well as himself. Finding, however, by their looks and expressions of
surprise, that they had not the same faculty, he began to grow very
silent and reserved.

About this time a grand-daughter of the famous Blacky was about to
calve; and Mr. K., who set a great value on the breed, recommended her
particularly to the care of a young servant boy, a favourite of his.
While he was looking after her and some others in a pasture near the
house, a young girl to whom he was under promise of marriage was passing
*by chance* along the path that bordered the fence. He asked her to
stop, but "she was in a hurry to the big house." Stop she did, however,
and full twenty minutes passed unmarked while they stood and conversed
on very interesting nullities.

At the end of the twenty minutes he gave a sudden start, and examined
the different groups of cattle with his eyes, but no Blacky was to be
seen. He searched, and his betrothed assisted, but in vain; and the poor
girl burst out a crying for the blame he would be sure to get through
her folly. She went forward at last on her message to the big house, and
passing by the kitchen garden, whom should she see, looking at the
operations of the bees, but the young master. Let her not be blamed too
much: she forgot everything but her lover's mishap; and so, after making
her curtsey, she cried out across the hedge--"Ah! Master Anthony,
alanna, do you know where the black cow has hid herself?" "Black cow!"
said he, "she is lying dead in the byre." At the moment his eyes opened
wide as if about to start from his head, an expression of terror took
possession of his features, he gave one wild cry, fell powerless on his
face, and when his wretched father came running to the spot, on hearing
of the circumstance, he found an idiot in the place of his fine
intelligent son.

The following event, said to have occurred near Scarawalsh, was told by
a certain Owen Jourdan, on a winter night, in a farm-house of Cromogue,
some seven miles away from the scene of action, the locality of such
stories being never in the neighbourhood of their exposition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Bewitched Churn](lfic036)
