[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lfic010)  [Next](lfic012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE BROWN BEAR OF NORWAY.

There was once a king in Ireland, and he had three daughters, and very
nice princesses they were. And one day that their father and themselves
were walking in the lawn, the king began to joke on them, and to ask
them who they would like to be married to. "I'll have the King of Ulster
for a husband," says one; "and I'll have the King of Munster," says
another; "and," says the youngest, "I'll have no husband but the Brown
Bear of Norway." For a nurse of hers used to be telling her of an
enchanted prince that she called by that name, and she fell in love with
him, and his name was the first name on her lips, for the very night
before she was dreaming of him. Well, one laughed, and another laughed,
and they joked on the princess all the rest of the evening. But that
very night she woke up out of her sleep in a great hail that was lighted
up with a thousand lamps; the richest carpets were on the floor, and the
walls were covered with cloth of gold and silver, and the place was full
of grand company, and the very beautiful prince she saw in her dreams
was there, and it wasn't a moment till he was on one knee before her,
and telling her how much he loved her, and asking her wouldn't she be
his queen. Well, she hadn't the heart to refuse him, and married they
were the same evening.

"Now, my darling," says he, when they were left by themselves, "you must
know that I am under enchantment. A sorceress, that had a beautiful
daughter, wished me for her son-in-law; and because I didn't keep the
young girl at the distance I ought, the mother got power over me, and
when I refused to marry her daughter, she made me take the form of a
bear by day, and I was to continue so till a lady would marry me of her
own free will, and endure five years of great trials after."

Well, when the princess woke in the morning, she missed her husband from
her side, and spent the day very sorrowful. But as soon as the lamps
were lighted in the grand hall, where she was sitting on a sofa covered
with silk, the folding doors flew open, and he was sitting by her side
the next minute. So they spent another evening so happy, and he took an
opportunity of warning her that whenever she began to tire of him, or
not to have any confidence in him, they would be parted for ever, and
he'd be obliged to marry the witch's daughter.

So she got used to find him absent by day, and they spent a happy
twelvemonth together, and at last a beautiful little boy was born; and
as happy as she was before, she was twice as happy now, for she had her
child to keep her company in the day when she couldn't see her husband.

At last, one evening, when herself, and himself and her child, were
sitting with a window open because it was a sultry night, in flew an
eagle, took the infant's sash in his beak, and flew up in the air with
him. She screamed, arid was going to throw herself out through the
window after him, but the prince caught her, and looked at her very
seriously. She bethought of what he said soon after their marriage, and
she stopped the cries and complaints that were on her lips. She spent
her days very lonely for another twelvemonth, when a beautiful little
girl was sent to her. Then she thought to herself she'd have a sharp eye
about her this time; so she never would allow a window to be more than a
few inches open.

But all her care was in vain. Another evening, when they were all so
happy, and the prince dandling the baby, a beautiful greyhound bitch
stood before them, took the child out of the father's hand, and was out
of the door before you could wink. This time she shouted, and ran out of
the room, but there was some of the servants in the next room, and all
declared that neither child nor dog passed out. She felt, she could not
tell how, to her husband, but still she kept command over herself, and
didn't once reproach him.

When the third child was born, she would hardly allow a window or a door
to be left open for a moment; but she wasn't the nearer to keep the
child to herself. They were sitting one evening by the fire, when a lady
appeared standing by them. She opened her eyes in a great fright, and
stared at her, and while she was doing so, the appearance wrapped a
shawl round the baby that was sitting in its father's lap, and either
sunk through the ground with it, or went up through the wide chimney.
This time the mother kept her bed for a month.

"My dear," said she to her husband, when she was beginning to recover,
"I think I'd feel better if I was after seeing my father, and mother,
and sisters once more. If you give me leave to go home for a few days,
I'd be glad." "Very well," said he, "I will do that; and whenever you
feel inclined to return, only mention your wish when you lie down at
night." The next morning when she awoke, she found herself in her own
old chamber in her father's palace. She rung the bell, and in a short
time she had her mother, and father, and married sisters about her, and
they laughed till they cried for joy at finding her safe back again.

So in time she told them all that happened to her, and they didn't know
what to advise her to do. She, was as fond of her husband as ever, and
said she was sure that he couldn't help letting the children go; but
still she was afraid beyond the world to have another child to be torn
from her. Well, the mother and sisters consulted a wise woman that used
to bring eggs to the castle, for they had great confidence in her
wisdom. She said the only plan was to secure the bear's skin that the
prince was obliged to put on every morning, and get it burned, and then
he couldn't help being a man night and day, and then the enchantment
would be at an end.

So they all persuaded her to do that, and she promised she would; and
after eight days she felt so great a longing to see her husband again,
that she made the wish the same night, and when she woke three hours
after, she was in her husband's palace, and himself was watching over
her. There was great joy on both sides, and they were happy for many
days.

Now she began to reflect how she never felt her husband leaving her of a
morning, and how she never found him neglecting to give her a sweet
drink out of a gold cup just as she was going to bed.

So one night she contrived not to drink any of it, though she pretended
to do so; and she was wakeful enough in the morning, and saw her husband
passing out through a panel in the wainscot, though she kept her eyelids
nearly closed. The next night she got a few drops of the sleepy posset
that she saved the evening before, put into her husband's night drink,-
and that made him sleep sound enough. She got up after midnight, passed
through the panel, and found a beautiful brown bear's hide hanging in an
alcove. She stole back, and went down to the parlour fire, and put the
hide into the middle of it, and never took eyes off it till it was all
fine ashes. She then lay down by her husband, gave him a kiss on the
cheek, and fell asleep.

If she was to live a hundred years, she'd never forget how she wakened
next morning, and found her husband looking down on her with misery and
anger in his face. "Unhappy woman," said he, "you have separated us for
ever! Why hadn't you patience for five years? I am now obliged, whether
I like or no, to go a three days journey to the witch's castle, and live
with her daughter. The skin that was my guard you have burned it, and
the egg-wife that gave you the counsel was the witch herself. I won't
reproach you: your punishment will be severe enough without it. Farewell
for ever!"

He kissed her for the last time, and was off the next minute walking as
fast as he could. She shouted after him, and then seeing there was no
use, she dressed herself and pursued him. He never stopped, nor stayed,
nor looked back, and still she kept him in sight; and when he was on the
hill she was in the hollow, and when he was in the hollow she was on the
hill. Her life was almost leaving her, when just as the sun was setting,
he turned up a *bohyeen* (lane), and went into a little house. She
crawled up after him, and when she got inside there was a beautiful
little boy on his knees, and he kissing and hugging him. "Here, my poor
darling," says he, "is your eldest child, and there," says he, pointing
to a nice middle-aged woman that was looking on with a smile on her
face, "is the eagle that carried him away." She forgot all her sorrows
in a moment, hugging her child, and laughing and crying over him. The
Vanithee washed their feet, and rubbed them with an ointment that took
all the soreness out of their bones, and made them as fresh as a daisy.
Next morning, just before sunrise, he was up, and prepared to be off.
"Here," said he to her, "is a thing which may be of use to you. It's a
scissors, and Whatever stuff you cut with it will he turned into rich
silk. The moment the sun rises, I'll. lose all memory of yourself and
the children, but I'll get it at sunset again; farewell." But he wasn't
far gone till she was in sight of him again, leaving her boy behind. It
was the same to-day as yesterday: their shadows went before them in the
morning, and followed them in the evening. He never stopped, and she
never stopped, and as the sun was setting, he turned up another lane,
and there they found their little daughter. It was all joy and comfort
again till morning, and then the third day's journey commenced.

But before he started, he gave her a comb, and told her that whenever
she used it, pearls and diamonds would fall from her hair. Still he had
his full memory from sunset to sunrise; but from sunrise to sunset he
travelled on under the charm, and never threw his eye behind. This night
they came to where the youngest baby was, and the next morning, just
before sunrise, the prince spoke to her for the last time. "Here, my
poor wife," said he, "is a little hand-reel, with gold thread that has
no end, and the half of our marriage ring. If you can ever get to my
bed, and put your half ring to mine, I will recollect you. There is a
wood yonder, and the moment I enter it, I will forget everything that
ever happened between us, just as if I was born yesterday. Farewell,
dear wife and child, for ever." Just then the sun rose, and away he
walked towards the wood., She saw it open before him, and close after
him, and when she came up, she could no more get in than she could break
through a stone wall. She wrung her hands, and shed tears, but then she
recollected herself, and cried out, "Wood, I charge you by my three
magic gifts--the scissors, the comb, and the reel--to let me through;
"and it opened, and she went along a walk till she came in sight of a
palace, and a lawn, and a woodman's cottage in the edge of the wood
where it came nearest the palace.

She went into this lodge, and asked the woodman and his wife to take her
into their service. They were not willing at first; but she told them
she would ask no wages, and would give them diamonds, and pearls, and
silk stuffs, and gold thread whenever they wished for them. So they
agreed to let her stay.

It wasn't long till she heard how a young prince, that was just arrived,
was living in the palace as the husband of the young mistress. Herself
and her mother said that they were married fifteen years before, and
that he was charmed away from them ever since. He seldom stirred abroad,
and every one that saw him remarked how silent and sorrowful he went
about, like a person that was searching for some lost thing.

The servants and conceited folk at the big house began to take notice of
the beautiful young woman at the lodge, and to annoy her with their
impudent addresses. The head-footman was the most troublesome, and at
last she invited him to *come take tea* with her. Oh, how rejoiced he
was, and how he bragged of it in the servants' hail! Well, the evening
came, and the footman walked into the lodge, and was shown to her
sitting-room; for the lodge-keeper and his wife stood in great awe of
her, and gave her two nice rooms to herself. Well, he sat down as stiff
as a ramrod, and was talking in a grand style about the great doings at
the castle, while she was getting the tea and toast ready. "Oh," says
she to him, "would you put your hand out at the window, and cut me off a
sprig or two of honeysuckle?" He got up in great glee, and put out his
hand and head; and said she, "By the virtue of my magic gifts, let a
pair of horns spring out of your head, and *serenade* the lodge." Just
as she wished, so it was. They sprung from the front of each ear, and
tore round the walls till they met at the back. Oh, the poor wretch! and
how he' bawled, and roared! and the servants that he used to be boasting
to, were soon flocking from the castle, and grinning, and huzzaing, and
beating tunes on tongs, and shovels, and pans; and he cursing and
swearing, and the eyes ready to start out of his head, and he so black
in the face, and kicking out his legs behind like mad.

At last she pitied his case, and removed the charm, and the horns
dropped down on the ground, and he would have killed her on the spot,
only he was as weak as water, and his fellow-servants came in, and
carried him up to the big house.

Well, some way or other, the story came to the ears of the prince, and
he strolled down that way. She had only the dress of a country-woman on
her as she sat sewing at the window, but that did not hide her beauty,
and he was greatly puzzled and disturbed, after he had a good look at
her features, just as a body is perplexed to know whether something
happened to him when he was young, or if he only dreamed it. Well, the
witch's daughter heard about it too, and she came to see the strange
girl; and what did she find her doing, but cutting out the pattern of a
gown from brown paper; and as she cut away, the paper became the richest
silk she ever saw. The lady looked on with very covetous eyes, and, says
she, "What would you be satisfied to take for that scissors?" "I'll take
nothing," says she, "but leave to spend one night in the prince's
chamber, and I'll swear that we'll be as innocent of any crime next
morning as we were in the evening." Well, the proud lady fired up, and
was going to say something dreadful; but the scissors kept on cutting,
and the silk growing richer and richer every inch. So she agreed, and
made her take a great oath to keep her promise.

When night came on she was let into her husband's chamber, and the door
was locked. But, when she came -in a tremble, and sat by--the bed-side,
the prince was in such a dead sleep, that all she did couldn't awake
him. She sung this verse to him, sighing and sobbing, and kept singing
it the night long, and it was all in vain

" Four long years I was married to thee  
Three sweet babes I bore to thee;  
Brown Bear of Norway, won't you turn to me?"

At the first dawn, the proud lady was in the chamber, and led her away,
and the footman of the horns put out his tongue at her as she was
quitting the palace.

So there was no luck so far; but the next day the prince passed by
again, and looked at her, and saluted her kindly, as a prince might a
farmer's daughter, and passed on; and soon the witch's daughter came by,
and found her combing her hair, and pearls and diamonds dropping from
it.

Well, another bargain was made, and the princess spent another night of
sorrow, and she left the castle at daybreak, and the footman was at his
post, and enjoyed his revenge.

The third day the prince went by, and stopped to talk with the strange
woman. He asked her could he do anything to serve her, and she said he
might. She asked him did he ever wake at night. He said that he was
rather wakeful than otherwise; but that during the last two nights, he
was listening to a sweet song in his dreams, and could not wake, and
that the voice was one that he must have known and loved in some other
world long ago. Says she, "Did you drink any sleepy posset either of
these evenings before you went to bed?" "I did," said he. "The two
evenings my wife gave me something to drink, but I don't know whether it
was a sleepy posset or not." "Well, prince," said she, "as you say you
would wish to oblige me, you can do it by not tasting any drink this
afternoon." "I will not," says he, and then he went on his walk.

Well, the great lady was soon after the prince, and found the stranger
using her hand-reel and winding threads of gold off it, and the third
bargain was made.

That evening the prince was lying on his bed at twilight, and his mind
much disturbed; and the door opened, and in his princess walked, and
down she sat by his bed-side, and sung:--

"Four long years I was married to thee;  
Three sweet babes I bore to thee;  
Brown Bear of Norway, won't you turn to me?"

"Brown Bear of Norway!" said he: "I don't understand you." "Don't you
remember, prince, that I was your wedded wife for four years?" "I do
not," said he, "but I'm sure I wish it was so." "Don't you remember our
three babes, that are still alive?" "Show me them. My mind is all a heap
of confusion." "Look for the half of our marriage ring, that hangs at
your neck, and fit it to this." He did so, and the same moment the charm
was broken. His full memory came back on him, and he flung his arms
round his wife's neck, and both burst into tears.

Well, there was a great cry outside, and the castle walls were heard
splitting and cracking. Every one in the castle was alarmed, and made
their way out. The prince and princess went with the rest, and by the
time all were safe on the lawn, down came the building, and made the
ground tremble for miles round. No one ever saw the witch and her
daughter afterwards. It was not long till the prince and princess had
their children with them, and then they set out for their own palace.
The kings of Ireland, and of Munster and Ulster, and their wives, soon
came to visit them, and may every one that deserves it be as happy as
the Brown Bear of Norway and his family.

 

The *Goban Saor*, pronounced Gubawn Seer (free smith, free mason, or
free carpenter, in fact), is a relative of Wayland Smith, or Voelund, in
the Voelundar Quida; but with equal skill he is endowed with more mother
wit than the Northern craftsman. Unconnected adventures of this
character are met with in every country of Europe. It is probable that a
more complete legend concerning this celebrated *gow* (Smith) would be
met with in Mayo or Kerry. Vulcan or Prometheus was the original
craftsman; perhaps Daedalus might dispute the honour with them. These
old-world legends have reached our time and our province in an .
unsatisfactory and degraded state. All that remains to us is to make the
most we can of our materials.

Our smith is a more moral, as well as a more fortunate man, than the
Voelund of the Northern saga. Voelund returns evil for evil, and the
master smith of MM. Asbjornsen and Moë is altogether unprincipled. He
cuts off horses' legs to shoe them with the greater ease to himself, and
sets an old woman in his furnace, in the vague hope that he may han-amer
her into a fresh young lass.when she is hot enough.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Goban Saor](lfic012.md)
