[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic045)  [Next](lfic047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE WOMAN IN WHITE.

Pat Gill, of the county of Kildare, was driving towards Dublin, with a
load of country produce. He had made a comfortable seat for himself on
the car, and had plenty of hay about him and under him. He was
pleasantly employed thinking of nothing in particular, dozing and giving
an eye to the proceedings of his beast. He was between the mill of
Baltracy and the cross roads of Borraheen, when he was startled by the
appearance of a woman dressed in long white clothes, crossing the fence,
and advancing into the road. She came up to the horse, and walked on
with him, close by his neck. The driver chocked the beast's head to the
opposite side, for fear he should tread on her feet or long robes, but
she still kept as close to him as before, and sometimes he thought he
could see the lower part of the horse's fore leg through her dress. The
matter had now become very serious. He could not keep his eyes off the
apparition; and he felt his whole frame covered with a cold
perspiration. He became bewildered, and could not determine either on
going on or stopping. So, the horse, finding matters left to himself
jogged on -apparently unconscious of his fellow-wayfarer. The centre of
the' cross-roads of Borraheen is or was occupied by a patch of green
turf; and when they came to its edge, the white figure stood still,
while a portion of the shaft of the car on that side seemed to pass
through her. Gill, observing this, drew the beast at once to the other
side, crying in a voice made tremulous by terror, "By your leave,
ma'am!" On went horse and car, the edges of the load preventing him from
seeing the white form. Having advanced two or three yards, he looked
back, fearing to see a mangled body on the road behind him, but he saw,
instead, the white appearance standing in the centre of the. plot of
grass, her hand seeming to shade her eyes, as she looked earnestly after
him. Terrified as he was, he never turned his gaze till a bend in the
road cut off the view.

 

The neighbourhood of Borraheen, Baltracy, and Rathcoffey was blessed, or
the contrary, in times past, by a fortune-teller and charm-concocter,
Molly Anthony by name. So unedifying was her life and conversation, that
the priest refused to have any religious services performed for her
after death. She left a son, who had acquired some skill in curing
cattle by herbs, and did not pretend to any supernatural gifts. A
farmer, Pat Behan, at whose house he had remained about a fortnight, and
who was well pleased with his performances, was passing near the green
hills in his jaunting car, accompanied by Jack Anthony, the doctor,
when, on a sudden, an old woman in a red cloak appeared to them between
the bushes on the road-fence, and cried, "Jack, it's time for you to
come." "Sir," said Jack to his patron, "will you excuse me for a minute,
while I go to say a word to this neighbour of mine?" "Oh, to be sure!
"Jack got on the fence, and passed through the bushes, but the farmer
was surprised at not subsequently hearing the sound of his or her voice.
He waited for about the space of a minute, and then bade his servant
climb the fence, and see if Jack was about to return. The servant did as
he was told, and the master observed him look along the inner side of
the ditch, now to the left, and then to the right, and then straight
before him, with a perplexed expression of face. The master sprung down,
joined his servant, and found he had a long range of vision right and
left, and up the sloping side of the green hill, and no bushes or rocks
to afford concealment. Neither Jack nor the red-cloaked women were in
view. It was months before the doctor presented himself before his
patron, and even then his account of his disappearance was not
consistent in all its parts. Our informant was acquainted with Pat Behan
and Jack Anthony, and heard the former relate the adventure.

Mrs. FitzPatrick, a native of Queen's County, has furnished us with the
next tale.--

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Queen's County Ghost](lfic047)
