[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lfic061)  [Next](lfic063.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PURSUIT OF DIARMUID AND GRAINNE.

Diarmuid was unhappily gifted with a *ball seirce* (beauty spot) on his
shoulder, and Grainne, catching sight of it while sitting at the window
of her Grianan (sunny chamber) while looking at him hurling, could no
more avoid loving him than hapless Phaedra, her stepson Hippolytus. When
she laid geasa on him to take her away, it was with much grief he obeyed
her. It was deeply wronging his chief, but to disobey a lady's
injunctions was out of the question. The close pursuit and the
hairbreadth escapes were what might be expected, but Diarmuid's brother
warriors, Oisin, Oscur, Caeilte the swift, MacLuacha, Fergus the poet,
and the others carried out Fion's revengeful intents in a way very
displeasing to the wrathful chief. They gave the fugitives every
opportunity of escaping, for they were fully aware of Diarmuid's
unwillingness at the outset. The peasants still point out their
resting-places, marked by standing stones, and still called the "Beds of
Diarmuid and Grainne." Of the hero's reception of Fion's auxiliaries
here is a sample taken from the *Ossianic Transactions*, vol. iii.

"He drew near the warriors and began to slaughter them heroically and
with swift valour. He went under them, over them, and through them as a
hawk would go through small birds, or a wolf through a flock of weak
sheep. Even 'thus it was that Diarmuid hewed crossways the glittering,
very beautiful mail of the men of Lochlann, so that there went not from
that spot a man to tell tidings without having the grievousness of death
executed upon him."

Fion was at last obliged to make peace, and on one occasion he and
Diarmuid went to hunt on Ben Gulban in Sligo in company. A youth slain
several years before by Donn, Diarmuid's father, was changed at the
moment of his death into a Druidic boar, and appointed to slay at some
future time the son of his murderer, but Diarjnuid had got warning at
the same time not to give chase to the magic beast. While Fion and he
were conversing, the fatal animal came charging like thunder up the
hill.

Diarmuid was at the time unprovided except with an inferior blade, but
with this he struck the savage a mighty blow, which smashed the
ill-tempered bronze in two, and his foot slipping, the beast tore his
side open with his tusk. At the returning charge of the enchanted animal
down hill, Diarmuid broke his skull with a strong cast of the hilt of
the treacherous sword. His own life was now fast ebbing away, but it was
in Fion's power to prevent his death by giving him, from a spring nine
ridges away, a draught of water brought in the hollow of his joined
palms. Oscur, Oisin, Caeilte, Fergus, and MacLuacha, had hurriedly
arrived at the spot, and loudly and earnestly did the heroes urge Fion
to haste, but he went about the unwelcome work so leisurely that when
the water touched Diarmuid's lips, life had departed. Three shouts of
indignation were raised by Oscur and the rest, and only for their
binding vows of loyalty they would have slain their chief on the spot.
In memory of the tragic deed, the place was thenceforward called the
"Mound of the Sword hilt." Archaeologists find a similarity between this
and the legend of. Venus, Adonis, and the boar.

 

In such importance were held fictional narrations in old times, that
they were carefully classified. The following were the chief
varieties:--Tales of battles, of voyages, of the taking of forts, of
sieges, of deaths of heroes, of cattle-raids, of courtships, of
adventures in caverns, of land and sea expeditions, of banquets, andof
elopements. Then there were the mere imaginative tales in prose or
verse, of which Fion or some of his friends were the heroes. The one
that follows is a specimen of the class of stories relative to flights
and pursuits; it is called

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Flight of the Sluggard](lfic063.md)
