[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lfic072)  [Next](lfic074.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE CHILDREN OF LIR.

Lir, though the father of a demi-god, was not able to secure domestic
comfort. Having lost his beloved wife he sought relief in travel; and
being on a visit with

Bogha Derg, King of Conacht, he was induced to enter on the married
state again, taking the beauteous and virtuous Princess *Aebh* (Eve) as
his new partner. She bore him twins, *Fionula* (Fair-shoulder) and
*Aodh* (Hugh), and at a second birth, Fiachra and Conn. This was
followed by her death; and after some time the bereaved widower again
sought the court of his father-in-law. He was there tempted to commit
matrimony again, hoping that the sister of his lamented wife, the
Princess *Aoifê*, would do the duty of an aunt, at least, to his
orphans. For a year there was nothing to be complained of, but then she
began to be jealous of the tenderness and attention ever exhibited by
Lir to the Princess Fionula and her brothers. From mere despite she took
to her bed,' and there remained a year. At last a skilful hut wicked
Druid visited her, extracted her heart's secret, and tendered his
advice. Rising from her bed, she arrayed herself in her best, and taking
the children with her, got up into her chariot, and set out for her
father's court, near Loch Derg, on the Shannon. On the route she urged
her charioteer to destroy the children; but he was deaf to her
entreaties, and she was obliged to enact the part of executioner
herself. Fionula, with a girl's acuteness, sorely distrusted her
stepmother; and when they arrived at the edge of a lake, and she and her
brothers were commanded to get down and bathe, she refused in the most
decided mariner for them and herself. However, Aoifd, with assistance
from her retinue, forced them into the water, and then and there, by a
stroke on the head of each with a wand, the wicked Druid's gift, she
changed them into four beautiful swans.

On arriving at her father's palace, he made inquiry about his
grandchildren, and suspecting that her representation of their being in
health at home was not true, he cast her into a druidic sleep, and made
her reveal her wickedness. Restoring her to her o\~-dinary state, he
bitterly reproached her in the presence of the court, changed her into a
grey vulture by a stroke of his wand of power, and doomed her to live in
the cold, and windy, and sleety air, while time was to endure.

All repaired to the lake where the enchantment was effected, and were
kept in a state of delight listening to the magic songs of the birds,
The chariots stood by the shore, and the steeds consumed their
provender, and the knights and ladies still listened entranced, night
and day, until by the power,pf Aoife's words, they were obliged to rise
in the air, and direct their flight to Loch Derg. There through the
mildness of summer, and the harsh winds and ice of winter, they abode
three hundred years;--Fionula pressing her dejected and shivering
brothers to her side, covering them with her wings, and cheering them
with her grandfather's prophecy--that when men with shaved heads--came
over the sea, set up their tables in the east ends' of their houses, and
rung their bells, the first sound would again restore their human form.

Three hundred years being gone, they once more were obliged to take
their flight to the sea of Moyle, between Erinn and Alba, and there, for
three hundred years more, endured unspeakable sufferings. In their
flight they passed over the pleasant rath where their childhood had been
spent, and now it was but a grass-covered mound, with a slimy ditch at
its base. The last three hundred years of their sad pilgrimage were
passed on the wild waves of the great western sea near *Irrus Domnann*
(Erris). The bell that rung in the first Mass celebrated on *Inis na
Gluaire* (Isle of Glory), restored them to their human shapes; but they
were now emaciated and decrepit, and only waited for baptism, to flee
away to rest eternal. \[a\]

Our ancient annalists took it upon them to assign the year on which
sprung forth certain rivers and lakes, and consequently it was not at
all strange that their associates who took charge of the imaginative
affairs of the island, should improve the hint; and, neglecting the
trilling circumstances of dates, and names of contemporary monarchs,
proceed to tell their willing listeners to what faults or negligences it
was owing,that the once fertile vale, dotted with the habitations of
happy mortals, was flooded over, and how keen-sighted guides can to this
day behold through the deep waters the pinnacles of churches, and
occasionally the conical cap of a round tower. There being no need, in
this instance, to rank our fine sheets of water by the more or less
beauty of the surrounding scenery, we take them at random, and commence
with

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[a\] The "children of Tuirrean," the "children of Lir," and the
children of Uisneach," form the "Three Sorrows of Story" so lovingly
quoted by admirers of Celtic literature. It is a grief to us to have
spoiled one of them by inevitable contraction, and to be obliged, by
want of space, to Omit the other. There being nothing of a magical
character about the last-named one, it has no place in this article; but
a charming version furnished by Samuel Ferguson may be found in the
Hibernian Nights' Entertainments in an early volume of the *University
Magazine*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lough Neagh](lfic074.md)
