[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lfic081)  [Next](lfic083.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# KILSTOHEEN IN THE SHANNON.

The *Regia* of Ptolemy is supposed to be in existence, and inhabited by
beings who once breathed the upper air. It lies in the bed of the
Shannon towards its mouth, and is visible once in every seven years.
Whoever is so unlucky as to get a sight of this buried city dies within
a month. So late as 1823, fifteen men who had been down the river in a
sail-boat, were seen by many people at mass in a neighbouring chapel,
and even spoken to; but later in the day terror and grief prevailed in
that neighbourhood, on finding that these poor fellows and their boat
had been at the bottom of the river at the very time when they were
supposed present in the chapel. A little vessel anchored one night near
Beale, which is not far from the supposed site of Kilstoheen; and next
morning the crew on awaking found themselves by the quay of a
magnificent city. A merchant coming on board engaged the vessel for a
voyage to Bordeaux, for a cargo of wine. Thither captain and crew went
in a few hours, laid in the commodity, and were back in Kilstoheen with
very little delay. The freight being royally paid, the sailors went
ashore, and enjoyed life in their peculiar way. One or two unfortunately
approached some ladies who were taking the air, with coarse language and
rough endearments, and at the same moment a storm began to blow, and the
waters to rise. The crew made a hasty retreat to their vessel, and they
had hardly gained it when they saw the beautiful city covered by the
swelling waters, and their own bark dancing like a nutshell among the
frothing waves. There was an unaccountable blank at this point in their
after recollections; but next morning they awoke with their little
vessel grounded on a sloping shallow portion of the bed of the river.

The people of Kilstoheen were reported to cultivate a fine breed of
horses. A farmer in the neighbourhood found his hayricks invaded several
nights in succession. So he set a watch, and found that the depredators,
after making their meal, made their way into the Shannon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Isle of the Living](lfic083.md)
