[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic092)  [Next](lfic094) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE FORTUNE OF DICHU.

On his first landing on the eastern coast a tall savage man named Dichu,
attended by a no less savage dog, attacked him in presence of a large
crowd, and both in a moment became as stiff in joint and limb as if they
were made of stone. At the saint's intercession they were restored to
power and flexibility, but their savage nature had quitted them, and
Dichu becoming a convert, granted his large barn to the Apostle for the
purpose of worship. The tradition of the incident was transmitted in the
name of the better-built church which succeeded it, and was called Sahal
Fhadruig (Patrick's Barn).

Patrick approached the royal fortress at the end of Holy Week, and on
Easter Saturday evening was reading the offices suitable to the occasion
in his temporary lodging, some distance eastward from Tara. It happened
to be the eve of the *Bealtein* \[a\] when no fire was to be seen
through the length and breadth of the land. As darkness fell, the king,
and his nobles, and his Druids, all assembled on the hill and the
neighbouring plain, were awaiting the propitious moment for lighting the
Sun's Fire. Watchers were stationed on every high hill through the whole
island at the moment, their eyes turned in the direction of Tara; and as
each caught sight of the blaze on a height in that direction, he lighted
his own heap of dry brush with sparks struck from flint stones. A
portion of the rest of the night's occurrences is legendary.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[a\] The latest day on which Easter Sunday falls is the 26th of April.
*Bealteiné* was held on May 1st; no authority hitherto consulted by us
has alluded to this discrepancy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: St Patrick's Contest with the Druids](lfic094)
