[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic077)  [Next](lfic079) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE ORIGIN OF THE LAKE OF TIIS.

Soon after the preaching of Christianity in Zealand, a church was raised
in Kund, and the cheerful clang of the bells was often heard, scattering
their holy music abroad, and exciting devotion. But the chimes, as all
other things connected with Christian ceremonial, were very distasteful
to a troll who haunted the neighbourhood; and at last his annoyance
became so intense, that he crossed over to Funen, and there abode.

Some time after he met a man from Kund, and made many inquiries about
his old neighbours. At last, seeming to recollect something on a sudden,
he changed the subject, and said to the man, "Will you oblige me by
delivering this letter which I am dropping into your pocket, without
showing you the address? There is a little secret about it, and you will
oblige me by throwing it over the churchyard wall in Kund, where my
friend is already expecting it." The man promised to do as desired, but
on his return he forgot all about it. At last, being one day out in the
low meadow, which now forms the basin of Lake Tiis, he suddenly
recollected the letter, and, forgetting the injunction, he pulled it out
of his pocket and looked at it. He observed with surprise that drops of
water were trickling out of the corners. But terror soon succeeded to
surprise when it flew open, and a mighty torrent began to rush from it.
He had time, however, to escape before the hollow of the land in which
he stood was filled with water. The revengeful troll had enclosed the
whole lake in that pestilent letter and if his evil design had
succeeded, the church, and perhaps the whole town of Kund, would have
been inundated.

The Celtic elves as well as the trolls have a great dislike to the
intrusion of churches near their own residences, though they express it
in a milder form. Sir Walter Scott has told how when they were going to
erect a church at Deer, in the old ages, a chorus of the little people
was heard to this effect

It is not here, it is not here,  
That ye shall build the Kirk o' Deer,  
But on Taptillerie,  
Where many a grave shall be."

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Building of Ardfert Cathredral](lfic079)
