[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lfic098)  [Next](lfic100.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE VISION OF ST. BRIGID.

Brigid, daughter of the converted Druid, Dubhthach, was distinguished
from her girlhood by an intense spirit of piety. Once while listening to
one of St. Patrick's discourses she was observed to fall asleep, and
those who observed it made signs to the preacher to arouse her. He did
not take the hint, but when the sermon was at an end and Brigid wide
awake but sorrowful, he begged her to reveal the vision which he knew
must have been vouchsafed her. "Alas, Father!" said she, "my soul is sad
from the sights that succeeded one another while I slumbered. I seemed
standing on a high eminence with all Erinn in my sight, and from every
part of it were issuing bright flames that joined above and filled the
atmosphere. I looked again, and behold, fires were still burning on
mountains and hills, but the sight was poor compared to the former
general blaze. The third time I cast my eyes abroad, nothing brighter
than the puny flames of torches and candles met my gaze. This was sad
enough, but when I looked again, the land was covered with ashes, except
where a few solitary torches burned in caverns and in the shadows of
rocks. I shut my eyes and wept, but was comforted on again opening them
to see a steady bright flame blazing in the north, and which spread,
scattering itself from its focus till the whole island was once more
cheerfully lighted up." \[a\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[a\] This vision is explained by the great sanctity of the people at
and after the death of St. Patrick, the gradual decay and almost
extinction of piety during the Danish irruptions, and its revival under
St. Malachy, Archbishop of Armagh.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Death and Burial of St Patrick](lfic100.md)
