[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lfic033)  [Next](lfic035.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE LONG SPOON.

The devil and the hearth-money collector for Bantry set out one summer
morning to decide a bet they made the night before over a jug of punch.
They wanted to see which would have the best load at sunset, and neither
was to pick up anything that wasn't offered with the goodwill of the
giver. They passed by a house, and they heard the poor vanithee cry out
to her lazy daughter, "O musha,--take you for a lazy sthronshuch of a
girl! do you intend to getup to-day?" "Oh, oh!" says the tax-man, "there
is a lob for you, Nick." "Ovoch! "says the other. "it wasn't from her
heart she said it: we must pass on." The next cabin they were passing,
the woman was on the bawn-ditch crying out to her husband, that was
mending one of his brogues inside: "Oh, tattheration to you, Mick! you
never rung them pigs, and there they are in the potato drills rootin'
away; the----run to Lusk with them!" "Another windfall for you," says
the man of the inkhorn, but the old thief only shook his horns and
wagged his tail. So they went on, and ever so many prizes offered to the
black fellow without him taking one. Here it was a gorsoon playing
marvels when he should be using his clappers in the corn-field; and
there it was a lazy drone of a servant asleep with his face to the sod,
when he ought to be weeding. No one thought of offering the hearth-money
man even a drink of buttermilk, and at last the sun was within half a
foot of the edge of Cooliagh. They were just then passing thro'
Monamolin, and a poor woman that was straining her supper in a skeeoge
outside her cabin door, seeing the two standing at the bawn gate, bawled
out, "Oh, here's the hearth-money man,--run away wid 'im!" "Got a bite
at last," says Nick. "Oh, no, no! it wasn't from her heart she said it,"
says the collector. "Indeed an' it was from the very foundation stone of
her heart it came. No help for misfortunes; in with you," says he,
opening the mouth of his big black bag; and whether the devil was ever
after seen taking the same walk or not, no one ever laid eyes on his
fellow-traveller again.

The Cooliagh, or White Mountain, forms part of the north-west boundary
of Wexford. The mere English reader is informed that the skeeoge or
flattish wicker basket, having received the potatoes and boiling water
on the pavement, lets the liquid off to the pool at the bottom of the
yard. The shields of the ancient Irish, consisting of strong leather, or
plates over a wicker framework, were called skiaghs.

At some period of the troubles in Munster a small tribe emigrated to the
north-east portion of the county Wexford. The following legend connected
with the family was current among the descendants who lived, and loved,
and sinned, and fought the battle of life half a century since.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Prophet before his Time](lfic035.md)
