[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lfic065)  [Next](lfic067.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE YOUTH OF OISIN.

As the Fianna were one day returning from the chase, a beautiful fawn
was started, which fled towards their own dun. At last all had fallen
back, both men and dogs, except Fion and his two favourite hounds.
Sweeping along a valley-side the animal suddenly ceased her flight, and
lay down on the smooth grass. Fion was amazed at this, but much more
when he saw the hounds frolic round her, and lick her face and neck and
limbs. To kill so beautiful and gentle a beast under the circumstances
was out of the question. She followed him home, playing with the hounds,
and was housed in Almuin that night.

When Fion was left alone late on that evening, a woman of fair features
and rich dress presented herself before him, and declared herself the
hunted fawn of that day. "For refusing the love of the Danaan Druid,
Fear Doirche," said she, "I have for three years endured the nature and
the dangers of a wild deer's life in a far district of Erinn, which
dread 'Geasach' prevents me from naming. A pitying slave of the Druid at
last revealed to me, that if I were once within any fortress owned by
the Fians of Erinn, his power over me would be at an end. I flew with
untiring limbs for a day, until I came into the territory of the chief
of Almuin, and ceased not my flight till Brann and Sceoluing of human
intellect were the only pursuers on my track. With them my life was
safe; they knew me to be of a nature like to their own."

Some months passed away, during which Fion went forth neither to the
fight nor to the chase, so lost was he to all his former amusements and
pursuits, through his deep love for the rescued princess. But at last
the *Loch-Leannach* (the Scandinavians) were in the bay of the Hill of
Oaks (Howth). Seven days were the Fians absent, and on the eighth the
chief was crossing the plain of Almuin with rapid strides, and wondering
that his sweet flower was not looking towards him from the top of the
mound. The dwellers of the fort rushed out in joy to greet their chief;
but sadness sat on their faces. "Where is the flower of Almuin, the
beauteous, the tender Saav?" "Blame not her nor us, O father of your
people! While the white strangers were falling beneath your axe of war,
your likeness and the likenesses of Brann and Sceoluing appeared before
the dun, and we thought we heard the sweet-sounding Dord Fionn blow from
your lips the music that makes wounded men and women in travail forget
their pains. Sav the good, the beautiful, came forth; she flew down the
pass; she issued through the gates; she would not listen to entreaty or
command. 'I must go and meet my protector, my love, the, father of my
unborn infant,' she cried, and in a few moments she was rushing into the
arms of the phantom.' Alas! we saw her start back with a scream, and the
form strike her with a hazel wand. A gentle, slender doe was on the
plain, where she stood a moment since, and with wild yelpings the two
hounds chased her from the dun. Thrice, four times, she sprang towards
'the moat, but every time she was seized by the throat and pulled away.
By your hand, O Fion, we were not idle. What we have told passed while
ten could scarcely be counted twice, and by that time we were on the
plain with glaive, lance, and javelin. *Mo chuma*! (my sorrow) neither
was woman, nor hind, nor sorcerer, nor dog to be seen, but we still
could hear the beating of rapid feet on the hard plain, and the howling
of dogs. If you were to ask every four of us in which quarter the noise
was heard, each would name a different one."

Fion looked upwards in anguish, and repeatedly struck the mail that
guarded his breast with his Clenched hands. Word he spoke none, but
retired to his private apartment, and did not show himself to his people
for the rest of that day, nor till the sun rose over the plain of the
Liffey next morning. For seven years from that time, whenever he was not
called with his Fianna to make head against the white strangers, lie
continued to explore every remote corner of the land for the beloved
Saav; and, except in the excitement of the chase or battle, an
unchanging sadness had possession of him. Nor for seven years more did
he forget the matchless princess who had shed such happiness, fleet as
it was, on his life. He never during that time took to the chase more
than his five favourite hounds--Brann, Sceoluing, Lomaire, Brod, and
Lomluath--lest he should endanger the life of Saav if his good destiny
led him upon her track.

At the end of the second period, as he and some of his knights were
hunting on the side of Bengulban, in Sligo, they heard a terrible
clamour among the dogs, who had got before them into a defile. On coming
up they found the five hounds of Fion in a sort of circle, opposing the
furious efforts of their companions to seize on a stripling of noble
features, but entirely naked, except for the long hair which covered him
from head' to foot. He stood within the circle with no sign of fear on
his countenance, and, forgetful of his own peril, did nothing but gaze
on the stately forms of the curai as they surrounded the dogs. As soon
as the fight was stopped, Brann and Sceoluing came to the wild youth,
and whined and fawned on him, and licked him, and seemed as if for the
moment they' had forgotten their master. Fion and the others approached,
and laid their hands on his head and caressed him, and his wild nature
began from that hour to be changed. They brought him to their hunting
sheds, and he ate and drank with them, and soon became as one of
themselves. Fion, considering his features, and seeing in them some
reflexion of the sweet countenance of Saav, and comparing his apparent
age with her disappearance, hoped that he was her child, and kept him
continually at his side. The youth fully returned his affection, and
Brann and Sceoluing seemed never tired of bounding round him and
receiving his caresses. His long hair soon disappeared with the use of
clothes, and as soon as he acquired the gift of speech he gave this
account of what he remembered:--

He and a hind whom he tenderly loved and who sheltered him and tended
him, inhabited a wide park, in which were hills, deep valleys, streams,
rocks, and dark woods. He lived on fruits and roots in summer, and in
winter he found provisions left in a sheltered cavern. A dark-visaged
man came at times, and spoke sometimes in soft and tender, sometimes in
loud and threatening tones, to the hind, but she ever shrunk away, and
looked at him with fear expressed in face, and limb, and attitude. He
always departed in great anger. All this time there was no way of
escaping from this park; where high steep cliffs were wanting, there
were straight descents of such depth as could not be passed with life.
The last time he beheld his mother, the Fear Doirche had been speaking
in soft and in harsh tones alternately for a long time; but still the
hind kept aloof from him trembling. At last he struck her with a hazel
wand, and she was obliged to follow him, still looking back at her son
and bleating piteously. He made violent efforts, to follow her. He cried
out in rage and sorrow, but, had not power to move, He fell on the
ground insensible, just as he was listening to what he supposed the
expiring 'cries of the deer, and when he awoke he found himself on the
side of the hill where some days after the dogs discovered him. He had
searched days and days for the inclosure where he had so happily lived
but could discover no appearance of cliffs springing up or descending,
such as had long been so. Familiar to his eyes.

This youth received the.name of Oisin, arid in time he became the sweet
singer of the Fianna of Erinn.

 

In the Book of Leinster are preserved some poetic pieces attributed to
Oisin, the son of Fion. Oisin and Oisin's poetry may have belonged to
the real world, but if so, succeeding poets so carefully surrounded his
remains with their own compositions imposed on the world as his, that
they became lost to sight and hearing, and are now either extinct or
dispersed in very small portions through the inferior productions of his
imitators. Subjoined is a literal translation of a poetical answer given
by Fion to Conane of the hill ridge, on his asking him what kind of
music he preferred:

 

THE FAVOURITE MUSIC OF FION MAC CUMHAIL.

When my seven battalions gather on, the plain,  
And hold aloft the standards of war,  
And the dry cold wind whistles through the silk,--  
that to me is sweetest music!

"When the drinking-hall is furnished in Almuin,  
And the pages hand the carved cups to the chiefs,  
And the musicians touch the wires with their fingers,  
And the drained cups ring on the hard polished table,--  
Sweet to my ears is that music!

"Sweet is the scream of the sea-gull and heron,  
And the waves resounding on the Fair Strand (Ventry)  
Sweet is the song of the three sons of Meardha,  
Mac Luacha's whistle, the Dord \[a\] of Fear-Scara,  
The cuckoo's note in early summer,  
And the echo of loud laughter in the wood."

the next tale may be considered the latest that has reference to the
Fianna.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[a\] a war bugle

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Old Age of Oisin](lfic067.md)
