[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic013)  [Next](lfic015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Legends of the 'Good People'

ALL our superstitions, and a great part of our legendary lore, have
descended to us from our, pagan ancestors. Aphrodite and Artemis
selected lovers from among mortals;--Melusina, Viviana, Morgana, and
other beautiful and celebrated fairies, followed their example in
enthralling Christian knights. The *Lianhan Sighe* (Fairy love) still
attaches herself to some favoured mortal, who is thenceforward lost to
human affection, and becomes what in pagan times would have been called
a Nympholept. Juno and the three Fates assisted at the births of
mortals--so do the fairies. The inflexible destinies were called the
Parcae (merciful);--the timorous cottager propitiates the fairies by
addressing them as the *Duine Matha*, "The Good People." Hephaestion,
and his swart Cyclops, forged impregnable armour for favoured
heroes;--the dwarf workers in the Northern mines did the same for the
terrible sea-kings. In the penetralia, at each side of the fire, were
the Lares and Penates to keep blessings about the abode of the master.
The Kobolds frequented favoured houses to bless the servants' efforts,
or even do their work. Apollo and Hercules got much trouble destroying
great hydras;--Fion MacCumhail murdered piasts in nearly every lake in
Ireland. Achilles was rendered invulnerable in every part of his body
except his heel;--Siegfried, the dragon slayer, could not be wounded
except at a portion of his back, the size of a small leaf. The Golden
Fleece brought misery to its possessors;--so did the Nibelungen hoard.
The three goddesses so reverenced among the Gauls and Germans, and the
Druidic priestesses afterwards substituted for them, became at last the
fairies or Breton Korigans; and the herbs of Druidic rites still retain
their power at All-Hallow Tide, in furnishing truthful visions of their
future husbands to superstitious damsels.

The name Fairy has given rise to long disquisitions. The nearest root,
in sound at least, is the Persian Peri. Then we have for the correct
name, Fay, the Fata, or Destinies, which became Fada in the Provençal,
and Hada in the Spanish tongues. The Greek language furnishes Μοίραι
(the Fates), and the propitiating title Parcae (merciful), applied to
the Destinies, has its representative in the "Good People," applied to
the Fays in Ireland. The Gaelic name is Sighe, which is not found out of
Ireland and the Highlands, except at *La font de Scée,* in Poitou. The
Breton Korigan may derive from κούρη, young maid, or, perhaps, the
Celtic *corrig*, a hill. The word Fairy, or Faërie, is properly the
state or condition of the Fays.

Even as the Parcae or other female divinities assisted at the births of
Achilles, Meleager, &c., so, in the romances of the Middle Ages, fairies
were present at the births of Holger the Dane, Oberon, Tristrem, &c.,
and endowed them with valuable gifts, or predicted their future
fortunes. Till our own days the Bretons would have a feast laid out in
an adjoining room on these occasions for their visitors. Aurora carried
away the favoured Tithonus into her glowing palace of the morning.
Calypso retained Ulysses in the happy isle of Ogygia. King Arthur was
borne to the isle of Avalon by Morgana. Lanval was conducted into the
same isle by his fairy love; Ossian was kept in the "Land of Youth"
under the Atlantic for a hundred and fifty years, by Nea of the Golden
Hair; and the fairies contemporary with our fathers and mothers stole
away to their Sighe-mounts as many mortals as they could get into their
power. The druidical bowl of inspiration, and the symbolic lance, sought
by Peredur in pagan Brittany, became, in the hands of the Christian
romancers, the sangraal or bowl used at the last supper, and the spear
which pierced our Saviour's side; and Sir Percival went forth in quest
of them. Error varies its form, but its essence is indestructible. There
is scarcely a legend or article of belief of the Greek or Roman
mythology which, in some modification, may not be traced in the fairy
systems of all the countries of Europe.

In connecting fairy superstition with paganism once prevailing over
Europe, one circumstance remains to be noticed. The progeny of a god or
goddess when residing among mortals, was distinguished by superexcellent
qualities; any of the fairy race that have abode among men are
noticeable for peculiarities the very reverse. They are gluttonous,
peevish, ungrateful. and spiteful, and are never found to develop into
anything better than rickety children. At the introduction of
Christianity, Crom, Odin, Frea, Zeus, Aphrodite, and Bacchus the
Intemperate, were obliged to forego adoration and even respect. They
lost a good deal of their beauty, and the best part of their amiability,
and even frolicsome Pan degenerated into the hoofed and horned devil.
Their proceedings towards man became of a capricious, if not baleful
character, and their interference in human affairs was deprecated by all
right-minded and timorous people. The next legend will illustrate these
remarks, Mrs. K., of the Duffrey, being our informant: -

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fairy Child](lfic015)
