[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lfic079)  [Next](lfic081.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# HOW DONAGHADEE GOT ITS NAME.

In the fine old kingdom of Kerry lived Donogha and Vauria, man and wife.
Had they been a happy pair, their names and their little disagreements
would not have reached our times. Donogha was lazy, Vauria was fiery in
temper; and so food and fuel were frequently scarce, and words of anger
and reproach frequent. On a fine summer day the master of the house was
sitting by his hearth devoid of care, and doing no heavier work than
smoking his pipe. Vauria coming in, rated him to such an extent for his
idleness, neither sticks nor turf being under the roof to boil the
supper, that he went forth into the wood to gather a *bresna.* Having
taken twice the time it would have cost another to collect his bundle,
he tied it up by a great effort, and then sat down upon it to lament at
his ease his hard fate, cursed with poverty and a scolding wife. Our
authority distinctly says that St. Brendain appeared to him then and
there, and after speaking some words of kindness and encouragement, told
him he would grant him two wishes, and advised him to think them over
seriously before he would give them utterance. In our opinion the
apparition was that of one of the fairy chiefs of the country. The lazy
man returned thanks, and getting the fagot on his back trudged
homewards. But the weight, multiplied by his native laziness, was nearly
intolerable, and forgetting the late occurrence, he groaned out, "Oh,
that this devil of a bresna was carrying me instead of *me* the bresna!"
On the moment he found himself astride of the bundle, which was using
the ends of its boughs as so many legs, and in a very short space of
time he was thundering from the "bawngap," to the door. "Oh, Donogha,
honey," says Vauria, "what's the meaning of this?" The fright inspired
her with some politeness and good nature. He told her his good luck, and
how they had still one wish left. "An', you anointed onshuch," said she,
"is that the way you threw away your good fortune? I wish the bresna was
in your stomach!" "It is well for me," said the easy man, "that it
wasn't to you the saint appeared." Well, she went on *aggravating* him
till he fairly lost patience; anti cried out, "Oh, you serpent o' the
world, I wish we were the length of Ireland separated from each other!"
The next moment she and her cabin were at *Teagh na Vauria* (Mary's
House), at the extreme end of Kerry, and he in the place called ever
since Donaghadee (qu. *.Teagh an Donogha).* They never saw one another
more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Borrowed Lake](lfic081.md)
