[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic104)  [Next](lfic106) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# ST. FANCHEA'S VISIT TO ARRAN.

St. Enda's sister, Fanchea, accompanied by three of her nuns, once paid
a visit to Arran to see how the good work was proceeding. She and they
were much edified by the praying, and fasting, and labouring, and
building, and the copying of Latin gospels and missals, all in busy
progress. When she was departing, she would not allow her brother to
withdraw a couple of his monks from their labours to row them across to
the mainland. "We will," said she, "trust to God for a passage." Coming
to the shore, she made the sign of the cross on the water, and spread
her cloak on it.

The garment at once assumed the qualities of a stout board, and the
sisters, each taking her position at a corner, went tranquilly over the
rough waters of the bay. Fanchea observing one corner of the raft rather
shaky, and inclined to let the salt water invade the feet of the sister
placed there, exhorted her to acknowledge the fault which occasioned
this partial failure. "Dear mother," said the repentant lady, "while on
the island I coveted a nice pipkin for which we have much need at home,
and so I secretly brought it away with me." "Ah, dear daughter, you have
done wrong. One venial sin deliberately cornmitted may lead easily to a
mortal sin. Throw the cause of your fault into the sea." It was done,
and the remainder of the voyage was pleasantly effected.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: St Brendain's Voyage](lfic106)
