[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lfic067)  [Next](lfic069.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# LEGEND OF LOCH NA PIASTA. \[a\]

A long time ago, the pool near the bridge of Thuar was infested by a
terrible beast in the shape.of a dragon. He laid waste all the Duffrey
from Kilmeashil out to Moghurry, and the king of this part of the
country didn't know what to do. His very breath was so strong that he
could suck a horse into his throat, if he smelled him within three miles
of his pool.

At last messengers were sent to the court of the head king of Ireland,
who lived somewhere in Munster, to see if he would sent some great
warrior to circumvent this devil of a serpent, that would soon not leave
a single family alive on this side the Slaney.

Off went the messengers, and nothing need be told of their travels till
they came to the court. They up and told their story, but the king was
unwilling to fix on any one, it was so entirely dangerous. However, the
hot blood was never wanting among the Irish, and so three brave
fellows--an O'Brien, an O'Farrel, and an O'Kennedy--volunteered.

Well, one of these, I won't say which, was so impatient to set out,
nothing could be like it; and "if the first lot didn't fall on him, he'd
roar his arm off." But what will you have of it? The day before they
were to leave, the buck got an impression on his chest, or the palate of
his mouth was down--some *meeah* was over him, at any rate: he said he
wasn't fit to go, and sure enough it's the truth he was telling. There
was a brother of his in the house--a big slob of a boy, that never got
anything better to do than turn out the cows or thrash fodder for the
cattle. Well becomes my brave lad, he goes to the king, and says he, "My
family will be disgraced for ever if your majesty doesn't let me go
instead of my brother." The king looked at him as if he had horns on
him, but he was a fine strong young fellow, and had a good innocent
look, and something very resolute in his eyes. "Well, go in God's name,"
says the king; "David killed Goliath with a small stone."

Off they set, by valleys and mountains, till they came to
Bullawn-a-Rinka, there on the top of Coolgarrow-hill. They put up their
spy-glasses, and saw the beast stretched out down below, very stupid
after a fog-meal he got on a small party of strange soldiers.

"Now, if you'll consent," says the big boy, "I'll try the battle first;
and if I fall it will be no great loss." But they would not agree to his
offer; so they cast lots, and sure enough he got the chance. "Now," says
he again, "bear a hand while the thief is asleep;" and so they cut down
trees, and made the full of a big sack of charcoal.

He got into it with a sharp skian, and made them fill all about him with
the black logs. Before they closed it he says to his comrades, "Get to
the top of the nearest part of Mount Leinster there beyond, and if you
see a smoke near the pool after three hours, kindle a fire, and that
will be a sign to all the country that the piastha is slain. You,
messengers, get across to Ferns as fast as you can lay leg to ground,
and tell your king what's going on."

Just as he said, just so they did, and the two knights were hardly up on
the mountain when they saw the monster waking up and stretching himself.
He began

to snuff about, and when he turned his nose towards Coolgarrow, he began
to suck like vengeance. The sack came through the air like a bow-arra,
and struck the inside of his jaw with such force that it almost knocked
him down. He didn't like the taste of the coals, so he swallowed the
sack, body and bones; and when the boy found himself in his belly, he
got out his skian and gashed away under him, and the piastha finding
something going wrong in his inside, rolled away to the pooi. The pain
was growing worse and worse, and just as he was rumbling heels over head
into the water, his belly was cut through, and out tumbled the Munster
man safe and sound on the sod.

He lost no time till he made a fire; and, by my word, there was another
fire soon on Mount Leinster, and another on Black Stairs and every hill
round, and such joy and delight as there was *we'll* never see any way.

But the brave boy was devout, too. He determined he'd build a church out
of gratitude, and he prayed that he might be shown, a proper place to
make, the foundation. So he had a dream, and the next morning he saw a
duck and mallard flying along. He followed them across Thuar Bridge, and
over the hill to Templeshambo. There they lighted, the drake on the near
side of the stream, and the duck on the far one. So he built a monastery
on one side and a nunnery on \~the 'other, and even when there wasn't a
stick nor a stone of either of them left, there was not a woman buried
on one side, nor a man on the other, till the devil bewitched the people
of Ballinlugg to bury Blue Cap on the men's side, within a foot of the
body of brave ould Daniel Jourdan, that fought with Sarsfield at
Aughrim, and you all know how it fared with her.

 

There is scarcely a lake in Ireland without its legend of a worm or
piastha, destroyed by Fion Mac Cumhail, or one of the old saints. As the
early missionaries were unable to induce their converts to give up the
recitation of these pagan fables, they turned them to account by
investing them with a new character. The worm or serpent was the devil,
and his conqueror was St. Michael. Kilmeashil churchyard lies a little
better than a mile away from Lough-na-Piastha: the name is a corruption
of *Ci-Mihil*, "Church of St. Michael." The later story-tellers,
however, found it more to' their purpose to leave out the spiritual
element, and so the legend by degrees resumed its ancient character,
substituting Christian knights for three of the Ossianic heroes.

About the year 1808 a report ran through the Duffrey that some spawn of
the old serpent had made its appearance in the pool, and was seen
tearing across the fields that divide it from Kennystown bog, and
plunging into one of the deepest bog-holes. Some hundreds of people
collected after Mass one Sunday, arid, armed with pitch-forks, fishing
spears, and spades, perambulated the bog the whole afternoon, with
intent to slay the young worm. They were obliged to separate towards
nightfall without a glimpse of him--head, body, or tail.

Our authority for the following legend was Owen Jourdan, already
mentioned. Poor Jourdan was a genuine story-telling genius. He was not
the mere talented Scealuidhe; he not only had a sense of what pleased
and interested, but he could invent, if needful--i.e. he could form a
good narrative out of two or three independent ones. With all his native
powers of deceiving his auditors while relating extraordinary things, as
if they had happened,to himself, he was suspected of believing in the
existence of fairies, and their dwelling in peculiar localities, such as
the Rath of Cromogue. As for raths in general, he would as soon think of
planting a ridge of potatoes in the ancient cemeteries of Kihneashill or
Templeshambo as of ploughing up the green area of one of these circular
remains. We have endeavoured to retain his style of narrative; but alas!
it is more than thirty years since we sat near his throne, viz., the,big
kitchen griddle in Tombrick.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[a\] Pool of the Worm (Serpent).

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The King with the Horse's Ears](lfic069.md)
