[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lfic106)  [Next](lfic108.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE ISLAND OF THE BIRDS.

St. Brendain's barque having sailed long in a south westerly direction
in beautiful weather, came to anchor by a delightful island in which the
fragrant turf cam down to the very water. There were hills in the centre
of the isle, where some grey rocks appeared among strip of green turf
and red flowered heath; the rest of the island was occupied by
delightful woods and sIoping meadows, the trees furnished with the
finest fruit, and shrubs everywhere presenting the loveliest flowers. No
cloud obscured the sunshine, and the trees and shrub were filled with
birds of varied and beautiful plumage whose voices united in forming
music that entranced the souls of the listeners. St. Brendain felt that
there was something supernatural about the little creatures; so he
adjured them to explain the mystery. "Welcome, sainted man!" cried out
one of them, who at that moment perched on his arm. "It is delightful to
us to hear the voice of one of God's creatures who loves and fears Him
as we do ourselves. When the rebel angels were plotting their evil
designs in heaven, we were tempted by the arch-fiend to join his party;
and, though we yielded not, we dallied with the temptation. So when the
unfortunate and wicked legions were flung headlong into the lower sea of
fire this island mercifully received us; and since then we have never
ceased night and day to sing hymns of joy and gratitude for being
spared. We can still see .the glorious companions of our former
happiness gliding fleetly through space on their heavenly errands, and
we wait with patience for our own release." The saint and his eleven
companions sometimes sitting down to listen to the choristers, at an
early hour in the morning, would find the sun about to set when no more
than half an hour seemed to have gone by.

All the incidents of the voyage were not of this agreeable character.
Once landing on a sort of purplish-grey slippery island, with a kind of
tough hard reeds springing up here and there, they lighted a fire; but
as it blazed up they were amazed to find the isle shaking itself
uncomfortably, and moving away. It was a very large fish, which, finding
itself incommoded by the fire, thus showed its discontent. The reader
will remember the same incident in the voyages of Sinbad, in the

Arabian Nights.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sinner Saved](lfic108.md)
