[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tnw01)  [Next](tnw03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The New Word*, by Allen Upward, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

### FIRST HEAD

### THE RIDDLE

*The Nobel Prize*.—1. *Philanthropy and Barabbas*.—2. *Charity and
Genius*.—3. *"Idealistic."*—4. *Eleven Guesses*.—5. *Prize for a New
Religion*.—6. *Challenge to Materialism?*—7. *The Academy and the
Idealist*.—8. *The Bequest in Abeyance*.

ALFRED BERNHARD NOBEL, maker of dynamite, died in the year 1896, and by
his will gave the bulk of his great wealth to benefit mankind, by these
remarkable provisions:—

 

“With the residue of my convertible estate I hereby direct my Executors
to proceed as follows: They shall convert my said residue of property
into money, which they shall then invest in safe securities; the capital
thus secured shall constitute a fund, the interest accruing from which
shall be annually awarded in prizes *to those persons who shall have
contributed most materially to benefit mankind during the year
immediately preceding*.

“The said interest shall be divided into five equal amounts to be
apportioned as follows:—

“One share to the person who shall have made the most important
discovery or invention in the domain of Physics;

“One share to the person who shall have made the most important Chemical
discovery or improvement;

“One share to the person who shall have made the

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

most important discovery in the domain of Physiology or Medicine;

“*One share to the person who shall have produced in the field of
Literature the most distinguished work of am idealist tendency;* 

“And finally, one share to the person who shall have most or best
promoted the Fraternity of Nations and the Abolition or Diminution of
Standing Armies and the Formation and Increase of Peace Congresses.

“The prizes for Physics and Chemistry shall be awarded by the Swedish
Academy of Science in Stockholm; the one for Physiology or Medicine by
the Caroline Medical Institute in Stockholm; *the prize for Literature
by the Academy in Stockholm*, and that for Peace by a Committee of five
persons to be elected by the Norwegian Storthing.

"I declare it to be my express desire that in the awarding of prizes no
consideration whatever be paid to the nationality of the candidates;
that is to say, that the most deserving be awarded the prize, whether of
Scandinavian origin or not."

I

The more attentively we study these provisions the more we shall be
struck by their originality and insight.

Hitherto the hereditary objects of charity have been the sad leavings of
mankind—

        The poor, whose broken lives  
Lie underneath great empires’ pageantry  
Like rubble underneath rich palace walls.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

Nobel is the first philanthropist who has desired to benefit the
forerunners of the race, as well as the laggards, and who has seen that
in benefiting them he would benefit all the rest.

There are two kinds of human outcasts. Man, in his march upward out of
the deep into the light, throws out a vanguard and a rearguard, and both
are out of step with the main body. Humanity condemns equally those who
are too good for it, and those who are too bad. On its Procrustean bed
the stunted members of the race are racked; the giants are cut down. It
puts to death with the same ruthless equality the prophet and the
atavist. The poet and the drunkard starve side by side.

Of these two classes of victims the stragglers are not more in need than
the forlorn hope; but the ambulance has always waited in the rear. It
would seem as though the vanity of benevolence were soothed by the sight
of degradation, but affronted by that of genius. Even the loafer and the
criminal have found friends. The thinker and the discoverer have been
left to the struggle for existence. For them are no asylums; for them no
societies stand ready to offer help. Millions have been spent in
providing libraries for the populace; the founder of German literature
was refused a librarian's place. And so philanthropy has cast its vote
to this day for Barabbas.

Nobel alone has had the courage not to be afraid of genius, and the
wisdom to see that whatever

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

is conferred on it really is conferred on all mankind.

The third of these bequests may serve to illustrate the superiority of
Nobel's method.

Many benefactors have desired to relieve bodily suffering. But they have
discerned no way of doing this except by building a hospital for the
advantage of a limited class. Nobel's aim has been at once wider and
higher. He has sought to relieve all suffering. He has demanded
worldwide remedies; he has offered rewards for the abolition of disease.

And in doing so he has at the same time remedied a great injustice, by
endowing medical discovery. The mechanical inventor has long had it in
his power to acquire wealth by the sale of his idea. Nobel's own fortune
owed its rise to a patented invention. But the noble etiquette of the
healer's calling voluntarily renounces an advantage that would hinder
the relief of human pain. In medicine every advance made by one is
placed freely at the service of all. For such saviours of humanity there
has been hitherto no material recompense, and humanity has been content
that it should be so. Neither parliaments nor emperors have ever wished
that the healers of men should take rank with their destroyers, and that
a Pasteur should receive the rewards of a Krupp. Nobel willed otherwise.

The fifth bequest contains a yet more striking instance of that refined
and beautiful inspiration which distinguishes the Testament of Nobel.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

This is a bequest for practical work on behalf of peace, disarmament and
the fraternity of nations. At the time when Nobel drew up his will these
aspirations seemed to have no more active enemies than the Norwegian
people. Norway was seeking separation from Sweden, and seeking it in
that temper of hatred which unhappily accompanies such movements almost
everywhere. The Norwegian Storthing was building fortresses on the
Swedish frontier, and providing battleships. Every Norwegian boy was
being trained with a view to an armed struggle with the Swedes, and
taught to regard them with revengeful feelings, as American children
were long taught to regard the English. Nobel was a Swede who loved his
country, and he has placed the administration of his other bequests in
Swedish hands. He entrusted the endowment of peace and brotherhood to
the Norwegian Storthing.

Surely no more magnanimous appeal than this has ever been addressed by a
man to men. The directions of such a Testator ought not to be regarded
lightly. They begin to assume the character of a sacred text.

II

What was the wish of Nobel's mind when, in language destined to
immortality, he drew up the Fourth Bequest?—

"One share to the person who shall have produced

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

in the field of Literature the most remarkable work of an idealistic
tendency?"

 

There is hardly any class which gives so much to humanity, and receives
so little in return, as the class of men of letters. There is hardly any
class whose sufferings are greater; and there is none which philanthropy
has done so little to relieve.

The works of Homer have been an unfailing spring of noble pleasure for
three thousand years, and during all that time humanity has repeated
with more complacency than shame the story of the poet begging his
bread, and has warned its children to shun the literary career. The
dreadful death of Chatterton seems never to have roused a momentary pity
in any philanthropist. Had that boy been blind, or dumb, or idiotic, or
incurably diseased, how many benevolent hearts would have yearned over
him! How many luxurious homes, standing in stately gardens amid glorious
scenery, would have opened their doors to take him in! On his behalf the
preachers would have preached, and the purse-proud would have loosed
their purse-strings. But because, instead of being blind, he saw too
well, saw the beauty and the wonder of the world, and would have told of
them, philanthropy turned its back on him, and humanity would not suffer
him to live.

Poe, himself the most gifted and the most wretched of his kind, has
declared that the laudation of the unworthy is to the worthy the
bitterest of all wrong.

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But what, then, of
the rewards of the unworthy? and the rewards of literature are too often
in inverse ratio to its worth. The author of a successful farce destined
to three or four years’ life could afford to look down on the Nobel
prize. The writer who faithfully reflects every prejudice in the public
mind can never stand in need of charity. But what of Dante and Milton,
of Villon and Verlaine?

The man of genius, above all the man of original genius, must generally
look for bread to some other pursuit than his own. The exceptions are
those whom robust health, or some strong talent auxiliary to their
inspiration, has enabled to overcome the public prejudice of their own
day. And too often the victory has been won at some cost to the abiding
value of their work. Happy is he who, like Spinoza, has been able to
make out a livelihood by grinding lenses, instead of demeaning himself
to the tasks that humanity offers him through its agents the booksellers
and editors. Unhappy, who must echo the mournful cry of Shakespeare—

           "My nature is subdued  
To what it works in, like the dyer's hand."

And yet the title of genius to protection and relief is hardly other
than that of the idiot, the epileptic and the paralytic. Science has
told us that the lunatic, the poet and the criminal are compact of one
clay. The lives of the poets reveal them as sufferers from strange
infirmities often beyond the

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

reach of medical lore. The most precious possessions of literature are
verily pearls, the glorious disguisement of some inward sore.

Literature is the chief ornament of humanity; and perhaps humanity never
shows itself uglier than when it stands with the pearl shining on its
forehead, and the pearl-maker crushed beneath its heel.

There is in England a thing called a Royal Literary Fund, for the
pretended purpose of showing charity to men of letters. By the published
rules of this institution its alms are only to be bestowed on those
whose lives and writings are alike free from reproach on the score of
religion and morality. What a clause for the charter of a hospital! It
is evident that those responsible for this public insult to literature
are inspired, not by compassion for genius, but by fear and hatred of
genius. They know well that it is as hard for a great poet to be a
regular churchgoer and a respectable father of a family, as it is for
themselves to write a great poem. Their true object is to give alms in
the name of literature to the enemies of literature. And so they have
built an asylum for well-behaved dunces, and have written over the door:
"No admittance for Shakespeare and Goethe."

III

If Nobel had only made a bequest to literature, he would have done a
brave thing. As it is, he has done a far braver.

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

The word Literature is not an exact term, because literature is not an
exact art. It is a term wide enough to cover every kind of communication
by means of words, from the Song of Songs to the least newspaper
advertisement. Nobel has manifestly used the word in a broad sense. He
was not thinking of literature from the literary standpoint, nor has he
laid the stress upon artistic merit. Instead of offering this prize for
the best work of literature, he has offered it for the best work of
idealism, coming within the field of literature.

That such is his intention seems to be fully recognised by a provision
in the statutes drawn up since the Testator's death to govern his
Trustees:—

"The term 'literature', used in the Will, shall be understood to embrace
not only works falling under the category of Polite Literature, but also
other writings which may claim to possess literary merit by reason of
their form or their mode of exposition."

The spirit which breathes in this bequest is the same which breathes in
the others. The Testator has kept one end steadily in sight, the
increase of human happiness. His method is to encourage those whose work
is, in his opinion, most beneficial to mankind, the work of the
inventor, the work of the idealist, the work of the peacemaker.

In this bequest the word idealist is mightier than the word literature,
and must prevail over it. This is not an endowment of the author, but of
some one greater than the author.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

IV

Nobel died, and the publication of his Will brought about a significant
discovery. No one could tell the meaning of the word *idealist*, or
*idealistic*.

The history of the world is glanced at in the following inquiry. Here it
will be enough to say that while it was in use in all the leading
languages of Europe in the Testator's lifetime, his Will revealed it as
a riddle.

In what astonishing senses the Testator's word was understood appears
from the list of the explanations given me by educated men in various
walks of life, soon after I had launched in this investigation.

"Something to do with the imaginative powers."  
"Fanatical."  
"Altruistic."  
"Not practical."  
"Exact."  
"Poetical."  
"Intangible."  
"Sentimental."  
"True."  
"That which cannot be proved."  
"The opposite to materialistic."

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

V

The mood of humanity towards the poet is that of the schoolboy towards
the butterfly—without pity but without malice. Towards the prophet it is
that of the spoilt child towards the physician—one of angry resistance.

There is no more pitiful sight than this; mankind suffers under no such
curse; it is the tragedy of the world, the stoning of the messenger of
good tidings. "Ye build the sepulchres of the prophets, and your fathers
killed them." Alas! it is in sacrifice to the dead prophet that the
living prophet is offered up.

There is no instinct much more deeply rooted in the heart of man than
this old cannibal one that the suffering of the best man is for the
benefit of mankind. "I exiled Dante," exults proud Florence, "and lo!
the Divine Comedy." "I hounded forth Mohammed," boasts Mecca, "and here
is Islam." It needs a Diagoras to ask where are the votive offerings of
those who were wrecked. It takes a Nobel to discern the difference to
mankind between the labours of Hercules and the agony of the Meriah.

The instinct of hatred is stronger than reason. It is not to be baffled
by etymologies. Whatever the uncertainty belonging to the Testator's
language, his fourth bequest was taken very differently from the
remainder of the Will. It drew to itself the prompt hostility of the two
great schools of thought which

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

divide between them the intellectual government of the world. Pharisee
land Sadducee both scented danger in the unknown word. Both felt
themselves threatened by something more formidable than a literary
competition.

The antagonism of both was summed up in the scornful criticism that
Nobel had offered a prize for a new religion. Nobel himself was branded
as a dreamer. There were those ready to insinuate that he had not been
in his right mind.

In the present age more than a hundred millions are paid every year for
the repetition of old texts; in England alone there are several
custodians of prophecy who each receive every year a sum greater than
that here proposed as the life's wage of the prophet. Nobel wished to
give eight thousand pounds a year among the writers of new texts. That
was his dream. His madness lay there. Humanity is not mad to spend one
hundred millions a year on phonographs. Nobel was mad to offer these few
thousands for a living voice.

VI

On the whole the feeling aroused most by this bequest was incredulity.
It was regarded as a challenge to materialism, a word not really better
understood than idealism, but taken to signify the spirit of modern
science, triumphant in so many departments of life.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

And in these days material science is very great, so that the very word
idealist is in some discredit. There is an opinion abroad that while
Idealism has been talking, Materialism has been doing. Materialist
science has conferred endless benefits on mankind. It has given us new
medicines and tools and carriages, and all manner of useful and pleasant
things. It has opened up the history of the world and man, and bidden
him recast all his beliefs and habits. Inch by inch it has invaded every
province of human knowledge; and now it is carrying the war into the
very citadel of Idealism, and beginning to measure nerves and brain
cells instead of arguing about mind.

Now this bequest does indeed come as a challenge, but not to those very
materialists to whom the Testator has given the chief place among his
legatees. The challenge is a challenge to the idealists, to show that
they also are contributing to benefit mankind.

Because of that it marks an era in the history of philosophy. Three
hundred years ago a challenge was addressed by Bacon to the physical
sciences, under the name of natural philosophy. His famous substitution
of inductive for deductive reasoning amounted to no more than this
advice: Learn from the things themselves, instead of from the words
about the things. But in asking for fruits he proposed to the
philosopher the same end that Nobel has proposed—the benefit of mankind.

It is since that date that the physical sciences have

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

arisen out of their sleep and marched to victory. Height after height
has been scaled, and all the glory of creation has burst on our eyes.
But still our eyes remain dim eyes. The march of reason has not kept
pace with that of knowledge. Men stand before the wonders of the
scientific revelation as they formerly stood before the sculptured
stones of Egypt, unable to decipher them, and half afraid to try.

Nobel, it seems, has hoped for a Champollion. He has asked for
interpretations. Like the Babylonian king of old, he has sent for the
magicians and the astrologers, the Chaldeans and the soothsayers, and
has bidden them expound anew the meaning of that dream which is called
Life.

For thousands of years the metaphysicians and moral philosophers, the
theologians and logicians, have been muttering the words of their
mystery in corners,—now at last a brave man has flung down this bag of
gold in the midst of them, and has said: Let us see what it all really
comes to. Let us see if you can help men to live.

VII

In the field of Literature the academy and the idealist meet as natural
foes. The academy is, by its constitution, the judge of literature, and
not of truth. The idealist is only a man of letters by accident—there
are no accidents!—by necessity. Of the

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

very greatest teachers of mankind, only two are known to have written
anything, and only of Mohammed can it be said that his book affords any
measure of himself. To the perfect Idealist, Lao, is attributed the
saying—"Those who know do not tell; those who tell do not know."

When the idealist enters the field of Literature he does so from the
opposite side to that of the academy. For him the spirit is everything,
for the academy the form is everything. It would seem easier for the
rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven than for the idealist to find
grace with the academy. Yet the Testator has placed this endowment in
the hands of the illustrious body styled the Swedish Academy.

In doing so he has shown himself not less inspired than in the rest of
the Will. For he is not concerned with idealism as an end, but as a
means. The end is still the benefit of mankind. To this end the idealist
is called upon to choose speech rather than silence. When he speaks, he
is to be judged by his words.

Had the Testator done otherwise, had he directed that the idealist was
to be judged by his ideals, he would have done what he has been
ignorantly accused of doing; he would have founded a new Catholic
Church. As it is, he has founded a Forum. By giving the prize to
eloquence and not to truth, he has done what is best for the idealist,
and best for mankind, and in the long run best for truth. He has secured
the freedom of thought by the bondage of

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

expression. This golden fetter is placed on the right foot.

At the same time he has given back to literature by the word "*marklig*"
all that is taken from it by the words "idealist tendency." I cannot
render it by the official translator's word "distinguished," because
that has now become cant. By a distinguished man, we mean a man who has
distinguished himself in a frock coat and tall hat and kid gloves; by a
distinguished writer one who has daintily picked his words out of a
dictionary of synonyms, and made a delicate mosaic, rather than one in
whose mind strong emotion has melted the element of language and cast
down the diamond of literature.

What the Testator has asked for is the most glorious work.

VIII

Nobel was an idealist who was not a man of letters. The great subtlety
with which this Will is drawn is not that of the grammarian or the
lawyer, but that of a sincere mind thoroughly possessed of its purpose,
and wresting words to that purpose. Has he not given this very legacy to
the "idealist" who shall contribute most "materially" to benefit
mankind?

The words of such a Testator must be approached in the spirit in which
lawyers pretend to approach all testaments. The object must be not to
explain

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

the words by themselves, but to gather from them what the Testator
wished to be done.

It is in that spirit that I have tried to shape the following inquiry.
The question I have asked myself is not, what is the meaning of the word
Idealist, but, what did the Testator mean by it?

How I was tempted to undertake the task is here beside the question. I
need only say that I began it just after the official publication of the
Will, in the year 1901, and when it was the subject of discussion as a
matter of public interest. It is as a member of the public, of that
great Public designated by the Testator, under the name of mankind, as
his ultimate heirs, that I am interested in this Will, and that, no one
else coming forward, I have been bold to vindicate it.

The six years that have elapsed since that time have not materially
changed the situation. Striking works of an idealist tendency are not
being written at the rate of one every year, or, if they are, they have
not been brought to the notice of the Trustees of this bequest. In the
dearth of such works the Trustees have done doubtless what the Testator
might have consented to, if not what he has directed, in awarding this
Prize as a testimonial to distinguished men of letters, at the close of
their careers. But inasmuch as they have framed no authoritative
interpretation of the governing word in the bequest, they seem to be in
the position of a Court which has not yet delivered judgment, and
therefore may be addressed

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

without impertinence by any counsel interested in the case. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0)

I lay these imperfect suggestions before the public in the hope that
they may be found of some interest, apart from their exciting cause; and
in the further hope that, if they do not increase, at any rate they
cannot lessen, the public gratitude for a high and unique example of
benevolence.

For addressing them more directly to the illustrious body charged with
the execution of the Trust I have no real excuse except that there would
have been a certain affectation in doing otherwise.

I make no claim to speak as an idealist. I am a scientist, and my
science is ontology, commonly called truth:—now this bequest is not in
favour of works of a true tendency, nor even of the truest works of an
idealist tendency. Nevertheless, I think, perhaps, that Nobel might have
pardoned what I do, and let me lay this little essay in interpretation
as a wreath upon his tomb.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[26:\*](tnw02.htm#fr_0) See introductory note.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. Psychology: The Personal Equation](tnw03)
