[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tnw02)  [Next](tnw04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The New Word*, by Allen Upward, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

### SECOND HEAD

### THE PERSONAL EQUATION

*Descartes and the Sorbonne*.—1. *Useless Literature*.—2.—*A Personal
Explanation*.—3. *The Blockade of the Schoolmasters*.—4. *Scientific
Philosophy*.—5. *Truth and Verihood*.—6. *The White Mind*.

AS the astronomer, in order to tell fairly the time kept by a star in
heaven, must first record the time taken by his own thought, and thereby
correct his reckoning; and as Descartes did not deem it beside the
purpose to tell the Sorbonne that he was in his dressing-gown when he
sat down to prove the existence of God; so it will not be vain for me to
describe with what bias I approached my present task.

I

An eloquent writer upon Art, in a work called *The Seven Lamps of
Architecture*, has chosen Truth to be his second Lamp, and thereby shown
that it was not his first wish to tell the truth about architecture.
Accordingly it is no surprise to see him begin by defining architecture
as useless building, and end, in a preface written long afterwards, by
complaining

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

that this very book had proved useless for its purpose. For if
architecture be useless building, literature must be useless writing. It
is significant, and it will not be found beside the question, that
neither in this book, nor in other books treating of Gothic
architecture, is there the least allusion to the architecture of the
Goths. The origin of the Gothic church, like the origin of everything
else in Europe, has been sought on the shores of the Mediterranean Sea.
No one has asked why the Italian masons, when they crossed the Alps, as
they are still crossing them to-day, in search of work, left off
building like the Romans, and began building otherwise. No one seems to
know that the Gothic church, in its essential features, features that
have been copied in St. Peter's, is a copy of the Gothic hall as it was
built in Iceland in the days of Charlemagne, and as it was built in
Gothland in the days of Herod.

To say that truth had been my first lamp in this inquiry would be only
to say that I was a Gothic writer, or, as men write it in my native
land, a Jute. I have approached the word Idealist in the spirit of a
Goth seeking to understand a Mediterranean word. I have approached it in
the spirit of a child seeking to understand a schoolmaster's word. I
have been like a sleeper, waking out of an enchanted sleep, and seeking
to understand an enchanter's word.

My first, and, to the best of my endeavour, my only, light in this
inquiry has been the light of verihood.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

II

The foreword of this Letter was really written thirty years ago, when a
mere schoolboy, hardly knowing what he did, chose Truth as being for him
the one sacred Name. Afterwards, when I had read the book in which
Darwin reminded us clearly of a fact dimly familiar to our forefathers,
I laid it down with the reflection that most other books would have to
be re-written in the light of that forgotten fact.—The question was how
to begin.

I spent the next twenty years in exploring the human mind as it is
revealed in literature, and as it is revealed in life. I have not passed
the time shut up in libraries. I have been a speaker and a writer; I
have been a lawyer and a soldier; I have been a ruler and a judge. I
have taught children, and learned from them. I have talked with the
learned in their colleges, and talked with the Black men in their own
land beside the Black River, in the oldest and most catholic speech, the
language of Signs. In a place where no White man had been before me, I
found a Black king and his folk withheld by an old curse from planting a
medicinal tree; and I broke the curse by showing to them a stone whereon
a Greek of long ago had carved the figure of his God.—In such ways I
have learned somewhat of the nature of words.

At the same time I have learned somewhat of the

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

feelings that words express, and found the same feeling underlying many
different words; as if all men, in all ages, and in all lands, were
trying to say much the same thing. And hardly knowing whether I had
found anything worth saying, nor how far the words that were right for
me would be right for others, I doubted whether I should speak.

In our time there are many honourable men and women who share my doubt.
They have been put to sleep in childhood with certain words, most true
and beautiful to those who spoke them first; and they have awakened out
of that sleep with great pain, and as those who are bereft of hope. Now
such a man as I speak of, a Materialist, came to me one day, and told me
he had been consulted by a mother, who was also a Materialist, about the
education of her child, a child who will one day occupy a great place in
the world, and influence the lives of many other children. And, both
being Materialists, he had given her the advice, and she had taken it,
that the child's mind should be put to sleep by the words which they
themselves both believed to be untrue.

The following day I found in the organ of my trades-union as an author
the announcement of Nobel's Testament.

On reading the Fourth Bequest my first reflection was the sad one that
such a Trust was not likely to be carried out. Then I asked myself why?
What books did the Testator wish to be written; why were they not being
written; and why, if they should be

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

written, must they nevertheless fail of their reward? The answer seemed
to lie in the meaning of the word Idealist.—What was its meaning? or
rather what was its meaning for other minds than my own?—I turned to the
dictionary; what I found led me further; I began to make notes, and
presently saw they were the book I had waited for so long to begin.

The natural shape of this inquiry, therefore, is that of a train of
thought, and I have not striven to give it any other. As, when the
chemical salts are held in solution in the glass, the introduction of
some foreign body will cause them to encircle it with crystals, so have
the floating thoughts of half a lifetime come together in answer to a
single question, and settled into shape.

III

Literature, from the lyric's pure cry of pain or joy down to the
pill-seller's advertisement, is a communication. There is a personal
equation of the reader as well as of the writer, and the fairest
language is a bargain between two minds. The counsel's speech to the
jury is not as his speech to the judge. The greatest of playwrights has
written for the gallery as well as for the boxes.

It is the second equation in which the difficulty lies. It is that
equation the thought of which caused the perfect Idealist to condemn
speech. It is that which stands in the way of Nobel's Fourth Bequest.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

My gallery is a gallery of judges; by which I mean that I speak in the
hearing of those with whom I am called on to quarrel, whose minds are so
much fixed on their own study as to be unable to think freely about that
or any other. The ontologist claims all the provinces of knowledge as
his fatherland, and he is treated as a trespasser in each. On every
frontier the specialist with his fixed bayonet keeps watch and ward, as
though he dreaded to give or to receive. The free trader in knowledge
bears the smuggler's brand. But it once made my holiday to take food
through the midst of six great navies to starving men on a Mediterranean
isle; and shall I now fear to run the blockade of the schoolmasters, if
I believe they are keeping children from the bread of life?

The man of letters will need no explanation of why I have found the
dogma of philology to be the devil's leading counsel in this debate. To
the philologist, whose history—for I cannot yet call it science—has
helped and hindered me by turns, I owe an honourable salute before the
foils are crossed.

The sciences fall roughly into two groups, according to whether they
come before or after man. The human sciences begin with folk-lore, and
Darwin's book has given them a natural starting-point. The
anthropologist holds the key to the position, and without his light all
other students of the arts of man are wandering at random in the dark,
and letting themselves be thwarted needlessly.

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

In his broad-minded treatise on the Kalevala, Comparetti has brought
together much learning to elucidate the name and nature of the Sampa,
the mystic lucky-box whose making and carrying off are main links in the
poem. But the Sampa contains no puzzle for the folk-learner. There is
just such a lucky-box in every West African hut. The serious-minded
Black would no more think of setting up house without it than the
Christian without his family Bible, or the scientist without his drain.
You can buy a Sampa at any wizard's for a few cowrie-shells. The wizard
makes it while you wait. He takes a bit of clay, and a feather, and a
twig of straw, and whatever else strikes his fancy, and sticks them
together in a calabash; and the householder puts it in his house to
conjure away the spirits of misfortune and disease—one of whom science
has now identified with the anopheles mosquito. That is the Sampa, and
it is a prayer, written in the old magic letters which the spirits, or
the mosquitoes, are most likely to understand; a language in which the
wizard is a specialist,—and the philologist not even a smatterer.

Philology needs the light of folklore more than any other study needs
it, because words are the most elusive work of man. They are the birds
and butterflies of man's creation, and the philologist shows his love
for them by trying to transfix them on Grimm's pin; by tearing them out
of the sky with his Aryan shotgun, and giving them glass beads for eyes,
and souls of cotton-wool. He is bitten by

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

the mania for exactness, and his study is the one study in which
exactness must almost certainly be wrong. When he rules out the guesses
of the untrained mind, he is ruling out the mind that shaped those very
words of his; he is contemning what ought to be his fundamental law.

The wild man's mind ran wild, and it was volatile to catch the most
fanciful resemblances between words, as his tongue was volatile to rhyme
their sounds. His words were spelt, like Mr. Weller's name, according to
the taste and fancy of the speller. The Athenian crowd that checked
Demosthenes for a wrong accent was no more like the group before a
Tartar tent that hung upon the earliest Tale of Troy than a first-night
audience in a London theatre is like the ring of naked Blacks who look
on at their native pantomime in the Australian scrub.

I am now interpreting a Will, and not writing an encyclopædia; though I
should like to persuade some living Nobel to organise the writing of an
encyclopædia on scientific lines, to replace the alphabetical chaos on
the shelves of the Free Library; one who would recognise, as this Will
recognises, that the books are more important than the shelves, and the
Librarian more important than the Library. Here I can only so far
suggest scientific canons of philology as to justify the interpretation
that follows, and to show that what otherwise might seem my careless
handling of words is founded on greater care.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

IV

If we should judge the mind of Europe by the work in various fields of
learners like Retzius and Sergi and Massey and Montelius, we should
think it had recovered from that disease of word-lore remembered as the
Aryan Myth. But all philologists have by no means recovered. I have
before me the latest and best work on English etymologies; and Professor
Skeat must be the whipping-boy of worser men.

By way of groundwork he has a list of imaginary Aryan roots, as though
the Aryans were a historic nation, dwelling in some country called
Aryana, whose literary remains were before him. That is not so, and the
buried cities of Bokhara, perhaps, hold many surprises in store for the
philologist. But even if it were so, Aryan would not be the last word on
English etymology. These roots were invented by men who had not read
Darwin, or, like Max Müller, did not believe in him; and if they are
anything but fancies, they are not roots but *stems* cut off from their
roots. The study of words from such a beginning is no more scientific
than a young lady's album of dried leaves is scientific botany. There
are only two sound starting-points for the history of a word; one is
where the word itself begins, in the wild man's cry, or the technical
coinage which is manifest in Nobel's *dynamite;* the other is where

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

our knowledge of it begins, in the dead manuscript and in the living
mouth. The first starting-point is the philologist's, the second is the
lexicographer's. The imaginary Aryan stem is a mere generalisation of
comparative lexicography.

Not only has the author ignored anthropology, but he has ignored
geology, geography and history. He has ignored the Ice-Cap, and with it
the fact that Europe must have been colonised from Africa long before it
was conquered from Asia (if it was conquered). The Black man crossed the
strait of Gibraltar, if even there were a strait, in his canoe, ages
before the White man drove his wagon across the snow-bound steppes of
Russia. The English language has more sources than the English
philologist has dreamed of. Only the other day an astronomer, measuring
Stonehenge after measuring the Great Pyramid, learned what Massey had
long before learned from folk-lore, that Pharaoh has left his mark in
Britain.

He deals with words as though they were all under a vow of celibacy,
like the monkish writers who have done so much to disfigure and disguise
them. Whereas one half of English words are in their present shape the
offspring of Dutch mothers and Latin fathers, or Latin mothers and Dutch
fathers, whose features may be still discerned in them; to say nothing
of the French and Scandinavian strains.

For instance, the remarkable word *very* or *werry*—for Mr. Weller
followed Piers Plowman in spelling

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

it with two *r*s—is labelled as being the French *vrai*, from the Low
Latin *veracus*. Whereas *vrai*, which the Provençal Mr. Weller spells
*yverai*, as I have ascertained on the spot, has no more to do with
*veracus* in form than with *very* in meaning. This strong word which
stands out in modern French like a rock against the tide of *vérité*,
*vérifier*, *véritable* and *véridique*, emerging from the monkish
effort to write it *vérai*, as a rock emerges from the waves is, like
its brother *vrac*, a Frankish word, and its English and Latin
representatives are (w) *right* and *rectus*. (We meet it letter for
letter in the English be*wray*, and catch the counter-sense in *awry*.)
The sense underlying it, which is a scientific root, is the strength of
the *wrist*, as in *wringing* or *wreaking* (Skeat has seen that the
brother word *vrac* is *wreck*), in short it is the strength of WORKING.
The sense underlying *verus* and *veracus*, and the Dutch *waar*, and,
to whatever extent, the English *very*, is the strength of the *ear*, in
being *ware*, and *wary*, in short it is the strength of HEARING. And
these are not imaginary Aryan roots, but sensible human ones; and if
they do not please the philologist, perhaps they will please the
psychologist.

The common term of *vrai* and *verus*, I suspect, is not *veracus* but
*vir*, as man is the common term of working and hearing. And that is the
sense which I catch faintly breathing in *very*, like the scent of a
flower lingering in a jar.

For *very* is not an adverb, nor an adjective, as

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Skeat carelessly
reckons it; neither does it mean "true" and "truly" as he pretends, to
support his derivation from *veracus*. We cannot say that a man is very,
nor that he speaks very. It is an intensitive particle, unique in the
language, and serving the office of a declension before adverbs and
adjectives. Such a word must have a complex pedigree, and I tell only
half the truth in saying that its story is the story of *vrai* inside
out. For just as *vrai* is a Frankish word which has absorbed a Roman
meaning, that of "true," so *very* has accepted a partly Roman spelling
while preserving an Anglo-Saxon meaning. And that meaning is very nearly
the original one of *vrai*. For not only does very mean "right" rather
than "true" or "truly," as may be seen at a glance in such uses as
"yours very truly," "the very man for the post" and "Very Reverend," but
it has displaced "right" in those very uses. It is, however, inferior to
right in strength, as the dean is inferior to the bishop; and without
pretending to give a thorough account of it, I think the clue may be
found in Mr. Weller's and Piers Plowman's double *r*, and that it may be
either a composition or a confusion of *wear* and *right*. *Verrey*
suggests to my ear much more an imaginary Latin *verrectus*, than any
Low Latin veracus.

The English philologist has not got beyond the state of mind of the
Australian Black, who has not yet found out the father's share in
child-begetting,

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

and believes children to be ancestral spirits who have entered the
mother's womb when she was walking past a grave. He has not got so far
as the Black, because even the Black sees the features of the ancestor
in the child, and the philologist does not see the Gothic features in
many a dog-latin word that has crept like a cuckoo into an Anglo-Saxon
nest.

He has accepted with childlike trust the story of the monk who, writing
with the Book of Joshua for his model, has described the Angles and
Saxons as sweeping over the island like a swarm of locusts, and leaving
no British man, woman or child alive to be their thralls or wives. And
that was not so. The Roman chesters did not all go down like Jericho,
leaving not one stone upon another, as soon as Hengist landed in the
Isle of Thanet; neither did all the Welsh flee into Wales. The
differences between English and Swedish are some of them Welsh
differences and Finnish differences, as the differences between Spanish
and Italian are Iberian differences.

The philologist seems never to have heard any one speaking English, but
to believe that his own learned dialect is the speech used in the
nursery and on the farmstead. And that is not so. What Skeat rarely and
unwillingly refers to as "provincial English" is *very* English, and
many words that he refers to as English are provincial Latin. Thus the
word *verity* has never been acclimatised, but is a lexicographer's
exotic. As soon as it is written verihood, to match the Dutch *waarheid*
and the German *wahrheit*, it

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

rhymes with falsehood, and sounds like an English word. The philologist
sits in his library, and cons the dusty manuscripts in which Roman
missionaries and Latin scholars have quaintly travestied the native
speech, while underneath his windows the children playing in the street
are pouring out better information from the well of English undefiled.
As soon as the English get away from their Latin colleges into some wild
land that Caesar never knew, their own words bubble up like a natural
spring, and the Aryan root is found budding and blossoming again.
Because these old-new blossoms are not in his specimen book, the
philologist calls them weeds.

The last great struggle of all those that have gone to make English took
place in and around London, and the chief antagonists were the Low Dutch
dialects of the East coast, as the spoken language, and provincial Latin
as the written one. The compromise has been drawn up in spelling, and as
the spelling was in the hands of the writers, the record is a one-sided
one, and by that one-sided record English philology has long been led
astray. It is an encouraging sign that Skeat should be the first to
allow that the Netherland dialects may have had some influence on
English, though he characteristically does not look deeper than such
historical incidents as the treaties of Edward III and the expeditions
of Elizabeth. Were he aware that within living memory the Yarmouth
fisherman understood

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

his Rotterdam neighbour almost better than his Plymouth countrymen, the
philologist might be brought to see that the Dutch work-book is likely
to be a safer guide than most monkish manuscripts to "provincial
English."

In the meanwhile I hope he will accept these suggestions in the spirit
in which they are uttered, as those of a provincial Englishman.

V

Since I first wrote this Letter there has come into my hands a work by
Bréal entitled *La Semantique*, which an English professor of philology
treats as the first recognition of the need for a science, or at least a
history, of the meaning of words. That seems to be the science the need
for which was recognised by Socrates in the market place of Athens, and
that is the science I have had to piece out for myself as best I could
in this inquiry; and which I call verihood, instead of truth.

Truth is the merit of the speaker rather than of the speech. The speaker
may be truthful, and yet his story may not be true. The witness who is
sworn to tell "the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,"
is only sworn to tell what happened as he saw it. He does not swear that
he saw rightly, and that his story is the correct one. The correct story
has to be put together by the jury, who are

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

sworn to give "a true verdict according to the evidence." The verdict is
the collected and corrected truth.

No imaginary Aryan root has been found for *truth*. But its sensible
root underlies words like *try* and *utter*, in short it is the strength
of the tongue. The imaginary Aryan root, offered by Skeat with a
"perhaps," for verihood, is *war*, one of four imaginary *wars*, and
said to mean "to choose," and thence "to believe." For a sensible root
we have only to go out into the play-ground. *Ware!* is the cry that can
still be heard on the lips of the English schoolboy. It is found in
written English in such words as *aware* and *wary*. The word *wary*
calls up a picture of the wild man of the woods, crouched with one ear
to the ground, his fingers tightening on his knife, and his whole soul
astrain to catch the first faint rustle that shall bewray the hidden
foe. Such a cry as *Ware!* is worth a library of manuscript. We need no
imaginary Aryan root to help us to its meaning. It means "Hear with all
your might!" It is the strength of the ear at its highest pitch. If
there be any root in word-lore this cry must be it. It is perhaps the
one word in English that has come straight down without a change from
the real Aryans;—and it is not to be found in the Etymological
Dictionary!

On these lines truth and verihood explain each other. Both words imply a
speaker and a listener.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> What the one tries
to tell is truth, and what the other yearns to hear is verihood. Of
these two the important standpoint is the listener's, because it is for
his sake that the speech is made, and what he hears is all that has been
really and effectually said. The impression matters more than the
expression. The gist of the speech is what is left in the mind of the
listener, and by his understanding of it it must be judged.

Hence verihood is a greater word than truth, as the verdict is greater
than the evidence. Verihood is the bull's eye that truth aims at, and
falsehood the inner or outer it must so often be content to hit. And
that is to say, in other words, that verihood's opposite pole is truth,
and its circumference falsehood.

The science of semantics is thus revealed as a branch of physical
mathematics. The semantological specialist will now be able to define
the word Idealist for himself. My story is meant to be read by the
untrained mind.

VI

It has been well said that all the stories in the world have only forty
plots between them, and all the words have not many more sensible roots.
We are indebted to Erdmann for the hint that the name Goth meant brave,
much as Frank meant free,—the *aut* of the Icelandic *Gautar* being one
with the *aud* 

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

of the Latin *audax*, or audacious—which Mrs. Gamp, with nicer
scholarship than that of Oxford, sounded *owdacious*. Be that as it may,
an outspoken work calls for a brave reader; and I am writing to the
Gothic mind, that is to say, to the White mind rather than the Black.

For the ontologist there are no coincidences, but only Rhymes. I will
not think it is for nothing that in the queen city of the Baltic, in the
homeland of the Goths, from which, as from the citadel of the White
race, went forth those armies that struck down the Rome of Caesar, and
once again scared back the Roman eagle from Pomerania to the Danube; I
will not think it is in vain that a countryman of Alaric and Gustav
Adolf has given it in charge to a Court that represents the White mind
in its preeminence, to draw up by its decisions the canon of the
scriptures of the new age. The mathematician has a greater license than
the poet to ignore reality in working out his problems. I shall be
forgiven if I have sometimes lost sight of the Academy of to-day in that
White City of the North; if I have sometimes forgotten a thousand years
and written to the Academy that shall sit hereafter, in the new Asgard,
in the Hall of the Aesir;—forgiven if I have sometimes lifted up my
eyes, and written as in the sight of the White Gods.

To understand, says the French poet, is to forgive. Yet which of us can
hope wholly to understand

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

another, or to be understood? Which of us can thoroughly pierce, from
within or from without—

The shell we slaves of time drag with us ever,  
Through which our souls, as if immured in glass,  
Become distorted, and we peer and strain,  
But find each other's real features never;  
A fateful screen that friendship cannot pass,  
And love beats his soft wings against in vain.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. Etymology: The Castle in the Air](tnw04)
