[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tnw14)  [Next](tnw16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The New Word*, by Allen Upward, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

### FOURTEENTH HEAD

### THE MAGIC CRYSTAL

*Pure Verihood*.—1. *The Art of Speech*.—2. *The Sign*.—3. *The
Shape*.—4. *The Symbol*.—5. *Ideal Dynamite*.

SO far the whirl-swirl is a mathematical figure. That is to say it is a
word, like Euclid's triangle. It is Pure Verihood.

To be more than a word it must take shape. Verihood must put on
falsehood ere it can dwell among us. The outline must be gained in
battle.

It is my business to write this word more distinctly, knowing that what
we gain in clearness we must lose in verihood. So, even a work of an
idealist tendency cannot be quite true, because literature cannot be
quite true. We can only draw the round by drawing a series of
overlapping straight lines. We can only paint light by painting the
shadows cast by light. We can only give to our God the figure of an
Idol. Is not that why the perfect Idealist uttered his cryptic
saying,—"They who know do not tell; they who tell do not know."

I

These words which I am writing, and you are reading, these black marks
upon white paper, are only signs for sounds, as the crotchets and
quavers

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

on a sheet of music are. And the sounds themselves are also in their
turn signs for strength, in this case the strength within me, which is
called feeling. I write this book to show you my feeling, to make you
feel how I feel. It is a cheque drawn on your mind.

Words are, like money, a medium of exchange, and the sureness with which
they can be used varies not only with the character of the coins
themselves, but also with the character of the things they buy, and that
of the men who tender and receive them. When we consider that the value
of the American dollar changes from day to day in America itself, and
when we read the books in which political economists pursue their
endless task of trying to tell us what is wealth, we shall wonder no
longer at the wasted toil of the logicians.

But words are not the only medium of exchange, any more than gold and
silver are. In Nigerland the coins most in use are slaves and cowrie
shells. So, in wild lands, and in old days, men have told each other how
they felt by other means than words.

Music is one such means. Another is the mystic dance. A black man who
was asked concerning some religious thought answered,—"I do not dance
that dance." The dervish dances his worship of the Wheel of Heaven. The
Christian kneels to show he is afraid of God.—That Roman critic who
condemned tragedies in which the knot was cut by a god coming out of a
machine, forgot why the word tragedy meant Goat-Song; forgot that the
tragedy

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

was a Mystery whose very end it was to show the god's power over men;
forgot that the Song of the Goat began when the stargroup called the
Goat led forth the great dance of the constellations, as it is written
in the Samaritan copy of Genesis,—"In the beginning the Goat created the
heaven and the earth." Machines are a clumsy kind of writing, but
tragedy is still the play that shows men overcome by a power outside
them, greater than themselves.

The language of clothes still lingers in our palaces and churches, our
courts and barracks. The language of the arms and hands is only frozen
by the long northern nights. Letters themselves are half-breeds,
degenerate pictures merging into signs. Writing flowered in the
sculptural hieroglyphs of Egypt, as afterwards in the illuminated
missals of the monks. But it began in rude notches on a stick, and rude
knots on a thread, serving, as knots on handkerchiefs still serve the
children, as reminders. The picture that reminds us is a Sign.

Before I draw the outline of the whirl-swirl, I will draw its sign.

II

The Cross is the rude picture of a knot. As such it is the sign of
Matter; and the Man on the cross signifies the thought that Matter is
Evil. The Cross by itself is pure ugliness. The Man on the

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Cross is a
tremendous allegory, whose full interpretation has yet to come.

The root significance of the Cross is not altered because it has also
signified other things to other minds; to some, the crossing of the sun
from south to north at Easter, to others a material Cross on which Rome
in the flesh impaled Idealism in the flesh.

The men who adopted the Cross as the sign of the religion which that
Idealist has been accused of founding, were men whose habit of mind led
them to look for more than one meaning in signs. For them the heaven and
the earth abounded in double meanings, in what I will call ontological
puns. The days of the week were seven, the moving planets were seven,
the stars in the Plough were seven, and the number seven was sacred for
all these reasons put together. By such frail supports they groped their
way towards truths which we have since learned and measured, so that
their mistakes are prophecies.

The Cross is the Sign of Matter, and as such it reminds us of the nature
of Matter. Not only is it the rude picture of a knot, that is to say, of
a joint in the network, but it shows us how the knot is made. It is by
two lines of strings meeting crosswise. Thus it reminds us that two Ways
of Strength must meet crosswise to become entangled. And their
entanglement is their arrest. We know they do not rest. The strain of
forward motion turns

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

into the strain of pressure. The soldiers do not halt, but they mark
time, and mark it faster than they marched. The wrestlers tremble as
they lock. The imprisoned crumbs beat their incalculable wings against
the cage. The word fast is true in its prophetic meaning.

Nevertheless the word fast is also true in its historical meaning. The
net which stops the way is in itself wrought by a stoppage of the Ways
of Strength. The nature of Matter is Fixity, and it has no more ultimate
nature than this. The ultimate nature of Materialism is the worship of
Fixity, under a hundred names, whether Matter or Shape, Exactness or
Certainty, or Rest or Death.—The enemy of Fixity is Change.

What is the sign of Change?

The Chinese sign for Everything is a point in the middle of a round.
Viewed as still figures this sign and the Cross offer the utmost
unlikeness to one another. But both are still figures; to be the sign of
Change, the Round ought to be turning into the End, and returning into
the Round.

The wheel of the Buddhists is a better sign. But the motion of the wheel
is not the full motion of the Whirl-swirl, in which wheels pass into
lesser wheels, and back again into greater wheels.

The least false sign that I can draw is a line turning from a round into
an end and back again into a round. The line going inward is the whirl,
and the line coming outward is the swirl. It goes in

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

black and comes out white. And according as a man judges the black line
or the white to be more real, he writes himself Materialist or
Idealist.—Is it not written in the book of the perfect Idealist that the
hollow within the bowl is more to be regarded than the bowl, inasmuch as
the bowl is made for the sake of the hollow.

I find that I have drawn a Spring.

<span id="img_19700"></span> ![](img/19700.jpg)

III

From the language of Measure we rise to that of Matter; the Sign grows
to a shape.

Let us begin from the real thing from which the likeness is to be
withdrawn, namely the waterspout. How does a waterspout behave?

The story of the waterspout, as it is told in books, shows it to be a
brief-lived tree. A cloud is whirling downwards, and thrusting out its
whirlpoint towards the sea, like a sucking mouth. The sea below whirls
upward, thrusting out its whirlpoint towards the cloud. The two ends
meet, and the water swept up in the sea-whirl passes on into the

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

cloud-whirl, and swirls up through it, as it were gain-saying it. So in
a tree the sap whirls upward from the roots into the trunk, and then
again swirls upward into the boughs and leaves, meeting the air and
light.

In the ideal waterspout, not only does the water swirl upward through
the cloud-whirl, but the cloud swirls downward through the sea-whirl. To
make their passage through each other easier for the trained mind to
follow, let us change the water into air, and the cloud into ether.

The ideal waterspout is not yet complete. The upper half must unfold
like a fan, only it unfolds all around like a flower-cup; and it does
not leave the cup empty, so that this flower is like a chrysanthemum. At
the same time the lower half has unfolded in the same way, till there
are two chrysanthemums, back to back. In one the air is whirling inward,
and the ether swirling outward; in the other it is the ether that
whirls, and the air that swirls.

Now let us change the air into ether, and the ether into ethereon, and
so on into more and more "perfect fluids," till we have pure strength
whirling in on all sides, and swirling out again.

It is the pure Shape, reached by the same road by which the
mathematician reaches his flats and lines. It is the grin without the
cat. It is the ideal whirl-swirl.

It is strength turning inside out. Such is the true beat of strength,
the first beat, the

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

one from which all others part, the beat which we feel in all things
that come within our measure, in ourselves, and in our starry world, the
beat that is called Action and Reaction.

Yet this ideal is not yet an idol. The whirl-swirl is not truly formed
into a ball. Every real ball we know of has an outline; but this one has
no outline, except eternity. How shall we clothe it with a skin?

IV

What is a real skin? It is Matter. It is indeed a network through whose
pores encompassing strength flows in and out. The heat waves reach the
blood, the light waves break through the eyeball into the brain; others,
more subtle, to which we have not yet given names, doubtless touch the
invisible membranes of undiscovered cells within.

The mathematical skin is Time. The whirl-swirl ebbs and flows between
the turning-point within and the returning-point without, and the moment
at which the swirl changes into the whirl is its outline.

To be real, the outline must be gained in battle. And since the battle
must go on all round at once, it must be waged against another
whirl-swirl, greater than the first one, and inclosing it. If the cloud
had inclosed the water, or the ethereon the ether, the inner whirl-swirl
would have been shaped into a ball.

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

If both the inner and the outer whirl-swirls are of pure strength, and
both keep the same time, shrinking and swelling together, then one will
not feel the other. Where there is no resistance there is no existence,
and so the two whirl-swirls will be one. And that is the demonstration
of the Nirvana of the Buddhists.

But both do not keep the same time, any more than the waves of the
incoming tide all reach the same height upon the shore. The farthest
wave, as it ebbs back, meets the next wave flowing forward; and so the
outer strength, as it whirls inward from its longer period, meets the
inner strength swirling outward, and resisting it. And that meeting is a
real outline. The inner whirl-swirl is created.

Again, the pressure of the greater whirl-swirl rolls up the inner one
into less room; and what is lost in space is gained in time. The beat of
the inner Whirl-swirl is quickened, and quickness is hardness. And in
this greater hardness of the inner strength we have the very difference
between ethereon and ether, between ether and "ponderable
matter."—Strength has foamed into stuff.

Consider this idea. Consider this inner strength, coming and going,
turning and returning, millions of beats in every tick of secular time,
while, throbbing through the network woven by their meeting, the
over-strength comes and goes faster than flashes in a diamond.

It is no longer a mere word. It is a magic crystal,

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

and by looking long into it, you will see wonderful meanings come and
go. It will change colour like an opal while you gaze, reflecting the
thoughts in your own mind. It is a most chameleon-like ball. It has this
deeper magic that it will show you, not only the thoughts you knew about
before, but other thoughts you did not know of, old, drowned thoughts,
hereditary thoughts; it will awaken the slumbering ancestral ghosts that
haunt the brain; you will remember things you used to know and feel
long, long ago.

What do you see in the magic crystal?

Do you see the Atom, the only real one, the point of strength within the
All-Strength?

Do you see the crumb, the tiny crystal that breathes ever so faintly,
swelling and shrinking too slightly for our measures, while in and out
of it there throbs that beat of strength we call attraction and
repulsion?

Do you see the sun's orb, not fixed as we suppose, but nearly in the
middle of our sun-whirl, swelling and shrinking in great tides of fire,
while it breathes in and out those throbs that we call Energy and Force?
Or is it this planet that you see, not altogether weaned, but clinging
like a suckling to its mother's breast, drinking in life, and giving it
forth again? Ourselves, involved in the vast cocoon of silken light, do
we not seem to other eyes, watching from other orbs, to be flame-spirits
moving in a burning world?

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

Is it the mite you see, the tiny life-crumb, fire-begotten, water-born,
air-fed, earth-clad, of which we know neither the beginning nor the end?

Is it the seed, feeding upon the earth-strength, and sending it forth
again in roots and shoots? Is it the living waterspout, through which
strength courses to and fro from leaves to roots, and back again to
leaves;—is it the Tree Yggdrasil?

Or is it rather the cell, swelling and shrinking within the
body-strength, while within the cell there swells and shrinks the
nucleus, and within that the nucleolus, and within that what lesser
nucleolites we have not measured?

Suppose it is yourself. Suppose it is your heart that pants and throbs,
while through it the blood whirls in and swirls out in systole and
diastole. Suppose it is your inner strength, swelling and shrinking
along its nervous tracery, while through it the great Outer-Strength
comes and goes, coming in sense, and going in emotion.—That word emotion
is not an Andronican cipher. It means outgoing. It means the swirl.
Those old men who used it first knew well enough what it meant. They
were not sleep-walkers as we are.

Suppose we say it is the Strength Within, played upon by the Strength
Without. Suppose we say, in words we hardly understand, that what we
call the Body is a network woven between the tiny Strength Within and
the great Strength Without.

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

V

I have drawn near to certain old familiar words, which once were good
and beautiful. But they are become so deeply tarnished by evil use, so
bent and battered, that I dare not use them; for if I were to, I should
feel that I was no longer trying to write truly.

On the other hand it seems to me that as fast as some words are becoming
ugly and meaningless, other words long deemed ugly and meaningless are
becoming beautiful and full of meaning. The old confused cries of the
savage are changing into prophecies; and one fairy tale succeeds
another. The earth is turning eastwards, and certain stars are going
down below the horizon, while other bright forgotten Signs are rising on
us out of the deep. Yet it is still the same earth and the same heaven.

This is the virtue of the magic crystal in which each one sees himself.
It is a touchstone of words. It is, as I have said, itself a word.

How shall I find courage to offer it to those great learners who have
built the glorious temple they call Science, wherein I see them standing
like archbishops at the altar, talking with God; while I am no more than
the little ragamuffin who has been put outside to clean the steps? I
have not listened to them as I ought. Even in the last age there was a
boy outside on the steps, looking on, and thinking

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

his own thoughts, while the archbishops within were muttering solemnly
their Mediterranean incantations; and when they came to the heart of
their mystery, and recited the words—*Hoc est corpus*, the boy outside
repeated to himself—*Hocus Pocus*. That was how the Mediterranean words
sounded to him.

But now suppose that boy has found a seed-pearl, or what he thinks may
be a seed-pearl, on the steps; what must he do? He knows it is not his.
He knows the great archbishop must have dropped it from his jewelled
robes, as he was passing in. So all the boy can do is to go up to the
archbishop as he comes out again, and say,—"Please, sir, is this yours?"

And lest my archbishops should not understand the street boy's words,
and should not recognise their seed-pearl, I will name it for their
sakes by an archbishop's word.

That is to say, *Metastrophe*.

By this word I mean more than the archbishops have meant by their word
metabolism. I mean, not growth and decay, but growth turning into decay,
and decay turning into growth. I mean involution in the midst of
evolution. I mean life turning inside out. And I mean more than life; I
mean also the expression of life. Metastrophe is a mood, and in so far
as we attain this mood, so will the Strength Within us chime more and
more sweetly with the Strength Without; not in dead unity, but in living

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

unison, and the faint gladness of our earthly voices climb and thread
the thunder music rolling out of Heaven.

Here is ideal dynamite that shall break up the bony knobs that clog the
brain, and set thought free. I cast this little seed into the mind. If
it be a true life-seed, I have no fear but that it will take root and
grow. It will be slower than the other kind of dynamite; it may take a
thousand years; but it will do its work more surely in the end. For it
is stronger than the material dynamite. It is alive. It will grow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 15. Biology: The Elf](tnw16)
