[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tnw10)  [Next](tnw12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The New Word*, by Allen Upward, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

### TENTH HEAD

### THE MAN IN THE CRUMB

*Young Cameron*.—1. *A Famous Cryptogram*.—2. *Perfect Elasticity*.—3.
*Ideal Crumbs*.—4. *Faith*.—5. *Boyle's Law Accounted for*.

LEST I should be misled about materialism by keeping to one book, and
that one written by a man of letters rather than a practical scientist,
I went out into the street, and was fortunate enough to find another
with the tempting title—*Chemical Theory for Beginners*.

This time there could be no mistake; the book was a real school-book,
and it had belonged to a real school-boy; I found his name, Cameron, and
the name of his school, on the fly-leaf. It was the work of two learned
specialists on the staff of a famous university. In England the
publisher is more important than the author, and this book was published
by the most important publisher in England. It was published in the year
of Nobel's death.

As we have seen, there is a slight cloud over the *Story of Creation*.
If it is not under lock and key in the Free Libraries, there must be
many who would like to be so. But not one would dream of locking up the
*Chemical Theory for Beginners*. It is perfectly respectable. It is a
book that might have

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

been written by a bishop. Its contents are taught to the sons of bishops
in the most conservative schools in England. They are taught alongside
of the Catechism of the Church of England. And yet they are not one whit
less materialistic than what we have been reading. The passage I have
picked out for examination is a chief cornerstone of the Materialistic
Faith. The schoolmasters have dealt with young Cameron fairly, according
to their lights. They have treated his mind as if it were a badger's
pit. You put in the badger, and you put in the dog, and you wait to see
which comes out first. They have thrown in the Catechism, and they have
thrown in the Chemical Theory, and now they are waiting to see whether
Cameron will turn out a Christian or an Atheist.

I got this book to learn what young Cameron had to learn, whether he
liked it or not, about Going Crumbs.

I

The Going Crumb has been invented to account for an interesting fact
which any one may examine for himself,—what science calls a law. In one
of my authorities it is thus stated.

"Gases are *highly elastic*. According to Boyle's Law the volume of a
gas is inversely as the pressure, whilst the density and *elastic force*
are directly as the pressure and inversely as the volume."

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

That is to say, in homely words, the more you squeeze gas, the more it
will shrink, and the more it will squeeze back. Elastic is not a very
good word; the gas behaves more like a spring shutting up than a piece
of elastic. Nor is the statement quite true; Boyle's Law is sometimes
broken, like real laws. However the fact itself is very simple, so
simple that learned men felt they must account for it. So they set to
work, and as we should expect them to do when they want to make anything
that is simple yet more simple, they began by taking down the Greek
lexicon.

They called their explanation the Kinetic Molecular Theory.

The English for that, as far as I can make out, is the Going Crumb View.
I am not sure that I ought not to write Belief instead of View. I am
afraid that Cameron believes that he has really viewed the going crumbs.
Only Ulysses can listen in safety to the siren's song.

We will read over this famous spell.

 

"According to this theory the particles of a gas—which are identical
with the chemical molecules—are practically independent of each other,
and are briskly moving in all directions in straight lines. It
frequently happens that the particles encounter each other, and also the
walls of the vessel containing them; but as they are supposed to behave
like *perfectly elastic bodies*, there is no loss to their energy

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

of motion in such encounters, merely their directions and relative
velocities being changed by the collision.

"The pressure exerted by a gas on the vessel containing it, is due to
the impacts of the gas molecules on the walls of the vessel. On this
hypothesis we can easily account for Boyle's Law."

 

And so these learned men have accounted for the gas being highly elastic
by supposing that its crumbs are perfectly elastic; and all they now
have to do is to account for the crumbs being perfectly elastic.

But there is more in this View than meets the eye. The cryptogram has
been put together with a cunning that, in a Jesuit casuist, would be
considered fraud. Let us see if we can unriddle it, bearing in mind that
whatever reverence is due to the sophists, or the casuists, of science,
a greater reverence is due to Cameron.

II

I will put aside the straight lines at once with the remark that real
crumbs do not move in straight lines,—only ideal crumbs do so. It was
careless of the distinguished writers to use an English word like
straight. A bright boy would have found them out at once. Another time
they had better write rectilinear.

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

Now let us see what is happening. A swarm of racket-balls are flying
this way and that inside a racket-court, and trying to get out. They
bump against each other, and against the wall, and when they bump they
change their "relative" velocities. But as they are supposed to be made
of "perfect elastic" they do not lose their "Energy of Motion."

The word *relative* is the first trap, and we must begin by getting rid
of it. Nothing is going but the elastic racket-balls. The only relation
is between the speed of one ball, and the speed of another. The only way
in which they can change their relative velocities is by one ball going
faster, and the other slower, by one ball gaining speed, and the other
losing it. We must be firm with the scientific wizards here. We must not
allow them to create crumbs that can change their relative velocities
without changing their velocities.

We now have to follow the racket-ball that has got the worst of the
encounter. We must watch this crippled warrior very closely as he limps
out of the fray, for a strange thing is about to happen to him.

When real racket-balls bump, no matter what elastic they are made of,
they will lose speed, and after they have bumped each other, and bumped
the wall of the racket-court, often enough they will slow down and stop.
But this ideal racket-ball is not allowed to slow down and stop,
because, if it should, the gas would cease to be gas. It would have to
go out into the Ether. To save it from that fate, after

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

a time the beaten crumb gets its breath again, and goes on as fast as
ever. How is this cure effected? Who puts the lame man on his legs
again, and furnishes the wounded bird with fresh wings to fly?

According to this View, the Good Samaritan is perfect elasticity. But if
perfect elasticity can save a racket-ball from stopping, it should also
save it from slowing. Prevention is better than cure. If perfect
elasticity is not at hand when it is really needed, to bring off the
crumb harmless from its encounter, it is too late for it to come on the
scene afterwards, and try to revive the flagging spirits of the sufferer
to their former briskness. We must draw the line somewhere, even in a
scientific hypothesis. We may allow the wizards their perfect
elasticity, though we may have our private doubts as to whether there is
such a thing, and whether they understand what they mean by it. But
elasticity that made a slowing india-rubber ball put on a spurt in the
middle of the air would be repeating elasticity. We must be firm here
also. We must not allow all the other laws of nature, and of grammar, to
be set aside to account for Boyle's not-quite-true Law.

The words perfect elasticity in this connection are another trap. What
really keeps up the heart of the worsted crumb, and sends it into the
fight again, this time with better luck, is not its elasticity but its
Energy of Motion. The whole magic of the incantation is here. The whole
art of the ideal racket-ball, the difference between it and other
racket-balls,

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

is that it can lose speed without losing "Energy of Motion."

What is that, messieurs Clausius and Clerk Maxwell, if you please?

III

We must not pin down the word Energy to Push, because the framers of the
cryptogram may not have read, or may not have believed, the *Story of
Creation*. I will write—Strength of Going. What is the difference
between that and Speed?

The word speed, or in Babu, velocity, is not an Andronican one. It is a
plain term of measurement, like length and weight, and it is used in
measuring Energy of Motion. We measure strength by measuring its work,
and speed is the work of Energy of Motion. If a crumb, or a racket-ball,
or a railway-train, is going at all, it is going through space, and in
time, and we can measure the strength with which it is going, by
measuring the space and the time, and dividing the first measure by the
second. The quotient, or result, is called the speed of the crumb or of
the train, and the speed exactly corresponds with the Energy of Motion.

If a railroad train has slowed down on account of having bumped against
another train it can pick up its speed again. But the strength which
enables

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

it to do so is not Energy of Motion, but Energy of Steam. In order to
distinguish between the two we have only to uncouple the engine from the
rest of the train. The strength left in the train is Energy of Motion,
and the train will run as long as it holds out. But now if the train
bumps against another, it will lose part of its Energy of Motion, and we
can measure the loss of energy by measuring the loss of speed.

The words "velocity" and "energy of motion," used in this cryptogram,
mean the same thing. Its learned framers, of course, knew this as well
as I do. What they must have meant to say is that whatever speed a crumb
loses by bumping against a slower crumb, it will presently regain by
bumping against a faster crumb, and so the total velocity among the
whole of the crumbs will not be changed. Unfortunately that is not what
they have said. They have left Cameron to believe, and if I know
anything of boys or men, he does believe, that an ideal crumb can go as
strongly as ever while it is coming to a dead stop, and as weakly as
ever while it is hurling through space at the rate of a billion
diameters of the universe in the trillionth of a second of time.

Secrecy is said by the lawyers to be a badge of fraud. This cryptogram
is a fraud upon young Cameron, because it does not tell him fairly that
there is a man in the Going Crumb. The Going Crumb View is another
example of scientific anthropomorphism, or demonology. What makes the

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

<span id="img_14900"></span>

[![Page 149 of The New Word by Allen Upward: First use of the word
Scientology (page image: see
https://ith.oarc.science/etc/tnw/tnw11.htm\#page\_149 for
text)](tn/14900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/14900.jpg.md)  
  

crumb go? When the savage sees a steam engine going, and does not know
how it goes, he says fairly enough that there must be a man inside it.
And indeed there is a man inside it, a man named Watt. That is what
Cameron would say about the Going Crumb if he were given the chance; and
most likely he would be right. Science is determined not to give him the
chance, and in order to blind him, and bewilder him, she has taken the
dead cipher whose right name is Speed, and dressed it up in an old suit
of clothes, and clapped on it a turnip's head, and an old hat, and stuck
a candle inside it, and called it Energy of Motion.

The Kinetic Molecular Theory is the view that crumbs have souls.

IV

The Going Crumb View, with its straight lines, which are curves; its
crumbs which are images formed in the mind out of real crumbs and
arithmetical ciphers; its Andronican elasticity, its man-faced energy of
motion, and its double-faced velocity; all brought together to account
for a not-quite-true law; is a fair sample, taken at haphazard, of
scientological writing. It is no whit better than theological writing.
And unhappily scientology is as often mistaken for science as theology
is for worship.

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

Since it was for young Cameron's sake that I had wrestled with this knot
of words I made the experiment of reading over my notes to a grown-up
Cameron.

I read them to a young man of naturally thoughtful mind, who had taken
lessons in physical science, which I have never been fortunate enough to
do, and who was disposed in consequence, perhaps, to feel towards me
some of that distrust which a trained mind feels towards an untrained
one.

He listened to me patiently till I came to the word faith, when he broke
in rather warmly.

"That is most unfair. No scientist regards a theory as a faith. He is
always ready to abandon it the moment it is shown to be unsound."

I thought that was encouraging, and I read on. My young friend allowed
what I had said about the straight lines, though I found it was news to
him. We had a misunderstanding over the relative velocities, my friend
being very anxious to bring in the word mass, which does not occur in
the cryptogram. His point was that in a compound, or mixed, gas the
crumbs would be of different weight. I was patient with him, and after a
long argument he allowed me to take the case of an unmixed gas, in which
the crumbs were all of the same weight.

In the end we got to the words "perfectly elastic," and I asked my young
friend what he meant by the word elastic.

It was like dropping a penny in an automatic

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

machine, for he instantly burst out with a shower of words like
"deformation," and "minimum of energy"; and I had to stop him, and say
that such words were over my head, and that they did not help me to
understand the word elastic. I asked him if a piece of elastic were
elastic, and he rather grudgingly allowed that it was. Then I said,—

"Let us stick to that, and we shall know where we are. Now what is meant
by perfectly elastic? Is a piece of india-rubber that yields stubbornly,
and springs back strongly, more or less elastic than a piece that yields
easily and springs back weakly?"

"Both are equally elastic," was the answer.

"Then anything that is elastic at all is perfectly elastic?"

My young friend said that was so. Then he changed his mind, and told me
that elasticity was a conception perfectly well understood by
scientists, and that it had nothing to do with real elastic. He began to
draw a diagram on a piece of paper to make the conception clear to me,
and then he found the diagram did not make it any clearer to himself,
and tore it up.

My enchanted young friend went away at last, more firmly convinced of
his theory than ever, and promising to bring me a really good book on
physics that would tell me exactly what elasticity was.—I am still
waiting for that really good book on physics.

Unhappily young Cameron is waiting too.

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

V

My aim in criticising scientific language is not to hurt science, but to
help it. I am, as I have said, myself a scientist. I merely act on the
altruistic principle by writing against my own side, by beating good men
and leaving wicked men alone.

It is in that spirit that I shall now go on to show the learned authors
of the *Chemical Theory for Beginners* that their cryptogram does less
than justice to the Going Crumbs.

In saying that crumbs are perfectly elastic they mean that when they
strike against anything hard, such as a wall, they will come back going
as fast as they went. That is the only meaning of the words, and as no
one understands very much about elastic, it would have been better to
call the crumbs perfectly steady-going. Of course no crumbs can behave
like that, but in a scientific hypothesis possibility is of no
consequence.

In this case the chief problem is the wall, because it is the terrible
and ever-increasing thumps of the Going Crumbs against the wall of the
containing vessel that account for Boyle's Law. It is expressly to save
the Going Crumb from injury from the wall that it has been endowed with
perfect elasticity,—and the wall, we may suppose, with perfect rigidity,
though the cryptogram is silent on that point. This is the armour of
Achilles. Clad in it, the invulnerable

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

crumb dashes itself time after time against the immovable wall without
taking the least hurt. But now what happens when it meets another crumb?

We have answered this question in calling the wall rigid. A railway
train that overtakes a slower train in front of it, is better off than
if it ran into a wall. But that is because it wants to go forward, and
not back. A Going Crumb does not care which way it goes; all it wants is
to keep up its speed. And therefore it is worse off when it overtakes a
slower crumb, and has to push it along, than when it strikes the wall.
It is no good being perfectly elastic when you strike a feather bed. It
is like trying to lean up against a wall that is falling away from you,
to try to rebound from a crumb going the same way as yourself. You can
only push it along, at a rate representing the mean between its speed
and yours. We have merely to look at an india-rubber ball striking a
wall, or striking the net of a tennis court, to see the difference.

But if it is better for such a ball to strike a wall than a yielding
net, it is better still for it to strike a tennis racket that is coming
towards it. In that case it rebounds with all its own strength, and the
strength of the racket, or of the tennis-player, added as a kick behind;
and the more elastic the racket is, and the harder it hits, the better
for the elastic ball. I am not a very good elastician, but I am clear of
this much, that when two Going Crumbs, sheathed in enchanted mail, meet
each other in full

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

career, the speed of each must be doubled by the encounter.

What is the consequence of these mathematical truths? Whenever two
steady-going crumbs meet frontways there is a gain of speed for both.
When one overtakes another from behind, there is a loss of speed for
one, but what it loses is gained by the other. If we now consider a
million crumbs as having a million pounds of speed between them, we
shall see that their joint capital is not lessened by a shilling here
and there being taken out of the pocket of one crumb, and put into the
pocket of another; whereas the joint capital is increased whenever two
crumbs endow each other with anything from a shilling upwards to a
pound. Moreover the addition takes place very much oftener than the
exchange, because it takes less time for a crumb to meet another coming
towards it, than to overtake one going from it.

The result of all this is that, just as real crumbs would gradually slow
down and stop, and put an end to the gas in one way; so these ideal
crumbs will gradually quicken their pace till they burst into flame, and
put an end to the gas in another way.

That is the dilemma, and I will leave science to deal with it. In order
to be understood by perfect elasticians, I will put it into
shorthand:—The cumulative effect of the collision between kinetic
molecules must be to equalize their average velocity, and equal average
velocity must tend to produce a greater

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

number of collisions at points of contact anterior to the molecular
diameter which is at right angles to the line of direction of the
molecule, than at points posterior to that diameter; so that whether
such collisions accelerate or diminish the velocity of the molecule,
their cumulative result must ultimately be fatal to the equilibrium of
the gas.

The cryptogram, we can now see, was too fainthearted when it said that
there was no loss of Energy of Motion in the encounters between the
Going Crumbs. There is a gain of Energy of Motion; and it is of course
that gain that produces the increasing fury of the thumps against the
wall of the containing vessel. In this way we have accounted for Boyle's
Law much better than the Kinetic Molecular Theory accounts for it.
Indeed the only thing we have not accounted for is the Kinetic Molecule.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11. Mathematics: The Conjuring Trick](tnw12.md)
