[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tnw16)  [Next](tnw18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The New Word*, by Allen Upward, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

### SIXTEENTH HEAD

### THE PAINTED WINDOW

*Talk about God*.—1. *Applied Theology*.—2. *Legal Definition of
God*.—3. *The Birth of Mind*. 4. *The Story of God*.—5. *Bad Language
about God*.—6. *The Idol*.

IDEALISTIC science measures from the Strength Within towards the
Strength Without. But it is still measuring relations. Like
Materialistic science, it can only measure strength by measuring the
ways of strength.

The attempt to measure the Inner Strength by itself is that science so
unwittingly christened by Andrónikos of Rhodes, which is not science but
only talk.

The attempt to measure the Over Strength by itself is fittingly named
Talk about God,—the Mediterranean word is Theology.

It is significant that the best talker about men who ever lived, never
talked about God. Of Kung the Master, whom the Babus name Confucius, it
is recorded that one of the subjects which he never would discuss with
his followers was the appointments of Heaven. Once, when he was asked
concerning our duty towards the spirits, he refused to answer, saying,
"Let us first learn our duty towards men; then it will be time enough to
talk about our

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

duty towards the spirits." Only on one occasion we are told, when he was
in danger in K‘wang, he told his followers,—"If Heaven has lodged the
cause of Truth in my person, what can the people of K‘wang do to me?"

The best talkers about God who have ever lived were the Hindus. And
after talking for a long time, and using very many words, they reached
this conclusion, that the only word which safely could be used about God
was No:—No. That was the end of their talk about God; so that they left
off where Kung the Master had begun.

II

The worst talkers about God who have ever lived, because the most
positive and circumstantial talkers, were the Catholics. Their ablest
talker, one of the ablest talkers I have heard of, was a Mediterranean
man named Thomas Aquinas, who wrote a book called the Sum of Theology,
or the Height of Talk about God. His book stands out as the
highwatermark of the human mind in the Dark Ages. It is theology at its
best, or worst.

Aquinas was by no means a man of weak or narrow mind. Within the
revolving cage of Andronican words there has toiled no braver nor
truer-minded squirrel. That High Talk of his sounded so like verihood
that to many of those who listened

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

to it Aquinas seemed to be an atheist, while to others he seemed to be a
saint. 'With truer instinct than Kant, and therefore with better reason,
he wished to set out from the two words God and the Soul. But for
Aquinas these words were fixed words, fixed by the authority, or as the
Babu hath it, the *ipse dixit*, of the Catholic Church; and thus his
eyes were shut to the metastrophe between them. So this great
sleep-walker never did set out, he only walked in his sleep, but never
really left his starting-point. Such questions as came before his mind
he examined truthfully, setting out the arguments on both sides, but
always giving judgment in the words of the Church. So we may see the
mesmerised subject exercising his reason freely where it has been left
free; but as soon as he is brought up by the suggestion of the
mesmerist, his mind ceases to work, and he repeats the mesmerist's will.

The Churchmen had no doubt that Aquinas was a saint. They applied a
simple test, and found that, however impartial might be the summing up,
the verdict was always in their favour.

To-day this book, the greatest book of Catholic Theology, ranks as a
curiosity rather than as literature. And that is not because, like the
book of Copernicus, it has done its work, but because no one any longer
hopes that it can do any work. It has no going strength. It is like a
disused incantation, which the spirit has left off obeying. The spell is
still there, but the spirit has fled.

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

The failure of such a theologian is the failure of theology. If his Talk
about God be not worth reading, no such Talk about God is likely to be
worth reading. For my part, whenever I have tried to read any of this
Talk, I have been brought up by sayings like these: God is almighty; God
created the world; God is wholly good; the world is mostly evil." And
that kind of talk has not helped me to know anything about God. The
words have seemed to me to unsay each other. They have gone round and
round me, but they have not taken me an inch nearer to God.

Let us see how this Talk about God works out in practice. Here is a
specimen of Applied Theology.

Antonio Perez, the disgraced minister of Philip II, was seized by the
Holy Inquisition, on a charge of heresy, for having threatened to cut
off God's nose. The holy inquisitors did not proceed against Perez for
the threat, but for the anthropomorphism. The heresy lay in saying that
God has a nose, not in railing against God. In the view of the Holy
Office it was worse to think falsely about God than to be angry with
God. But now, let us look into this. Antonio Perez would not have railed
against God unless he had thought God was going to treat him badly. So
that in uttering his threat he was denying the goodness of God. Again,
in threatening to injure God, he was denying God's omnipotence.
Therefore in the view of the inquisitors it was worse to think falsely
about God's shape than about

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> God's Character.
To use their own language, they were exalting the species above the
essence. The curious thing is that all this while their own Book told
them that God had made man in his own image. However, as we know from
history, the inquisitors were thinking really, not about God, but about
Philip II, who was using them as the ministers of his revenge on Perez.
The talk about God was only a blind; perhaps that also was a kind of
heresy.

It does not look as though Andronican language about God were ever
likely to be of material benefit to mankind.

II

By way of contrast, let us look at another kind of talk about God, a bit
of rule-of-thumb theology. It happens that there is to be found in
English law-books a working definition of God, that is to say, a
definition good enough to dispose of a sum of money. It was made in this
way.

Merchants and shipowners have a form of agreement which they call a
charter-party. In this agreement they say that the shipowner is to carry
the cargo safely, but that he is not to be liable for losses brought
about by, among other causes, "the act of God." It was not the lawyers
who first wrote those curious, medieval words; it was the shipowners and
merchants. But of course they very

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

soon quarrelled over their meaning, and so they came to the lawyers, and
said—"Tell us what we mean by our words."

It is noteworthy that they did not go to the theologians. They did not
turn to the pages of that famous Sum of Theology, to ascertain the
meaning of the words "Act of God." The theologians had been talking
about God, and trying to explain God, for hundreds and hundreds of
years; and yet when these plain, business men wanted an answer to their
question, it never struck them that the theologians could be of the
least use to them. You see the reason. There was a sum of money at
stake; and so they wanted a real answer, an answer that would settle who
was to pay for the lost cargo; they did not want Mediterranean words
that went round and round.

So they went to the lawyers. And the answer of the lawyers was a very
practical one. They said that God sent the big storms, but not the
little ones.

To the logical and theological mind that answer will sound very foolish.
But let us look into it. The lawyers were not thinking about God,
really, any more than the inquisitors had been; they were thinking about
who was to pay the sum of money. They had to find the strength
underlying the words, and they were wise enough to look for it in the
minds of the shipowners and merchants. As soon as they did that they saw
that what the words meant was

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

nothing more than that the shipowner must do his utmost to carry the
cargo safely. If it was lost in some little storm, when the shipowner's
care might have saved it, then he was to pay, because he had not done
his utmost; if it was lost in some great storm, after the shipowner had
done his utmost, then he was not to pay. It came to this, that there
were two strengths, as it were, working against one another, the
strength of the shipowner and the Strength Outside; and there was a
measure up to which the strength of the shipowner could prevail.—The
balance of the Strength Outside over the shipowner's strength was God.

What can the Sum of Theology add to that?

What can be added to that by all who have ever reasoned-

"In endless mazes lost,  
 Of providence, fore-knowledge, will and fate?"

the task which Milton, the poet in him triumphing over the theologian,
has given to the damned spirits in Hell.

What can be added to it by all those poor, tired, stupid, angry folks
who are always trying to apologise for God, to vindicate the ways of God
to man, to explain to us that God is not so bad as he seems?

Most of their trouble is self-made. They look around them and deem what
they see to be Evil,

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

and then they begin to find excuses for God. Yet all the time they are
not agreed among themselves as to what is evil. One says that pain is an
evil, another that pleasure is an evil; one tells us that labour is the
primal curse, another that idleness is a yet greater curse. One or
another think that marriage, or that celibacy, or that money-making, or
that losing money or that drinking wine, or that eating meat, or
knowledge, or ignorance, or not going to church, or going to the rival
church, is evil; and so they set to work to excuse God for not being
more like themselves. Each of them is doing much what the Aragonese
inquisitors were doing, making God a stalking-horse. When they ought to
say "I," they say "God." When they ought to say, "I hate this or that,
and therefore I will punish my neighbours for doing it," they say, "God
hates."

The talk about God ends, as we see, in theological hatred. Whenever in
its history the Ithuriel spear of any truth-seeker has touched it,
Theology has been revealed in its true shape. And it is a Fiery Shape
indeed.

III

In these latter days a branch of learning has sprung up amongst us,
almost unawares, and is growing as fast as theology is decaying. It was
at first called folk-lore; but as soon as learned men noticed it, they
felt that they could only know it by

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

a learned name, and they christened it Anthropology, which is to say,
Talk about Man. Now this science tells us the ways in which man has
talked about God. It is the history of Theology that the learned men
have somehow named Anthropology.

In reading the painful gibberish which good men are not afraid to write
about their God, we sometimes come on sayings of this kind:—All savages
have a belief in God; therefore there is such a person as God.—And over
against them we come on other sayings of this kind:—No savages have a
belief in God; therefore the book which tells us that there is such a
person must have been written by God.

We need not ask which of these sayings makes the greater nonsense,
because of course we learn from folk-lore what we have already learned
from word-lore, that no one has ever lived without being aware of the
Outer-Strength, as well as of the Inner. There were no Bishop Berkeleys
among the early men, whose thought we partly learn from their language.
No one who ever felt hot and cold by turns believed himself to be alone
in Everything. From that we begin; the history starts there.

Everywhere, as far back as we can go, we find men in communication with
the Strength Outside, measuring it by measuring themselves against it,
listening to it, talking to it, talking about it, not only in words, but
in songs and dances, in signs and

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

symbols, in all the languages in which they talked with one another. And
in their language we read the growth of their belief; and see it is no
other than the natural growth of mind, or wakefulness, or consciousness,
or by whatever name it may be called.

Because the story is a double story, the story of a double
understanding. Man's knowledge of the Inner and the Outer Strengths kept
pace together. As we have seen, he could not learn of one without the
other, because he had to measure one by the other. Mind is Matter. It is
the meeting place of these two strengths. The seat of Mind is, verily
speaking, in the skin; the brain itself is a fold of skin-stuff caught
between the bone-stuff, by the turning inside out of the life-seed while
it is yet in the womb. And so the story of the mind is the story of the
slow awakening of the Self, from what seems to our scant measures the
whole sleep of the lower life, upward through the dream-like instinct of
the beast, to the distincter sight and carefuller reckoning of man.

It is the Life Within being awakened by the Life Without.

IV

In books not much less painful to read than the good men's books, though
written by much brighter men, we come on these strange thoughts:—The

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

savage's belief in God is drawn from his belief in ghosts; and as there
are no ghosts, so there is no God. And again:—One savage had no pronoun
save he, and therefore he called the sun He; and therefore another
savage, who overheard the first one, believed the sun was a He.

Now our forefathers were not out of their senses, nor out of their
minds. Their senses were keener than ours, and their minds less keen.
The mind was less keen because the senses were more keen; the
counting-house in the brain kept too many books; it reckoned in sounds
and scents and tastes, and other forgotten notations which we have
dropped. Our mind works better because it tends to use only one
notation, that of sight. But in dropping the other notations we have
partly dropped the knowledge they expressed. The early mind was more
round than ours. What we have gained in clearness we have lost in
verihood.

The early language has been scrawled over by later generations, much as
the child's language is scrawled over by the schoolmasters, and the wild
man's of to-day by the missionaries of to-day. Yet on the whole we can
make sense of it; and it comes to this, that our forefathers were doing
what we are still doing, thinking of other strength in terms of their
own strength, and figuring it as a Man Outside.

They did this more openly than we do it. They treated the Man Outside as
one of themselves.

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When they wanted
to bribe him they offered the bribe frankly; and when they were angry
with him, they punished him; and though they were often afraid of him,
they were often not afraid to fight him; and if, like us, they sometimes
tried to hoodwink him, they did not, like us, try to hoodwink themselves
at the same time.

Man did not begin by saying to himself that there was another man in the
stones and trees and stars he coaxed or threatened, any more than the
child who strikes his head against a table says to himself that there is
another child in the table. He cries out because he is hurt, and he
beats the table because he is angry with it. Feeling comes before
thought, and emotion before explanation.

The early man, we see, could not find the Man Outside, till he had found
the Man Inside. He was in his way a Darwinian; he recognised the beasts
as his kinsmen, and some of them as greater than himself. Thus for a
long time he seems to have figured the unknown strength outside as beast
strength. He talks to the Kangaroo in the moon, and to the Crocodile in
the river, and to the Dragon in the sun. To this day the Elder Gods, who
have fallen from Heaven, retain the mark of the Beast Outside in tail
and pointed ears and cloven hoof.

By slow degrees, as man went on measuring his own life against the life
outside, both became more distinct to him. He raised himself, partly
emerging

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

from the beast, as in the old Assyrian sculptures we see the man's head
emerging from the body of the bull. The Sphynx is his prophecy of
evolution. The Assyrian bull is a yet loftier prophecy. For on its
shoulders are wings, and in our later art the wings have lifted up the
face, and carried it away from the brute's body, and the *kharab* has
become the cherub.

Dreaming and guessing, hoping and measuring, man climbed upward by such
ladders to the knowledge of everlasting Life. Doubtless the ghost guided
him towards the great interpretation. Was it not, too, a magic letter in
the mysterious handwriting of the Man Outside? And so at length the
words become clear and beautiful for us. The man finds himself in the
marble. The woman sees herself in the well. There is a Man in the sun,
and a Woman in the moon.

All this was not a nightmare; it was an awakening. Superstition passes
into science. The Woman in the moon sways the great tides of the sea,
and the more secret tides in man's own blood, and brings the child to
birth at the appointed time. The Man in the sun, most wonderful of all
these Men, goes round the world a conqueror, driving the four Seasons in
his yoke, and bringing seed time and harvest.

Had they no voices, these Men Outside? They had voices; there were
idealists in those days interpreting the ways of Heaven by the heart of
man.

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Did not that
Bright One in the sun say by his prophets in Egypt and Syria and Asia
and Greece:—"What, are ye anointing a man at Easter, and slaying him,
and burying him in your cornfields, that his life may give life to the
seed, and his flesh be your bread! Ye know not what you do. It is I who
give life to the seed, I who give you your daily bread. Cease your cruel
rites, for I am a merciful God, delighting not in the death of a
sinner."—Real Prophets, we may learn from the legends of Linus and Atys
and Adonis, a real Herakles, whether by that name or any other, went
round the Mediterranean coasts, preaching the Gospel of the Sun, and
snatching the victim from the cross.

V

That old Talk about the Gods, which is called mythology, is confused in
many ways, partly because all language is confused, partly because it is
a layer of many languages. When the talkers no longer used the beast as
an idol, they used it as a symbol, in short a word; when they no longer
slew the real Christ at Easter, they named the sun at Easter, Christ.
Their language is tangled and twisted beyond our power wholly to
unravel, because it was beyond their power; because it began as a
tangle, when man's mind was still a blur, and he saw men as trees
walking, and trees as men standing still.—

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> How hard the old
cloistered scholarship, to which the Nobels of a bygone age gave their
endowments, has toiled to understand the word *glaukopis*, given to the
goddess Athene. Did it mean blue-eyed, or gray-eyed, or—by the aid of
Sanskrit—merely glare-eyed? And all the time they had not only the word
*glaux* staring them in the face, as the Athenian name for owl, and the
name of ox-eyed Hera to guide them, but they had the owl itself cut at
the foot of every statue of Athene, and stamped on every coin of Athens,
to tell them that she was the owl-eyed goddess, the lightning that
blinks like an owl. For what is characteristic of the owl's eyes is not
that they glare, but that they suddenly leave off glaring, like
lighthouses whose light is shut off. We may see the shutter of the
lightning in that mask that overhangs Athene's brow, and hear its click
in the word *glaukos*. And the leafage of the olive, whose writhen trunk
bears, as it were, the lightning's brand, does not glare, but glitters,
the pale under face of the leaves alternating with the dark upper face,
and so the olive is Athene's tree, and is called *glaukos*. Why need we
carry owls to Oxford?

Much of this olden language is with us still. It is bad language, not
because it was always bad. like theology, but because it is out of date,
and we repeat it without understanding it, like the Latin-school boys,
and their Oxford schoolmasters. There is another Mediterranean building,
standing

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

beside the school and proudly looking down on it, inside which grown men
and women are saying what sounds to me like *Hic haec hoc*. They are
saying it to the Man Outside, and hoping it will sound better in his
ears than it does in their own. But words are two-edged tools, and while
they are talking to the Man Outside in the words of savages, they are
partly thinking of him as if he were a savage, and they are partly
behaving like savages, when they come out into the open air.

The old savages, we have seen, thought of the Man Outside as many men;
and their descendants sometimes talk as if they thought there were two
Men, ruling over them by two contradictory rules, which they foolishly
label Science and Religion.

The Man Outside does indeed speak to us by two voices; but if they seem
to contradict each other, that shows that we are not listening
carefully. Hope is not less the word of God than Sense, and one word has
to be interpreted by the other. In these days men seem to be divided
into two parties, each listening carefully to one word, and shutting
their ears against the other with Mediterranean cotton-wool. That is the
sin of this age; it is that way madness lies.

If Idealism has any business on earth it is here. Nobel has left his
Third Bequest for the cure of bodily suffering: he has offered his
Fourth Bequest to whomsoever can minister to the mind diseased.

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

VI

There is another, and a true distinction, which will be always with us
while we live, however we may strive to do away with it, between the Man
Outside and the Idol whom we ignorantly worship.

Life, says one of those idealists who are expelled from Oxford, and
exiled from England, and denied the alms of Royal Literary Funds,—

"Life, like a dome of many-coloured glass,  
 Stains the white radiance of Eternity."

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> So does the
stained-glass window of the church debar our vision of the sun; so is
the Winged Figure it reveals, and that whether we spell its name Idol or
Ideal, a false likeness of the Man Outside. Until that is learnt,
nothing is truly learnt about God.

God is the right name of that Figure on the painted window, a Figure
made by man's hands, however honourably and beautifully; and whosoever
confounds it with That of which it is the symbol is the heretic of the
True Church.

It is not the business of the Idealist to break the painted window, but
rather to make it. In so far as he is an artist as well as a scientist,
window-making is his calling and his craft. The eye of man can seldom
bear to look into the burning core of

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Verihood, and
cannot bear it long. Light tempered to his need is strained through
yonder shining Falsehood, dyed in the paints of the blue sky and green
earth and foaming sea, the yellow day, the violet night, the red of
blood, the glory of all creation's golden wheels.

The falsehood is always there, the Figure changes. It is the calling of
the Idealist to cleanse and change it, and to make ever fairer and
fairer Figures, better and better likenesses of the Man Outside.—The
word idealist does not mean idolator, but idol-maker, after all.

The Idealist is called to make windows; let them look to it who will not
give him leave. Let them look to it who imprison him in their temples,
so that he must needs begin his work by breaking theirs. Every Catholic
Church is a jail for the Idealist, whether it be built in Rome, or in
Mecca, or in Pekin, or in Benares. And it does not lie with them who are
sending out into the four corners of the earth to break windows, some of
them older and more nobly painted than their own, to cry out when their
own come under the glazier's hands. They who live in glass houses ought
not to throw stones. The bloodiest iconoclasts the world has ever seen
ought not to whine so miserably when their own Idol is being washed.

The Window-Cleaner on his side, must heed neither whining nor stoning.
The Idealist has a Master whom he serves, and that Master is the

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Man Outside. He
must go whither he is sent, suffering no man to hinder him, for he has a
great privilege. He cannot be stayed, neither can he be turned back,
neither can any man lay hold of him to his hurt, for he is the
ambassador of a great King.

If Heaven has lodged the cause of Truth in his person, what can the
people of K‘wang do to him?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 17. Exegetics: The Forbidden Fruit](tnw18.md)
