[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tnw19)  [Next](tnw21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The New Word*, by Allen Upward, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

### NINETEENTH HEAD

### THE ECLIPSE

*The New Religion*.—1. *White and Black*. 2. *African Tales*.—3. *The
End of the World*.—4. *Prophecy*.—5. *The Heretic*.

EVIDENTLY it is not the business of Idealism to furnish mankind with a
new religion. The new religion is already with us. It has been with us
for some hundreds of years. It is no longer struggling for a footing. It
is partly established by law. It has always had its heretics, and it has
for some time been persecuting them. Men are being sent to jail in
England, while I write, for fidelity towards Christianity, and
infidelity towards Science.

The old religion bade men, when their friends were ill, to pray to the
Man Outside in words. The new religion bids them to pray in drugs. And
when they obey the old religion, and disobey the new, and their friends
happen to die, the law sends them to prison.

The new religion has won its way over the old by sheer business merit.
Its spells are stronger than those of the old religion. They work
better. They bind the Man Outside more surely. The prayers of the new
religion are more often answered.

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The priests of the
old religion themselves have learnt that. When they want to bind the Man
Outside not to strike their church with lightning, they no longer trust
to the prayers written in their book. They borrow the iron prayer of
Science; and that prayer climbs above the church; and, like a trail of
ivy, sucks the strength out of the church.

The new spells are stronger than the old spells because they are braver.
They do not treat the Man Outside as though he were a half-savage
tyrant, ruling by fits and starts, and swayed this way and that by the
flatteries of his courtiers. They treat him as a Man who, on the whole,
knows his own mind, and means us to know it, and gives his prizes for
discernment and not for flattery. And so the new prayer does not cast
itself on its knees saying,—"Thy will be done": it lifts its iron finger
to the skies with the proud challenge,—"Touch me if you can!"

The new prayers are more businesslike than the old, because they are
written to please the Man Outside and not the Man Inside. And they use
the language which the Man Outside seems to understand best, the
language of deeds, not words.

They are sincere prayers. They ask for what men really want, and not for
what they pretend to want, or fear the Man Outside wants them to want.
Hence they are not so often put up out of vanity, and so as to be heard
of men, as the old prayers.

Above all they are truthful prayers. They are

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

not attempts to hoodwink the Man Outside. The plumber does not lay down
a dummy drain, and hope the Man Outside will mistake it for a real
drain. He may break the sanitary laws, but he does not think he can
break the Law of Health.

And the new prayers have all these merits because they try, on the
whole, to be true prayers. Verihood is the foundation of the new
religion. The Man Outside is revealing himself to us by a new name, and
Verihood is that name.

Between these two religions how does the Idealist stand?

I

It is significant that the new religion comes from the North. It
breathes the sheer courage and intense love of life of those old Vikings
who prayed to die in battle, and not a cow's death on the straw. It is
on the whole the rebellion of the Baltic against the Mediterranean mind.

For that reason the Idealist will not want it to end in the harsh
conquest of the Mediterranean by the Baltic mind. We have heard too much
of world religions. The world can do very well without another Catholic
Church. The Northern folk are the White folk. What we are dealing with
is the White Man's religion.

By one of those Rhymes which the seeing eye sees everywhere, and which
only stupefy the stupid eye,

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

the Papal party in the new Rome call themselves the Blacks. Anyone who
has ever lived among the real Blacks, in the land of the Black River,
can understand why. Europe, as I have said, is an African colony
conquered from Asia. And Christendom has been its reconquest by Africa,
a great spiritual jacquerie not yet over, so that more than one White
king is still cowering at Canossa, doing homage to that Black Caesar out
of the Catacombs.

As I have said, the task of the Idealist is not only to free White men
from the Black religion, but to save Black men from the White religion.

I myself spend so much time in the thirtieth century that the latter
task sometimes seems to me the most pressing. But perhaps the two tasks
are really one and the same.

II

Nothing is more painful and bewildering to the White mind than what
seems to it the reckless lying, the utter indifference to verihood, of
the Black mind. That literature of the Black Age, those legends and
romances, have not their very names become our words for falsehood; by a
Roman tale, do we not mean a tale that is not supposed to be true? It is
not till we come to the Icelandic sagas that we seem to find men making
any effort at all to tell the story as it really might have happened.

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

And yet all the time the fault has been partly our own. There has been a
misunderstanding. We have partly mistaken poetry for prose.

All these old Mediterranean men did not always mean to deceive. The man
who wrote, without one doubt or hesitation,—"They called his name Jesus
that the prophecy might be fulfilled: They shall call his name
Immanuel"—that man does not seem to have been trying to deceive anybody.
He tells us fairly enough what the prophecy said, and what the event
said. He thought the two tallied, and so have we thought down to the
present day. He wrote in his sleep, and we have read in our sleep. Now,
if a modern reporter, describing a christening, were to say the child
was named John to carry out the request of his godfather that he should
be named Alfred, we should see the discrepancy. Those old writers and
readers saw no discrepancy. And so they put forward as part of their
apology a statement that the modern apologist has to apologise for.
Surely it is using bad language to say that the old apologists were
trying to deceive us. As one of themselves has put it, they deceived
themselves, and the truth was not in them.

The grand mistake of the White mind has been to take the Black mind
literally, or rather to mistake Letters for Things. The old painters who
painted their heroes with yellow plates around their heads did not mean
to tell us that they really went about wearing yellow plates, as a
Frenchman wears

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

his red ribbon, but only that they were very good men—that they deserved
to wear yellow plates. The White mind has been believing that the yellow
plates were really there. Now it has been much the same with the Roman
tales.

I have before me a Roman tale, a fair specimen of the Black book. It is
called the "Life of Saint Francis Borgia, S. J.", a very good man,
related to a Pope of Rome who was not a very good man. It is published
in the Anglo-Irish town of Dublin, and it bears the following strange
inscriptions:—"*Nihil obstat*. Edwardus Kelly, S. J., Cens. Dep." and
"*Imprimatur*. Gulielmus, Archiepiscopus Dublinensis, Hiberniae Primas."
We see at once that it is a thoroughly Mediterranean book, about fifteen
hundred years behind the times. It tells the story of a General of the
Jesuit Society, who had the good fortune to be deified in the year 1671,
and it goes on to say,—

"In connection with this occasion there is an incident on record which
shows how deeply God resents an affront against the honour of his
faithful servants. In a remote town of Spain a number of persons were
discussing the recent canonisation, and remarking on the virtues and
miracles of the saint, when an unhappy heretic, overhearing them,
exclaimed—'You make very sure that the famous Duke of Gandia is in
heaven, in spite of his absurd superstitions and miracles; rather than
believe it I call on God to send me down to hell this moment,

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

body and soul.' Scarcely had the blasphemy passed his lips when the
awe-stricken and terrified beholders saw the fulfilment of his impious
wish, for the earth immediately opened beneath his feet, and, engulphing
him in its depths, reclosed for ever over him."

Now when the White Man reads tales like that they do him harm. But they
do not harm Archbishop Gulielmus and Edwardus Kelly, S. J., and their
friends. They understand them. All that is merely their Mediterranean
way of saying that Francis Borgia was a very good man. It does not help
us to think any better of this worthy Jesuit to be told that the earth
opened in "a remote town" of Spain, and that a Baltic-minded man
disappeared into the bowels of our planet; but it helps them. They do
not mean that if we should speak disrespectfully of Archbishop Gulielmus
the pavement of Dublin or elsewhere would open beneath our feet, and
engulph us. If we should offer £8,000, or 8,000 times £8,000,000 to
Archbishop Gulielmus on condition that the earth should open in some
town not too remote to have a name, and engulph an unhappy heretic, he
would answer quite fairly that we had not understood his little book. In
the same way, when I lived in Dublin, my Black friends used to assure me
that this very Archbishop Gulielmus could, if he wished, strike every
heretic in the city dead. I am not sure if this power of his is even
limited to his own diocese, but in any case it is formidable

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

enough. Now in telling me that, my friends were not trying to deceive
me. It was an African tale, that was all, and I have heard tales like it
since, in Africa. My friends would have been quite as much surprised as
I, if the archbishop really had struck any heretics dead. It was only
their African way of saying that he was a very respectable man. It
helped them to respect him, to talk like that, but it did not help me.

That is how, I think, we must bring ourselves to regard this language of
theirs. It seems to us bad language, but the meaning is not always bad.
I found the men who used it on the whole very good men. I even found
some of them very tolerant men, often more so than their white
neighbours. Even Archbishop Gulielmus is tolerant, because, after all,
he never does strike anybody dead. He does not abuse his power.

The art of writing truly is so high an art, so far beyond our present
reach, that those who have essayed it most will think most charitably of
the poor Blacks who have given it up.

III

As soon as we leave off reading these old books as if they were
newspapers published in New York, we shall begin to understand them. It
is almost time, indeed, to leave off refuting and apologising,

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

and to begin interpreting. To say that two thousand years ago men
suddenly went out of their minds and began mistaking a mosaic of
Egyptian mythology for a page of Josephus may be true, and yet it may be
the most idle thing that can be said about Christianity. Because it does
not tell us why the Mediterranean mind turned inside out.

To-day there is no science so exact as astronomy. It is only one remove
from Pure Mathematics. The very Zodiac has been nailed to the sun, as
far as words can do it, so that we still speak of the sun as in the Sign
of Aries, while he is actually rising in the star-group of the Fishes.
And there is no Cinderella so despised as astrology. Darwin has pointed
out in a footnote that our descent from the little tidal creature called
the Ascidian may account for the moon-pulse in all warm-blooded life.
But even he only ventured to put that in a footnote, perhaps for fear of
the astronomers, which is the key to astrology, and was the beginning of
astronomy.

Exact science is so busy with her exact measures that she is apt to turn
a little angrily from any attempt to apply those measures for the
material benefit of mankind. But for the old astrologers the measures
were only means to an end. They wanted to make the stars useful. These
Signs of theirs were weather signs. They did not know there were extinct
volcanoes in the moon, but they knew all about that moon-pulse in
themselves.

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Their science,
like our science, was their religion. And thus they drew no hard and
fast line between the lore of heaven and the lore of Heaven. We see they
could not, before writing was invented.

We learn from their mistakes. We see them trying, like other scientists,
to be too exact. They tried to make the stars work overtime. They made
their picture book in the sky, and then sought to read too much in it,
mistaking their own pothooks and hangers for the Cuneiform of God. The
strange thing is that they did not always, and altogether, read it
wrong.

They had a great deal of trouble with the stars. Those stars are like
men, they will not always go as they ought. You build your temple, your
long stone telescope, pointing to where a star ought to rise, and lo!
after a thousand years or so, it rises somewhere else, and you have to
build a new temple. But what is this greatest change of all? Lo! Heaven
itself is on the move, the eternal Picture- Book is turning over one by
one its mighty leaves, the immortal Sun himself after two thousand years
deserts his mansion in the sky, and passes from Sign to Sign.

This was the change which so shook the mind of those old learners that
in their mystic speech they named it the End of an Age, the beginning of
a New Heaven and a New Earth. And when their words came into the
streets, when they were peddled in chapbooks, and caught up by every
sufferer longing

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

for better things, by every captive in a dungeon and by every slave
bleeding under the lash, and by every Idealist dreaming dreams of
Righteousness, what wonder if they fulfilled themselves.

We catch the echo of this far-famed prediction all round the
Mediterranean shores. Alexander thought of it. Caesar thought of it.
Plato wrote of it. Virgil wrote of it. It passed from Jewry into the
catacombs. The Book of Daniel breathes of it. The Book of Enoch is full
of it. The Apocalypse is it. The Roman slaves drew the mysterious Fish
of the New Covenant on the ground as their secret password long before
any one had begun to draw a Cross. When they were shown that its Greek
name, *i-c-th-u-s* was an acrostic on the name of Jesus Christ, they had
nothing more to ask. The Sign of Jonah had been given to them. The early
Christians were called Little Fishes, and the early preachers Fishermen.

What strikes me under it all is that, whatever words they used, the old
astrologers were right. Their world did come to an end.

Before their time the White man, whom we know as Zarathustra, had
reached the first great generalisation which brought order out of the
chaos of mythology. He had polarised idolatry in two Antagonists who
played the same parts as our Energy and Force. He had identified them,
not by the words Bright and Might, but as the Bright One and the Dark
One. And, going on to use the two words

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

that seem to me the most shifty of meaning in all human speech, he had
declared the Bright One to be Good, and the Dark One, Evil. His theology
was the theology of conquerors. And it was this theology that
Christianity overthrew. It was the Bright One that fell from Heaven, and
was bound for a thousand years, while the Dark One ascended into Heaven,
and reigned during the Dark Age.

It was metastrophe. It was hope turning inside out.

The world did end. That old, bright pagan world did end. The old Gods
vanished from their Olympus. The oracles grew dumb. The great Pan lay
dead. We can see men sinking down and falling asleep all round the
coasts of the Mediterranean Sea. We see the rulers drooping, and
wearying of their task. We see the scholars ceasing to write, and the
soldiers ceasing to fight. We see the hunted slaves creeping out of
their sewers with their old mysteries and shocking rites. The books of
science are burned. The schools are closed. The Idiots put down the
Gnostics. The beautiful literature is lost, or scrawled over with
senseless legends that read like the talk of men in a nightmare. We see
the Northern folks descending on the exhausted southern lands, only to
fall under the spell. It is the Gospel—God's Spell. The mind of man has
turned inside out. It is the Reign of the Saints. The world has gone to
sleep for a thousand years. It is Ragnarok—the Twilight of the Gods.

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

We have been living in the New Jerusalem while the Millennium has come
and gone.

IV

The words of the old prophets seem senseless enough to us, but so did
other hieroglyphs till Champollion had found the key. And neither did
the priests, nor did the prophets, write all they knew. Neither were
they able to do so; neither is any man able to write all he knows.

Somehow or other, it seems to me that those astrologers were
weather-wise, that they foreknew that millennial ebb and flow of heat
and light that was to dry up Lake Tchad and unfreeze the Baltic; that
giant tidal wave in the sun that was to sweep the empire of Rome before
it like an egg-shell, and wash up the wreckage of Thebes and Babel on
the shores of Scandinavia. Their memorable prophecy has been memorably
fulfilled.

Some day we may be able to see in this the handwriting of the Man
Outside, and to take to heart the tremendous Lesson. Some day we may be
allowed to show the apologists for Christianity the meaning of the word
Christ.

In the meantime the pressing business seems to be to prevent the new
shell from hardening.

And it is hardening very fast. The new religion is to-day much more sure
of itself than the old religion,

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

much more positive, more catholic,—in a word, more materialistic. It has
already taken over the word faith.

"By faith," cries a distinguished prophet of the new religion, who
prophesies in wheels and gases, in the machine, the triangle and the
lethal chamber, "by faith we disbelieve!" And what is it that the
Materialist so heroically disbelieves? It is the evidence of his senses.

Out of the millions of waves forever flowing in and out of us from the
Strength Without, whose best name is Heaven, our little
strength-conductors gather a few here and there to keep the body safe,
and from these few we try to piece together a Meaning by which we can
live, as the bird pieces together sticks and straws to make itself a
nest. But the bird's nest is not the dome of Saint Sophia. There are
other senses than the celebrated five of Alexandrian lore; and the
Siberian shaman in his swoon, the dervish in his dance, the animal in
its sleep, the very trees and flowers, feel waves that we have left off
feeling, and know what we have forgotten how to know. With us sight has
killed second-sight. The Past is too much with us; and the Future not
enough.

If we will think roundly and speak sensibly, we shall know that the
Beyond is not less real than the Near, the Future not less real than the
Past. It is the Present that is unreal, a meeting-point only; and in
these lives of ours the metastrophe of Future and

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Past becomes the
metastrophe of Hope and Memory.

Are we nothing but a makeshift between Heredity and Environment? But
Hope is the greatest part of our environment. It is the Pull of Heaven.
It is the Energy of Longing. It is the Swirl. The story of creation that
tries to leave out hope will leave out sense unawares. For the
environment of Earth is Heaven.

V

The Idealist cannot halt between the old and new religions. His face is
turned ever towards the east.

The new religion is his; because he foresaw it, he foretold it, he
founded it, he witnessed for it, in bonds and in death, what time the
very men who are now persecuting Christians were persecuting Scientists,
and they who are now carving beasts for Man's sake, were torturing men
for God's sake. But the prophet of a new religion cannot be also its
priest. As it becomes orthodox, so he will become heterodox. Because the
Idealist founded the new religion it will excommunicate him.

Let there be no mistake about this. The Idealist may build temples; he
does not dwell in them. He is never an archbishop; he remains ever the
prophet. To mankind—and let us believe for the material benefit of
mankind, or let us believe the All-Thing an everlasting Hoax—the
Idealist is always saying

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

what Remigius said to the Frankish king,—"Burn what you have learned;
learn what you have burned."

Who can make him an archbishop? Who can patronise the Idealist, except
some greater Idealist? England will always have fifteen thousand a year
for some respectable clergyman; she will never have it for Shelley or
Carlyle.

The Idealist on his side knows what he has to expect of mankind. The
crucifix set up at the entrance to every Catholic village, Lamartine has
written, is Humanity's warning to the Idealist,—a warning given in vain:

"We know the price, and yet our gifts we strew,  
 Our lifeblood and our tears to feed the lamp  
 God orders us to bear in front of you."

In our sun-whirl there is one planet which has a moon which is turning
the other way. And if it be strong enough, and last long enough, sooner
or later the whole mighty Wheel of Light will return and follow that one
little moon. There is the home of the homeless Idealist, in that far-off
spot his vantage-ground; that moon is his fiery chariot. For here he has
no continuing city, but he seeks one to come.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 20. Ethics: The Book of Etiquette](tnw21)
