[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tnw20)  [Next](tnw22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The New Word*, by Allen Upward, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

### TWENTIETH HEAD

### THE BOOK OF ETIQUETTE

*Translation*.—1. *The Energy of Longing*. 2. *Diagram of Life*.—3. *The
Art of Living*.—4. *Groundless Fear*.—5. *Ethical Sing-song*.—6. *The
New Church*.—7. *The Unknown God*.

BY this time the Testator's word has so far unfolded that we are able to
see somewhat of his meaning.

The Swedish word for ideal seems to be *höpp*, the English hope, and a
work of an idealist tendency to be neither more nor less than a hopeful
work.

I

A hope differs from a thought, and an ideal from an idea, in that it has
a tendency. It has going strength. It is not the builder's plan, but
rather the householder's desire, of which the house is in some measure
the fulfilment. It is indefinite because strength is indefinite, and if
it were definite it would be dead.

Hope is a term of strength, like energy; it may be called the energy of
longing. The children call it looking forward, which is the very
etymology of idealist. It is by metaphor that we speak of a hope, or an
ideal. That is an abstract word used as the name for an imaginary point
towards which the

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

energy of longing works, and, as we have seen, it is an extreme point
and an extravagant one. To fix the mind on this imaginary point instead
of on the real strength is a cardinal error, and to refute it has been
my first care in this interpretation. For the sound mind, the only real
point is the Man Inside, whose circumference is the Man Outside; and the
way of strength which is called Hope works between them.

All strength turns inside out, and we try to follow it with our names.
The strength which leaves the sun as energy of light is called force of
attraction whenas it leads the plant out of the soil, and the flower out
of the plant; and again, within the flower, it is called energy of
growth. Man is the flower and not the sun, and the attraction which
leads the man out of the beast, and the angel out of the man, is known
to himself as longing, or hope.

I have tried to show that this way of strength is as real as the force
of gravitation. The swirl is the mathematical demonstration of hope, and
the universe is the mathematical demonstration of the swirl. For there
is an annex to the universe; but it is not built of words only, and it
does not stand empty, but in it there abides an immortal Guest, whose
name is Hope.

The Way of hope is marked off from the Way called heredity as the pull
is marked off from the push. We are led as well as driven. Hope wrestles
with heredity in the shaping of life, and

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

evolution is the triumph of hope over heredity. To say otherwise were to
say that there is no growth, and no life.

Hope, therefore, must be half of the true story of creation. Beyond the
struggle for existence is the struggle for a better existence. The
survival of the fittest turns out to be the survival of the foremost,
which is the creation of a higher type. The fittest for the past is not
the fittest for the future, and it is the fittest for the future who is
the elect of Hope. The Tree of Life grows upward, and it is the breath
of life that has changed *up* into *hope*.

II

In its full meaning the word hope may be made to cover all man's work.
It is hope that leads the veriest Materialist to learn from sense, and
hope that turns the lesson to use for mankind's benefit. Nothing is so
practical as hope. History itself is only busy idleness unless it can
turn into prophecy.

But though hope spreads out fan-wise, instead of narrowing to a point,
the Testator has clearly outlined the department of hope which he meant
to endow. The Idealist is placed by him between the scientific
discoverer on the one hand, and the practical pioneer of kindness on the
other, both working for the benefit of mankind. Between these two the
Idealist stands like an interpreter, whose business it should be to turn
the lessons of science into rules of behaviour.

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

Idealism is first of all the science of hope, learning the will of
Heaven from the voice within, as Materialism learns it from the voice
without. So far as I can look into the mind of the Testator he sought in
these two sciences, not a contradiction, but a collaboration, like that
of the centripetal and centrifugal forces which are supposed to guide a
planet in its course. This may be illustrated by a simple diagram:

<span id="img_29700"></span> ![](img/29700.jpg)

The science of hope is languishing to-day, and I have thought it not the
least part of this inquiry to investigate the causes of this aberration,
and suggest

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

a remedy. Its chairs are filled, and its endowments are embezzled, by
men who are still living in the Dark Age. They are good men, or so I
like to think, but their work is not good, and they are blocking the way
of better men. They seem to me like old women who should stand round a
burning house with pails in their hands, faithfully throwing their
paltry dribble on the flames, but keeping back the engine which alone
can put out the fire. This legacy is certainly not meant for them. It is
a summons to the firemen.

That seems to me the whole point. Here is not a prize for a new
religion, for what is called science is the new religion. But here is a
prize for a new hope, and it would not have been offered if the old hope
were still strong and bright.

My chief end in this inquiry has been to show that this at bottom is a
question of words, but to show at the same time that that does not
lessen the importance of the question; because words are the signposts
of hope. If the weathervane be stuck fast and useless, the wind will
still blow, but that is no excuse for the weathervane. I have tried to
show that the old words are outlandish words, as well as out-of-date
words, and to point to where better words may be found. The folk-lore of
the Black man has had a long innings in the North, and it is time to
give the White man's folk-lore a turn. It is only my own judgment, but
it is one not lightly nor hastily formed; and I think that the secret

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

lies here, and that this is the remedy for hope's disease.

It is a very gradual remedy, and that is why I hope so much from it.
Before this Will can be fully carried out, before we can have truly
hopeful works competing with one another for this Prize, we must have a
generation, perhaps several generations, of writers who have been
brought up on truth, and encouraged to write truthfully. For it is
verihood that is difficult,—hope comes of its own accord wherever it has
leave. But, to begin with, the mind must have light and air and freedom.
The bandages must be taken off the brain. The laws against hope must be
repealed.

The Idealist of our day works like the medieval alchemist by stealth and
in dread of men, and his books are not sound and sensible. In the last
generation an admired idealist wrote many books in praise of medieval
churches and medieval manners and medieval hopes. Had this admired
writer thoroughly asked himself the question,—To what end do we build
to-day; what is our best hope; and in what building may we express it
best?—had he gone to work in that spirit, then, although his search had
ended in the bottom of a drain, he might have helped his fellows to
build a better drain, and been not a preacher but a teacher.

On this head the Testator has left us in no doubt, that he did not want
works of a useless tendency. He did not want beautiful words about hope,
nor

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

words that would go round and round hope, but words that would help men
to hope, and by helping them to hope, help them to live.

III

The Art of life is that high art which children name Behaviour, and as
art is the end of science, so beautiful behaviour is the end of hope. If
it were not so, Nobel would not have wasted his money on Idealism, nor I
my labour. Here is the highest and most difficult art in the world, and
yet the one in which each is called to be an artist; the art which any
man, in any walk of life, may excel in, but in which no man may achieve
perfection. Not even Kung the Master achieved perfection, if he is now
worshipped alongside of Heaven. Not even the Buddha achieved perfection,
if the Gods in Heaven now worship him.

When I look around me, and see so many men and women, of such differing
creeds, of such varying degrees of knowledge, and under such manifold
temptations, all trying to behave as well as their infirmities will let
them, and behaving so much better than myself, I feel it is almost
unkind to quarrel with them because their words are so much uglier than
their deeds.

And yet nowhere, perhaps, are Andronican words much worse than in Talk
about Behaviour, and nowhere are they more heedlessly flung out. The

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

word Love is the most dangerous in the dictionary. If we should ask any
Christian to tell us the keyword of his religion, he would answer,—Love.
And if we should ask any other man what religion had engendered the most
hatred, he would answer,—Christianity. If those who use this word so
recklessly would keep in mind that love and hate are in metastrophe;
that the more they are loving in one direction, the more they are hating
in another, and that it is hard for them to help one man without hurting
another; if before they set out on those crusades of theirs, they would
ask themselves, To whom am I going to be cruel?—how much more gentle
their behaviour might become.

Again, as I walk through this world I hear going up from many earnest
souls the cry,—Tell us how to behave! Teach us the Rule of Right! Make
us a Moral Code!—And, unhappily as they think, happily as I think, no
one knows quite how to behave; there is no Rule of Right; the Moral Code
cannot be made. Not even the lawyers, with their magical sum of money,
can make it; how much less then the mere moral philosophers and
ethic-mongers, who have not even a Court.

The kindest saying I have found in all the words of men is this:—One
man's meat is another man's poison. That is the idealist rule: not—Do
unto others as you would that they should do unto you; but—Do unto
others as they would have you do unto them.

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

Each of us has his own Moral Code, and makes it as he goes along, and
changes it as his mind changes and grows. We know that the perfect
Moneymaker will kill any one for a dollar, but that he makes an
admirable Sunday-school teacher. We know that the perfect Idealist would
make a poor policeman, but that if you were to set down a bag of gold on
the desk in front of him, and afterwards take it away again, he would
hardly notice what you were doing.

It is not well to be troubled over much even about behaviour. It is good
for us sometimes to think that our behaviour does not matter very much
to any one besides ourselves. The stars go on shining very steadily,
summer and winter follow one another, the flowers spring up in their
season, and the songbirds carol in the sky.

TV

Why is it that, while I see everywhere around me men whose manners are
better than their words, yet they are all anxious to persuade me that it
is the words that bring about the good manners? The astrologers seem to
have persuaded them that a reform of the kalendar will be followed by
bloodshed in the streets.

Much of this seems to be the backwash of the great French Revolution.
The educated European mind has been marking time for a hundred years,

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

out of fear of the mob. Frederick of Prussia, Catherine of Russia, that
strange, ill-starred Idealist on a throne who founded the Swedish
Academy, were all more enlightened than kings have ventured to be since.
The Revolution frightened the rich. And the astrologers have seen their
opportunity. They have persuaded the poor rich men that that great
jacquerie was a scientific orgy. There were no starving serfs up and
down France. There were no heartless, worthless lords. There was no
bankrupt, foolish king. There was no Bastille for idealists; and no
Idealist named Rousseau. The kingship did not bring the kingdom to utter
wreck, and then call in a desperate mob to put things straight for it.
The old régime did not commit suicide. No; all that is a mistake. There
was a wit named Voltaire, and he was allowed to say witty things about
the astrologers, and because of that the mob rose and cut the rich men's
throats.—And because of that Mammon to-day sits on guard, with his
Mass-book in one hand, and his Maxim in the other, watching for Truth as
a terrier watches for a rat.

The policy of the poor, frightened rich men is the policy of the
ostrich. They build their churches, and patch up their cathedrals, and
hire respectable clergymen at enormous salaries to make-believe that the
earth is flat,—and meanwhile Columbus has discovered the new world, and
Copernicus has discovered the sun, and Darwin has discovered life. And
not one of the poor rich men is a penny the worse.

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

Their fear is groundless. No one wants to cut their throats. No one
wants to rob them. The Socialist wants them to pay their poor-rate, and
by withholding it they create Socialism. The poor man asked them for
bread, and they have given him a vote; and now they must pay in taxes
more than they refused as alms. The Idealist is not thinking of their
gold at all. He is not asking bread but freedom. And Hope is a dangerous
prisoner.

On the whole there never has been a time during the last two thousand
years when the astrology had so little real hold on men's minds as it
has to-day, and there never has been a time when the behaviour of men
towards one another was on the whole so good. The untightening of dogma
and the bettering of behaviour have pretty nearly kept pace together.
And a hundred years after the French Revolution a White folk, called on
to choose between kingship and commonwealth, have chosen kingship.

Who was the first to write under words like—"The kingdom of heaven is
within your own hearts"—the label *"Poetry"*; and under words
like—"Where the worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched"—the label
*"Exact Geography"?* The story of the Good Samaritan is not an
astrological myth. The good seed of the Idealist has been choked by the
astrologer's tares.

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

V

There is a slang word in use among us, *cant*, which seems to be in
English *sing-song*. It is our old enemy the magic spell, but in its
dotage, and grown too feeble to withstand any searching test. It is more
beloved in England than in any other country in the world, and for that
very reason. The English are a practical people, and the spell that
gives way most readily before a sum of money is the one that suits them
best. It is not easy for foreigners to understand the English character.
You think that they are fighting to the death over whether their
children shall be taught the gospel according to Queen Elizabeth, or the
gospel according to the London County Council; but when you go among
them, you find that they do not mind what their children are taught, so
long as they do not have to pay for it; that the whole quarrel is over
that; and that quite a number of them are cheerfully sending their
children to schools opened by the cast-out monks and nuns of other
countries, to be taught the gospel according to Ignatius Loyola.

Let us see if we can talk about behaviour without dropping into
sing-song.

It seems to be true that there is hardly anything, from mother-slaying
down to Sabbath-breaking, which one man at one time thinks to be right,
which

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

another man at another time, or even at the same time, does not think to
be wrong. I cannot think of anything which is to-day in one country
punished as a crime which has not been yesterday, or in another country,
practised as a virtue and preached as a religion. In our own time and
country, while every one repeats the same moral *Hic haec hoc*, each one
interprets it to please himself, and keeps it or breaks it as his wishes
prevail over his fears.

In order to learn how men really feel about behaviour there seems to be
no way open but to look past what they are saying to what they are
doing. And accordingly, when I wish to find a moral code that really is
believed in and obeyed, when I want to find the true Levitical law of
the age, I have to put on one side all the Ethical masterpieces, all the
tomes of Moral Philosophy, all the sermons and the tracts, and to begin
with a very humble, and not at all distinguished, treatise calling
itself the *Book of Etiquette*.

The Book of Etiquette is, according to its lights, the book of the
knowledge of good and evil behaviour. It is wonderfully free from
sing-song. It does not use many Andronican words. It does not take high
ground with its readers; it only tells them how they must behave if they
wish to be thought ladies and gentlemen. It utters no threats; it holds
up no punishments. And yet I find there is no lawgiver so willingly
obeyed as the lawgiver who writes this little book. When must I call on
my friends;

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

how many cards must I leave; how many minutes must I stay?—such are the
things I may learn, if I will, from this remarkable book.

The Book of Etiquette is sometimes sneered at for teaching its readers
to ape their betters. But I see nothing to sneer at; and to ape our
betters seems to me a very beautiful thing to do, and a very touching
thing; and I would far rather see my fellows anxious to be thought
ladies and gentlemen, than hear them using words like Humanity and
Brotherhood. I find nothing about bombs in the Book of Etiquette. And if
the people of England should ever look at it from my point of view, they
will sink their differences about Queen Elizabeth, and begin from the
beginning with the Book of Beautiful Behaviour.

For it is a work of a hopeful tendency.

VI

There have been times when I have been tempted to join those good men
who are trying to reform the Church. And then again I have looked at
that lightning conductor, and seen that it was reforming the church
faster than any words of theirs or mine could do. In the end I have
looked round me and found growing up unawares the New Church.

The Club is to the Book of Etiquette what the Church was to theology. It
is the real thing instead

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

of the explanation, the house and not the plan. If we wish to learn how
men feel about behaviour today, we must go to the clubs. They are the
Œcumenical Council of our time, with power to bless and to curse. No one
any longer minds being excommunicated by this or that clerical
authority, but everybody minds being expelled by his club. The old
priesthood no longer dares to beard the sinner by name, if he live any
nearer than Constantinople. The new priesthood takes the sinner by the
scruff of his neck, and thrusts him out.

The new Church does not deal in Andronican language. All its theology
and ethics are summed up in the two short words—*Good Form*. And perhaps
those are the only ethical words in use among us which are never
sing-song. So, while the moral philosophers are writing their moral
codes, and the teachers of ethics are piling up their Mediterranean
words, the clubs have quietly got hold of their own unwritten code, and
are shaping mankind by it.

Now the grand merit which I find in this new church is that it is not a
catholic church. It is the other way about. It is the Exclusive Church.
It does not force the sinner and the dissenter to come in, but tries its
very hardest to keep them outside. And in that I find more hope for
mankind than in any other observation I have made since I came to live
among them.

When we have laid the lesson of the Club to heart, the world will be
changed. We shall no

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

longer try to take the Black Man into the White Man's Club against our
will, nor the Yellow Man against his will. There will be no more great
empires, and no more oppressed nationalities; no more crusades, and
therefore no more pilgrimages of peace. There will be no more laws, and
no more prisons. There will be no more creeds, and no more
catechisms,—and the catechisms are a thousandfold more wicked than the
creeds.

For the Clubs are not all alike, neither are they meant to be all alike.
They are meant to sort out men and women, each into his own Club, to the
end that they may enjoy themselves, without marring the enjoyment of
others. In the long-run they tend to mount in an upward spiral, and to
draw the Rules of Good Manners from the highest Club. And that is how
Hope works in the evolution of behaviour.

The Coming Man is there. He is the member of the highest Club. And, as I
hope, he will be neither the furious enslaver of millionairism, nor the
ticketed and machine-made doll of socialism, neither will he be like the
mad saint of the Dark Age. He will be first and foremost a good-tempered
Man, trying to play the Game according to the Rules, and ever ready to
learn, and to change the Rules of the Club when the Rules of the Game
are being changed by the Man Outside. I foresee that he will not all at
once beat his sword into a ploughshare, but that he will in time put a
button on his foil, and that when he finds he must fight, he will

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

fall on, not spitting and snarling like a beast, but like a gentleman,
raising his sword to the salute, and keeping loyally the Rules of the
Fencing School.

VII

Now I have done putting together these sticks and straws of verihood and
falsehood; and I have woven a nest, but how unlike that dome which only
hope can build! I have woven it, as though round my own mind, and yet it
does not altogether follow the shape of my own mind. So does the bee,
working in the midst of other bees, to fashion its round cell, find at
the last that it has wrought a hexagon, for so has overwrought the bee
outside.

The man outside me all this time has been my Testator, with whom I have
wrought as a faithful. wordsmith, striking blow for blow, to forge upon
the anvil of sense a definition of hope that should ring true in the ear
of the Materialist as well as of the Idealist.

I read this great Bequest as a bequest to Hope, but not to every hope. I
read it as a bequest to the highest hope, and to the Interpretation of
that Hope. I read it as a prayer for Light. I read it as the prayer of
one who walked in darkness, but hoped for light; and as an appeal from
the darkness to the Light.

I have seen an altar to the Unknown God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 21. The Heir](tnw22.md)
