[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](qm03)  [Next](qm05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1602062145/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002I630CY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Quimby Manuscripts*, Phineas Parkhurst Quimby, ed. by Horatio W.
Dresser \[1921\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

# The Quimby Manuscripts

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

### 1

### Biographical Sketch

WHEN a man of ability and influence in the world has been
misrepresented, a golden opportunity is put before us. Once in touch
with his spirit, we may have the good fortune to catch his vision, see
the marvels he might have achieved had he lived until our day, his
genius recognized, his truth made our own. It will not then be necessary
to devote much time to the controversies which have grown up around his
name.

Such an opportunity is put before the truth-loving world in the case of
Phineas Parkhurst Quimby, gone from among us since January 16, 1866. He
was not great as some account greatness. We need not praise him to do
him justice. But he loved his fellowmen, lived and labored, and laid
down his life for them. He was a very genuine lover of truth, and
faithfully stood for a great truth of surpassing value for humanity.
Whoever does this is worthy of our endeavors to put his work in its real
light. Because he was persistently misrepresented, the world demands to
know the full truth about him, and in knowing it may come into surer
possession of his gift to humanity.

Because Dr. Quimby, as he was called by his patients and friends, has
been put in a false light for many years, he is given opportunity to
speak for himself, in his own words, from his letters, manuscripts and
other documents, preserved precisely as he left them. Time has kept for
our purposes everything needed to make the record complete.

Quimby's writings were not meant for publication, although their author
hoped to revise them for a hook, and he had already written experimental
introductions. The lapse of time has brought many changes of thought,
hence notes and explanations are necessary. The therapeutic movement
which

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

grew out of Quimby's pioneer work has also undergone changes. Time has
shown that the original teachings have come to possess a value which
might not have been theirs had they been published fifty years ago. Now
that the teachings are given to the world, many new estimates will be
made. The majority of us are little accustomed to thinking in terms of
inner experience without the embellishments of literary art or the
interpretations of sects and schools; and some effort will be required
to take up the point of view of a writer who wrote precisely as he
thought.

There is little to add to the biographical sketch published by his son
George A. Quimby, in the New England Magazine, March, 1888, so far as
external details are concerned. Quimby was born in Lebanon, New
Hampshire, February 16, 1802. When two years of age his home was moved
to Belfast, Maine, where he spent his boyhood days without noteworthy
incident. The family home remained in Belfast. There Quimby began his
first investigations in mental phenomena. Thither he went for rest and
change in the years of his greatest activities as spiritual healer in
Portland, and there his earthly life came to an end, after more than
twenty years devoted to the type of work which gives him title to fame
among original minds.

His education in the schools was so meagre that he did not learn to
spell and punctuate as most writers do. But when he misspelled he did so
uniformly, and his phonetic spellings are convenient means of
identification in his manuscripts. The same is true of his peculiar use
of words. In one of his papers he says, with reference to his education,
that if he has learning enough to convey his ideas to the world that
will suffice. Had he been granted the opportunity as a young man, he
would naturally have sought the best training in the special sciences,
as that was the tendency of his mind. But there are other sorts of
education which some of us value more. If to be educated is to have
power to quicken in men and women knowledge of themselves, love for
spiritual truth and love for God, then indeed he was educated in high
degree. The significant fact is that with only a common-school
education, and with but slight acquaintance with the ages of human
thought, Quimby made the best use of his powers and grappled with the
greatest problems with clear insight. To see why he came to believe as
he did is to pass far beyond the external

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

facts of his biography, and turn to his inner life with its
outreachings.

Quimby early manifested ability as an inventor, but his mechanical
interests do not explain him. So, too, in his occupation as watch and
clockmaker there is no hint of his peculiar ability in discerning the
human heart. His power as inventor was limited by his interest in
mechanics. Before the period of his experiments in mental phenomena
there is only one incident of any significance recorded, the recovery of
his health in part without the aid of medicine; but even in this case
his meagre account fails to tell us whether the change was in any sense
permanent. It was not until his investigations were well begun that he
wholly regained his health and began to see that health is a spiritual
possession. But in reviewing this introductory period of his life
everything once more depends on what we call education. Inventive or
creative ability, combined with love for facts, the facts and laws of
the special sciences, is a splendid beginning if one is to devote
maturer years to establishing a spiritual science. Perhaps it was
Quimby's love for natural facts which kept him from ignoring the
existence and reality of the natural world, when he became absorbed in
the study of the mind.

Quimby's mind was scientific in the good sense of the term. He did not
stop many years in the domain of mechanics. He was not content with
letters patent as signs of his ability. Nor was he satisfied with
studies in mesmerism, spiritism and kindred phenomena. The impressive
fact is that he continued his researches until he laid the basis for a
new structure in the world of thought. During the period of his
preliminary investigations he read books on the sciences to some extent.
But with the beginning of his life-work he branched out in a new
direction, working entirely alone, amidst opposition and with no books
to help him. His more productive years should therefore be judged by his
high ideal of a spiritual science.

His great love for truth, his desire to prove all things for himself, is
then the most prominent characteristic of his early manhood. Apparently,
those who knew him well in the early years of his life in Belfast saw
nothing peculiar or exceptional in him. Hence there is nothing recorded
that gives us any clue until, putting aside conventional standards of
thought, we seek the man's inner type, the sources of his insight in

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

the Divine purpose. Yet there is an advantage in being known by one's
fellow townsmen as honest, upright, dedicated to practical pursuits, and
by no means peculiar. For when Quimby took up a study that was
unpopular, he was a prophet with honor in his own country. From his home
town he went forth to engage in public experiments, well recommended.
And in his own town he began the practice of spiritual healing, winning
there the reputation which led him to move to Portland, in 1859, and
enlarge his work.

Was he a religious man? In one of his articles he says, "I have been
trying all my life, ever since I was old enough to listen, to understand
the religious opinions of the world, and see if people understand what
they profess to believe." Not finding spiritual wisdom, he was inclined
to be sceptical, and later spent much time setting his patients free
from religious beliefs. George Quimby tells us emphatically that his
father was not religious in the sense in which one might understand the
term religion as applied to organizations, churches and authorized
text-books. We shall see reasons for this distinction as we proceed. But
if to believe profoundly in the indwelling presence of God as love and
wisdom, if to live by this Presence so as to realize its reality vividly
in the practice of spiritual healing, is to be religious, then indeed
few men have been more truly religious than he. Those of us who have
known his chief followers have felt from them a spiritual impetus coming
from his work which surpasses what we have elsewhere met in actual
practice.

After he ceased to experiment with mesmerism, and began to study the
sick intuitively, he took his starting-point in religious matters from
the state in which he found his patients. He found many of them victims
of what we now call the old theology. The priests and ministers of that
theology were to him blind guides. Hence, as he tells us, he made war on
all religious opinions and on all priestcraft. Jesus was to him a
reformer who had overcome all his religion before beginning to establish
"the Truth or Christ." Quimby was very radical in opposing doctrinal
conceptions of Christ. He uniformly called Jesus "a man like ourselves,"
that he might win for the Master new recognition as the founder of
spiritual science. To him "the Science of the Christ" was greater than a
religion.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

Did he allow his own personality to become a centre of interest and
admiration? Not at all. He realized of course that his patients would
look up to him as to any physician who had restored them to health when
there was apparently no hope. So he sometimes freely spoke of his "power
or influence." But this was to divert attention from doctors and
medicines. He then disclosed the way to his great truth, and kept his
"science" steadily before his patient's mind. His manuscripts contain
scarcely a reference to himself save to show what he learned from early
investigations, why lie is not a spiritualist, humbug or quack, and why
he believed man possesses "spiritual senses" in touch with Divine
wisdom. Thus he often speaks of himself in the third person as "P. P.
Q." not "the natural man," but the one who has seen a great truth which
all might understand.

In his constructive period in Portland, Quimby had around him, not
ardent disciples who compared him with the great philosophers or with
Jesus, but a small group who defended him against misrepresentation, and
regarded him as he wished to be regarded, as a lover of truth. His
patients became his special friends, and it was to those most interested
that he gave forth his ideas most freely. The Misses Ware, who did most
of the copying of the manuscripts and made changes in them according to
his suggestions when he heard them read, were especially fitted for this
service, since they brought forward no opinions of their own and were
devoted to this part of the work. So, too, Mr. Julius A. Dresser, who
spent his time after his own recovery, in June, 1860, conversing with
new patients and inquirers, explaining Quimby's theory and methods, was
particularly adapted to aid the great cause to which his life was
dedicated. A few followers wrote brief articles for the press, but none
had the confidence to undertake any elaborate exposition, hoping as they
did that the manuscripts would soon be given to the world and that these
would disclose the new truth in its fulness.

It has been supposed that Quimby did no teaching, and this is true so
far as organized instruction is concerned. But he did the same kind of
teaching that all original men engage in, he conversed with his
followers, speaking out of the fulness of experience and with the force
of native insight. Thus he began the educational part of his treatment
as soon

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

as his patients were in a state of mind to listen responsively. Then he
explained his "Truth" more at length as responsiveness grew and interest
was awakened. Coming out of his office filled with insights from his
latest sitting, he would share his views with interested groups.
Sometimes, too, his essays would be read and the contents discussed. His
writings were loaned to patients and followers who were especially
interested, and after February, 1862, copies of his "Questions and
Answers" were kept in circulation among patients. The Misses Ware and
Mr. Dresser had freer access to the writings and were in a position to
make supplementary explanations. In a way, this is the best sort of
instruction in the world, this teaching by the conversational method
when the works and evidences in question are immediately accessible to
those interested to follow the implied principles and learn all they
can.

This was the way in which the author of "Science and Health" received
her instruction. Mrs. Eddy, then Mrs. Patterson, had the full benefit of
these exceptional opportunities. Soon after she had sufficiently
recovered from her invalidism to give attention to the principles of
which she had witnessed such an impressive demonstration in her own
case, she manifested great interest in the new truths. Mr. Dresser, who
understood Quimby's ideas and methods particularly well, talked at
length with her, and later loaned her Vol. I of the manuscripts, printed
in Chap. XIV. We learn from George Quimby who, as his father's
secretary, was always present, that she talked at length with Dr.
Quimby, in his office, at the close of the silent sittings. She was
present in the groups of interested listeners above referred to. She
heard essays read and discussed. Submitting some of her first attempts
at expressing the new ideas in her own way, she also had the benefit of
Dr. Quimby's criticism. Then too she had opportunity to copy "Questions
and Answers," on which she was later to base her teachings. We have
direct testimony on all these points from those in regular association
with Dr. Quimby, and from those who knew Mrs. Eddy when she was noting
down remembered sayings and modifying manuscripts preparatory to
teaching. Here, in brief, was the origin of Mrs. Eddy's type of
Christian Science as she later gave it forth in successive editions of
"Science and Health."

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Her indebtedness
was that of the student to the teacher with an original mind. Our
interest is to note Quimby's power of quickening such responsiveness by
sharing his insights, contributing his peculiar terms, and explaining
his methods.

The only member of the little group not formerly a patient was Quimby's
son, George. Dr. Quimby hoped that his son would devote himself to "the
Truth," for George had exceptional [opportunities](errata.htm#0) as his
father's secretary during the Portland period to see the fruits of the
new Science. Fortunately for us, George had an exceptional memory for
all important details, he was conscientious to the limit in preserving
the manuscripts until the time should come to fulfil all conditions and
publish them, and his keen sense of humor was oftentimes the saving
grace of the long-drawn-out controversy which began in 1883. He had as
intimate knowledge of his father's teachings and methods as one could
have who had not himself demonstrated them by healing or being healed,
or by teaching. His correspondence with inquirers discloses little
interest in the spiritual side of his father's teachings, and so he
dwells rather on the mental theory of the origin of disease and its
cure. But he well knew that what he calls the "religious" part of Mrs.
Eddy's book and church were her own, not his father's, as greatly
indebted as she was for the ideas and methods without which her work
could never have come to be.

Quimby's followers were remarkably free from; hero-worship. Hence they
did not put down wise sayings to any extent, did not make note of
impressive incidents, and have not handed down material for the
elaborate biography which some have hoped the editor of this book would
write. All this is in perfect keeping with the truth which Quimby
taught. It is disappointing to those who care little except for human
anecdotes. It is taken as a matter of course by those who love truth
above its prophets.

His patients tell us that Quimby had remarkable insight into the
character of the sick. He judged character, not by external signs, not
through reasoning from facts to conclusions, but by silent impressions
gained as he rendered his mind open to discern the real life and "see it
whole." The quest for facts and the inventive ability of his earlier
years became the love for truth regarding his patients and the creative

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

insight of his constructive period. He was in the habit of telling the
truth as he saw it, even if it aroused momentary resentment in the mind
of his patients. If a patient was in bondage to medical or priestly
opinion, he disclosed this servitude with startling directness. He
addressed himself to the real or "scientific" man, summoning the true
self into power.

One of his patients has said, "P. P. Quimby's perceptive powers were
remarkable. He always told his patient at the first sitting what the
latter thought was his disease; and, as he was able to do this, he never
allowed the patient to tell him anything about his case. Quimby would
also continue and tell the patient what the circumstances were which
first caused the trouble, and then explain to him how he fell into his
error, and then from this basis he would prove . . . that his state of
suffering was purely an error of mind, and not what he thought it was.
Thus his system of treating diseases was really and truly a science,
which proved itself. . . . He taught his patients to understand . . .
and \[they were\] instructed in the truth as well as restored to
health." <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

That is to say, Quimby's work, emulating that of Jesus, was fundamental
and central. It began with bodily and mental healing, when this was
called for first, as it was in nearly every instance. It became
spiritual and regenerative if a person desired. For he could not compel
a person to be born anew. He could but disclose the way persuasively.
That his way was indeed persuasive was seen in the case of followers who
came to him as a last resort, deeming him some sort of irregular
practitioner, his method a "humbug," and went away deeply touched by his
spirit and the power of the great truths he had to give.

Some effort will be required to discern his inner type, on the part of
those who have heard adverse opinions circulated about him during the
long controversial years. It is by no means a mere question of doing him
justice at last. He desired no credit, and there is no reason for
underestimating what others have done in order to win recognition for
him. His work and teachings were both like and unlike the teachings and
work of his later followers. He undoubtedly possessed

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

greater intuition and greater healing power than the therapeutists who
have come after him. He did not stop with nervous or functional
diseases, but more often healed organic disorders. A closet full of
canes and crutches left by patients in his office in Portland in the
last years of his practice testified to his remarkable power. His
followers lacked the requisite confidence to try to heal as he did,
while he was still with them. Later, when his ideas and methods began to
become known outside of Maine and New Hampshire, the therapeutists who
took up the work had to depend upon questioning their patients, and some
of the early writers restated the Quimby philosophy in a much more
abstract way.

The reader will see why the Christian Science of Mrs. Eddy's type could
not have come into being without Quimby's work as healer and teacher,
but will as surely see that what Quimby meant by "Science" was something
greater and nobler. What was most original with Quimby was his method of
silent spiritual healing, with its dependence on the Divine presence.
Without this method neither Mrs. Eddy nor any other follower could have
developed the special variations of the theory known as Divine or mental
science. The present-day disciple of mental healing will recognize much
that is familiar in Quimby's writings and will be deeply interested to
learn how it all came to be; but will also notice that the language is
different, and that far-reaching consequences will follow if this theory
is taken seriously.

No ideas of value spring into fulness of being from the human brain. If
we realize that in all discoveries there are periods of groping,
followed by times of readjustment or assimilation, and then a
constructive period, we shall expect the same in the case of Dr. Quimby.
He needed his mechanical interests and his love of invention as
incentives to progress of sufficient power to carry him beyond
allegiance to medical science. Then his interest in mesmerism, awaking
with the beginnings of that subject in 1838, becoming more active in
1840, and leading to his public exhibitions, 1843-47, afforded
opportunity for a yet greater reaction against prevailing points of view
and yielded problems enough for many a year. Next came his intermediate
period, 1847-59, with its gradual assimilation of new-truths, the
development of a new

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

method of treating the sick, and the first expressions of his "Science
of Health." Finally, came the constructive period,
[coincident](errata.htm#1) with the years of his greater work among the
sick, in Portland, 1859-65, and continuing to the time of his death, in
Belfast, January 16, 1866. He was a public experimenter for four years
only. He was a mental and spiritual healer from 1847 through the long
period when he was acquiring his original views about life and health.
Thus we have before us an inner history from small beginnings, in place
of an alleged "revelation."

It will be necessary to give some attention to the mesmeric period,
1843-47, for two reasons. First, because it put Mr. Quimby in possession
of those clues which he was to follow until he rejected the hypotheses
of mesmerism and animal magnetism, and developed a theory and method of
his own; second, because the assertion has been made that he never
passed out of this period, but remained until his death a mere mesmerist
and magnetic healer (whatever that may be). The fact that there was a
long intermediate period, 1847-59, will be a surprise to those who have
supposed that one could suddenly acquire ideas and methods of greatest
value. The fact of a gradual mental and spiritual development will be to
some the conclusive evidence that they are learning the full "true
history" of the discovery of Christian Science.

The "Quimby writings" are now published because they are
[unquestionably](errata.htm#2) the most important contributions to the
subject, because they show how the modern theory and practice of
spiritual healing came into being. From the point of mere arguments in
the light of history these writings were surpassed by the works of Rev.
W. F. Evans, who acquired Quimby's ideas when a patient under his care
in Portland, in 1863. The underlying theory has been greatly elaborated
since his time. The same ideas and methods have been applied in fields
which he did not enter. Quimby was, if you please, a pioneer and
specialist, devoted to truth as his own insight led to it, without
regard to prior teachings save those of the New Testament. But it still
remains impressively significant that entirely alone in an unfriendly
age, he acquired ideas and discovered methods which gave him title to
fame. His writings therefore have a special value of their own.

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

We have incorporated some of Quimby's letters in the volume because they
prepare the way for the articles and essays by showing Quimby's great
love for facts. In these letters Quimby shows himself a friend of the
sick. He tells his patients precisely where they stand in such a way as
to encourage true faith and well-grounded hope. He writes about symptoms
in some detail because his patients must first know that they are
getting well physically, because they need tangible evidence, and do not
yet understand how he can diagnose their cases intuitively and heal them
at a distance. He shows that he wishes those only as patients who will
take him in entire good faith, responding willingly to his efforts.
Hence he returns money when patients seem to be purchasing his skill as
healer. He aims above all to point the way to his Truth or Science.

Disciples of mental healing who have taken their clues from Divine
Science or Mrs. Eddy's version will think they are hearing about an
inferior theory, because matters of fact are made prominent in Quimby's
writings instead of the anticipated idealism and the affirmations or
denials to which they are accustomed. But they are likely to be
unmindful of the unfriendly age in which Quimby worked, if not
neglectful of a larger truth. Quimby, with far-reaching insight, grasped
the whole situation, and looked through existing conditions to the
ideal. This is a much more courageous venture than the denial of
actuality in fondness for the abstract. Quimby's standard calls for a
Science that can be demonstrated, can prove itself thoroughly Christian
in thought, life, interpretation of Scripture, and all. It will send us
back to the Gospel anew to ask why the process of coming to judgment is
essential to spiritual rebirth, why we must adopt life as given in its
fulness in order to entertain as ideal "the Christ." We will then see
why Quimby never denied the existence of the natural world, although
sometimes referring to it as a mere shadow, and contending that matter
contains no intelligence. We will also note that he assigns "mind" to a
very subordinate position in contrast with spirit, since his
investigations had shown him that the average mind is subject to
opinions, it is indeed a "mind of opinions," later called by Mrs. Eddy
"mortal mind." Then we shall find him turning to that Wisdom which sees
through

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

all opinions or errors, dissipating them in favor of Science. The truth
he sought to establish was a concretely verifiable truth, written in the
human heart and in the Word which Jesus taught. Consequently, what was
needed was not mere affirmation but *real understanding*, like workable
knowledge of [mathematics](errata.htm#3).

To read deeply in these writings is to see that the best use one can
make of them is to cultivate the mode of life they call for, a life
which looks forward to health and freedom, productivity and an old age
that is never old. Quimby laid down his life in over-sacrifice to those
needing to be led into this life of the Spirit. His work quickened a
deeply spiritual impetus in those followers who spread his ideas in the
world. It is primarily a question of this spiritual impetus, if we would
understand the discovery of spiritual healing. His teachings are true if
they do indeed contain a Science which inculcates creative humility.

Those who have supposed that Quimby borrowed from Berkeley or Swedenborg
will see why this could not have been the case. Quimby was not a reader
of philosophy or theology. He was not in any sense a borrower, after he
took up the theory of mesmerism and found how meagre was the supposed
science, and branched out into the field of his own investigations. His
experience in practising the silent method of spiritual healing, after
1847, led the way to his idea of God as indwelling Wisdom, as we find it
expressed in his best essays.

This same practice led to his view of matter and the natural world in
general as a subordinate expression of Spirit, in contrast with the
eternal inner life of man. His conversations with patients tended to
awaken faith in the same great Wisdom which to him was the source of all
guidance and all true knowledge. The prime result, he believed, would be
a "Science of Life and Happiness" which could be taught even to
children, and which will banish all error from the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[14:1](qm04.htm#fr_0) J. A. Dresser, in "The True
History of Mental Science," revised edition, p. 23.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. History of the Manuscripts](qm05)
