[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](qm04)  [Next](qm06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1602062145/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002I630CY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Quimby Manuscripts*, Phineas Parkhurst Quimby, ed. by Horatio W.
Dresser \[1921\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

### 2

### History of the Manuscripts

To many it seems strange indeed that the publication of the Quimby
manuscripts has been so long delayed. As far back as 1882, Mr. Julius
Dresser began to make it publicly known in Boston that the writings
existed, and that when published they would disclose the real history of
the discovery of spiritual healing. Naturally, there was a strong desire
to have them published. In his pamphlet, "The True History of Mental
Science," issued in 1887, Mr. Dresser expressed the opinion that "no
such depth of understanding has yet seen the light in print as those
manuscripts contain," that is, on the subject of spiritual healing. It
was not Mr. Dresser's privilege at that time to publish more than one of
the articles, and the best he could do was to give a good reason why Dr.
Quimby had no opportunity to revise the writings before publication
prior to his death.

"I think I see a wisdom in nearly everything," said Mr. Dresser. "If
those writings had been published, as Dr. Quimby intended, or even at
any time since, previous to now, they would have found a public
unprepared for them. Therefore they are in the hands of a person whose
sympathies are not stirred by a work in the truth, as some of ours are,
to issue them before their time. But those manuscripts will be published
at a future day."

We had a copy of the manuscripts in the household until 1893, when by
arrangement with Mr. George Quimby, the owner, this copy was sent to
Belfast to be kept with the other copies. The household copy was used in
connection with instruction in classes, and from time to time portions
of the articles were read in the classes on spiritual healing. But we
were not permitted to give the writings further publicity. We frequently
urged their owner to publish them, but Mr. Quimby did not believe the
right time had come. When we compiled "The Philosophy of P. P. Quimby,"
in 1895, we

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

were still unable to secure the right to print more than brief excerpts
from two of the manuscript volumes, since Mr. Quimby did not wish any
essay printed in full till all the chief writings should be published.
Many efforts were made as the years passed to secure further privileges.
Mr. Quimby was frequently besought by interested people, clergymen,
writers, healers and editors, some of whom traveled to Belfast to argue
the point. Mr. Quimby answered all letters courteously, sometimes giving
his reasons at length, and explaining his father's ideas; but he stoutly
refused to publish the writings.

Many rumors could have been denied had he relented. For example, it
could have been conclusively shown that nothing whatever was settled by
a suit in court in 1883 concerning these writings, for the simple reason
that the owner declined to have them taken into court. Ever since that
suit took place rumors have been persistently started to the effect that
the writings were proved not to exist. Again, it would have been shown
once for all in what respects Mrs. Eddy was indebted to Dr. Quimby for
ideas and methods. Many misunderstandings have arisen because the
writings were not published, and all these must now gradually be cleared
away, as matters are put in their true light by the publication of the
present volume.

Mr. Quimby gave abundant evidence to honest inquirers to show that he
actually possessed the writings, and that they were genuine. But it was
still necessary for those of us who knew the facts at first hand to
explain the matter to those who came to inquire. With one exception we
had not seen any of the manuscript books between 1893 and 1921, and
inquirers had to take our word for it that the writings existed.

Although there was a tacit understanding between us with regard to the
publication of the writings when certain conditions should be fulfilled,
Mr. Quimby died several years ago without making provision for the
disposition of them. When "A History of the New Thought Movement" was
published, in 1919, I could do no more than express the hope that I
might print the manuscripts at some future time. At last the way opened
in December, 1920, for the publishing of those portions of the writings
which have historical or permanent value. Mr. Quimby wished his father's
Mss. to be published when their truth could be established without
[further](errata.htm#4) controversies

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

or misstatements. He knew that I was acquainted with their history from
the beginning, knew those who copied the writings, knew that they were
authentic, and that they were not the "first scribblings" of any other
person. It was the wish of the family that I should do the editing and
annotating.

As the statement has been made that some one else served as Dr. Quimby's
secretary, revising and copying his manuscripts for him, or giving him
her own writings, it is necessary to state once more that his son George
was the secretary during the period in question, in Portland, 1859-60,
while the copying was done either by him or by the Misses Ware, of
Portland. George Quimby explained how this came about in his article in
the *New England Magazine*, March, 1888. His statement is as follows:

"Among his earlier patients in Portland were the Misses Ware, daughters
of the late Judge Ashur Ware, of the United States Supreme Court; and
they became much interested in 'the Truth,' as he called it. But the
ideas were so new, and his reasoning so divergent from the popular
conceptions, that they found it difficult to follow him or remember all
he said; and they suggested to him the propriety of putting into writing
the body of his thoughts.

"From that time on he began to write out his ideas, which practice he
continued until his death, the articles now being in the possession of
the writer of this sketch. The original copy he would give to the Misses
Ware; and it would be read to him by them, and, if he suggested any
alteration, it would be made, after which it would be copied by the
Misses Ware or the writer of this; and then reread to him, that he might
see that all was just as he intended it. Not even the most
[trivial](errata.htm#5) word or the construction of a sentence would be
changed without consulting him. He was given to repetition; and it was
with difficulty that he could be induced to have a repeated sentence or
phrase [stricken](errata.htm#6) out, as he would say, 'If that idea is a
good one, and true, it will do no harm to have it in two or three
times.'"

It will be seen then with what care the exact wishes of Dr. Quimby were
carried out. The manuscript books were loaned to some extent by the
Misses Ware, Mrs. Sabine and Mr. Dresser, but only when they deemed it
wise and under conditions.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The copies were
kept in security after Dr. Quimby's death so that their teachings should
be given to people who appreciated them, and so that they should not be
published before the right time. Thus the few came to know that they
existed. From the Misses Ware we had abundant opportunity to learn the
method of producing and copying the writings as above described.

Mr. A. J. Swarts, one of the pioneers of the movement now known as New
Thought, took pains to investigate the facts in order to clear away
misapprehensions which prevailed concerning the discovery of Christian
Science. Mr. Swarts had nothing against Mrs. Eddy nor any reason for
defending Dr. Quimby except to bring out the truth. After visiting
Belfast, where he had opportunity to read excerpts from the press
concerning Quimby's work and to hear portions of the manuscripts read by
George Quimby, Mr. Swarts published his findings in the *Mental Science
Magazine*, Chicago, April, 1888. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)
Learning that the facts of her indebtness to Quimby were becoming known
through the endeavors of Mr. Swarts, Mrs. Eddy sent from Boston over her
own signature to the *Portland Daily Press*, while Mr. Swarts was in
Portland, a paid article called an "Important Offer." Among other
things, Mrs. Eddy offered to pay the cost of printing the Quimby
manuscripts, the qualification being, in Mrs. Eddy's own words,
"provided that I am allowed first to examine said manuscripts, and that
I find they were P. P. Quimby's own compositions, and not mine that were
left with him many years ago, or that they have not since his death, in
1865, been stolen from my published works." Inasmuch as everything
depended on her own decision, of course no attention was paid to this
offer. Readers interested to follow this controversy in detail will be
able to do so by means of the summary in the Appendix. They will then
see that with the publication of this volume the matter has become one
of "internal evidence," since the writings show plainly that they were
produced by a mind of Dr. Quimby's type as that mind has been
characterized by those who knew him intimately, hence that the
manuscripts could not have been the products of the one who claimed to
have written them.

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

Most of the writings were produced prior to October 1862, the later
articles being mostly repetitions of earlier statements and on the whole
not so clear. All the significant terms and expressions such as Science,
Science or Christ, Science of Health, the Science of Life and Happiness,
were in regular use by 1861. No patient of Quimby's could have explained
to him in 1862 that there was a "deeper principle" than magnetism or
mesmerism underlying his cures, for he had come to that conclusion
himself in 1847, when he gave up his former practice. Nor would this
patient have undertaken to explain away his "manipulations," because she
knew that the occasional rubbing of the head was no essential part of
the treatment. In The *Evening Courier* and the *Portland Advertiser*,
Mrs. Eddy committed herself publicly to the view that Quimby's works
were wrought by the Christ-principle, in contrast with the idea that he
healed as did spiritists, mesmerisers and magnetic healers. After
Quimby's death she made good this view of his work by writing her "Lines
on the Death of Dr. P. P. Quimby, who healed with the Truth that Christ
taught, in contradistinction to all isms." The internal evidences show
that this estimate was the true one, and that every adverse opinion
since circulated has been created since 1872.

The most important date in the whole history might be called January 7,
1921, when there came into the editor's hands the entire collection of
letters, original writings, copies, and the other material so carefully
preserved since the death of Dr. Quimby. I went through the entire
collection in the spirit of fresh investigation. Some of the material I
had never seen, and the collection proved richer in valuable data than I
had thought. The rest I had not seen for twenty-seven years, with the
exception referred to above. I give the facts concerning all this
material as thus found.

The material consisted of the following: (1) Original manuscripts of
articles and letters in P. P. Quimby's handwriting, with his own
spelling, <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) and no changes made by any
other hand; (2) 6 manuscript books containing revised articles copied by
the Misses Ware and George Quimby, with emendations made here and there
by these writers under the direction

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

of Dr. Quimby; (3) 3 sets of manuscript books containing the copies
formerly belonging to Miss Sarah Ware, Mrs. Sabine (formerly Miss S. M.
Deering, Dr. Quimby's patient), and Julius A. Dresser; (4) a manuscript
book of pieces by Dr. Quimby prior to 1856, Dr. Quimby's letters to
patients, 1860, and Miss Emma Ware's catalogue of all the articles,
1859-65; (5) the private journal of Lucius Burkmar, 1843, Quimby's
"subject" in his mesmeric period; (6) miscellaneous notes, letters and
articles in separated sheets, copied from the originals on these sheets
before being copied into books; (7) letters of patients to Dr. Quimby,
including 14 by Mrs. Eddy, then Mrs. Patterson, and letters by Dr.
Patterson; (8) Quimby's letters to patients after 1860; (9) 3 copies for
circulation of Quimby's "Answers to Questions," 1862, with George
Quimby's note on one of them that these were written before Mrs. Eddy
visited Mr. Quimby as patient; and (10) newspaper scrapbook of articles
about Dr. Quimby, 1840-65. There was also placed at my disposal the
entire correspondence between George Quimby and inquirers and critics,
as well as all newspaper and magazine articles on the Christian Science
controversy to date. And the material put into my hands was all that had
existed, save that it was customary to destroy articles in their first
form after they had been revised in consultation with the Misses Ware
and copied as before indicated. P. P. Quimby's handwriting is
distinctive, unmistakable, as the facsimiles show. So too is that of
Miss Emma Ware, Miss Sarah Ware and George Quimby.

Having all the material at hand, every page or line of it whatsoever, I
am able not only to corroborate all statements made by George Quimby
concerning the manuscripts, but to state facts which he did not mention
in print. I have read carefully through all the original manuscripts,
which were copied by George Quimby and the Misses Ware, and have taken
note in conscientious detail to see if any revisions or changes were in
the handwriting of Mrs. Eddy, then Mrs. Patterson: *there is not a page,
a sentence or word that bears evidence of any such thing*, all revisions
or changes having been made by the Misses Ware as already described.
There is not anywhere a page or even a line of her own by Mrs.
Patterson-Eddy, no "first scribblings." Her name is not written on the
back of any page. Nor is there any evidence of any idea

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

that might have been suggested by her, had she been in a state to make
any suggestions of value. Instead, there is an assemblage of writings
that would have filled her mind with chagrin had she realized how fully
Quimby's ideas were developed, long before she ever saw him. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) There is all the material any one could
desire to make the argument [irrefragable](errata.htm#7).

The writings were plainly the work of one mind, with continuity of
thought from first to last. Even the unfinished fragments are of
interest, for they indicate the state of mind of their author. Dr.
Quimby tells us that he frequently wrote when "excited" by learning how
greatly his patients had suffered from bondage to priestcraft.
Consequently at times he did not even capitalize the first personal
pronoun, but started in at once with the main idea. Quimby wrote as he
thought. If his thought comprised several subjects at once, he wrote so,
seldom pausing to indicate paragraphs. The copyists would then suggest
changes here and there to bring out his meaning, not to interpose any
view of their own; for they knew his thought exceedingly well, his
peculiar use of words, and whatever was part of his style. The titles
were suggested in conference with the author, although some of the
articles remained unnamed till after Quimby's death, and a few bear more
than one title in different stages of revision. The dates were entered
in the book when the articles were copied.

With his characteristic humor, George Quimby sometimes wrote at the
close of an article copied on detached pages, "Finished, thank the Lord;
G. Q., scribe." If there were miscellaneous pages of notes or any other
statement by herself or her sister, Miss Emma Ware was careful to write
on the margin, "Not Dr. Quimby's." All these little matters are
significant, for they show the fidelity of those who did their part to
transmit these writings intact. A few of the articles were copied after
Quimby's death, by Miss Emma Ware. In some of the copy-books a few
alterations had been made, under Dr. Quimby's direction, with a view to
preparing the articles for a book. Two pages from Vol. I as thus revised
are reproduced in facsimile at the end of this volume.

The originals and first copies were kept in his safe by George Quimby,
and the other copies referred to above were

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

returned to Mr. Quimby after the death of their sometime owners.
Visitors and correspondents would labor to persuade him that he was
keeping the truth from the world. But he believed he was faithful to the
greater good in withholding the writings until the last echo of the
controversy had died away. After his death the writings were kept in
storage in a bank, and there they remained secure until January
1921. <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[22:1](qm05.htm#fr_1) Reprinted in "The True
History of Mental Science," revised edition, 1899.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[23:1](qm05.htm#fr_2) See the facsimile of George
Quimby's writing on the wrapper at the end of this volume.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[25:1](qm05.htm#fr_3) See, for example, Chap.
XIV, containing Vol. I.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[26:1](qm05.htm#fr_4) For a complete list of the
pieces and articles, see Appendix. The package of articles and pieces on
separate sheets mentioned above bears this inscription on the outside,
"First copies from Father's original manuscripts, afterwards copied into
blank books by Emma G. Ware, Sarah Ware, George A. Quimby." This is
written in George Quimby's hand. The complete list of the articles is in
the handwriting of Miss Emma Ware.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. Quimby's Restoration to Health](qm06)
