[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vlsng36)  [Next](vlsng38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XXXV.

## The Dreams of the Wives of the Giukings.

So when men had drunk their fill, they fared to sleep; then falls
Kostbera to beholding the runes, and spelling over the letters, and sees
that beneath were other things cut, and that the runes are guileful, yet
because of her wisdom she had skill to read them aright. So then she
goes to bed by her husband; but when they awoke, she spake unto Hogni--

"Thou art minded to wend away from home--ill-counselled is that; abide
till another time! Scarce a keen reader of runes art thou, if thou
deemest thou hast beheld in them the bidding of thy sister to this
journey: lo, I read them the runes, and had marvel of so wise a woman as
Gudrun is, that she should have miscut them; but that which lieth
underneath beareth your bane with it,--yea, either she lacked a letter,
or others have dealt guilefully with the runes.

"And now hearken to my dream; for therein methought there fell in upon
us here a river exceeding strong, and brake up the timbers of the hall."

He answered, "Full oft are ye evil of mind, ye women, but for me, I was
not made in such wise as to meet men with evil who deserve no evil;
belike he will give us good welcome."

She answered, "Well, the thing must ye yourselves prove, but no
friendship follows this bidding:--but yet again I dreamed that another
river fell in here with a great and grimly rush, and tore up the dais of
the hall, and brake the legs of both you brethren; surely that
betokeneth somewhat."

He answers, "Meadows along our way, whereas thou didst dream of the
river; for when we go through the meadows, plentifully doth the seeds of
the hay hang about our legs."

"Again I dreamed," she says, "that thy cloak was afire, and that the
flame blazed up above the hall."

Says he, "Well, I wot what that shall betoken; here lieth my fair-dyed
raiment, and it shall burn and blaze, whereas thou dreamedst of the
cloak."

"Methought a bear came in," she says, "and brake up the king's
high-seat, and shook his paws in such a wise that we were all adrad
thereat, and he gat us all together into the mouth of him, so that we
might avail us naught, and thereof fell great horror on us."

He answered, "Some great storm will befall, whereas thou hadst a white
bear in thy mind."

"An erne methought came in," she says, "and swept adown the hall, and
drenched me and all of us with blood, and ill shall that betoken, for
methought it was the double of King Atli."

He answered, "Full oft do we slaughter beasts freely, and smite down
great neat for our cheer, and the dream of the erne has but to do with
oxen; yea, Atli is heart-whole toward us."

And therewithal they cease this talk.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVI: Of the Journey of the Giukings to King
Atli.](vlsng38)
