[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vlsng12)  [Next](vlsng14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XI.

## Of King Sigmund's last Battle, and of how he must yield up his Sword again.

There was a king called Eylimi, mighty and of great fame, and his
daughter was called Hjordis, the fairest and wisest of womankind; and
Sigmund hears it told of her that she was meet to be his wife, yea if
none else were. So he goes to the house of King Eylimi, who would make a
great feast for him, if so be he comes not thither in the guise of a
foe. So messages were sent from one to the other that this present
journey was a peaceful one, and not for war; so the feast was held in
the best of wise and with many a man thereat; fairs were in every place
established for King Sigmund, and all things else were done to the aid
and comfort of his journey: so he came to the feast, and both kings hold
their state in one hall; thither also was come King Lyngi, son of King
Hunding, and he also is a-wooing the daughter of King Eylimi.

Now the king deemed he knew that the twain had come thither but for one
errand, and thought withal that war and trouble might be looked for from
the hands of him who brought not his end about; so he spake to his
daughter, and said--

"Thou art a wise woman, and I have spoken it, that thou alone shalt
choose a husband for thyself; choose therefore between these two kings,
and my rede shall be even as thine."

"A hard and troublous matter," says she; "yet will I choose him who is
of greatest fame, King Sigmund to wife albeit he is well stricken in
years."

So to him was she betrothed, and King Lyngi gat him gone. Then was
Sigmund wedded to Hjordis, and now each day was the feast better and
more glorious than on the day before it. But thereafter Sigmund went
back home to Hunland, and King Eylimi, his father-in-law, with him, and
King Sigmund betakes himself to the due ruling of his realm.

But King Lyngi and his brethren gather an army together to fall on
Sigmund, for as in all matters they were wont to have the worser lot, so
did this bite the sorest of all; and they would fain prevail over the
might and pride of the Volsungs. So they came to Hunland, and sent King
Sigmund word how that they would not steal upon him and that they deemed
he would scarce slink away from them. So Sigmund said he would come and
meet them in battle, and drew his power together; but Hjordis was borne
into the wood with a certain bondmaid, and mighty wealth went with them;
and there she abode the while they fought.

Now the vikings rushed from their ships in numbers not to be borne up
against, but Sigmund the King, and Eylimi set up their banners, and the
horns blew up to battle; but King Sigmund let blow the horn his father
erst had had, and cheered on his men to the fight, but his army was far
the fewest.

Now was that battle fierce and fell, and though Sigmund were old, yet
most hardily he fought, and was ever the foremost of his men; no shield
or byrny might hold against him, and he went ever through the ranks of
his foemen on that day, and no man might see how things would fare
between them; many an arrow and many a spear was aloft in air that day,
and so his spae-wrights wrought for him that he got no wound, and none
can tell over the tale of those who fell before him, and both his arms
were red with blood, even to the shoulders.

But now whenas the battle had dured a while, there came a man into the
fight clad in a blue cloak, and with a slouched hat on his head,
one-eyed he was, \[1\] and bare a bill in his hand; and he came against
Sigmund the King, and have up his bill against him, and as Sigmund smote
fiercely with the sword it fell upon the bill and burst asunder in the
midst: thenceforth the slaughter and dismay turned to his side, for the
good-hap of King Sigmund had departed from him, and his men fell fast
about him; naught did the king spare himself, but the rather cheered on
his men; but even as the saw says, "No might 'gainst many", so was it
now proven; and in this fight fell Sigmund the King, and King Eylimi,
his father-in-law, in the fore-front of their battle, and therewith the
more part of their folk.

 

ENDNOTES:

\[1\] Odin coming to change the ownership of the sword he had given
Sigmund. See Chapter 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII: Of the Shards of the Sword Gram, and how Hjordis
went to King Alf.](vlsng14)
