[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vlsng06)  [Next](vlsng08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER V.

## Of the Slaying of King Volsung.

Now tells the tale of King Volsung and his sons that they go at the time
appointed to Gothland at the bidding of King Siggeir, and put off from
the land in three ships, all well manned, and have a fair voyage, and
made Gothland late of an evening tide.

But that same night came Signy and called her father and brothers to a
privy talk, and told them what she deemed King Siggeir was minded to do,
and how that he had drawn together an army no man may meet. "And," says
she, "he is minded to do guilefully by you; wherefore I bid you get ye
gone back again to your own land, and gather together the mightiest
power ye may, and then come back hither and avenge you; neither go ye
now to your undoing, for ye shall surely fail not to fall by his wiles
if ye turn not on him even as I bid you."

Then spake Volsung the king, "All people and nations shall tell of the
word I spake, yet being unborn, wherein I vowed a vow that I would flee
in fear from neither fire nor the sword; even so have I done hitherto,
and shall I depart therefrom now I am old? Yea withal never shall the
maidens mock these my sons at the games, and cry out at them that they
fear death; once alone must all men need die, and from that season shall
none escape; so my rede is that we flee nowhither, but do the work of
our hands in as manly wise as we may; a hundred fights have I fought and
whiles I had more, and whiles I had less, and yet even had I the
victory, nor shall it ever be heard tell of me that I fled away or
prayed for peace."

Then Signy wept right sore, and prayed that she might not go back to
King Siggeir, but King Volsung answered--

"Thou shalt surely go back to thine husband, and abide with him,
howsoever it fares with us."

So Signy went home, and they abode there that night but in the morning,
as soon as it was day, Volsung bade his men arise and go aland and make
them ready for battle; so they went aland, all of them all-armed, and
had not long to wait before Siggeir fell on them with all his army, and
the fiercest fight there was betwixt them; and Siggeir cried on his men
to the onset all he might; and so the tale tells that King Volsung and
his sons went eight times right through Siggeir's folk that day, smiting
and hewing on either hand, but when they would do so even once again,
King Volsung fell amidst his folk and all his men withal, saving his ten
sons, for mightier was the power against them than they might withstand.

But now are all his sons taken, and laid in bonds and led away; and
Signy was ware withal that her father was slain, and her brothers taken
and doomed to death, that she called King Siggeir apart to talk with
her, and said--

"This will I pray of thee, that thou let not slay my brothers hastily,
but let them be set awhile in the stocks, for home to me comes the saw
that says, "Sweet to eye while seen": but longer life I pray not for
them, because I wot well that my prayer will not avail me."

Then answered Siggeir:

"Surely thou art mad and witless, praying thus for more bale for thy
brothers than their present slaying; yet this will I grant thee, for the
better it likes me the more they must bear, and the longer their pain is
or ever death come to them."

Now he let it be done even as she prayed, and a mighty beam was brought
and set on the feet of those ten brethren in a certain place of the
wild-wood, and there they sit day-long until night; but at midnight, as
they sat in the stocks, there came on them a she-wolf from out the wood;
old she was, and both great and evil of aspect; and the first thing she
did was to bite one of those brethren till he died, and then she ate him
up withal, and went on her way.

But the next morning Signy sent a man to the brethren, even one whom she
most trusted, to wot of the tidings; and when he came back he told her
that one of them was dead, and great and grievous she deemed it, if they
should all fare in like wise, and yet naught might she avail them.

Soon is the tale told thereof: nine nights together came the she-wolf at
midnight, and each night slew and ate up one of the brethren, until all
were dead, save Sigmund only; so now, before the tenth night came, Signy
sent that trusty man to Sigmund, her brother, and gave honey into his
hand, bidding him do it over Sigmund's face, and set a little deal of it
in his mouth; so he went to Sigmund and did as he was bidden, and then
came home again; and so the next night came the she-wolf according to
her wont, and would slay him and eat him even as his brothers; but now
she sniffs the breeze from him, whereas he was anointed with the honey,
and licks his face all over with her tongue, and then thrusts her tongue
into the mouth of him. No fear he had thereof, but caught the she-wolf's
tongue betwixt his teeth, and so hard she started back thereat, and
pulled herself away so mightily, setting her feet against the stock that
all was riven asunder; but he ever held so fast that the tongue came
away by the roots, and thereof she had her bane.

But some men say that this same she-wolf was the mother of King Siggeir,
who had turned herself into this likeness by troll's lore and
witchcraft.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI: Of how Signy sent the Children of her and Siggeir to
Sigmund.](vlsng08)
