<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](nop06)  [Next](nop08) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues*, by W. Wynn Westcott,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

# PART IV.

## THE INDIVIDUAL NUMERALS.

### THE MONAD. 1.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> number One or the Monad has been
defined by the mathematician Theon of Smyrna as "the principal and
element of numbers, which while multitute can be lessened by
subtraction, is itself deprived of every number and remains stable and
firm"; hence as number it is indivisible, it remains immutable, and even
multiplied into itself remains itself only, since once one is still one,
and the monad multiplied by the monad remains the immutable monad to
infinity. It remains by itself among numbers, for no number can be taken
from it, or separated from its unity. Proclus observed: "The first monad
is the world itself; the second is the inerratic sphere; then thirdly
succeed the spheres of the planets, each a unity; then lastly are the
spheres of the elements which are also Monads"; and these as they have a
perpetual subsistence are called wholenesses—*holotetes* in Greek.

The Monad, Unity, or the number One received very numerous meanings.
Photius tells us that the Pythagoreans gave it the following names:—

1\. God, the First of all things, the maker of all things.

2\. Intellect, the source of all ideas.

3\. Male and Female—both together produce all things; from the odd
proceed both odd and even.

4\. Matter, the last development of universality.

5\. Chaos, which resembles the infinite, indifferentiation.

6\. Confusion. 7. Commixion. 8. Obscurity, because

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

in the Ineffable principle of things, of which it is the image, all is
confused, vague and in darkness.

9\. A Chasm, as a void.

10\. Tartarus, from its being at the lowest extremity, is dissimilarly
similar to God, at the highest end of the series.

11\. The Styx, from its immutable nature.

12\. Horror, the ineffable, is perfectly unknown and is therefore
terrible.

13\. Void of Mixture, from the simplicity of the nature of the
ineffable.

14\. Lethe, oblivion, ignorance.

15\. A Virgin, from the purity of its nature.

16\. Atlas, it connects, supports, and separates all things.

17\. The Sun. 18. Apollo. 19. Pyralios, dweller in fire. 20. Morpho. 21.
The Axis. 22. Vesta, or the fire in the centre of the earth. 23.
Spermatic Reason. 24. "The point within a circle," "the Central Fire
Deity."

The lingam, an upright pillar, was its Hindoo symbol.

The Monad being esteemed the Father of numbers is the reason for the
universal prejudice in favour of Odd Numbers over Even ones, which are
but copies of the first even number the Dyad, or universal Mother; the
father being more esteemed than the mother, for "Might."

Odd numbers were given to the greater Gods, and even ones to the
inferior and terrestrial deities.

The number one is represented in the Roman and Arabic systems, by an
upright simple line, but in many old systems whose numerals were their
letters, we find that almost universally the letter A, from being chosen
to commence the set of letters, had the task of representing the Monad.

In Numeration, note that the Romans began with lines, I, II, III, IIII,
and then followed the Acute Angle V for 5, then for ten this was doubled
X, for fifty the angle was laid down and became L, for a hundred, two
fifties, one inverted became C, for five hundred C and L became D.

Hermias, the Christian philosopher, author of "Ridicule of the Gentile
Philosophers," quotes from the Pythagoreans;

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "The Monad is the
Beginning of all things"—"*arche ton panton he monas*."

The figure of one signifies identity, equality, existence and
preservation, it signifies living man" alone among animals "erect"; on
adding a head we make of it P, the sign of creative Power (paternity,
phallus, Pan, the Greek gods and Priapus, all commencing with the
vocable P).

Another dash added, and we have man walking, advancing, with foot set
forward, in the letter R, which signifies "fens," "iturus," or
"advancing."

Compare Unity, *solus*, alone, the unique principle of good; with *Sol*,
Sun God, the emblem of supreme power; and they are identical.

The Hebrew word for One is AChD, achad, and it is often put for God;
God's One voice to man is the *Bath Kol*, the echo or daughter of the
Divine Voice.

The Talmud in Berachoth vi. 1 says that the Shekinah shall rest even
upon One who studies the Law. One pang of remorse is of more avail for
reformation than many stripes.

One thing obtained with difficulty is more valued than a hundred
obtained with ease. Talmud.

It is indiscreet for one man to sleep in a house alone, for fear that he
may be attacked by Lilith, who was said to have been Adam's first wife;
she is the Night Spectre, and has also power over newly-born infants who
are not protected by an Amulet.

Rabbi Nathan exhorted—"Repent One day before thy death"; a wise maxim
inculcating the duty of being ever prepared; every day some advance in
knowledge and goodness should be attained.

Ever work and ever pray, "for the road winds upward all the way," as the
Lord Buddha taught in ancient India.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Dyad. 2.](nop08)

</div>
