<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](nop02)  [Next](nop04) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues*, by W. Wynn Westcott,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

### PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION, 1902.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> first edition of this little book has
been long out of print, and for several years I have been asked to
enlarge it, but until the present time sufficient leisure has not been
found to collect the additional matter which seemed desirable.

This essay on Numbers now appears as Volume IX. of my Series entitled
"Collectanea Hermetica," of which it seems to form a suitable part, and
I am hopeful that it may be as well received by students of mystic
philosophy as the previous volumes which treated of Alchemy, in the
Hermetic Arcanum, Hermetic Art, Euphrates and Aesch Metzareph; the Dream
of Scipio and the Golden verses of the Pythagoreans, the Pymander of
Hermes and Egyptian Magic.

I have added in this edition many notes on the notions of the Rabbis of
Israel, both from those who contributed to the Mishnah and Gemara of the
Talmuds of Jerusalem and of Babylon, and from the Rabbis who made
special study of the Kabalah. Only a few Talmudic treatises have as yet
appeared in the English language, and hardly any Kabalistic tracts,
except three from the Zohar or Book of Splendour, viz., the Siphra
Dtzenioutha, the Idra Rabba and the Idra Suta. A few others are to be
read in German and French translations. Many Talmudic and Kabalistic
quotations may, however, be found in J. P. Stehelin's Rabbinical
Literature of 1748; in John Allen's "Modern

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Judaism," 1816,
and in works on the Kabalah by Adolph Franck and Christian Ginsburg,
while Hershon has published Hebraic lore in his "Talmudic Miscellany,"
and "Genesis according to the Talmud."

The "Midrash ha Zohar" of D. H. Joel, Leipzig, 1849, narrates the
relation between the Kabalah and Platonism, Neo-Platonism, Greek
philosophy and the Zoroastrian doctrines of the Parsees.

Perhaps the oldest extant Kabalistic Book is the "Sepher Yetzirah," or
"Book of Formation," an English translation of which has appeared in
three editions from the Author's own pen. The fundamentals of the
numerical Kabalistic ideas on creation are laid down in that treatise;
it has also been printed both in French and German, and there is an
American edition.

Upon the mathematical aspect of Numbers, readers may consult for further
detail the works of Gauss, "Disquisitiones Arithmeticæ," 1801; Legendre,
"Théorie des Nombres," 1830; W. G. O. Smith, "Reports on the Theory of
Numbers," in the "Transactions of the British Association," 1859; James
Ozanam, "Mathematical Recreations," 1710, translated by Hutton in 1814;
Snart, "The Power of Numbers"; and Barlow's "Investigations of the
Theory of Numbers."

For further information on Hindoo philosophy, see "The Theosophical
Glossary" of H. P. Blavatsky, the works of Tukaram Tatya, and modern
translations of the Vedas, Puranas and Upanishads, also Rama Prasad's
"Nature's Finer Forces."

"Lamaism in Tibet," 1895, by Dr Laurence Austine Waddell, is a very
learned work; it contains a vast store of information on the numerical
occult lore of the Lamas and Buddhists.

Upon Egyptian Numbers consult the works of E. A. Wallis Budge; Flinders
Petrie; Sir John Gardner Wilkinson; "Life in Ancient Egypt," by Adolf
Erman; and "Egyptian Belief," by James Bonwick. Mystics will find much
food for thought in the Yi-King, a very curious product of ancient
Chinese lore. The Gnostic philosophy

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

has a deep numerical basis, and the works of C. W. King and G. R. S.
Mead may be suitably studied.

Many volumes of "Bijou Notes and Queries" have been published by S. C.
Gould of Manchester, U.S.A., and these are full of numerical ideas.

I am prepared to find that critics will declare this volume to be an
undigested collection of heterogeneous information, still I prefer to
leave the data in their present form; for there is a scheme of
instruction running through it, which will be recognised by students of
certain schools, and others will be able to find a basis for a general
knowledge of numbers viewed from the standpoint of occult science.

W. W. W.

### PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION, 1911.

<span class="smallcaps">A few</span> corrections have been made, and
interesting notes have been added; many of these have been supplied by
my pupils and fellow-students of the Rosicrucian Society.

W. W. W.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part I. Pythagoras, his Tenets and his Followers](nop04)

</div>
