<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](nop14)  [Next](nop16) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues*, by W. Wynn Westcott,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

### THE OGDOAD. 8.

Is the first cube of energy, and is the only evenly even number within
the decad. The Greeks thought it an all-powerful number; they had a
Proverb "all things are eight."

Camerarius, in his edition of the Arithmetic of Nicomachus, calls it
Universal Harmony, because musical ratios are distinguished by this
number.

The Ratio of 9 to 8 is sesquioctave, this forms a tone and is attributed
to the Moon.

Mercury.

12 to 9 is sesquitertian

12 to 8 is sesquialter

Venus.

16 to 12 is sesquitertian

16 to 8 is duple

Sun.

18 to 12 is sesquialter.

18 to 9 is duple

Mars.

21 to 9 is duple sesquitertian

Attributed to Jupiter.

24 to 18 is sesquitertian

24 to 12 is duple.

24 to 8 is triple

18 to 12 sesquialter

12 to 8 sesquialter

Saturn.

32 to 24 sesquitertian

32 to 8 quadruple

Are ascribed to the 8th or Inerratic Sphere which comprehends all the
rest.

36 to 24. sesquialter

36 to 18 duple

36 to 8 quadruple

24 to 18 sesquitertian

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

Hence the Ogdoad was also called "Cadmeia," because Harmony was looked
upon as the wife of Cadmus; and Cadmus meant the Sub-lunary World, as
Olympiodorus says. Eight was called also Mother, and Rhea, Cybele and
Dindymene, from being the first cube, and a cube representing the earth.

The eight persons saved from the flood of Xisuthrus are synonyms of many
octaves of gods, such as the 8 Cabiri great gods of Samothrace; see
Bryant and Faber on this myth.

There are 8 Beatitudes of the Christian religion, Matthew, chap. v.

Eight is the number of the Moons of Saturn.

There have been several Masonic orders concerned with this Noachite
Ogdoad, as the Prussian masons, Knights of the Royal Axe, or Prince of
Libanus, the Noachites, and the Royal Ark Mariners, which is a
subsidiary order to the Mark Master Masons.

Macrobius says the Ogdoad was the type of Justice, because it consists
of evenly even numbers, and on account of its equal divisions.

John Heydon tells us that 8 Events befall the Damned, and that there are
8 rewards of the Blessed.

The number 8 was sacred to Dionysos, who was born at the 8th month; the
isle of Naxos was dedicated to him and it was granted to the women of
Naxos, that their children born in the 8th month should live, whereas it
is usual for such to die, although those born in either the 7th or the
9th month are usually reared.

The Jews were accustomed to practise Circumcision on male infants upon
the 8th day after birth.

The Jews at the Chanucah or Feast of Dedication lit 8 candles, and it
lasted 8 days. This is the Engkainia of John x. 22. As to conjuring
among the ancient Jews, it is said in Talmud, Succah. 53. 1, that Levi
played with 8 knives; Samuel in the presence of the King Sapor of Persia
used 8 cups, and Abaji before Rabbi Rava used 8 eggs.

Eight prophets were descended from Rahab the Harlot,

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

viz., Neraiah, Seraiah, Maasiah, Jeremiah, Hilkiah, Hannemeel, and
Shallum. Note also that Huldah the prophetess was the grandchild of
Rahab.

The last 8 verses of Deuteronomy, The Mosaic Law, The Pentateuch, were
written by Joshua. Bava Bathra, 14. 1.

Rabbi Nathan states that there were 8 sects of the Pharisees: but both
of the Talmuds (Jerusalem and Babylon) name only seven. It is prophesied
that the Harps which will be played on earth before the Messiah will
have 8 strings. Erachin, 13. 2.

As seven was the number of the original Creation, so 8, says W. F. Shaw,
may be considered as the Day of Regeneration. Eight souls were saved in
the Ark of Noah, and Noah was the 8th in descent, his name was NVCh = 8
times 8 = 64.

888 is the special number of Jesus Christ as "He who is the Resurrection
and the Life." He is the great opponent of the 666, the number of the
Beast, the number of a Man.

The ancient Chinese writings refer to 8 musical sounds, the Pah-yin. (G.
Schlegel.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Ennead. 9.](nop16)

</div>
