[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omy04)  [Next](omy06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766144569/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002JTWO8Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Oriental Mysticism*, by E.H. Palmer, \[1867\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

# PART I.

### CHAPTER I.

#### OF THE TRAVELLER, THE GOAL, THE STAGES, AND THE ROAD.

<span class="margnote">The Traveller.</span>THE Traveller in the path of
mystic philosophy is the Perceptive Sense, which as it becomes further
developed results in Intelligence, not however the intelligence of life,
but such as is described in the words of Mohammed, "Intelligence is
light in the heart, distinguishing between truth and vanity, not the
intelligence of life." After a time our traveller merges into Divine
Light, but of the thousands who start upon the road scarcely one attains
thereunto. <span class="margnote">The Goal.</span> The Goal is the
Knowledge of God, and the acquisition of this knowledge is the work of
Divine Light alone, Perception or worldly intelligence having no lot or
portion therein. The latter is represented as the sovereign of this
world, and the perceptive faculties are the executive officers of his
rule, to whom both the cultivation and devastation of the face of the
earth is due. The idea is suggested by the following passage of the
Corán: "When God said to the angels, I am about to place a vicegerent

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

in the earth, they said, Wilt thou place therein one who shall commit
abomination and shed blood? Nay; we celebrate Thy praise and holiness.
God answered them, Verily I know what ye wot not of." (Cor. cap. 2, v.
28.) Which answer implies that God knew that although such might even be
the conduct of the bulk of mankind, there would still be some who should
receive the Divine Light and attain to a knowledge of Him; so that it is
clear that the object <span class="margnote">Object of Philosophical
Inquiry.</span> of the creation of existent beings was that God should
be known. Existence was made for man, and man for the knowledge of God.
To the same purport is the answer given to David, "David enquired and
said, Oh Lord! why hast thou created mankind? God said, I am a hidden
treasure, and I would fain become known <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)." The business of the Traveller then is to
exert himself and strive to attain to the Divine light, and so to the
knowledge of God; and this is to be achieved by associating with the
wise. The received notion of the "stages" in the "road," involves <span
class="margnote">The stages and the road.</span> a paradox, the disciple
who asks concerning them being told that there is not even a single
stage, nay more, not even a road at all. This statement is differently
explained by two sects, the Sufis and the *Ahl i Wahdat*, whom I shall
call the Unitarians. The Sufis say that there is no road from man to
God, because the nature of God is illimitable and infinite, without
beginning or end or even direction. There is not a single atom of
existent things with which

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> God is not and
which God does not comprise: "Are they not in doubt concerning the union
with their Lord? doth he not comprise everything?" (Cor. cap. 42, v.
54.) Nor is there aught that he does not comprehend with his knowledge:
"Verily God comprehendeth all things with his knowledge." (Cor. cap. 42,
v. 54.) The Traveller who has not attained to this Divine Light can have
no lot or portion with God, but those who have reached it gaze always
upon His face; they go not forth by day and retire not to rest at night
without an abashed consciousness that God is present every where; for
with Him they live, and in Him they act.

The whole universe compared with the majesty of God is as a drop in the
ocean, nay infinitely less than this. But Perception or Intelligence can
never lead to this conviction, or reveal this glorious mystery; that is
the province of the Divine Light alone. Such is the Sufiistic
explanation of the proposition, "There is no road from man to God."

<span class="margnote">Unitarian Interpretation of the preceding.</span>
The Unitarians interpret it as follows. They hold that existence is not
independent, but is of God; that besides the existence of God there is
no real existence, nor can there possibly be: for that which exists not,
cannot exist of itself, but that which does exist, exists of itself, and
that which is self-existent is God.

When man imagines that be has an existence other than the existence of
God he falls into a grievous error and sin; yet this error and sin is
the only road from man to God; for until the Traveller has

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

passed over this he cannot reach God. A certain Sufi poet has said,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Plant one foot on the neck of self,  
  The other in thy Friend's domain;  
In everything His presence see,  
  For other vision is in vain.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> That is, whilst
you are looking up to self you cannot see God, but when you are not
looking up to self all that you see is God. Such is the Unitarian
solution of the proposition that "there is no road from man to God,"
namely that the error of imagining an existence separate from God is the
only road to Him; the stages on this road are innumerable, and some
philosophers even assert that it has no end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[5:1](omy05.htm#fr_2) Cf. Sale's Corán,
Preliminary Discourse, p. 97.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Of Law, Doctrine and Truth](omy06)
