[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omy01)  [Next](omy03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766144569/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002JTWO8Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Oriental Mysticism*, by E.H. Palmer, \[1867\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

### PREFACE.

THE following work is founded upon a Persian MS. treatise by ’Azíz bin
Mohammed Nafasí <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0), but I have
endeavoured to give a clearer and more succinct account of the system
than would have been afforded by a mere translation. The term Súfí is
derived from the Arabic word *súf* "wool," in allusion to the dress
adopted by the Dervishes, who are the master and teachers of the sect;
the similarity to the Greek σοφὸς appears to be merely accidental. The
system of the Sufis consists in endeavouring

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

to reconcile Philosophy with Revealed Religion, and in assigning a
mystical and allegorical interpretation to all religious doctrines and
precepts. These tenets are found principally among the Shi’ites, or
followers of ’Ali, and appear to have existed in Islamism from its very
foundation; indeed the expression of the Corán, "I am the Truth" (Hacc),
is the first principle of the system. They may be considered as forming
the esoteric doctrine of that creed <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1).
Steering a mid course between the pantheism of India on the one hand and
the deism of the Corán on the other, the Sufis’ cult is the religion of
beauty, where heavenly perfection is considered under the imperfect type
of earthly loveliness. Their principal writers are the lyric poets,
whose aim is to elevate mankind to the contemplation of spiritual
things, through the medium of their most impressionable feelings. This
habit of contemplation, which is so constantly inculcated by them,
requiring as it does retirement and seclusion for its due exercise,
inclines the followers of the system somewhat towards asceticism, but in
countries where luxury is the idol of the many, we may not unnaturally
look

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

for a protest against it in the tendencies of the few. My present
intention is merely to give an exposition of the system; its origin and
history I reserve for a future work, in which I hope to prove that
Sufiism is really the development of the Primæval Religion of the Aryan
race. The *Ahl i wahdat* form a branch of Sufiism, rather than a
separate sect of Theosophists; they insist upon the Universality and
Unity of God. I have translated the title "Unitarian," although I am
sensible that misapprehension may arise in consequence of its current
application to the professors of a particular form of modern belief. I
should have preferred the use of some such term as *Monopantachists* had
I possessed sufficient courage or position to warrant me in coining so
formidable an epithet. The term may be generally understood of those
Mussulmans, who, though pursuing philosophical enquiry, refuse to
subscribe unreservedly to all the metaphysical doctrines of the Súfís.

The expression *zát i Khudá*, "the Nature of God," by which the Persians
designate the very essence and being of the Deity, would, perhaps
(according to the general use of the word *zát* in construction with a
proper name), be more idiomatically rendered "God Himself;" but as this
treatise

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

professes to deal in exactitudes investigated from an Oriental point of
view, I have preferred keeping to the original idiom as more definitely
expressing the idea.

In conclusion, I have only to acknowledge my obligation to Mr C. A.
Hope, of St John's College, for his valuable assistance afforded me in
preparing this book for the press.

E. H. PALMER.

<span class="small">ST JOHN'S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[ix:1](omy02.htm#fr_0) The *Maksad i Aksá* or
"Remotest Aim." Vide *Hajji Khalfa*, ed. Flügel, Vol. VI. p. 90. This
work was originally written in Turkish and translated into Persian by
Khwárazím Shah. Some fragments of it were edited in Turkish and Latin by
A. Müller, Brandenburg, 1663. The copy I have made use of forms part of
a volume containing miscellaneous Persian and Turkish treatises on
Philosophical and Religious subjects, presented by Adam Bowen to the
Library of Trinity College, Cambridge. It is marked R. 13. 32. in the
Catalogue.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[x:1](omy02.htm#fr_1) Cf. *La Poesie
philosophique et religieuse chez les Persans*, par M. Garcin de Tassy,
p. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](omy03)
