[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gcot10)  [Next](gcot12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0262580020/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Garden Cities of To-morrow*, by Ebenezer Howard, \[1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

### Chapter Nine

#### Some Difficulties Considered

'Watt was often consulted about supposed inventions and discoveries, and
his invariable reply was to recommend that a model should be formed and
tried. This he considered as the only true test of the value of any
novelty in mechanics.'—*Book of Days*.

'Selfish and contentious men will not cohere, and without coherence
nothing can be accomplished.'—CHARLES DARWIN, *Descent of Man* (1871).

'The difficulty felt about Communism, or even about any fairly complete
Socialism, is that it interferes with man's freedom to make demands for
his many-sided nature, and to endeavour to satisfy those demands. It
secures bread to all, perhaps, but it ignores the doctrine that man
shall not live by bread alone. The future probably lies with those who,
instead of pitting against one another, Socialism and Individualism,
will seek to realize a true, vital, organic conception of Society and of
the State in which both Individualism and Socialism will have their
proper share. The bark which carries civilized man with his fortunes
will thus steer an even course between the Scylla of anarchy and the
Charybdis of despotism.'—*Daily Chronicle*, 2nd July 1894.

Having now, in a concrete rather than an abstract form, stated the
objects and purposes of our scheme, it may be well to deal, though
somewhat briefly, with an objection which may arise in the thought of
the reader: 'Your scheme may be very attractive, but it is but one of a
great number, many of which have been tried and have met with but little
success. How do you distinguish it from those? How, in the face of such
a record of failure, do you expect to secure that large measure of
public support which is necessary ere such a scheme can be put into
operation?'

The question is a very natural one, and demands an answer. My reply is:
It is quite true that the pathway of experiment towards a better state
of society is strewn with failures. But so is the pathway of experiment
to any result that is worth achieving.

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Success is, for
the most part, built on failure. As Mrs. Humphry Ward remarks in *Robert
Elsmere*: 'All great changes are preceded by numbers of sporadic, and,
as the bystander thinks, intermittent efforts.' A successful invention
or discovery is usually a slow growth, to which new elements are added,
and from which old elements are removed, first in the thought of the
inventor, and subsequently in an outward form, until at last precisely
the right elements and no others are brought together. Indeed, it may be
truly said that if you find a series of experiments continued through
many years by various workers, there will eventually be produced the
result for which so many have been industriously searching.
Long-continued effort, in spite of failure and defeat, is the forerunner
of complete success. He who wishes to achieve success may turn past
defeat into future victory by observing one condition. He must profit by
past experiences, and aim at retaining all the strong points without the
weaknesses of former efforts.

To deal at all exhaustively here with the history of social experiments
would be beyond the scope of this book; but a few leading features may
be noticed with a view of meeting the objection with which this chapter
opens.

Probably the chief cause of failure in former social experiments has
been a misconception of the principal element in the problem—human
nature itself. The degree of strain which average human nature will bear
in an altruistic direction has not been duly considered by those who
have essayed the task of suggesting new forms of social organization. A
kindred mistake has arisen from regarding one principle of action to the
exclusion of others. Take Communism, for instance. Communism is a most
excellent principle, and all of us are Communists in some degree, even
those who would shudder at being told so. For we all believe in
communistic roads, communistic parks, and communistic libraries. But
though Communism is an excellent principle, Individualism is no less
excellent. A great orchestra which enraptures us with its delightful
music is composed of men and women who are accustomed not only to play
together, but to practise separately, and to delight themselves and
their friends by their own, it may be comparatively, feeble efforts.
Nay, more: isolated and individual thought and action are as essential,

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

if the best results of combination are to be secured, as combination and
co-operation are essential, if the best results of isolated effort are
to be gained. It is by isolated thought that new combinations are worked
out; it is through the lessons learned in associated effort that the
best individual work is accomplished; and that society will prove the
most healthy and vigorous where the freest and fullest opportunities are
afforded alike for individual and for combined effort.

Now, do not the whole series of communistic experiments owe their
failure largely to this—that they have not recognized this duality of
principle, but have carried one principle, excellent enough in itself,
altogether too far? They have assumed that because common property is
good, all property should be common; that because associated effort can
produce marvels, individual effort is to be regarded as dangerous, or at
least futile, some extremists even seeking to abolish altogether the
idea of the family or home. No reader will confuse the experiment here
advocated with any experiment in absolute Communism.

Nor is the scheme to be regarded as a socialistic experiment.
Socialists, who may be regarded as Communists of a more moderate type,
advocate common property in land and in all the instruments of
production, distribution, and exchange—railways, machinery, factories,
docks, banks, and the like; but they would preserve the principle of
private ownership in all such things as have passed in the form of wages
to the servants of the community, with the proviso, however, that these
wages shall not be employed in organized creative effort, involving the
employment of more than one person; for all forms of employment with a
view to remuneration should, as the Socialists contend, be under the
direction of some recognized department of the Government, which is to
claim a rigid monopoly. But it is very doubtful whether this principle
of the Socialist, in which there is a certain measure of recognition of
the individual side of man's nature as well as of his social side,
represents a basis on which an experiment can fairly proceed with the
hope of permanent success. Two chief difficulties appear to present
themselves. First, the self-seeking side of man—his too frequent desire
to produce, with a view to possessing for his own personal

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

use and enjoyment; and, secondly, his love of independence and of
initiative, his personal ambition, and his consequent unwillingness to
put himself under the guidance of others for the whole of his working
day, with little opportunity of striking out some independent line of
action, or of taking a leading part in the creation of new forms of
enterprise.

Now, even if we pass over the first difficulty—that of human
self-seeking—even if we assume that we have a body of men and women who
have realized the truth that concerted social effort will achieve far
better results in enjoyable commodities for each member of the community
than can possibly be achieved by ordinary competitive methods—each
struggling for himself—we have still the other difficulty, arising out
of the higher and not the lower nature of the men and women who are to
be organized—their love of independence and of initiative. Men love
combined effort, but they love individual effort, too, and they will not
be content with such few opportunities for personal effort as they would
be allowed to make in a rigid socialistic community. Men do not object
to being organized under competent leadership, but some also want to be
leaders, and to have a share in the work of organizing; they like to
lead as well as to be led. Besides, one can easily imagine men filled
with a desire to serve the community in some way which the community as
a whole did not at the moment appreciate the advantage of, and who would
be precluded by the very constitution of the socialistic state from
carrying their proposals into effect.

Now, it is at this very point that a most interesting experiment at
Topolobampo has broken down. The experiment, which was initiated by Mr.
A. K. Owen, an American civil engineer, was started on a considerable
tract of land obtained under concession from the Mexican Government. One
principle adopted by Mr. Owen was that 'all employment must be through
the Department for the Diversity of Home Industries. One member cannot
directly employ another member, and only members can be employed through
the settlement.' <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22.md) In other words, if
A. and B. were dissatisfied with the management,

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

whether owing to doubts as to its competency or honesty, they could not
arrange to work with each other, even though their sole desire might be
the common good; but they must leave the settlement. And this is what
they accordingly did in very considerable numbers.

It is at this point that a great distinction between the Topolobampo
experiment and the scheme advocated in this work is evident. In
Topolobampo the organization claimed a monopoly of all productive work,
and each member must work under the direction of those who controlled
that monopoly, or must leave the organization. In Garden City no such
monopoly is claimed, and any dissatisfaction with the public
administration of the affairs of the town would no more necessarily lead
to a widespread split in Garden City than in any other municipality. At
the outset, at least, by far the larger part of the work done will be by
individuals or combinations of individuals quite other than municipal
servants, just as in any other municipality, at present existing, the
sphere of municipal work is still very small as compared with the work
performed by other groups.

Other sources of failure in some social experiments are the considerable
expense incurred by migrants before they reach the scene of their future
labours, the great distance from any large market, and the difficulty of
previously obtaining any real knowledge of the conditions of life and
labour there prevailing. The one advantage gained—cheap land—seems to be
altogether insufficient to compensate for these and other disadvantages.

We now come to what is perhaps the chief difference between the scheme
advocated in this work and most other schemes of a like nature which
have been, hitherto advocated or put into actual practice. That
difference is this: While others have sought to weld into one large
organization individuals who have not yet been combined into smaller
groups, or who must leave those smaller groups on their joining the
larger organization, my proposal appeals not only to individuals but to
co-operators, manufacturers, philanthropic societies, and others
experienced in organization, and with organizations under their control,
to come and place themselves under conditions involving no new
restraints but rather securing wider freedom. And, further, a striking
feature of the present scheme is that the very considerable

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

number of persons already engaged on the estate will not be displaced
(except those on the town site, and these gradually), but these will
themselves form a valuable nucleus, paying in rents, from the very
inception of the enterprise, a sum which will go very far towards the
interest on the money with which the estate is purchased—rents which
they will be more willing to pay to a landlord who will treat them with
perfect equity, and who will bring to their doors consumers for their
produce. The work of organization is, therefore, in a very large measure
accomplished. The army is now in existence; it has but to be mobilized;
it is with no undisciplined mob that we have to deal. Or the comparison
between this experiment and those which have preceded it is like that
between two machines—one of which has to be created out of various ores
which have first to be gathered together and then cast into various
shapes, while for the other all the parts are ready to hand and have but
to be fitted together.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[115:1](gcot11.htm#fr_22.md) A. K. Owen, *Integral
Co-operation at Work* (U.S. Book Co., 150 Worth St., N.Y., 1885).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Ten. A Unique Combination of Proposals](gcot12.md)
