[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gcot13)  [Next](gcot15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0262580020/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Garden Cities of To-morrow*, by Ebenezer Howard, \[1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

### Chapter Twelve

#### Social Cities

'Human nature will not flourish, any more than a potato, if it be
planted and replanted for too long a series of generations in the same
worn-out soil. My children have had other birthplaces, and, so far as
their fortunes may be within my control, shall strike their roots into
unaccustomed earth.'—NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE, *The Scarlet Letter*.

'The question which now interests people is, What are we going to do
with democracy now that we have got it? What kind of society are we
going to make by its aid? Are we to see nothing but an endless vista of
Londons and Manchesters, New Yorks and Chicagos, with their noise and
ugliness, their money-getting, their "corners" and "rings", their
strikes, their contrasts of luxury and squalor? Or shall we be able to
build up a society with art and culture for all, and with some great
spiritual aim dominating men's lives?'—*Daily Chronicle*, 4th March
1891.

The problem with which we have now to deal, shortly stated, is this: How
to make our Garden City experiment the stepping stone to a higher and
better form of industrial life generally throughout the country. Granted
the success of the initial experiment, and there must inevitably arise a
widespread demand for an extension of methods so healthy and so
advantageous; and it will be well, therefore, to consider some of the
chief problems which will have to be faced in the progress of such
extension.

It will, I think, be well, in approaching this question, to consider the
analogy presented by the early progress of railway enterprise. This will
help us to see more clearly some of the broader features of the new
development which is now so closely upon us if only we show ourselves
energetic and imaginative. Railways were first made without any
statutory powers. They were constructed on a very small scale, and,
being of very short lengths, the consent of only one or at the most a
few landowners was necessary; and what private agreement and arrangement
could thus easily compass was scarcely a fit subject for an appeal

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

to the Legislature of the country. But when the 'Rocket' was built, and
the supremacy of the locomotive was fully established, it then became
necessary, if railway enterprise was to go forward, to obtain
legislative powers. For it would have been impossible, or at least very
difficult, to make equitable arrangements with all the landowners whose
estates might lie between points many miles distant; because one
obstinate landlord might take advantage of his position to demand an
altogether exorbitant price for his land, and thus practically stifle
such an enterprise. It was necessary, therefore, to obtain power to
secure the land compulsorily at its market value, or at a price not too
extravagantly removed from such value; and, this being done, railway
enterprise went forward at so rapid a rate that in one year no less than
£132,600,000 was authorized by Parliament to be raised for the purpose
of railway construction. <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32.md)

Now, if Parliamentary powers were necessary for the extension of railway
enterprise, such powers will certainly be also needed when the inherent
practicability of building new, well-planned towns, and of the
population moving into them from the old slum cities as naturally, and,
in proportion to the power to be exercised, almost as easily as a family
moves out of a rotten old tenement into a new and comfortable dwelling,
is once fairly recognized by the people. To build such towns, large
areas of land must be obtained. Here and there a suitable site may be
secured by arrangement with one or more landowners, but if the movement
is to be carried on in anything like a scientific fashion, stretches of
land far larger than that occupied by our first experiment must be
obtained. For, just as the first short railway, which was the germ of
railway enterprise, would convey to few minds the conception of a
network of railways extending over the whole country, so, perhaps, the
idea of a well-planned town such as I have described will not have
prepared the reader for the later development which must inevitably
follow—the planning and building of town clusters—each town in the
cluster being of different design from the others, and yet the whole
forming part of one large and well-thought-out plan.

Let me here introduce a very rough diagram, representing, as

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I conceive, the
true principle on which all towns should grow. Garden City has, we will
suppose, grown until it has reached a population of 32,000. How shall it
grow? How shall it provide for the needs of others who will be attracted
by its numerous advantages? Shall it build on the zone of agricultural
land which is around it, and thus for ever destroy its right to be
called a 'Garden City'? Surely not. This disastrous result would indeed
take place if the land around the town were, as is the land around our
present cities, owned by private individuals anxious to make a profit
out of it. For then, as the town filled up, the agricultural land would
become 'ripe' for building purposes, and the beauty and healthfulness of
the town would be quickly destroyed. But the land around Garden City is,
fortunately, not in the hands of private individuals: it is in the hands
of the people: and is to be administered, not in the supposed interests
of the few, but in the real interests of the whole community. Now, there
are few objects which the people so jealously guard as their parks and
open spaces; and we may, I think, feel confident that the people of
Garden City will not for a moment permit the beauty of their city to be
destroyed by the process of growth. But it may be urged—if this be true,
will not the inhabitants of Garden City in this way be selfishly
preventing the growth of their city, and thus preclude many from
enjoying its advantages? Certainly not. There is a bright, but
overlooked, alternative. The town will grow; but it will grow in
accordance with a principle which will result in this—that such growth
shall not lessen or destroy, but ever add to its social opportunities,
to its beauty, to its convenience. Consider for a moment the case of a
city in Australia which in some measure illustrates the principle for
which I am contending. The city of Adelaide, as the accompanying [sketch
map](#img_diag04.md) shows, is surrounded by its 'Park Lands'. The city is
built up. How does it grow? It grows by leaping over the 'Park Lands'
and establishing North Adelaide. And this is the

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

<span id="img_diag04"></span>

[![ADELAIDE AND ITS LANDS](tn/diag04.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/diag04.jpg.md)  
ADELAIDE AND ITS LANDS  

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

principle which it is intended to follow, but improve upon, in Garden
City.

Our diagram may now be understood. Garden City is built up. Its
population has reached 32,000. How will it grow? It will grow by
establishing—under Parliamentary powers probably—another city some
little distance beyond its own zone of 'country', so that the new town
may have a zone of country of its own. I have said 'by establishing
another city', and, for administrative purposes there would be two
cities; but the inhabitants of the one could reach the other in a very
few minutes; for rapid transit would be specially provided for, and thus
the people of the two towns would in reality represent one community.

And this principle of growth—this principle of always preserving a belt
of country round our cities would be ever kept in mind till, in course
of time, we should have a cluster of cities, not of course arranged in
the precise geometrical form of my diagram, but so grouped around a
Central City that each inhabitant of the whole group, though in one
sense living in a town of small size, would be in reality living in, and
would enjoy all the advantages of, a great and most beautiful city; and
yet all the fresh delights of the country—field, hedgerow, and
woodland—not prim parks and gardens merely—would be within a very few
minutes' walk or ride.' And *because the people in their collective
capacity own the land* on which this beautiful group of cities is built,
the public buildings, the churches, the schools and universities, the
libraries, picture galleries, theatres, would be on a scale of
magnificence which no city in the world whose land is in pawn to private
individuals can afford.

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

<span id="img_diag05"></span>

[![CORRECT PRINCIPLE OF A CITY'S GROWTH](tn/diag05.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/diag05.jpg.md)  
CORRECT PRINCIPLE OF A CITY'S GROWTH  

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

I have said that rapid railway transit would be realized by those who
dwell in this beautiful city or group of cities. Reference to the
diagram will show at a glance the main features of its railway system.
There is, first, an inter-municipal railway, connecting all the towns of
the outer ring—twenty miles in circumference—so that to get from any
town to its most distant neighbour requires one to cover a distance of
only ten miles, which could be accomplished in, say, twelve minutes.
These trains would not stop between the towns—means of communication for
this purpose being afforded by electric tramways which traverse the high
roads, of which, it will be seen, there are a number—each town being
connected with every other town in the group by a direct route.

There is also a system of railways by which each town is placed in
direct communication with Central City. The distance from any town to
the heart of Central City is only three and a quarter miles, and this
could be readily covered in five minutes.

Those who have had experience of the difficulty of getting from one
suburb of London to another will see in a moment what an enormous
advantage those who dwell in such a group of cities as here shown would
enjoy, because they would have a railway *system* and not a railway
*chaos* to serve their ends. The difficulty felt in London is of course
due to want of forethought and pre-arrangement. On this point, I may
quote with advantage a passage from the Presidential address of Sir
Benjamin Baker to the Institute of Civil Engineers, 12th November 1895:
'We Londoners often complain of the want of system in the arrangement of
the railways and their terminal stations in and around the Metropolis,
which necessitates our performing long journeys in cabs to get from one
railway system to another. That this difficulty exists, arises, I feel
sure, chiefly from the want of forethought of no less able a statesman
than Sir Robert Peel, for, in 1836, a motion was proposed in the House
of Commons that all the Railway Bills seeking powers for terminals in
London should be referred to a Special Committee, so that a complete
scheme might be evolved out of the numerous projects before Parliament,
and that property might not be unnecessarily sacrificed for rival
schemes. Sir Robert Peel opposed the motion on the part of the
Government, on the grounds

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

that "no railway project could come into operation till the majority of
Parliament had declared that its principles and arrangements appeared to
them satisfactory, and its investments profitable. It was a recognized
principle in these cases that the probable profits of an undertaking
should be shown to be sufficient to maintain it in a state of permanent
utility before a Bill could be obtained, and landlords were perfectly
justified in expecting and demanding such a warranty from Parliament."
In this instance, incalculable injury was unintentionally inflicted upon
Londoners by not having a grand central station in the Metropolis, and
events have shown how false was the assumption that the passing of an
Act implied any warranty as to the financial prospects of a railway.'

But are the people of England to suffer for ever for the want of
foresight of those who little dreamed of the future development of
railways? Surely not. It was in the nature of things little likely that
the first network of railways ever constructed should conform to true
principles; but now, seeing the enormous progress which has been made in
the means of rapid communication, it is high time that we availed
ourselves more fully of those means, and built our cities upon such some
plan as that I have crudely shown. We should then be, for all purposes
of quick communication, nearer to each other than we are in our crowded
cities, while, at the same time, we should be surrounding ourselves with
the most healthy and the most advantageous conditions.

Some of my friends have suggested that such a scheme of town clusters is
well enough adapted to a new country, but that in an old-settled
country, with its towns built, and its railway 'system' for the most
part constructed, it is quite a different matter. But surely to raise
such a point is to contend, in other words, that the existing wealth
forms of the country are permanent, and are forever to serve as
hindrances to the introduction of better forms: that crowded,
ill-ventilated, unplanned, unwieldy, unhealthy cities—ulcers on the very
face of our beautiful island—are to stand as barriers to the
introduction of towns in which modern scientific methods and the aims of
social reformers may have the fullest scope in which to express
themselves. No, it cannot be; at least, it cannot be for long. What Is

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

may hinder What Might Be for a while, but cannot stay the tide of
progress. These crowded cities have done their work; they were the best
which a society largely based on selfishness and rapacity could
construct, but they are in the nature of things entirely unadapted for a
society in which the social side of our nature is demanding a larger
share of recognition—a society where even the very love of self leads us
to insist upon a greater regard for the well-being of our fellows. The
large cities of today are scarcely better adapted for the expression of
the fraternal spirit than would a work on astronomy which taught that
the earth was the centre of the universe be capable of adaptation for
use in our schools. Each generation should build to suit its own needs;
and it is no more in the nature of things that men should continue to
live in old areas because their ancestors lived in them, than it is that
they should cherish the old beliefs which a wider faith and a more
enlarged understanding have outgrown. The reader is, therefore,
earnestly asked not to take it for granted that the large cities in
which he may perhaps take a pardonable pride are necessarily, in their
present form, any more permanent than the stage-coach system which was
the subject of so much admiration just at the very moment when it was
about to be supplanted by the railways. <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33.md) The simple issue to be faced, and faced
resolutely, is: Can better results be obtained by starting on a bold
plan on comparatively virgin soil than by attempting to adapt our old
cities to our newer and higher needs? Thus fairly faced, the question
can only be answered in one way; and when that simple fact is well
grasped, the social revolution will speedily commence.

That there is ample land in this country on which such a cluster as I
have here depicted could be constructed with *comparatively* small
disturbance of vested interests, and, therefore, with but little need
for compensation, will be obvious to anyone; and, when our first
experiment has been brought to a successful issue, there will be no
great difficulty in acquiring the necessary Parliamentary powers to
purchase the land and carry out the necessary works step by step. County
Councils are now seeking larger powers, and an overburdened Parliament
is be-

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

coming more and more anxious to devolve some of its duties upon them.
Let such powers be given more and more freely. Let larger and yet larger
measures of local self-government be granted, and then all that my
diagram depicts—only on a far better plan, because the result of
well-concerted and combined thought—will be easily attainable.

But it may be said, 'Are you not, by thus frankly avowing the very great
danger to the vested interests of this country which your scheme
indirectly threatens, arming vested interests against yourself, and so
making any change by legislation impossible?' I think not. And for three
reasons. First, because those vested interests which are said to be
ranged like a solid phalanx against progress, will, by the force of
circumstances and the current of events, be for once divided into
opposing camps. Secondly, because property owners, who are very
reluctant to yield to threats, such as are sometimes made against them
by Socialists of a certain type, will be far more ready to make
concessions to the logic of events as revealing itself in an undoubted
advance of society to a higher form; and, thirdly, because the largest
and most important, and, in the end, the most influential of all vested
interests—I mean the vested interests of those who work for their
living, whether by hand or brain—will be naturally in favour of the
change when they understand its nature.

Let me deal with these points separately. First, I say vested-property
interests will be broken in twain, and will range themselves in opposite
camps. This sort of cleavage has occurred before. Thus, in the early
days of railway legislation, the vested interests in canals and stage
coaches were alarmed, and did all in their power to thwart and hamper
what threatened them. But other great vested interests brushed this
opposition easily on one side. These interests were chiefly two—capital
seeking investment, and land desiring to sell itself. (A third vested
interest —namely, labour seeking employment—had then scarcely begun to
assert its claims.) And notice now how such a successful experiment as
Garden City may easily become will drive into the very bed-rock of
vested interests a great wedge, which will split them asunder with
irresistible force, and permit the current of legislation to set
strongly in a new direction. For what will such an experiment have
proved up to the very hilt? Among

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

other things too numerous to mention, it will have proved that far more
healthy and economic conditions can be secured on raw uncultivated land
(if only that land he held on just conditions) than can be secured on
land which is at present of vastly higher market value; and in proving
this it will open wide the doors of migration from the old crowded
cities with their inflated and artificial rents, back to the land which
can be now secured so cheaply. Two tendencies will then display
themselves. The first will be a strong tendency for city ground values
to fall, the other a less marked tendency for agricultural land to
rise. <span id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34.md) The holders of agricultural
land, at least those who are willing to sell—and many of them are even
now most anxious to do so—-will welcome the extension of an experiment
which promises to place English agriculture once again in a position of
prosperity: the holders of city lands will, so far as their merely
selfish interests prevail, greatly fear it, In this way, landowners
throughout the country will be divided into two opposing factions, and
the path of land reform—the foundation on which all other reforms must
be built—will be made comparatively easy.

Capital in the same way will be divided into opposite camps. Invested
capital—that is, capital sunk in enterprises which society will
recognize as belonging to the old order—will take the alarm and fall in
value enormously, while, on the other hand, capital seeking investment
will welcome an cutlet which has long been its sorest need. Invested
capital will in its opposition be further weakened by another
consideration. Holders of existing forms of capital will strive—even
though it be at a great sacrifice—to sell part of their old
time-honoured stocks, and invest them in new enterprises, on municipally
owned land, for they will not wish to 'have all their eggs in one
basket'; and thus will the opposing influences of vested property
neutralize each other.

But vested-property interests will be, as I believe, affected yet more
remarkably in another way. The man of wealth, when he is personally
attacked and denounced as an enemy of society, is slow to believe in the
perfect good faith of those who denounce

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

him, and, when efforts are made to tax him out by the forcible hand of
the State, he is apt to use every endeavour, lawful or unlawful, to
oppose such efforts, and often with no small measure of success. But the
average wealthy man is no more an unmixed compound of selfishness than
the average poor man; and if he sees his houses or lands depreciated in
value, not by force, but because those who lived in or upon them have
learned how to erect far better homes of their own, and on land held on
conditions more advantageous to them, and to surround their children
with many advantages which cannot be enjoyed on his estate, he will
philosophically bow to the inevitable, and, in his better moments, even
welcome a change which will involve him in far greater pecuniary loss
than any change in the incidence of taxation is likely to inflict. In
every man there is some measure of the reforming instinct; in every man
there is some regard for his fellows; and when these natural feelings
run athwart his pecuniary interests, then the result is that the spirit
of opposition is inevitably softened, in some degree in all men, while
in others it is entirely replaced by a fervent desire for the country's
good, even at the sacrifice of many cherished possessions. Thus it is
that what will not be yielded to a force from without may readily be
granted as the result of an impulse from within.

And now let me deal for a moment with the greatest, the most valuable,
and the most permanent of all vested interests—the vested interests of
skill, labour, energy, talent, industry. How will these be affected? My
answer is, the force which will divide in twain the vested interests of
land and capital will unite and consolidate the interests of those who
live by work, and will lead them to unite their forces with the holders
of agricultural land and of capital seeking investment, to urge upon the
State the necessity for the prompt opening up of facilities for the
reconstruction of society; and, when the State is slow to act, then to
employ voluntary collective efforts similar to those adopted in the
Garden City experiment, with such modifications as experience may show
to be necessary. Such a task as the construction of a cluster of cities
like that represented in our diagram may well inspire all workers with
that enthusiasm which unites men, for it will call for the very highest
talents of

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

engineers of all kinds, of architects, artists, medical men, experts in
sanitation, landscape gardeners, agricultural experts, surveyors,
builders, manufacturers, merchants and financiers, organizers of trades
unions, friendly and co-operative societies, as well as the very
simplest forms of unskilled labour, together with all those forms of
lesser skill and talent which lie between. For the vastness of the task
which seems to frighten some of my friends, represents, in fact, the
very measure of its value to the community, if that task be only
undertaken in a worthy spirit and with worthy aims. Work in abundance
is, as has been several times urged, one of the greatest needs of
to-day, and no such field of employment has been opened up since
civilization began as would be represented by the task which is before
us of reconstructing anew the entire external fabric of society,
employing, as we build, all the skill and knowledge which the experience
of centuries has taught us. It was 'a large order' which was presented
in the early part of this century to construct iron highways throughout
the length and breadth of this island, uniting in a vast network all its
towns and cities. But railway enterprise, vast as has been its
influence, touched the life of the people at but few points compared
with the newer call to build home-towns for slum cities; to plant
gardens for crowded courts; to construct beautiful water-ways in flooded
valleys; to establish a scientific system of distribution to take the
place of a chaos, a just system of land tenure for one representing the
selfishness which we hope is passing away; to found pensions with
liberty for our aged poor, now imprisoned in workhouses; to banish
despair and awaken hope in the breasts of those who have fallen; to
silence the harsh voice of anger, and to awaken the soft notes of
brotherliness and goodwill; to place in strong hands implements of peace
and construction, so that implements of war and destruction may drop
uselessly down. Here is a task which may well unite a vast army of
workers to utilize that power, the present waste of which is the source
of half our poverty, disease, and suffering.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_32"></span>[139:1](gcot14.htm#fr_32.md) Clifford's *History of
Private Bill Legislation* (Butterworth, 1885), Introduction, p. 88.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[146:1](gcot14.htm#fr_33.md) See, for instance, the
opening chapter of *The Heart of Midlothian* (Sir Walter Scott).

<span id="fn_34"></span>[148:1](gcot14.htm#fr_34.md) The chief reason for
this is that agricultural land as compared with city land is of vastly
larger quantity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Thirteen. The Future of London](gcot15.md)
