[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gcot14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0262580020/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Garden Cities of To-morrow*, by Ebenezer Howard, \[1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

### Chapter Thirteen

#### The Future of London

It will now be interesting to consider some of the more striking effects
which will be produced on our now overcrowded cities by the opening up
in new districts of such a vast field of employment as the reader's mind
will, it is hoped, be now able to realize with some degree of clearness.
New towns and groups of towns are springing up in parts of our islands
hitherto wellnigh deserted; new means of communication, the most
scientific the world has yet seen, are being constructed; new means of
distribution are bringing the producer and the consumer into closer
relations, and thus (by reducing railway rates and charges, and the
number of profits) are at once raising prices to the producer and
diminishing them to the consumer; parks and gardens, orchards and woods,
are being planted in the midst of the busy life of the people, so that
they may be enjoyed in the fullest measure; homes are being erected for
those who have long lived in slums; work is found for the workless, land
for the landless, and opportunities for the expenditure of long pent-up
energy are presenting themselves at every turn. A new sense of freedom
and joy is pervading the hearts of the people as their individual
faculties are awakened, and they discover, in a social life which
permits alike of the completest concerted action and of the fullest
individual liberty, the long-sought-for means of reconciliation between
order and freedom—between the wellbeing of the individual and of
society.

The effects produced on our over-crowded cities, whose forms are at
once, by the light of a new contrast, seen to be old-fashioned and
effete, will be so far-reaching in their character that, in order to
study them effectively, it will be well to confine our attention to
London, which, as the largest and most unwieldy of our cities, is likely
to exhibit those effects in the most marked degree.

There is, as I said at the outset, a wellnigh universal current of
opinion that a remedy for the depopulation of our country

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

districts and for the overcrowding of our large cities is urgently
needed. But though everyone recommends that a remedy should be
diligently sought for, few appear to believe that such a remedy will
ever be found, and the calculations of our statesmen and reformers
proceed upon the assumption that not only will the tide of population
never actually turn from the large cities countryward, but that it will
continue to flow in its present direction at a scarcely diminished rate
for a long time to come. <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35.md) Now it can
hardly be supposed that any search made in the full belief that the
remedy sought for will not be discovered is likely to be carried on with
great zeal or thoroughness; and therefore, it is perhaps not surprising
to find that though the late chairman of the London County Council (Lord
Rosebery) declared that the growth of this huge city was fitly
comparable to the growth of a tumour (see [p.
42](gcot02.htm#page_42).md)—few venturing to deny the correctness of the
analogy—yet the various members of that body, instead of bending their
energies to reforming London by means of a reduction of its population,
are boldly advocating a policy which involves the purchase of vast
undertakings on behalf of the municipality, at prices which must prove
far higher than they will be worth if only the long-sought-for remedy is
found.

Let us now assume (simply as an hypothesis, if the reader is still
sceptical) that the remedy advocated in this work is effective; that new
garden cities are springing up all over the country on sites owned by
the municipalities—the rate-rents of such corporate property forming a
fund ample for the carrying on of municipal undertakings representing
the highest skill of the modern engineer and the best aspirations of the
enlightened reformer;

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span> <span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

and that in these cities, healthier, wholesomer, cleaner and more just
and sound economic conditions prevail. What, then, must in the nature of
things be the more noticeable effects upon London and the population of
London; upon its land values; upon its municipal debt, and its municipal
assets; upon London as a labour market; upon the homes of its people;
upon its open spaces, and upon the great undertakings which our
socialistic and municipal reformers are at the present moment so anxious
to secure?

First, notice that ground values will fall enormously! Of course, so
long as the 121 square miles out of the 58,000 square miles of England
exercise a magnetic attraction so great as to draw to it one-fifth of
the whole population, who compete fiercely with each other for the right
to occupy the land within that small area, so long will that land have a
monopoly price. But de-magnetize that people, convince large numbers of
them that they can better their condition in every way by migrating
elsewhere, and what becomes of that monopoly value? Its spell is broken,
and the great bubble bursts.

But the life and earnings of Londoners are not only in pawn to the
owners of its soil, who kindly permit them to live upon it at enormous
rents—£16,000,000 per annum, representing the present ground value of
London, which is yearly increasing; but they are also in pawn to the
extent of about £40,000,000, representing London's municipal debts.

But notice this. A municipal debtor is quite different from an ordinary
debtor in one most important respect. *He can escape payment by
migration*. He has but to move away from a given municipal area, and he
at once, *ipso facto*, shakes off not only all his obligations to his
landlord, but also all his obligations to his municipal creditors. It is
true, when he migrates he must assume the burden of a new municipal
rent, and of a new municipal debt; but these in our new cities will
represent an extremely small and diminishing fraction of the burden now
borne, and the temptation to migrate will, for this and many other
reasons, be extremely strong.

But now let us notice how each person in migrating from London, while
making the burden of *ground-rents* less heavy for those who remain,
will (unless there be some change in the law),

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

make the burden of *rates* on the ratepayers of London yet heavier. For,
though each person in migrating will enable those who remain to make
better and yet better terms with their landlords; on the other hand, the
municipal debt remaining the same, the interest on it will have to be
borne by fewer and yet fewer people, and thus the relief to the working
population which comes from *reduced rent* will be largely discounted by
*increased rates*, and in this way the temptation to migrate will
continue, and yet further population will remove, making the debt ever a
larger and larger burden, till at length, though accompanied by a still
further reduction of rent, it may become intolerable. Of course this
huge debt need never have been incurred. Had London been built on
municipally-owned land, its rents would not only have easily provided
for all current expenditure, without any need for a levy of rates or for
incurring loans for long periods, but it would have been enabled to own
its own water-supply and many other useful and profit-bearing
undertakings, instead of being in its present position with vast debts
and small assets. But a vicious and immoral system is bound ultimately
to snap, and when the breaking-point is reached, thè owners of London's
bonds will, like the owners of London's land, have to make terms with a
people who can apply the simple remedy of migrating and building a
better and brighter civilization elsewhere, if they are not allowed to
rebuild on a just and reasonable basis on the site of their ancient
city.

We may next notice, very briefly, the bearing of this migration of
population upon two great problems—the problem of the housing of the
people of London, and the problem of finding employment for those who
remain. The rents now paid by the working population of London, for
accommodation most miserable and insufficient, represents each year a
larger and larger proportion of income, while the cost of moving to and
from work, continually increasing, often represents in time and money a
very considerable tax. But imagine the population of London falling, and
falling rapidly; the migrating people establishing themselves where
rents are extremely low, and where their work is within easy walking
distance of their homes! Obviously, house-property in London will fall
in rental value, and fall enormously. Slum property will sink to zero,
and the whole

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

working population will move into houses of a class quite above those
which they can now afford to occupy. Families which are now compelled to
huddle together in one room will be able to rent five or six, and thus
will the housing problem temporarily solve itself by the simple process
of a diminution in the numbers of the tenants.

But what will become of this slum property? its power to extort a large
proportion of the hard earnings of the London poor gone for ever, will
it yet remain an eye-sore and a blot, though no longer a danger to
health and an outrage on decency? No. These wretched slums will be
pulled down, and their sites occupied by parks, recreation grounds, and
allotment gardens. And this change, as well as many others, will be
effected, not at the expense of the ratepayers, but almost entirely at
the expense of the landlord class: in this sense, at least, that such
ground rents as are still paid by the people of London in respect of
those classes of property which retain some rental value will have to
bear the burden of improving the city. Nor will, I think, the compulsion
of any Act of Parliament be necessary to effect this result: it will
probably be achieved by the voluntary action of the landowners,
compelled, by a Nemesis from whom there is no escape, to make some
restitution for the great injustice which they have so long committed.

For observe what must inevitably happen. A vast field of employment
being opened outside London, unless a corresponding field of employment
is opened within it, London must die—when the landowners will be in a
sorry plight. Elsewhere new cities are being built: London then must be
transformed. Elsewhere the town is invading the country: here the
country must invade the town. Elsewhere cities are being built on the
terms of paying low prices for land, and of then vesting such land in
the new municipalities: in London corresponding arrangements must be
made or no one will consent to build. Elsewhere, owing to the fact that
there are but few interests to buy out, improvements of all kinds can go
forward rapidly and scientifically: in London similar improvements can
only be carried out if vested interests recognize the inevitable and
accept terms which may seem ridiculous, but are no more so than those
which a manufacturer often finds himself compelled to submit to, who
sells

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

for a ridiculously low price the machine which has cost a very large
sum, for the simple reason that there is a far better one in the market,
and that it no longer *pays*, in the face of keen competition, to work
the inferior machine. The displacement of capital will, no doubt, be
enormous but the implacement of labour will be yet greater. A few may be
made comparatively poor, but the many will be made comparatively rich—a
very healthy change, the slight evils attending which society will be
well able to mitigate.

There are already visible symptoms of the coming change—rumblings which
precede the earthquake. London at this very moment may be said to he on
strike against its landowners. Long-desired London improvements are
awaiting such a change in the law as will throw some of the cost of
making them upon the landowners of London. Railways are projected, but
in some cases are not built—for instance, The Epping Forest Railway
—because the London County Council, most properly anxious to keep down
the fares by workmen's trains, press for and secure, at the hands of a
Parliamentary Committee, the imposition of terms upon the promoters
which seem to them extremely onerous and unremunerative, but which would
pay the company extremely well were it not for the prohibitive price
asked for land and other property along the line of its projected route.
These checks upon enterprise must affect the growth of London even now,
and make it less rapid than it otherwise would be; but when the untold
treasures of our land are unlocked, and when the people now living in
London discover how easily vested interests, without being attacked, may
be circumvented, then the landowners of London and those who represent
other vested interests had better quickly make terms, or London, besides
being what Mr. Grant Allen termed 'a squalid village', will also become
a deserted one.

But better counsels, let us hope, will prevail, and a new city rise on
the ashes of the old. The task will indeed be difficult. Easy,
comparatively, is it to lay out on virgin soil the plan of a magnificent
city, such as represented on our [Diagram 5](gcot14.htm#img_diag05.md). Of
far greater difficulty is the problem—even if all vested interests
freely effaced themselves—of rebuilding a new city on an old site, and
that site occupied by a huge population. But this, at

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

least, is certain, that the present area of the London County Council
ought not (if health and beauty, and that which is too frequently put in
the front rank—rapid production of wealth forms—are to be considered) to
contain more than, say, one-fifth of its present population; and that
new systems of railways, sewerage, drainage, lighting, parks, etc., must
be constructed if London is to be saved, while the whole system of
production and of distribution must undergo changes as complete and as
remarkable as was the change from a system of barter to our present
complicated commercial system.

Proposals for the reconstruction of London have already been projected.
In 1883 the late Mr. William Westgarth offered the Society of Arts the
sum of £1,200 to be awarded in prizes for essays on the best means of
providing dwellings for the London poor, and on the reconstruction of
Central London—an offer which brought forward several schemes of some
boldness. <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36.md) More recently a book by
Mr. Arthur Cawston, entitled *A Comprehensive Scheme for Street
Improvements in London*, was published by Stanford, which contains in
its introduction the following striking passage: 'The literature
relating to London, extensive as it is, contains no work which aims at
the solution of one problem of vast interest to Londoners. They are
beginning to realize, partly by their more and more extensive travels,
and partly through their American and foreign critics, that the gigantic
growth of their capital, without the controlling guidance of a
municipality, has resulted in not only the biggest, but in probably the
most irregular, inconvenient, and unmethodical collection of houses in
the world. A comprehensive plan for the transformation of Paris has been
gradually developed since 1848; slums have disappeared from Berlin since
1870; eighty-eight acres in the centre of Glasgow have been remodelled;
Birmingham has transformed ninety-three acres of squalid slums into
magnificent streets flanked by architectural buildings; Vienna, having
completed her stately outer ring, is about to remodel her inner city:
and the aim of the writer is to show, by example and illustration, in
what way the means successfully employed for improving these cities can
be best adapted to the needs of London.'

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

The time for the complete reconstruction of London—which will eventually
take place on a far more comprehensive scale than that now exhibited in
Paris, Berlin, Glasgow, Birmingham, or Vienna—has, however, not yet
come. A simpler problem must first be solved. One small Garden City must
be built as a working model, and then a group of cities such as that
dealt with in the last chapter. These tasks done, and done well, the
reconstruction of London must inevitably follow, and the power of vested
interests to block the way will have been almost, if not entirely,
removed.

Let us, therefore, first bend all our energies to the smaller of these
tasks, thinking only of the larger tasks which lie beyond as incentives
to a determined line of immediate action, and as a means of realizing
the great value of little things if done in the right manner and in the
right spirit.

 

 

THE END

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[152:1](gcot15.htm#fr_35.md) It is scarcely
necessary to give instances of what is meant; but one that occurs to my
mind is that this assumption of the continued growth of London forms one
of the fundamental premises of the Report of the Royal Commission on
Metropolitan Water Supply, 1893. On the contrary, it is satisfactory to
note that Mr. H. G. Wells has recently entirely changed his views as to
the future growth of London, (see *Anticipations*, Chap. II), Read also
'The Distribution of Industry', by P. W. Wilson, in *The Heart of the
Empire* (Fisher Unwin), and Paper by Mr. W. L. Madgen, M.I.E.E., on
'Industrial Redistribution', *Society of Arts Journal*, February 1902.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[158:1](gcot15.htm#fr_36.md) See *Reconstruction of
Central London* (George Bell and Sons).

 
