[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gcot03)  [Next](gcot05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0262580020/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Garden Cities of To-morrow*, by Ebenezer Howard, \[1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

### Chapter Two

#### The Revenue of Garden City, and how it is obtained—The Agricultural Estate

'It is my object to put forward a theoretical outline of a community so
circumstanced and so maintained by the exercise of its own free will,
guided by scientific knowledge, that the perfection of sanitary results
will be approached, if not actually realized, in the coexistence of the
lowest possible general mortality with the highest possible individual
longevity.'—DR. B. W. RICHARDSON, *Hygeia; or, a City of Health* (1876).

'When drainage everywhere, with its double functions, restoring what it
takes away, is accomplished, then, this being combined with the data of
a new social economy, the products of the earth will be increased
tenfold, and the problem of misery will be wonderfully diminished. Add
the suppression of parasitism and it will be solved.'—VICTOR HUGO, *Les
Misérables* (1862).

Amongst the essential differences between Garden City and other
municipalities, one of the chief is its method of raising its revenue.
Its entire revenue is derived from rents; and one of the purposes of
this work is to show that the rents which may very reasonably be
expected from the various tenants on the estate will be amply
sufficient, if paid into the coffers of Garden City, (*a*) to pay the
interest on the money with which the estate is purchased, (*b*) to
provide a sinking fund for the purpose of paying off the principal,
(*c*) to construct and maintain all such works as are usually
constructed and maintained by municipal and other local authorities out
of rates compulsorily levied, and (*d*) (after redemption of debentures)
to provide a large surplus for other purposes, such as old-age pensions
or insurance against accident and sickness.

Perhaps no difference between town and country is more noticeable than
the difference in the rent charged for the use of

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

the soil. Thus, while in some parts of London the rent is equal to
£30,000 an acre, £4 an acre is an extremely high rent for agricultural
land. This enormous difference of rental value is, of course, almost
entirely due to the presence in the one case and the absence in the
other of a large population; and, as it cannot be attributed to the
action of any particular individuals, it is frequently spoken of as the
'unearned increment', i.e. unearned by the landlord, though a more
correct term would be 'collectively earned increment'.

The presence of a considerable population thus giving a greatly
additional value to the soil, it is obvious that a migration of
population on any considerable scale to any particular area will be
certainly attended with a corresponding rise in the value of the land so
settled upon, and it is also obvious that such increment of value may,
with some foresight and pre-arrangement, become the property of the
migrating people.

Such foresight and pre-arrangement, never before exercised in an
effective manner, are displayed conspicuously in the case of Garden
City, where the land, as we have seen, is vested in trustees, who hold
it in trust (after payment of the debentures) for the whole community,
so that the entire increment of value gradually created becomes the
property of the municipality, with the effect that though rents may
rise, and even rise considerably, such rise in rent will not become the
property of private individuals, but will be applied in relief of rates.
It is this arrangement which will be seen to give Garden City much of
its magnetic power.

The site of Garden City we have taken to be worth at the time of its
purchase £40 an acre, or £240,000. The purchase money may be assumed to
represent thirty years' purchase, and on this basis the annual rent paid
by the former tenants was £8,000. If, therefore, there was a population
of 1,000 persons upon the estate at the time of the purchase, then each
man, woman, and child was contributing towards this rent-roll an average
sum of £8 per annum. But the population of Garden City, including its
agricultural land, is, when completed, 32,000,

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

and the estate has cost them a sum on which they pay an annual charge by
way of interest of £9,600. Thus, while before the experiment was
initiated, 1,000 persons out of their united earnings contributed £8,000
a year, or £*8* *a head*, on the completion of the town 32,000 persons
out of their united earnings will contribute £9,600 a year, or an
average of 6*s*. *a head*.

This sum of 6s. per head per annum is all the rent, strictly speaking,
which the inhabitants of Garden City will ever be called upon to pay;
for it is all the rent which they *pay away*, any further sum they pay
being a contribution towards their rates.

Let us now suppose that each person, besides contributing annually 6s. a
head, contributes an average annual sum of £1 14s., or £2 in all. In
that case two things may be noticed. First, each person will be paying
for ground rent and rates only one-fourth of the sum which each person
before the purchase paid in ground rent alone; and, secondly, the Board
of Management, after the payment of interest on the debentures, will
receive an annual sum of £54,400, which, as will be presently shown,
would, after providing a sinking fund (of £4,400), defray all those
costs, charges, and expenses which are usually met by local taxation.

The average annual sum contributed by each man, woman, and child in
England and Wales for local purposes is about £2 a head, and the average
sum contributed for ground rent is, at a very low estimate, about £2
10s. The average yearly contribution for ground rent and local rates is,
therefore, about £4 10s. It might, therefore, be safely assumed that the
people of Garden City would willingly pay £2 per head in complete
discharge of ground rent and local rates; but to make the case the
clearer and stronger, we will test the supposed willingness of the
tenants of Garden City to pay such a sum as £2 a year for rates and
rents in another way.

For this purpose, let us deal first with the agricultural estate,
leaving the town estate to be dealt with separately. Obviously the rent
which can be secured will be considerably greater than before the town
was built. Every farmer now has a market close to his doors. There are
30,000 townspeople to be fed. Those persons, of course, are perfectly
free to get their foodstuffs from any part of the world, and in the case
of many products will

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

doubtless continue to be supplied from abroad. These farmers are hardly
likely to supply them with tea, with coffee, with spices, with tropical
fruits or with sugar, <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md) and their
struggle to compete with America and Russia for the supply of wheat or
flour to the town may be as keen as ever. But surely the struggle will
not be so despairing. A ray—a beam of hope will gladden the heart of the
despairing home-producer of wheat, for while the American has to pay
railway charges to the seaboard, charges for Atlantic transit and
railway charges to the consumer, the farmer of Garden City has a market
at his very doors, and this a market which the rent he contributes will
help to build up. <span id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6.md)

Or, consider vegetables and fruits. Farmers, except near towns, do not
often grow them now. Why? Chiefly because of the difficulty and
uncertainty of a market, and the high charges for freights and
commission. To quote the words of Dr. Farquharson, M.P., when they 'try
to dispose of these things they find themselves struggling so hopelessly
in a spider's web of rings and middlemen, and speculators, that they are
more than half-inclined to give up the attempt in despair, and fall back
on those things that stand up straight and square to their prices in the
open market'. A curious calculation may be interesting with regard to
milk. Assuming each person in the town consumed only one-third of a pint
a day, then 30,000 would consume 1,250 gallons a day, and might thus
save, taking railway charges at a penny per gallon, upwards of £1,900
per annum in railway rates upon the one item of milk, a saving which
must be multiplied by a large figure in order to realize the general
saving to be effected by placing consumer and producer in such close
association. In other words, the combination of town and country is not
only healthful, but economic—a point which every step taken will serve
to make yet more clear.

But the rents which the agricultural tenants of Garden City would be
willing to pay would increase for another reason. The waste products of
the town could, and this without heavy

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

charges for railway transport or other expensive agencies, be readily
brought back to the soil, thus increasing its fertility. The question of
sewage disposal is naturally a difficult one to deal with, but its
inherent difficulty is often much increased by artificial and imperfect
conditions already in existence. Thus, Sir Benjamin Baker, in his joint
report with Mr. (now Sir) Alexander Binnie to the London County Council,
says: 'In approaching the consideration of the vast question of the
whole sewerage system of the Metropolis, and the state of the Thames, as
a practical problem . . . we had clearly at once to recognize the fact
that the general features of the main drainage system were unalterably
settled, and must be accepted in the same way as the main lines of
thoroughfares have to be accepted whether quite as we could wish them to
be or not.' But on Garden City site, given the skilful engineer, he
would have comparatively little difficulty. He would have, as it were, a
clean sheet on which to prepare his plans, and the whole estate being
equally the property of the municipality, he would have a free course
before him, and would doubtless succeed in adding greatly to the
productiveness of the agricultural estate.

The great increase in the number of allotments, especially such
favourably situated allotments as are shown in [Diagram
2](gcot03.htm#img_diag02.md), would also tend to raise the total sum
offered in rent.

There are yet other reasons why the rent which a farmer on the Garden
City estate would be willing to pay for his farm, or a labourer for his
allotment, would tend to increase. The productiveness of the
agricultural part of the estate, besides being increased by a
well-devised system of sewage disposal, and by a new and somewhat
extensive market, with unique conveniences for transit to more distant
markets, would also be increased because the tenure on which the land is
held encourages maximum cultivation. It is a just tenure. The
agricultural portion of the estate is let at fair rents, with a right to
continue in occupation as long as the tenant is willing to pay a rent
equal to that offered by any would-be occupier, less, say, 10 per cent
in favour of the occupying tenant—the incoming tenant having also to
compensate the outgoing tenant for all unexhausted improvements. Under
this system, while it would be impossible for the tenant to secure to
himself any undue share of that

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

natural increment of land-value which would be brought about by the
general growth in well-being of the town, he would yet have, as all
tenants in possession probably should have, a preference over any
newcomer, and would know that he would not lose those fruits of his past
industry which were not yet in-gathered but were still adding their
value to the soil. Surely no one can doubt that such a tenure would, of
itself, tend greatly to increase at once the activity and industry of
the tenant, the productivity of the soil, and the rent which the tenant
would be willing to pay.

That there would be this increased offer of rent will become yet more
obvious if we consider for a moment the nature of the rent paid by a
tenant of Garden City. Part of what he pays would be in respect of
interest on the debentures on which the money to purchase the estate was
raised, or in the redemption of those debentures, and would thus, except
so far as the debentures were held by residents on the estate, pass away
from the community altogether; but the whole of the remaining sum paid
would be expended locally, and the farmer would have a share equal to
that of every adult in the administration of such money. The term
'rent', therefore, has, in Garden City, acquired a new meaning, and, for
the sake of clearness, it will be necessary in future to use terms which
will not be ambiguous. That part of the rent which represents interest
on debentures will be hereafter called 'landlord's rent'; that part
which represents repayment of purchase-money 'sinking fund'; that part
which is devoted to public purposes 'rates'; while the total sum will be
termed 'rate-rent'.

From these considerations, surely it is obvious that the 'rate-rent'
which the farmer will be willing to pay into the treasury of Garden City
will be considerably higher than the rent he would be willing to pay to
a private landlord, who, besides increasing his rent as the farmer makes
his land more valuable, will also leave him with the full burden of
local taxation resting upon him. In short the plan proposed embraces a
system of sewage-disposal which will return to the soil in a transmuted
form many of those products the growth of which, by exhausting its
natural fertility, demand elsewhere the application of manures so
expensive that the farmer becomes sometimes blinded to their

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

necessity, and it also embraces a system of rate-rents by which many of
the farmer's hard-earned sovereigns, hitherto lost to him by being paid
away to his landlord, shall return to his exhausted exchequer, not
indeed in the form in which they left it, but in a variety of useful
forms, such as roads, schools, markets, which will assist him most
materially, though indirectly, in his work, but which, under present
conditions, entail so severe a burden as to make him naturally slow to
see their inherent necessity, and even to look upon some of them with
suspicion and dislike. Who can doubt that if the farm and the farmer can
be placed under conditions so healthful and natural alike in a physical
and moral sense, the willing soil and the hopeful farmer will alike
respond to their new environment—the soil becoming more fertile by every
blade of grass it yields, the farmer richer by every penny of rate-rent
he contributes?

We are now in a position to see that the rate-rent which will be readily
paid by farmer, small occupier, and allotment holder, would be
considerably greater than the rent he paid before: (1) because of the
presence of a new town population demanding new and more profitable farm
products, in respect of which railway charges can be largely saved; (2)
by the due return to the soil of its natural elements; (3) by the just,
equitable, and natural conditions on which the land is held; and (4) by
reason of the fact that the rent now paid is *rate and rent*, while the
rent formerly paid left the rates to be paid by the tenant.

But certain as it is that the '*rate-rent*' would represent a very
considerable increase over the bare *rent* formerly paid by the tenants
on the estate, it is still very much a matter of conjecture what the
'rate-rent' would be; and we shall, therefore, be acting prudently if we
greatly under-estimate the 'rate-rent' which would probably be offered.
If, then, in view of all the circumstances, we estimate that the
*farming population* of Garden City will be prepared to pay for rates
and rent 50 per cent more than they before paid for rent alone, we shall
reach the following result:

*Estimated Gross Revenue from Agricultural Estate*

<div align="center">

|                                                             |               |
|-------------------------------------------------------------|---------------|
| Original rent paid by tenants of 5,000 acres, say           | £6,500        |
| Add 50 per cent for contributions to rates and sinking fund | <u> 3,250</u> |
|        Total 'rate-rent' from agricultural estate           | £9,750        |

</div>

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

We shall in the next chapter estimate the amount which may, on the most
reasonable calculation, be expected from the town estate, and then
proceed to consider the sufficiency of the total rate-rents for the
municipal needs of the town.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[61:1](gcot04.htm#fr_5.md) The electric light, with
cheap motive power for its generation, with glass-houses, may make even
some of these things possible.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[61:2](gcot04.htm#fr_6.md) See *Fields, Factories,
and Workshops*, by Prince Kropotkin (London, 1898), and *The Coming
Revolution*, by Capt. J. W. Petavel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Three. The Revenue of Garden City—Town Estate](gcot05.md)
