[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gcot02)  [Next](gcot04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0262580020/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Garden Cities of To-morrow*, by Ebenezer Howard, \[1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

### Chapter One

#### The Town-Country Magnet

'I will not cease from mental strife,  
   Nor shall my sword sleep in my hand,  
Till we have built Jerusalem  
  In England's green and pleasant land.'  
                                    —BLAKE.

'Thorough sanitary and remedial action in the houses that we have; and
then the building of more, strongly, beautifully, and in groups of
limited extent, kept in proportion to their streams and walled round, so
that there may be no festering and wretched suburb anywhere, but clean
and busy street within and the open country without, with a belt of
beautiful garden and orchard round the walls, so that from any part of
the city perfectly fresh air and grass and sight of far horizon might be
reachable in a few minutes' walk. This the final aim.'—JOIN RUSKIN,
*Sesame and Lilies*.

'No scene is continuously and untiringly loved, but one rich by joyful
human labour; smooth in field; fair in garden; full in orchard; trim,
sweet and frequent in homestead; ringing with voices of vivid existence.
No air is sweet that is silent; it is only sweet when full of low
currents of under sound—triplets of birds, and murmur and chirp of
insects, and deep-toned words of men, and wayward trebles of childhood.
As the art of life is learned, it will be found at last that all lovely
things are also necessary;—the wild flower by the wayside, as well as
the tended corn; and the wild birds and creatures of the forest, as well
as the tended cattle; because man doth not live by bread only, but also
by the desert manna; by every wondrous word and unknowable work of
God.'—JOHN RUSKIN, *Unto This Last* (1862).

The reader is asked to imagine an estate embracing an area of 6,000
acres, which is at present purely agricultural, and has been obtained by
purchase in the open market at a cost of £40 <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) an acre, or £240,000. The purchase money is
supposed to have been raised on mortgage debentures, bearing interest at
an average rate not exceeding £4 per cent. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2) The estate is legally vested in the names of
four gentlemen of responsible position and of undoubted probity and
honour, who hold it in trust, first, as a security for the
debenture-holders, and, secondly, in

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

trust for the people of Garden City, the Town-country magnet, which it
is intended to build thereon. One essential feature of the plan is that
all ground rents, which are to be based upon the annual value of the
land, shall be paid to the trustees, who, after providing for interest
and sinking fund, will hand the balance to the Central Council of the
new municipality, <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) to be employed by
such Council in the creation and maintenance of all necessary public
works—roads, schools, parks, etc.

The objects of this land purchase may be stated in various ways, but it
is sufficient here to say that some of the chief objects are these: To
find for our industrial population work at wages of *higher purchasing
power*, and to secure healthier surroundings and more regular
employment. To enterprising manufacturers, co-operative societies,
architects, engineers, builders, and mechanicians of all kinds, as well
as to many engaged in various professions, it is intended to offer a
means of securing new and better employment for their capital and
talents, while to the agriculturists at present on the estate as well as
to those who may migrate thither, it is designed to open a new market
for their produce close to their doors. Its object is, in short, to
raise the standard of health and comfort of all true workers of whatever
grade—the means by which these objects are to be achieved being a
healthy, natural, and economic combination of town and country life, and
this on land owned by the municipality.

Garden City, which is to be built near the centre of the 6,000 acres,
covers an area of 1,000 acres, or a sixth part of the 6,000 acres, and
might be of circular form, 1,240 yards (or nearly three-quarters of a
mile) from centre to circumference. ([Diagram 2](#img_diag02) is a
ground plan of the whole municipal area, showing the town in the centre;
and [Diagram 3](#img_diag03), which represents one section or ward of
the town, will be useful in following the description of the town
itself—*a description which is, however, merely suggestive, and will
probably be much departed from*.)

Six magnificent boulevards—each 120 feet wide—traverse the city from
centre to circumference, dividing it into six equal parts or wards. In
the centre is a circular space containing about

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

<span id="img_diag02"></span>

[![2. GARDEN CITY AND RURAL BELT](tn/diag02.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/diag02.jpg)  
2. GARDEN CITY AND RURAL BELT  

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

five and a half acres, laid out as a beautiful and well-watered garden;
and, surrounding this garden, each standing in its own ample grounds,
are the larger public buildings—town hall,

<span id="img_diag03"></span>

[![3. WARD AND CENTRE OF GARDEN CITY](tn/diag03.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/diag03.jpg)  
3. WARD AND CENTRE OF GARDEN CITY  

principal concert and lecture hall, theatre, library, museum,
picture-gallery, and hospital.

The rest of the large space encircled by the 'Crystal Palace' is a
public park, containing 145 acres, which includes ample recreation
grounds within very easy access of all the people.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

Running all round the Central Park (except where it is intersected by
the boulevards) is a wide glass arcade called the 'Crystal Palace',
opening on to the park. This building is in wet weather one of the
favourite resorts of the people, whilst the knowledge that its bright
shelter is ever close at hand tempts people into Central Park, even in
the most doubtful of weathers. Here manufactured goods are exposed for
sale, and here most of that class of shopping which requires the joy of
deliberation and selection is done. The space enclosed by the Crystal
Palace is, however, a good deal larger than is required for these
purposes, and a considerable part of it is used as a Winter Garden —the
whole forming a permanent exhibition of a most attractive character,
whilst its circular form brings it near to every dweller in the town—the
furthest removed inhabitant being within 600 yards.

Passing out of the Crystal Palace on our way to the outer ring of the
town, we cross Fifth Avenue—lined, as are all the roads of the town,
with trees—fronting which, and looking on to the Crystal Palace, we find
a ring of very excellently built houses, each standing in its own ample
grounds; and, as we continue our walk, we observe that the houses are
for the most part built either in concentric rings, facing the various
avenues (as the circular roads are termed), or fronting the boulevards
and roads which all converge to the centre of the town. Asking the
friend who accompanies us on our journey what the population of this
little city may be, we are told about 30,000 in the city itself, and
about 2,000 in the agricultural estate, and that there are in the town
5,500 building lots of an *average* size of 20 feet × 130 feet —the
minimum space allotted for the purpose being 20 × 100. Noticing the very
varied architecture and design which the houses and groups of houses
display—some having common gardens and co-operative kitchens—we learn
that general observance of street line or harmonious departure from it
are the chief points as to house building, over which the municipal
authorities exercise control, for, though proper sanitary arrangements
are strictly enforced, the fullest measure of individual taste and
preference is encouraged.

Walking still toward the outskirts of the town, we come upon 'Grand
Avenue'. This avenue is fully entitled to the name it

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

bears, for it is 420 feet wide, <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4) and,
forming a belt of green upwards of three miles long, divides that part
of the town which lies outside Central Park into two belts. It really
constitutes an additional park of 115 acres—a park which is within 240
yards of the furthest removed inhabitant. In this splendid avenue six
sites, each of four acres, are occupied by public schools and their
surrounding playgrounds and gardens, while other sites are reserved for
churches, of such denominations as the religious beliefs of the people
may determine, to be erected and maintained out of the funds of the
worshippers and their friends. We observe that the houses fronting on
Grand Avenue have departed (at least in one of the wards—that of which
Diagram 3 is a representation)—from the general plan of concentric
rings, and, in order to ensure a longer line of frontage on Grand
Avenue, are arranged in crescents—thus also to the eye yet further
enlarging the already splendid width of Grand Avenue.

On the outer ring of the town are factories, warehouses, dairies,
markets, coal yards, timber yards, etc., all fronting on the circle
railway, which encompasses the whole town, and which has sidings
connecting it with a main line of railway which passes through the
estate. This arrangement enables goods to be loaded direct into trucks
from the warehouses and workshops, and so sent by railway to distant
markets, or to be taken direct from the trucks into the warehouses or
factories; thus not only effecting a very great saving in regard to
packing and cartage, and reducing to a minimum loss from breakage, but
also, by reducing the traffic on the roads of the town, lessening to a
very marked extent the cost of their maintenance. The smoke fiend is
kept well within bounds in Garden City; for all machinery is driven by
electric energy, with the result that the cost of electricity for
lighting and other purposes is greatly reduced.

The refuse of the town is utilized on the agricultural portions of the
estate, which are held by various individuals in large farms, small
holdings, allotments, cow pastures, etc.; the natural competition of
these various methods of agriculture, tested by the willingness of
occupiers to offer the highest rent

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

to the municipality, tending to bring about the best system of
husbandry, or, what is more probable, the best systems adapted for
various purposes. Thus it is easily conceivable that it may prove
advantageous to grow wheat in very large fields, involving united action
under a capitalist farmer, or by a body of co-operators; while the
cultivation of vegetables, fruits, and flowers, which requires closer
and more personal care, and more of the artistic and inventive faculty,
may possibly be best dealt with by individuals, or by small groups of
individuals having a common belief in the efficacy and value of certain
dressings, methods of culture, or artificial and natural surroundings.

This plan, or, if the reader be pleased to so term it, this absence of
plan, avoids the dangers of stagnation or dead level, and, though
encouraging individual initiative, permits of the fullest co-operation,
while the increased rents which follow from this form of competition are
common or municipal property, and by far the larger part of them are
expended in permanent improvements.

While the town proper, with its population engaged in various trades,
callings, and professions, and with a store or depot in each ward,
offers the most natural market to the people engaged on the agricultural
estate, inasmuch as to the extent to which the townspeople demand their
produce they escape altogether any railway rates and charges; yet the
farmers and others are not by any means limited to the town as their
only market, but have the fullest right to dispose of their produce to
whomsoever they please. Here, as in every feature of the experiment, it
will be seen that it is not the area of rights which is contracted, but
the area of choice which is enlarged.

This principle of freedom holds good with regard to manufacturers and
others who have established themselves in the town. These manage their
affairs in their own way, subject, of course, to the general law of the
land, and subject to the provision of sufficient space for workmen and
reasonable sanitary conditions. Even in regard to such matters as water,
lighting, and telephonic communication—which a municipality, if
efficient and honest, is certainly the best and most natural body to
supply—no rigid or absolute monopoly is sought; and if any private
corporation or any body of individuals proved itself

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

capable of supplying on more advantageous terms, either the whole town
or a section of it, with these or any commodities the supply of which
was taken up by the corporation, this would be allowed. No really sound
system of action is in more need of artificial support than is any sound
system of thought. The area of municipal and corporate action is
probably destined to become greatly enlarged; but, if it is to be so, it
will be because the people possess faith in such action, and that faith
can be best shown by a wide extension of the area of freedom.

Dotted about the estate are seen various charitable and philanthropic
institutions. These are not under the control of the municipality, but
are supported and managed by various public-spirited people who have
been invited by the municipality to establish these institutions in an
open healthy district, and on land let to them at a pepper-corn rent, it
occurring to the authorities that they can the better afford to be thus
generous, as the spending power of these institutions greatly benefits
the whole community. Besides, as those persons who migrate to the town
are among its most energetic and resourceful members, it is but just and
right that their more helpless brethren should be able to enjoy the
benefits of an experiment which is designed for humanity at large.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[50:1](gcot03.htm#fr_1) This was the average
price paid for agricultural land in 1898; and, though this estimate may
prove far more than sufficient, it is hardly likely to be much exceeded.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[50:2](gcot03.htm#fr_2) The financial
arrangements described in this book are likely to be departed from in
form, but not in essential principle. And until a definite scheme has
been agreed upon, I think it better to repeat them precisely as they
appeared in *To-morrow*, the original title of this book—the book which
led to the formation of the Garden City Association.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[51:1](gcot03.htm#fr_3) This word,
'municipality', is not used in a technical sense.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[55:1](gcot03.htm#fr_4) Portland Place, London,
is only 100 feet wide.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Two. The Revenue of Garden City, and how it is
obtained—The Agricultural Estate](gcot04)
