[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gcot01)  [Next](gcot03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0262580020/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Garden Cities of To-morrow*, by Ebenezer Howard, \[1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

### Introduction

'New forces, new cravings, new aims, which had been silently gathering
beneath the crust of reaction, burst suddenly into view.'—J. R. GREEN,
*Short History of the English People*, Chap. x.

'Change is consummated in many cases after much argument and agitation,
and men do not observe that almost everything has been silently effected
by causes to which few people paid any heed. In one generation an
institution is unassailable, in the next bold men may assail it, and in
the third bold men defend it. At one time the most conclusive arguments
are advanced against it in vain, if indeed they are allowed utterance at
all. At another time the most childish sophistry is enough to secure its
condemnation. In the first place, the institution, though probably
indefensible by pure reason, was congruous with the conscious habits and
modes of thought of the community. In the second, these had changed from
influences which the acutest analysis would probably fail to explain,
and a breath sufficed to topple over the sapped structure.'—*The Times*,
27th November 1891.

In these days of strong party feeling and of keenly contested social and
religious issues, it might perhaps be thought difficult to find a single
question having a vital bearing upon national life and well-being on
which all persons, no matter of what political party, or of what shade
of sociological opinion, would be found to be fully and entirely agreed.
Discuss the temperance cause, and you will hear from Mr. John Morley
that it is 'the greatest moral movement since the movement for the
abolition of slavery'; but Lord Bruce will remind you that 'every year
the trade contributes £40,000,000 to the revenue of the country, so that
practically it maintains the Army and Navy, besides which it affords
employment to many thousands of persons'—that 'even the teetotallers owe
much to the licensed victuallers, for if it were not for them the
refreshment bars at the Crystal Palace would have been closed long ago'.
Discuss the opium traffic, and, on the one hand, you will hear that
opium is rapidly destroying the *morale* of the people of China, and, on
the other,

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

that this is quite a delusion, and that the Chinese are capable, thanks
to opium, of doing work which to a European is quite impossible, and
that on food at which the least squeamish of English people would turn
up their noses in disgust.

Religious and political questions too often divide us into hostile
camps; and so, in the very realms where calm, dispassionate thought and
pure emotions are the essentials of all advance towards right beliefs
and sound principles of action, the din of battle and the struggles of
contending hosts are more forcibly suggested to the onlooker than the
really sincere love of truth and love of country which, one may yet be
sure, animate nearly all breasts.

There is, however, a question in regard to which one can scarcely find
any difference of opinion. It is wellnigh universally agreed by men of
all parties, not only in England, but all over Europe and America and
our colonies, that it is deeply to be deplored that the people should
continue to stream into the already over-crowded cities, and should thus
further deplete the country districts.

Lord Rosebery, speaking some years ago as Chairman of the London County
Council, dwelt with very special emphasis on this point:

'There is no thought of pride associated in my mind with the idea of
London. I am always haunted by the awfulness of London: by the great
appalling fact of these millions cast down, as it would appear by
hazard, on the banks of this noble stream, working each in their own
groove and their own cell, without regard or knowledge of each other,
without heeding each other, without having the slightest idea how the
other lives—the heedless casualty of unnumbered thousands of men. Sixty
years ago a great Englishman, Cobbett, called it a wen. If it was a wen
then, what is it now? A tumour, an elephantiasis sucking into its gorged
system half the life and the blood and the bone of the rural districts.'
(March 1891.)

Sir John Gorst points out the evil, and suggests the remedy:

'If they wanted a permanent remedy of the evil they must remove the
cause; they must back the tide, and stop the migration of the people
into the towns, and get the people back to the land. The interest and
the safety of the towns themselves were

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

involved in the solution of the problem.' (*Daily Chronicle*, 6th
November 1891.)

Dean Farrar says:

'We are becoming a land of great cities. Villages are stationary or
receding; cities are enormously increasing. And if it be true that great
cities tend more and more to become the graves of the physique of our
race, can we wonder at it when we see the houses so foul, so squalid, so
ill-drained, so vitiated by neglect and dirt?'

Dr. Rhodes, at the Demographic Congress, called attention to 'the
migration which was going on from the English agricultural districts. In
Lancashire and other manufacturing districts 35 per cent of the
population were over sixty years of age, but in agricultural districts
they would have over 60 per cent. Many of the cottages were so
abominable that they could not call them houses, and the people so
deteriorated in physique that they were not able to do the amount of
work which able-bodied persons should do. Unless something was done to
make the lot of the agricultural labourer better, the exodus would go
on, with what results in the future he dared not say.' (*Times*, 15th
August 1891.)

The Press, Liberal, Radical, and Conservative, views this grave symptom
of the time with the same alarm. The *St. James's Gazette*, on 6th June
1892, remarks:

'How best to provide the proper antidote against the greatest danger of
modern existence is a question of no mean significance.'

*The Star*, 9th October 1891, says:

'How to stem the drift from the country is one of the main problems of
the day. The labourer may perhaps be restored to the land, but how will
the country industries be restored to rural England?'

*The Daily News*, a few years ago, published a series of articles, 'Life
in our Villages', dealing with the same problem.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

Trade Unionist leaders utter the same note of warning. Mr. Ben Tillett
says:

'Hands are hungry for toil, and lands are starving for labour.' Mr. Tom
Mann observes:

'The congestion of labour in the metropolis is caused mainly by the
influx from the country districts of those who were needed there to
cultivate the land.'

All, then, are agreed on the pressing nature of this problem, all are
bent on its solution, and though it would doubtless be quite Utopian to
expect a similar agreement as to the value of any remedy that may be
proposed, it is at least of immense importance that, on a subject thus
universally regarded as of supreme importance, we have such a consensus
of opinion at the outset. This will be the more remarkable and the more
hopeful sign when it is shown, as I believe will be conclusively shown
in this work, that the answer to this, one of the most pressing
questions of the day, makes of comparatively easy solution many other
problems which have hitherto taxed the ingenuity of the greatest
thinkers and reformers of our time. Yes, the key to the problem how to
restore the people to the land—that beautiful land of ours, with its
canopy of sky, the air that blows upon it, the sun that warms it, the
rain and dew that moisten it —the very embodiment of Divine love for
man—is indeed a *Master Key*, for it is the key to a portal through
which, even when scarce ajar, will be seen to pour a flood of light on
the problems of intemperance, of excessive toil, of restless anxiety, of
grinding poverty—the true limits of Governmental interference, ay, and
even the relations of man to the Supreme Power.

It may perhaps be thought that the first step to be taken towards the
solution of this question—how to restore the people to the land—would
involve a careful consideration of the very numerous causes which have
hitherto led to their aggregation in large cities. Were this the case, a
very prolonged enquiry would be necessary at the outset. Fortunately,
alike for writer and for reader, such an analysis is not, however, here
requisite, and for a very simple reason, which may be stated thus:
Whatever may have been the causes which have operated in the past, and
are operating now, to draw the people into the cities, those causes may
all be summed up as 'attractions'; and it is obvious,

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

therefore, that no remedy can possibly be effective which will not
present to the people, or at least to considerable portions of them,
greater 'attractions' than our cities now possess, so that the force of
the old 'attractions' shall be overcome by the force of new
'attractions' which are to be created. Each city may be regarded as a
magnet, each person as a needle; and, so viewed, it is at once seen that
nothing short of the discovery of a method for constructing magnets of
yet greater power than our cities possess can be effective for
redistributing the population in a spontaneous and healthy manner.

So presented, the problem may appear at first sight to be difficult, if
not impossible, of solution. 'What', some may be disposed to ask, 'can
possibly be done to make the country more attractive to a workaday
people than the town—to make wages, or at least the standard of physical
comfort, higher in the country than in the town; to secure in the
country equal possibilities of social intercourse, and to make the
prospects of advancement for the average man or woman equal, not to say
superior, to those enjoyed in our large cities?' The issue one
constantly finds presented in a form very similar to that. The subject
is treated continually in the public press, and in all forms of
discussion, as though men, or at least working men, had not now, and
never could have, any choice or alternative, but either, on the one
hand, to stifle their love for human society—at least in wider relations
than can be found in a straggling village—or, on the other hand, to
forgo almost entirely all the keen and pure delights of the country. The
question is universally considered as though it were now, and for ever
must remain, quite impossible for working people to live in the country
and yet be engaged in pursuits other than agricultural; as though
crowded, unhealthy cities were the last word of economic science; and as
if our present form of industry, in which sharp lines divide
agricultural from industrial pursuits, were necessarily an enduring one.
This fallacy is the very common one of ignoring altogether the
possibility of alternatives other than those presented to the mind.
There are in reality not only, as is so constantly assumed, two
alternatives—town life and country life—but a third alternative, in
which all the advantages of the most energetic and active town life,
with all the beauty and delight of the country,

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

may be secured in perfect combination; and the certainty of being able
to live this life will be the magnet which will produce the effect for
which we are all striving—the spontaneous movement of the people from
our crowded cities to the bosom of our

<span id="img_diag01"></span>

[![1. THE THREE MAGNETS](tn/diag01.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/diag01.jpg)  
1. THE THREE MAGNETS  

kindly mother earth, at once the source of life, of happiness, of
wealth, and of power. The town and the country may, therefore, be
regarded as two magnets, each striving to draw the people to itself—a
rivalry which a new form of life, partaking of the nature of both, comes
to take part in. This may be illustrated

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

by a [diagram](#img_diag01) of 'The Three Magnets', in which the chief
advantages of the Town and of the Country are set forth with their
corresponding drawbacks, while the advantages of the Town-Country are
seen to be free from the disadvantages of either.

The Town magnet, it will be seen, offers, as compared with the Country
magnet, the advantages of high wages, opportunities for employment,
tempting prospects of advancement, but these are largely counterbalanced
by high rents and prices. Its social opportunities and its places of
amusement are very alluring, but excessive hours of toil, distance from
work, and the 'isolation of crowds' tend greatly to reduce the value of
these good things. The well-lit streets are a great attraction,
especially in winter, but the sunlight is being more and more shut out,
while the air is so vitiated that the fine public buildings, like the
sparrows, rapidly become covered with soot, and the very statues are in
despair. Palatial edifices and fearful slums are the strange,
complementary features of modern cities.

The, Country magnet declares herself to be the source of all beauty and
wealth; but the Town magnet mockingly reminds her that she is very dull
for lack of society, and very sparing of her gifts for lack of capital.
There are in the country beautiful vistas, lordly parks, violet-scented
woods, fresh air, sounds of rippling water; but too often one sees those
threatening words, 'Trespassers will be prosecuted'. Rents, if estimated
by the acre, are certainly low, but such low rents are the natural fruit
of low wages rather than a cause of substantial comfort; while long
hours and lack of amusements forbid the bright sunshine and the pure air
to gladden the hearts of the people. The one industry, agriculture,
suffers frequently from excessive rainfalls; but this wondrous harvest
of the clouds is seldom properly in-gathered, so that, in times of
drought, there is frequently, even for drinking purposes, a most
insufficient supply. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) Even the

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

natural healthfulness of the country is largely lost for lack of proper
drainage and other sanitary conditions, while, in parts almost deserted
by the people, the few who remain are yet frequently huddled together as
if in rivalry with the slums of our cities.

But neither the Town magnet nor the Country magnet represents the full
plan and purpose of nature. Human society and the beauty of nature are
meant to be enjoyed together. The two magnets must be made one. As man
and woman by their varied gifts and faculties supplement each other, so
should town and country. The town is the symbol of society—of mutual
help and friendly 'co-operation, of fatherhood, motherhood, brotherhood,
sisterhood, of wide relations between man and man—of broad, expanding
sympathies—of science, art, culture, religion. And the country! The
country is the symbol of God's love and care for man. All that we are
and all that we have comes from it. Our bodies are formed of it; to it
they return. We are fed by it, clothed by it, and by it are we warmed
and sheltered. On its bosom we rest. Its beauty is the inspiration of
art, of music, of poetry. Its forces propel all the wheels of industry.
It is the source of all health, all wealth, all knowledge. But its
fullness of joy and wisdom has not revealed itself to man. Nor can it
ever, so long as this unholy, unnatural separation of society and nature
endures. Town and country must be married, and out of this joyous union
will spring a new hope, a new life, a new civilization. It is the
purpose of this work to show how a first step can he taken in this
direction by the construction of a Town-country magnet; and I hope to
convince the reader that this is practicable, here and now, and that on
principles which are the very soundest, whether viewed from the ethical
or the economic standpoint.

I will undertake, then, to show how in 'Town-country' equal, nay better,
opportunities of social intercourse may be enjoyed than are enjoyed in
any crowded city, while yet the beauties of

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

nature may encompass and enfold each dweller therein; how higher wages
are compatible with reduced rents and rates; how abundant opportunities
for employment and bright prospects of advancement may be secured for
all; how capital may be attracted and wealth created; how the most
admirable sanitary conditions may be ensured; how beautiful homes and
gardens may be seen on every hand; how the bounds of freedom may be
widened, and yet all the best results of concert and co-operation
gathered in by a happy people.

The construction of such a magnet, could it be effected, followed, as it
would be, by the construction of many more, would certainly afford a
solution of the burning question set before us by Sir John Gorst, 'how
to back the tide of migration of the people into the towns, and to get
them back upon the land'.

A fuller description of such a magnet and its mode of construction will
form the theme of subsequent chapters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[47:1](gcot02.htm#fr_0) Dr. Barwise, Medical
Officer of Health for the County Council of Derbyshire, giving evidence
before a Select Committee of the House of Commons, on 25th April 1894,
on the Chesterfield Gas and Water Bill, said, in answer to Question
1873: 'At Brimington Common School I saw some basins full of soapsuds,
and it was all the water that the whole of the children had to wash in.
They had to wash one after another in the same water. Of course, a child
with <span id="page_47">p. 47</span> ringworm or something of that kind
might spread it through the whole of the children. . . . The
schoolmistress told me that the children came in from the playground
hot, and she had seen them actually drink this dirty water. In fact,
when they were thirsty there was no other water for them to have.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter One. The Town-Country Magnet](gcot03)
