<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots270)  [Next](lots272) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### August 29.—THE BEHEADING OF ST. JOHN THE BAPTIST.

ST. JOHN THE BAPTIST was called by God to be the forerunner of His
divine Son. In order to preserve his innocence spotless, and to improve
the extraordinary graces which he had received, he was directed by the
Holy Ghost to lead an austere and contemplative life in the

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

wilderness, in the continual exercises of devout prayer and penance,
from his infancy till he was thirty years of age. At this age the
faithful minister began to discharge his mission. Clothed with the weeds
of penance, be announced to all men the obligation they lay under of
washing away their iniquities with the tears of sincere compunction; and
proclaimed the Messias, Who was then coming to make His appearance among
them. He was received by the people as the true herald of the Most High
God, and his voice was, as it were, a trumpet sounding from heaven to
summon all men to avert the divine judgments, and to prepare themselves
to reap the benefit of Vie mercy that was offered them. The tetrarch
Herod Antipas having, in defiance of all laws divine and human, married
Herodias, the wife of his brother Philip, who was yet living, St. John
the Baptist boldly reprehended the tetrarch and his accomplice for so
scandalous an incest and adultery, and Herod, urged on by lust and
anger, cast the Saint into prison. About a year after St. John had been
made a prisoner, Herod gave a splendid entertainment to the nobility of
Galilee. Salome, a daughter of Herodias by her lawful husband, pleased
Herod by her dancing, insomuch that he promised her to grant whatever
she asked. On this, Salome consulted with her mother what to ask.
Herodias instructed her daughter to demand the death of John the
Baptist, and persuaded the young damsel to make it part of her petition
that the head of the prisoner should be forthwith brought to her in a
dish. This strange request startled the tyrant himself; he assented,
however, and sent a soldier of his guard to behead the Saint in prison,
with an order to bring his head in a charger and present it to Salome,
who delivered it to her mother. St. Jerome relates that the furious
Herodias made it her inhuman pastime to prick the sacred tongue with a
bodkin. Thus died the great forerunner of our blessed Saviour, about two
years and three months after his entrance upon his public ministry,
about a year before the death of our blessed Redeemer.

**Reflection**.—All the high graces with which St. John was favored
sprang from his humility; in this all his other

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

virtues were founded. If we desire to form ourselves upon so great a
model, we must, above all things, labor to lay the same deep foundation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 30. St. Rose of Lima](lots272)

</div>
