<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots189)  [Next](lots191) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### June 13.—ST. ANTONY OF PADUA.

IN 1221 St. Francis held a general chapter at Assisi; when the others
dispersed, there lingered behind, unknown and neglected, a poor
Portuguese friar, resolved to ask for and to refuse nothing. Nine months
later, Fra Antonio rose under obedience to preach to the religious
assembled at Forli, when, as the discourse proceeded, "the Hammer of
Heretics," "the Ark of the Testament," "the eldest son of St. Francis,"
stood revealed in all his sanctity, learning, and eloquence before his
rapt and astonished brethren. Devoted from earliest youth to prayer and
study among the Canons Regular, Ferdinand de Bulloens, as his name was
in the world, had been stirred, by the spirit and example of the first
five Franciscan martyrs, to put on their habit and preach the Faith to
the Moors in Africa. Denied a martyr's palm, and enfeebled by sickness,
at the age of twenty-seven he was taking silent but merciless revenge
upon himself in the humblest offices of his community. From this
obscurity he was now called forth, and for nine years France, Italy, and
Sicily heard his voice, saw his miracles, and men's hearts turned to
God. One night, when St. Antony was staying with a friend in the city of
Padua, his host saw brilliant rays streaming under the door of the
Saint's room, and on looking through the keyhole he beheld a little
Child of marvellous beauty standing upon a book which lay open upon the
table, and clinging with both arms round Antony's neck. With an
ineffable sweetness he watched the tender caresses of the Saint and his
wondrous Visitor. At last the Child vanished, and Fra Antonio, opening
the door, charged his friend, by the love of Him Whom he had seen, to
"tell the vision to no

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

man" as long as he was alive. Suddenly, in 1231, our Saint's brief
apostolate was closed, and the voices of children were heard crying
along the streets of Padua, "Our father, St. Antony, is dead." The
following year, the church-bells of Lisbon rang without ringers, while
at Rome one of its sons was inscribed among the Saints of God.

**Reflection**.—Let us love to pray and labor unseen, and cherish in the
secret of our hearts the graces of God and the growth of our immortal
souls. Like St. Antony, let us attend to this, and leave the rest to
God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 14. St. Basil the Great](lots191)

</div>
