<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots055)  [Next](lots057) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### February 13.—ST. CATHERINE OF RICCI.

ALEXANDRINA of Ricci was the daughter of a noble Florentine. At the age
of thirteen she entered the Third Order of St. Dominic in the monastery
of Prato, taking in religion the name of Catherine, after her patron and
namesake of Siena. Her special attraction was to the Passion of Christ,
in which she was permitted miraculously to participate. In the Lent of
1541, being then twenty-one years of age, she had a vision of the
crucifixion so heart-rending that she was confined to bed for three
weeks, and was only restored, on Holy Saturday, by an apparition of St.
Mary Magdalene and Jesus risen. During twelve years she passed every
Friday in ecstasy, She received the sacred

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

stigmata, the wound in the left side, and the crown of thorns. All these
favors gave her continual and intense  suffering, and inspired her with
a loving sympathy for the yet more bitter tortures of the Holy Souls. In
their behalf she offered all her prayers and penances; and her charity
toward them became so famous throughout Tuscany that after every death
the friends of the deceased hastened to Catherine to secure her prayers.
St. Catherine offered many prayers, fasts, and penances for a certain
great man, and thus obtained his salvation. It was revealed to her that
he was in purgatory; and such was her love of Jesus crucified that she
offered to suffer all the pains about to be inflicted on that soul. Her
prayer was granted. The soul entered heaven, and for forty days
Catherine suffered indescribable agonies. Her body was covered with
blisters, emitting heat so great that her cell seemed on fire. Her flesh
appeared as if roasted, and her tongue like red-hot iron. Amid all she
was calm and joyful, saying, "I long to suffer all imaginable pains,
that souls may quickly see and praise their Redeemer." She knew by
revelation the arrival of a soul in. purgatory, and the hour of its
release. She held intercourse with the Saints in glory, and frequently
conversed with St. Philip Neri at Rome without ever leaving her convent
at Prato. She died, amid angels’ songs, in 1589.

**Reflection**.—If we truly love Jesus crucified, we must long, as did
St. Catherine, to release the Holy Souls whom He has redeemed but has
left to our charity to set free.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 14. St. Valentine, Priest and Martyr](lots057)

</div>
