<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots169)  [Next](lots171) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VENERABLE BEDE.

VENERABLE BEDE, the illustrious ornament of the Anglo-Saxon Church and
the first English historian, was consecrated -to God at the age of
seven, and intrusted to the care of St. Benedict Biscop at Wearmouth. He
became a monk in the sister-house of Jarrow, and there trained no less
than six hundred scholars, whom his piety, learning, and sweet
disposition had gathered round him. To the toils of teaching and the
exact observance of his rule he added long hours of private prayer, and
the study of every branch of science and literature then known. He was
familiar with Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. In the treatise which he
compiled for his scholars, still extant, he threw together all that the
world had then stored in history, chronology, physics, music,
philosophy, poetry, arithmetic,

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

and medicine. In his Ecclesiastical History he has left us beautiful
lives of Anglo-Saxon Saints and holy Fathers, while his commentaries on
the Holy Scriptures are still in use by the Church. It was to the study
of the Divine Word that he devoted the whole energy of his soul, and at
times his compunction was so overpowering that his voice would break
with weeping, while the tears of his scholars mingled with his own. He
had little aid from others, and during his later years suffered from
constant illness; yet he worked and prayed up to his last hour.

The Saint was employed in translating the Gospel of St. John from the
Greek up to the hour of his death, which took place on Ascension Day,
735. "He spent that day joyfully," writes one of his scholars. And in
the evening the boy who attended him said, "Dear master, there is yet
one sentence unwritten." He answered, "Write it quickly." Presently the
youth said, "Now it is written" He replied, "Good! thou hast said the
truth—*consummatum est;* take my head into thy hands, for it is very
pleasant to me to sit facing my old praying-place, and there to call
upon my Father." And so on the floor of his cell he sang, "Glory be to
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;" and just as he said "Holy Ghost," he
breathed his last, and went to the realms above.

**Reflection**.—"The more," says the Imitation of Christ, "a man is
united within himself and interiorly simple, so much the more and deeper
things doth he understand without labor; for he receiveth the light of
understanding from on high."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 28. St. Germanus, Bishop](lots171)

</div>
