<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots035)  [Next](lots037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

### January 26.—ST. POLYCARP, Bishop, Martyr.

ST. POLYCARP, Bishop of Smyrna, was a disciple of St. John. He wrote to
the Philippians, exhorting them to mutual love and to hatred of heresy.
When the apostate Marcion met St. Polycarp at Rome, he asked the aged
Saint if he knew him. "Yes," St. Polycarp answered, "I know you for the
first-born of Satan." These were the words of a Saint most loving and
most charitable, and specially noted for his compassion to sinners. He
hated heresy, because he loved God and man so much. In 167, persecution
broke out in Smyrna. When Polycarp heard that his pursuers were at the
door, he said, "The will of God be done; " and meeting them, he begged
to be left alone for a little time, which he spent in prayer for "the
Catholic Church throughout the world." He was brought to Smyrna early on
Holy Saturday; and, as he entered, a voice was heard from heaven,
"Polycarp, be strong." When the proconsul besought him to curse Christ
and go free, Polycarp answered, "Eighty-six years I have served Him, and
He never did me wrong; how can I blaspheme my King and Saviour?" When he
threatened him with fire, Polycarp told him this fire of his lasted but
a little, while the fire prepared for the wicked lasted forever. At the
stake he thanked God aloud for letting him drink of Christ's chalice.
The fire was lighted, but it did him no hurt; so he was stabbed to the
heart, and his dead body was burnt. "Then," say the writers of his acts,
"we took up the bones, more precious than the richest jewels or gold,
and deposited them in a fitting place, at which may God grant us to
assemble with joy to celebrate the birthday of the martyr to his life in
heaven!"

**Reflection**.—If we love Jesus Christ, we shall love the Church and
hate heresy, which rends His mystical body, and destroys the souls for
which He died. Like St. Polycarp, we shall maintain our constancy in the
faith by loves of Jesus Christ, Who is its author and its finisher.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 27. St. John Chrysostom](lots037)

</div>
