<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots108)  [Next](lots110) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### April 3.—ST. RICHARD OF CHICHESTER.

RICHARD was born, 1197, in the little town of Wyche, eight miles from
Worcester, England. He and his elder brother were left orphans when
young, and Richard gave up the studies which he loved, to farm his
brother's impoverished estate. His brother, in gratitude for Richard's
successful care, proposed to make over to him all his lands; but he
refused both the estate and the offer of a brilliant marriage, to study
for the priesthood at Oxford. In 1235 he was appointed, for his learning
and piety, chancellor of that University, and afterwards, by St. Edmund
of Canterbury, chancellor of his diocese. He stood by that Saint in his
long contest with the king, and accompanied him into exile. After St.
Edmund's death Richard returned to England to toil as a simple curate,
but was soon elected Bishop of Chichester in preference to the worthless
nominee of Henry III. The king in revenge refused to recognize the
election, and seized the revenues of the see. Thus Richard found himself
fighting the same 1 battle in which St. Edmund had died. He went to
Lyons, was there consecrated by Innocent IV. in 1245, and returning to
England, in spite of his poverty and the king's hostility, exercised
fully his episcopal rights, and thoroughly reformed his see. After two
years his revenues were restored. Young and old loved St. Richard. He
gave all he had, and worked miracles, to feed the poor and heal the
sick; but when the rights or purity of the Church were concerned he was
inexorable. A priest of noble blood polluted his office by sin; Richard
deprived him of his benefice, and refused the king's petition in his
favor. On the

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

other hand, when a knight violently put a priest in prison, Richard
compelled the knight to walk round the priest's church with the same log
of wood on his neck to which he had chained the priest; and when the
burgesses of Lewes tore a criminal from the church and hanged him,
Richard made them dig up the body from its unconsecrated grave, and bear
it back to the sanctuary they had violated. Richard died in 1253, while
preaching, at the Pope's command, a crusade against the Saracens.

**Reflection**.—As a brother, as chancellor, and as bishop, St. Richard
faithfully performed each duty of his state without a thought of his own
interests. Neglect of duty is the first sign of that self-love which
ends with the loss of grace.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. St. Isidore, Archbishop](lots110)

</div>
