<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots141)  [Next](lots143) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_may"></span>

### May 1.—STS. PHILIP and JAMES, Apostles.

PHILIP was one of the first chosen disciples of Christ. On the way from
Judea to Galilee Our Lord found Philip, and said, "Follow Me" Philip
straightway obeyed; and then in his zeal and charity sought to win
Nathaniel also, saying, "We have found Him of Whom Moses and the
prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth;" and when Nathaniel in wonder
asked, "Can any good come out of Nazareth?" Philip simply answered,
"Come and see," and brought him to Jesus. Another characteristic saying
of this apostle is preserved for us by St. John. Christ in His last
discourse had spoken of His Father; and Philip exclaimed, in the fervor
of his thirst for God, "Lord, show us the Father, and it is enough"

St. James the Less, the author of an inspired epistle, was also one of
the Twelve. St. Paul tells us that he was favored by a special
apparition of Christ after the Resurrection. On the dispersion of the
apostles among the nations, St. James was left as Bishop of Jerusalem;
and even the Jews held in such high veneration his purity,
mortification, and prayer, that they named him the Just. The earliest of
Church historians has handed down many

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

traditions of St. James's sanctity. He was always a virgin, says
Hegesippus, and consecrated to God. He drank no wine, wore no sandals on
his feet, and but a single garment on his body. He prostrated himself so
much in prayer that the skin of his knees was hardened like a camel's
hoof. The Jews, it is said, used out of respect to touch the hem of his
garment. He was indeed a living proof of his own words, "The wisdom that
is from above first indeed is chaste, then peaceable, modest, full of
mercy and good fruits." He sat beside St. Peter and St. Paul at the
Council of Jerusalem; and when St. Paul at a later time escaped the fury
of the Jews by appealing to Cæsar, the people took vengeance on James,
and crying, "The just one hath erred," stoned him to death.

**Reflection**.—The Church commemorates on the same day Sts. Philip and
James, whose bodies lie side by side at Rome. They represent to us two
aspects of Christian holiness. The first preaches faith, the second
works; the one holy aspirations, the other purity of heart.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. St. Athanasius, Bishop](lots143)

</div>
