<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots018)  [Next](lots020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### January 9.—SS. JULIAN and BASILISSA, Martyrs.

ST. JULIAN and St. Basilissa, though married, lived, by mutual consent,
in perpetual chastity; they sanctified themselves by the most perfect
exercises of an ascetic life, and employed their revenues in relieving
the poor and the sick. For this purpose they converted their house into
a kind of hospital, in which they sometimes entertained a thousand poor
people. Basilissa attended those of her sex, in separate lodgings from
the men; these were taken care of by Julian, who from his charity is
named the Hospitalarian. Egypt, where they lived, had then begun to
abound with examples of persons who, either in the cities or in the
deserts, devoted themselves to the most perfect exercises of charity,
penance, and mortification.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Basilissa, after
having stood seven persecutions, died in peace; Julian survived her many
years and received the crown of a glorious martyrdom, together with
Celsus, a youth, Antony, a priest, Anastasius, and Marcianilla, the
mother of Celsus. Many churches and hospitals in the East, and
especially in the West, bear the name of one or other of these martyrs.
Four churches at Rome, and three out of five at Paris, which bear the
name of St. Julian, were originally dedicated under the name of St.
Julian, the Hospitalarian and martyr. In the time of St. Gregory the
Great, the skull of St. Julian was brought out of the East into France,
and given to Queen Brunehault; she gave it to the nunnery which she
founded at Étampes; part of it is at present in the monastery of
Morigny, near Étampes, and part in the church of the regular canonesses
of St. Basilissa at Paris.

**Reflection**.—God often rewards men for works that are pleasing in His
sight by giving them grace and opportunity to do other works higher
still. St. Augustine said, "have never seen a compassionate and
charitable man die a bad death"

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10. St. William, Archbishop](lots020)

</div>
