<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots094)  [Next](lots096) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### March 20.—ST. WULFRAN, Archbishop.

His father was an officer in the armies of King Dagobert, and the Saint
spent some years in the court of King Clotaire III. and of his mother,
St. Bathildes, but occupied his heart only, on God, despising worldly
greatness

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

as empty and dangerous, and daily advancing in virtue. His estate of
Maurilly he bestowed on the Abbey of Fontenelle, or St. Vandrille, in
Normandy. He was chosen and consecrated Archbishop of Sens in 682, which
diocese he governed two years and a half with great zeal and sanctity. A
tender compassion for the blindness of the idolaters of Friesland, and
the example of the English zealous preachers in those parts, moved him
to resign his bishopric, with proper advice, and after a retreat at
Fontenelle to enter Friesland in quality of a poor missionary priest. He
baptized great multitudes, among them a son of King Radbod, and drew the
people from the barbarous custom of sacrificing men to idols. On a
certain occasion, one Ovon having been selected as a victim of a
sacrifice to the heathen gods, St. Wulfran earnestly begged his life of
King Radbod; but the people ran tumultuously to the palace, and would
not suffer what they called a sacrilege. After many words they
consented, but on condition that Wulfran's God should save Ovon's life.
The Saint betook himself to prayer; the man, after hanging on the gibbet
two hours, and being left for dead, fell to the ground by the breaking
of the cord; being found alive he was given to the Saint, and became a
monk and priest at Fontenelle. Wulfran also miraculously rescued two
children from being drowned in honor of the idols. Radbod, who had been
an  eye-witness to this last miracle, promised to become a Christian;
but as he was going to step into the baptismal font he asked where the
great number of his ancestors and nobles were in the next world. The
Saint replied that hell is the portion of all who die guilty of
idolatry; at which the prince refused to be baptized, saying he would go
with the greater number. This tyrant sent afterwards to St. Willibrord
to treat with him about his conversion, but before the arrival of the
Saint was found dead. St. Wulfran retired to Fontenelle that he might
prepare himself for death, and expired there on the 20th of April, 720.

**Reflection**.—In every age the Catholic Church is a missionary church.
She has received the world for her inheritance, and in our own days many
missioners have watered with their blood the lands in which they
labored.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Help the
propagation of the faith by alms, and above all by prayers. You will
quicken your own faith and gain a part in the merits of the glorious
apostolate.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 21. St. Benedict, Abbot](lots096)

</div>
