<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots105)  [Next](lots107) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### March 31.—ST. BENJAMIN, Deacon, Martyr.

ISDEGERDES, Son of Sapor III., put a stop to the cruel persecutions
against the Christians in Persia, which had been begun by Sapor II., and
the Church had enjoyed twelve years' peace in that kingdom, when in 420
it was disturbed by the indiscreet zeal of Abdas, a Christian

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

bishop, who burned down the Pyræum, or Temple of Fire, the great
divinity of the Persians. King Isdegerdes thereupon demolished all the
Christian churches in Persia, put to death Abdas, and raised a general
persecution against the Church, which continued forty years with great
fury. Isdegerdes died the year following, in 421. But his son and
successor, Varanes, carried on the persecution with greater inhumanity.
The very recital of the cruelties he exercised on the Christian strikes
us with horror. Among the glorious champions of Christ was St. Benjamin,
a deacon. The tyrant caused him to be beaten and imprisoned. He had lain
a year in the dungeon, when an ambassador from the emperor obtained his
release on condition that he should never speak to any of the courtiers
about religion. The ambassador passed his word in his behalf that he
would not; but Benjamin, who was a minister of the Gospel, declared that
he should miss no opportunity of announcing Christ. The king, being
informed that he still preached the Faith in his kingdom, ordered him to
be apprehended, caused reeds to be run in between the nails and the
flesh, both of his hands and feet, and to be thrust into other most
tender parts, and drawn out again, and this to be frequently repeated
with violence. Lastly, a knotty stake was thrust into his bowels, to
rend and tear them, in which torment he expired in the year 424.

**Reflection**.—We entreat you, O most holy martyrs, who cheerfully
suffered most cruel torments for God our Saviour and His love, on which
account you are now most intimately and familiarly united to Him, that
you pray to the Lord for us miserable sinners, covered with filth, that
He infuse into us the grace of Christ, that it may enlighten our souls
that we may love Him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1. St. Hugh, Bishop](lots107)

</div>
