<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots226)  [Next](lots228) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### July 19.—ST. VINCENT OF PAUL.

ST. VINCENT was born in 1576. In after-years, when adviser of the queen
and oracle of the Church in France, he loved to recount how, in his
youth, he had guarded his father's pigs. Soon after his ordination he

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

was captured by corsairs, and carried into Barbary. He converted his
renegade master, and escaped with him to France. Appointed
chaplain-general of the galleys of France, his tender charity brought
hope into those prisons where hitherto despair had reigned. A mother
mourned her imprisoned son. Vincent put on his chains and took his place
at the oar, and gave him to his mother. His charity embraced the poor,
young and old, provinces desolated by civil war, Christians enslaved by
the infidel. The poor man, ignorant and degraded, was to him the image
of Him Who became as "a leper and no man." "Turn the medal," he said,
"and you then will see Jesus Christ." He went through the streets of
Paris at night, seeking the children who were left there to die. Once
robbers rushed upon him, thinking he carried a treasure, but when he
opened his cloak, they recognized him and his burden, and fell at his
feet. Not only was St. Vincent the saviour of the poor, but also of the
rich, for he taught them to do works of mercy. When the work for the
foundlings was in danger of failing from want of funds, he assembled the
ladies of the Association of Charity. He bade his most fervent daughters
be present to give the spur to the others. Then he said, "Compassion and
charity have made you adopt these little creatures as your children. You
have been their mothers according to grace, when their own mothers
abandoned them. Cease to be their mothers, that you may become their
judges; their life and death are in your hands. I shall now take your
votes: it is time to pronounce sentence" The tears of the assembly were
his only answer, and the work was continued. The Society of St. Vincent,
the Priests of the Mission, and 25,000 Sisters of Charity still comfort
the afflicted with the charity of St. Vincent of Paul. He died in 1660.

**Reflection**.—Most people who profess piety ask advice of directors
about their prayers and spiritual exercises. Few inquire whether they
are not in danger of damnation from neglect of works of charity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 20. St. Margaret, Virgin and Martyr](lots228)

</div>
