<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots218)  [Next](lots220) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### July 11.—ST. JAMES, Bishop.

THIS eminent Saint and glorious Doctor of the Syriac Church was a native
of Nisibis, in Mesopotamia. In his youth, entering the world, he
trembled at the sight of its vices and the slippery path of its
pleasures, and he thought it the safer part to strengthen himself in
retirement, that he might afterward be the better able to stand his
ground in the field. He accordingly chose the highest mountain for his
abode, sheltering himself in a cave in the winter, and the rest of the
year living in the woods, continually exposed to the open air.
Notwithstanding his desire to live unknown to men, he was discovered,
and many were not afraid to climb the rugged rocks that they might
recommend themselves to his prayers and receive the comfort of his
spiritual advice. He was favored with the gifts of prophecy and miracles
in an uncommon measure. One day, as he was travelling, he was accosted
by a gang of

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

beggars, with the view of extorting money from him under pretence of
burying their companion, who lay stretched on the ground as if he were
dead. The holy man gave them what they asked, and "offering up
supplications to God as for a soul departed, he prayed that his Divine
Majesty would pardon him the sins he had committed whilst he lived, and
that he would admit him into the company of the Saints." As soon as the
Saint was gone by, the beggars, calling upon their companion to rise and
take his share of the booty, were surprised to find him really dead.
Seized with sudden fear and grief, they shrieked in the utmost
consternation, and immediately ran after the man of God, cast themselves
at his feet, confessed the cheat, begged forgiveness, and besought him
by his prayers to restore their unhappy companion to life, which the
Saint did. The most famous miracle of our Saint was that by which he
protected his native city from the barbarians. Sapor II., the haughty
King of Persia, besieged Nisibis with the whole strength of his empire,
whilst our Saint was Bishop. The Bishop would not pray for the
destruction of any one, but he implored the Divine Mercy that the city
might be delivered from the calamities of so long a siege. Afterward,
going to the top of a high tower, and turning his face towards the
enemy, and seeing the prodigious multitude of men and beasts which
covered the whole country, he said, "Lord, Thou art able by the weakest
means to humble the pride of Thy enemies; defeat these multitudes by an
army of gnats." God heard the humble prayer of His servant. Scarce had
the Saint spoken those words, when whole clouds of gnats and flies came
pouring down upon the Persians, got into the elephants’ trunks and the
horses’ ears and nostrils, which made them chafe and foam, throw their
riders, and put the whole army into confusion and disorder. A famine and
pestilence, which followed, carried off a great part of the army; and
Sapor, after lying above three months before the place, set fire to all
his own engines of war, and was forced to abandon the siege and return
home with the loss of twenty thousand men. Sapor received a third foil
under the walls of Nisibis, in 359, upon which he turned his arms
against Amidus, took that strong city, and put the garrison and the
greatest part of

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

the inhabitants to the sword. The citizens of Nisibis attributed their
preservation to the intercession of their glorious patron, St. James,
although he had already gone to his reward. He died in 350.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12. St. John Gualbert](lots220)

</div>
