<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots046)  [Next](lots048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### February 5.—ST. AGATHA, Virgin, Martyr.

ST. AGATHA was born in Sicily, of rich and noble parents—a child of
benediction from the first, for she was promised to her parents before
her birth, and consecrated from her earliest infancy to God. In the
midst of dangers and temptations she served Christ in purity of body and
soul, and she died for the love of chastity. Quintanus, who governed
Sicily under the Emperor Decius, had heard the rumor of her beauty and
wealth, and he made the laws against the Christians a pretext for
summoning her from Palermo to Catania, where he was at the time. "O
Jesus Christ!" she cried, as she set out on this dreaded journey, "all
that I am is Thine; preserve me against the tyrant."

And Our Lord did indeed preserve one who had given herself so utterly to
Him. He kept her pure and undefiled while she was imprisoned for a whole
month under charge of an evil woman. He gave her strength to reply to
the offer of her life and safety, if she would but consent to sin,
"Christ alone is my life and my salvation." When Quintanus turned from
passion to cruelty, and cut off her breasts, Our Lord sent the Prince of
His apostles to heal her. And when, after she had been rolled naked upon
potsherds, she asked that her torments might be ended, her Spouse heard
her prayer and took her to Himself.

St. Agatha gave herself without reserve to Jesus Christ; she followed
Him in virginal purity, and then looked to Him for protection. And down
to this day Christ has shown His tender regard for the very body of St.
Agatha. Again and again, during the eruptions of Mount Etna, the people
of Catania have exposed her veil for public veneration, and found safety
by this means; and in modern times, on opening the tomb in which her
body lies waiting

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

for the resurrection, they beheld the skin still entire, and felt the
sweet fragrance which issued from this temple of the Holy Ghost.

**Reflection**.—Purity is a gift of God: we can gain it and preserve it
only by care and diligence in avoiding all that may prove an incentive
to sin.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. The Martyrs of Japan](lots048)

</div>
