<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots125)  [Next](lots127) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### April 18.—ST. APOLLONIUS, Martyr.

MARCUS AURELIUS had persecuted the Christians, but his son Commodus, who
in 180 succeeded him, showed himself favorable to them out of regard to
his Empress Marcia, who was an admirer of the Faith. During this calm
the number of the faithful was exceedingly increased, and many persons
of the first rank, among them Apollonius, a Roman senator, enlisted
themselves under the banner of the cross. He was a person very well
versed both in philosophy and the Holy Scripture. In the midst of the
peace which the Church enjoyed, he was publicly accused of Christianity
by one of his own slaves. The slave was immediately condemned to have
his legs broken, and to be put to death, in consequence of an edict of
Marcus Aurelius, who, without repealing the former laws against
convicted Christians, ordered by it that their accusers should be put to
death. The slave being executed, the same judge sent an order to St.
Apollonius to renounce his religion as he valued his life and fortune.
The Saint courageously rejected such ignominious terms of safety,
wherefore Perennis referred him to the judgment of the Roman senate, to
give an account of his faith to that body. Persisting in his refusal to
comply with the condition, the Saint was condemned by a decree of the
Senate, and beheaded about the year 186.

**Refection**.—It is the prerogative of the Christian religion to
inspire men with such resolution, and form them to such heroism, that
they rejoice to sacrifice their life to truth. This is not the bare
force and exertion of nature, but the undoubted power of the Almighty,
Whose strength is thus made perfect in weakness. Every Christian ought,

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

by his manner, to bear witness to the sanctity of his faith. Such would
be the force of universal good example, that no libertine or infidel
could withstand it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 19. St. Elphege, Archbishop](lots127)

</div>
