<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots086)  [Next](lots088) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

### March 12.—ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.

GREGORY was a Roman of noble birth, and while still young was governor
of Rome. On his father's death he gave his great wealth to the poor,
turned his house on the Cœlian Hill into a monastery, which now bears
his name, and for some years lived as a perfect monk. The Pope drew him
from his seclusion to make him one of the seven deacons of Rome; and he
did great service to the Church for many years as what we now call
Nuncio to the Imperial court at Constantinople. While still a monk the
saint was struck with some boys who were exposed for sale in Rome, and
heard with sorrow that they were pagans. "And of what race are they?" he
asked. "They are Angles." "Worthy indeed to be Angels of God," said he.
"And of what province?" "Of Deira," was the reply. "Truly must we rescue
them from the wrath of God. And what is the name of their king?" "He is
called Ella." "It is well," said Gregory; "Alleluia must be sung in
their land to God." He at once got leave from the Pope, and had set out
to convert the English when the murmurs of the people led the Pope to
recall him. Still the Angles were not forgotten, and one of the Saint's
first cares as Pope was to send from his own monastery St. Augustine and
other monks to England. On the death of Pope Pelagius II., Gregory was
compelled to take the government of the Church, and for fourteen years
his pontificate was a perfect model of ecclesiastical rule. He healed
schisms; revived discipline; saved Italy by converting the wild Arian
Lombards who were laying it waste; aided in the conversion of the
Spanish and French Goths, who were also Arians; and kindled anew in
Britain the light of the Faith, which the English had put out in blood.
He set in order the Church's prayers and chant, guided and consoled her
pastors with innumerable letters, and preached incessantly, most
effectually by his own example. He died A. D. 604, worn out by
austerities and toils; and the Church reckons him one of her four great
doctors, and reveres him as St. Gregory the Great.

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

**Reflection**.—The champions of faith prove the truth of their teaching
no less by the holiness of their lives than by the force of their
arguments. Never forget that to con Pert others you must first see to
your own soul.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 13. St. Euphrasia, Virgin](lots088)

</div>
