<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots188)  [Next](lots190) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### June 12.—ST. JOHN OF ST. FAGONDEZ.

ST. JOHN was born at St. Fagondez, in Spain. At an early age he held
several benefices in the diocese of Burgos, till the reproaches of his
conscience forced him to resign them all except one chapel, where he
said Mass daily, preached, and catechised. After this he studied
theology at Salamanca, and then labored for some time as a most devoted
missionary priest. Ultimately he became a hermit of the Augustinian
Order, in the same city. There his life was marked by a singular
devotion to the Holy Mass. Each night after Matins he remained in prayer
till the hour of celebration, when he offered the Adorable Sacrifice
with the most tender piety, often enjoying the sight of Jesus in glory,
and holding sweet colloquies with Him. The power of his personal
holiness was seen in his preaching, which produced a complete
reformation in Salamanca. He had a special gift of reconciling
differences, and was enabled to put an end to the quarrels and feuds
among noblemen, at that period very common and fatal. The boldness shown
by St. John in reproving vice endangered his life. A powerful noble,
having been corrected by the Saint for oppressing his vassals, sent two
assassins to slay him. The holiness of the Saint's aspect, however,
caused by that peace which continually reigned in his soul, struck such
awe into their minds that they could not execute their purpose, but
humbly besought his forgiveness. And the nobleman himself, falling sick,
was brought to repentance, and recovered his health by the prayers of
the Saint whom he had endeavored to murder. He was also most zealous in
denouncing those hideous vices which are a fruitful source of strife,
and it was in defence of holy purity that he met his death. A lady of
noble birth but

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

evil life, whose companion in sin St. John had converted, contrived to
administer a fatal poison to the Saint. After several months of terrible
suffering, borne with unvarying patience, St. John went to his reward on
June 11, 1479.

**Reflection**.—All men desire peace, but those alone enjoy it who, like
St. John, are completely dead to themselves, and love to bear all things
for Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 13. St. Antony of Padua](lots190)

</div>
