<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots154)  [Next](lots156) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### May 14.—ST. PACHOMIUS, Abbot.

IN the beginning of the fourth century great levies of troops were made
throughout Egypt for the service of the Roman emperor. Among the
recruits was Pachomius, a young heathen, then in his twenty-first year.
On his way down the Nile he passed a village, whose inhabitants gave him
food and money. Marvelling at this kindness, Pachomius was told they
were Christians, and hoped for a reward in the life to come. He then
prayed God to show him the truth, and promised to devote his life to His

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

service. On being discharged, he returned to a Christian village in
Egypt, where he was instructed and baptized. Instead of going home, he
sought Palemon, an aged solitary, to learn from him a perfect life, and
with great joy embraced the most severe austerities. Their food was
bread and water, once a day in summer, and once in two days in winter;
sometimes they added herbs, but mixed ashes with them. They only slept
one hour each night, and this short repose Pachomius took sitting
upright without support. Three times God revealed to him that he was to
found a religious order at Tabenna; and an angel gave him a rule of
life. Trusting in God, he built a monastery, although he had no
disciples; but vast multitudes soon flocked to him, and he trained them
in perfect detachment from creatures and from self. One day a monk, by
dint of great exertions, contrived to make two mats instead of the one
which was the usual daily task, and set them both out in front of his
cell, that Pachomius might see how diligent he had been. But the Saint,
perceiving the vainglory which had prompted the act, said, "This brother
has taken a great deal of pains from morning till night to give his work
to the devil" Then, to cure him of his delusion, Pachomius imposed on
him as a penance to keep his cell for five months and to taste no food
but bread and water. His visions and miracles were innumerable, and he
read all hearts. His holy death occurred in 348.

**Reflection**.—"To live in great simplicity," said St. Pachomius, "and
in a wise ignorance, is exceeding wise."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 15. Sts. Peter and Dionysia](lots156)

</div>
