<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots213)  [Next](lots215) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

### ST. PALLADIUS, Bishop, Apostle of the Scots.

THE name of Palladius shows this Saint to have been a Roman, and most
authors agree that he was deacon of the Church of Rome. At least St.
Prosper, in his chronicle, informs us that when Agricola, a noted
Pelagian, had corrupted the churches of Britain by introducing that
pestilential heresy, Pope Celestine, at the instance of Palladius the
deacon, in 429, sent thither St. Germanus, Bishop of Auxerre, in quality
of his legate, who, having ejected the heretics, brought back the
Britons to the Catholic faith. In 431 Pope Celestine sent Palladius, the
first bishop, to the Scots then believing in Christ. The Irish writers
of the lives of St. Patrick say that St. Palladius had preached in
Ireland a little before St. Patrick, but that he was soon banished by
the King of Leinster, and returned to North Britain, where he had first
opened his mission. There seems to be no doubt that he was sent to the
whole nation of the Scots, several colonies of whom had passed from
Ireland into North Britain, and possessed themselves of part of the
country since called Scotland. After St. Palladius had left Ireland, he
arrived among the Scots in North Britain, according to St. Prosper, in
the consulate of Bassus and Antochius, in the year of Christ 431. He
preached there with great zeal, and formed a considerable Church. The
Scottish historians tell us that the Faith was planted in North Britain
about the year 200, in the time of King Donald, when Victor was Pope of
Rome. But they all acknowledge that Palladius was the first bishop in
that country, and style him their first apostle. The Saint died at
Fordun, fifteen miles from Aberdeen, about the year 450.

**Reflection**.—St. Palladius surmounted every obstacle which a fierce
nation had opposed to the establishment of the kingdom of Jesus Christ.
Ought not our hearts to be impressed with the most lively sentiments of
love and gratitude to our merciful God for having raised up such great
and zealous men, by whose ministry the light of true faith has been
conveyed to us?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. St. Pantænus, Father of the Church](lots215)

</div>
