<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots024)  [Next](lots026) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

### January 15.—ST. PAUL, the First Hermit.

ST. PAUL was born in Upper Egypt, about the year 230, and became an
orphan at the age of fifteen. He was very rich and highly educated.
Fearing lest the tortures of a terrible persecution might endanger his
Christian perseverance, he retired into a remote village. But his pagan
brother-in-law denounced him, and St. Paul, rather than remain where his
faith was in danger, entered the barren desert, trusting that God would
supply his wants. And his confidence was rewarded; for on the spot to
which Providence led him he found the fruit of the palm-tree for food,
and its leaves for clothing, and the water of a spring for drink. His
first design was to return to the world when the persecution was over;
but, tasting great delights in prayer and penance, he remained the rest
of his life, ninety years, in penance, prayer, and contemplation. God
revealed his existence to St. Antony, who sought him for three days.
Seeing a thirsty she-wolf run through an opening in the rocks, Antony
followed her to look for water, and found Paul. They knew each other at
once, and praised God together. When St. Antony visited him, a raven
brought him a loaf, and St. Paul said, "See how good God is! For sixty
years this bird has brought me half a loaf every day; now thou art come,
Christ has doubled the provision for His servants." Having passed the
night in prayer, at dawn of day Paul told Antony that he was about to
die, and asked to be buried in the cloak given to Antony by St.
Athanasius. Antony hastened to fetch it, and on his way back saw Paul
rise to heaven in glory. He found his dead body kneeling as if in
prayer, and two lions came and dug his grave. Paul died in his one
hundred and thirteenth year.

**Reflection**.—We shall never repent of having trusted in God, for He
cannot fail those who lean on Him; nor shall We ever trust in ourselves
without being deceived.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 16. St. Honoratus, Archbishop](lots026)

</div>
