<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots088)  [Next](lots090) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### March 14.—ST. MAUD. Queen

THIS princess was daughter of Theodoric, a powerful  Saxon count. Her
parents placed her very young in the monastery of Erford, of which her
grandmother Maud was then abbess. Our Saint remained in that house, an
accomplished model of all virtues, till her parents married her to
Henry, son of Otho, Duke of Saxony, in 913, who was afterwards chosen
king of Germany. He was s pious and victorious prince, and very tender
of his subjects. Whilst by his arms he checked the insolence of the
Hungarians and Danes, and enlarged his dominions by adding to them
Bavaria, Maud gained domestic victories over her spiritual enemies more
worthy of a Christian and far greater in the eyes of Heaven. She
nourished the precious seeds of devotion and humility in her heart by
assiduous prayer and meditation. It was her delight to visit, comfort,
and exhort the sick and the afflicted; to serve and instruct the poor,
and to afford her charitable succor to prisoners. Her husband, edified
by her example, concurred with her in every pious undertaking which she
projected. After twenty-three years' marriage God was pleased to call
the king to himself, in 936. Maud, during his sickness, went to the
church to pour forth her soul in prayer for him at the foot of the
altar. As soon as she understood, by the tears and cries of the people,
that he had expired, she called for a priest that was fasting to offer
the holy sacrifice for his soul. She had three sons: Otho, afterwards
emperor; Henry, Duke of Bavaria; and St. Brunn, Archbishop of Cologne.
Otho was crowned king of Germany in 937, and emperor at Rome in 962,
after his victories over the Bohemians and Lombards. The two oldest sons
conspired to strip Maud of her dowry, on the unjust pretence that she
had

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

squandered the revenues of the state on the poor. The unnatural princes
at length repented of their injustice, and restored to her all that had
been taken from her. She then became more liberal in her alms than ever,
and founded many churches, with five monasteries. In her last sickness
she made her confession to her grandson William, the Archbishop of
Mentz, who yet died twelve days before her, on his road home. She again
made a public confession before the priests and monks of the place,
received a second time the last sacraments, and, lying on a sack-cloth,
with ashes on her head, died on the 14th of March in 968.

**Reflection**.—The beginning of true virtue is most ardently to desire
it, and to ask it of God with the utmost assiduity and earnestness.
Fervent prayer, holy meditation, and reading pious books, are the
principal means by which this virtue is to be constantly improved, and
the interior life of the soul to be strengthened.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 15. St. Zachary, Pope](lots090)

</div>
