<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots083)  [Next](lots085) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### March 9.—ST. FRANCES OF ROME.

FRANCES was born at Rome in 1384. Her parents were, of high rank. They
overruled her desire to become a nun, and at twelve years of age married
her to Rorenzo Ponziano, a Roman noble. During the forty years or their
married life they never had a disagreement. While spending her days in
retirement and prayer, she attended promptly to every household duty,
saying, "A married woman must leave God at the altar to find Him in her
domestic cares;" and she once found the verse of a psalm in which she
had been four times thus interrupted completed for her in letters of
gold. Her ordinary food was dry bread. Secretly she would exchange with
beggars good food for their hard crusts; her drink was water, and her
cup a human skull. During the invasion of Rome, in 1413, Ponziano was
banished, his estates confiscated, his house destroyed, and his eldest
son taken as a hostage. Prances saw in these losses only the finger of
God, and blessed His holy name. When peace was restored Ponziano
recovered his estate, and Frances founded the Oblates. After her
husband's death, barefoot and with a cord about her neck she begged
admission to the community,

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

and was soon elected Superioress. She lived always in the presence of
God, and amongst many visions was given constant sight of her angel
guardian, who shed such brightness around him that the Saint could read
her midnight Office by this light alone. He shielded her in the hour of
temptation, and directed her in every good act. But when she was
betrayed into some defect, he faded from her sight; and when some light
words were spoken before her, he covered his face in shame. She died on
the day she had foretold, March 9, 1440.

**Reflection**.—God has appointed an angel to guard each one of us, to
whose warnings we are bound to attend. Let us listen to his voice here,
and we shall see him hereafter when he leads us before the throne of
God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10. The Forty Martyrs of Sebaste](lots085)

</div>
