<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots049)  [Next](lots051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### February 7.—ST. ROMUALD, Abbot.

IN 976, Sergius, a nobleman of Ravenna, quarrelled with a relative about
an estate, and slew him in a duel. His son Romuald, horrified at his
father's crime, entered the Benedictine monastery at Classe, to do a
forty days’ penance for him. This penance ended in his own vocation to
religion. After three years at Classe, Romuald went to live as a hermit
near Venice, where he was joined by Peter Urseolus, Duke of Venice, and
together they led a most austere life in the midst of assaults from the
evil spirits. St. Romuald founded many monasteries, the chief of which
was that at Camaldoli, a wild desert place, where he built a church,
which he surrounded with a number of separate cells for the solitaries
who lived under his rule. His disciples were hence called Camaldolese.
He is said to have seen here a vision of a mystic ladder, and his
white-clothed monks ascending by it to heaven. Among his first disciples
were Sts. Adalbert and Boniface, apostles of Russia, and Sts. John and
Benedict of Poland, martyrs for the faith. He was an intimate friend of
the Emperor St. Henry, and was reverenced and consulted by many great
men of his time. He once passed seven years in solitude and complete
silence.

In his youth St. Romuald was much troubled by temptations of the flesh.
To escape them he had recourse to hunting, and in the woods first
conceived his love for

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

solitude. His father's sin, as we have seen, first prompted him to
undertake a forty days' penance in the monastery, which he forthwith
made his home. Some bad example of his fellow monks induced him to leave
them and adopt the solitary mode of life. The penance of Urseolus, who
had obtained his power wrongfully, brought him his first disciple; the
temptations of the devil compelled him to his severe life; and finally
the persecutions of others were the occasion of his settlement at
Camaldoli, and the foundation of his Order. He died, as he had foretold
twenty years before, alone, in his monastery of Val Castro, on the 19th
of June, 1027.

**Reflection**.—St. Romuald's life teaches us that, if we only follow
the impulse of the Holy Spirit, we shall easily find good everywhere,
even on the most unlikely occasions. Our own sins, the sins of others,
their ill will against us, or our own mistakes and misfortunes, are
equally capable of leading us, with softened hearts, to the feet of
God's mercy and love.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8. St. John of Matha](lots051)

</div>
