<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots163)  [Next](lots165) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### May 23.—ST. JULIA, Virgin, Martyr.

JULIA was a noble virgin of Carthage, who, when the city was token by
Genseric in 439, was sold for a slave to a pagan merchant of Syria named
Eusebius. Under the most mortifying employments of her station, by
cheerfulness and patience she found a happiness and comfort which the
world could not have afforded. All the time she was not employed in her
master's business was devoted to prayer and reading books of piety. Her
master, who was charmed with her fidelity and other virtues, thought
proper to carry her with him on one of his voyages to Gaul. Having
reached the northern part of Corsica, he cast anchor, and went on shore
to join the pagans of the place in an idolatrous festival. Julia was
left at some distance, because she would not be defiled by the
superstitious ceremonies which she openly reviled. Felix, the governor
of the island, who was a bigoted pagan, asked who this woman was who
dared to insult the gods. Eusebius informed him that she was a
Christian, and that all his authority over her was too weak to prevail
with her to renounce her religion, but that he found her so diligent and
faithful he could not part with her. The governor offered him four of
his best female slaves in exchange for her. But the merchant replied,
"No; all you are worth will not purchase her; for I would freely lose
the most valuable thing I have in the world rather than be deprived of
her." However, the governor, while Eusebius was drunk and asleep, took
upon him to compel her to sacrifice to his gods. He offered to procure
her liberty if she would comply. The Saint made answer that she was as
free as she desired to be as long as she was allowed to serve Jesus
Christ.

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Felix, thinking
himself derided by her undaunted and resolute air, in a transport of
rage caused her to be struck on the face, and the hair of her head to be
torn off, and, lastly, ordered her to be hanged on a cross till she
expired. Certain monks of the isle of Gorgon carried off her body; but
in 763 Desiderius, King of Lombardy, removed her relics to Brescia,
where her memory is celebrated with great devotion.

**Reflection**.—St. Julia, whether free or a slave, whether in
prosperity or in adversity, was equally fervent and devout. She adored
all the sweet designs of Providence; and far from complaining, she never
ceased to praise and thank God under all His holy appointments, making
them always the means of her virtue and sanctification. God, by an
admirable chain of events, raised her by her fidelity to the honor of
the saints, and to the dignity of a virgin and martyr.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 24. Sts. Donatian and Rogatian, Martyrs](lots165)

</div>
