<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots229)  [Next](lots231) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### July 21.—ST. VICTOR, Martyr.

THE Emperor Maximian, reeking with the blood of the Thebæan legion and
many other martyrs, arrived at Marseilles, where the Church then
flourished. The tyrant breathed here nothing but slaughter and fury, and
his coming filled the Christians with fear and alarm. In this general
consternation, Victor, a Christian officer in the troops, went about in
the night-time from house to house, visiting the faithful and inspiring
them with contempt of a temporal death and the love of eternal life. He
was surprised in this, and brought before the prefects Asterius and
Eutychius, who exhorted him not to lose the fruit of all his services
and the favor of his prince for the worship of a dead man, as they
called Jesus Christ. He answered that he renounced those recompenses if
he could not enjoy them without being unfaithful to Jesus Christ, the
eternal Son of God, Who vouchsafed to become man for our salvation, but
Who raised Himself from the dead, and reigns with the Father, being God
equally with Him. The whole court heard him with shouts of rage. Victor
was bound hand and foot and dragged through the streets of the city,
exposed to the blows and insults of the populace. He was brought back
bruised and bloody to the tribunal of the prefects, who, thinking his
resolution must have been weakened by his sufferings, pressed him again
to adore their gods. But the martyr, filled with the Holy Ghost,
expressed his respect for the emperor and his contempt for their gods.
He was then hoisted on the rack and tortured a long time, until, the
tormentors being at last weary, the prefect ordered him to be taken down
and thrown into a dark dungeon. At midnight, God visited him by His
angels; the prison was filled with a light brighter than that of the
sun, and the martyr sung with the angels the praises of God. Three
soldiers who guarded the prison,

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

seeing this light, cast themselves at the martyr's feet, asked his
pardon, and desired Baptism. Victor instructed them as well as time
would permit, sent for priests the same night, and, going with them to
the seaside, had them baptized, and returned with them again to his
prison. The next morning Maximian was informed of the conversion of the
guards, and in a transport of rage sent officers to bring them all four
before him. The three soldiers persevered in the confession of Jesus
Christ, and by the emperor's orders were forthwith beheaded. Victor,
after having been exposed to the insults of the whole city and beaten
with clubs and scourged with leather thongs, was carried back to prison,
where he continued three days, recommending to God his martyrdom with
many tears. After that term the emperor called him again before his
tribunal, and commanded the martyr to offer incense to a statue of
Jupiter. Victor went up to the profane altar, and by a kick of his foot
threw it down. The emperor ordered the foot to be forthwith chopped off,
which the Saint suffered with great joy, offering to God these
first-fruits of his body. A few moments after, the emperor condemned him
to be put under the grindstone of a hand-mill and crushed to death. The
executioners turned the wheel, and when part of his body was bruised and
crushed the mill broke down. The Saint still breathed a little, but his
head was immediately ordered to be cut off. His and the other three
bodies were thrown into the sea, but, being cast ashore, were buried by
the Christians in a grotto hewn out of a rock.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 22. St. Mary Magdalen](lots231)

</div>
