<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots196)  [Next](lots198) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### June 20.—ST. SILVERIUS, Pope and Martyr.

SILVERIUS was son of Pope Hermisdas, who had been married before he
entered the ministry. Upon the death of St. Agapetas, after a vacancy of
forty-seven days, Silverius, then subdeacon, was chosen Pope, and
ordained on the 8th of June, 536.

Theodora, the empress of Justinian, resolved to promote the sect of the
Acephali. She endeavored to win Silverius over to her interest, and
wrote to him, ordering that he should acknowledge Anthimus lawful
bishop, or repair in person to Constantinople and reëxamine his cause on
the spot. Without the least hesitation or delay, Silverius returned her
a short answer, by which he peremptorily gave her to understand that he
neither could nor would obey her unjust demands and betray the cause of
the Catholic faith. The empress, finding that she could expect nothing
from him, resolved to have him deposed. Vigilius, archdeacon of the
Roman Church, a man of address, was then at Constantinople. To him the
empress made her application, and finding him taken by the bait of
ambition, promised to make him Pope, and to bestow on him seven hundred
pieces of gold, provided he would engage himself to condemn the Council
of Chalcedon and receive to Communion the three deposed Eutychian
patriarchs, Anthimus of Constantinople, Severus of Antioch, and
Theodosius of Alexandria. The unhappy Vigilius having assented to these
conditions, the empress sent him to Rome, charged with a letter to the
general Belisarius, commanding him to drive out Silverius and to
contrive the election of Vigilius to the pontificate. Vigilius urged the
general to execute the project. The more easily to carry out this
project the Pope was accused of corresponding with the enemy and a
letter was produced which was pretended to have been written

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

by him to the king of the Goths, inviting him into the city, and
promising to open the gates to him. Silverius was banished to Patara in
Lycia. The bishop of that city received the illustrious exile with all
possible marks of honor and respect; and thinking himself bound to
undertake his defence, repaired to Constantinople, and spoke boldly to
the emperor, terrifying him with the threats of the divine judgments for
the expulsion of a bishop of so great a see, telling him, "There are
many kings in the world, but there is only one Pope over the Church of
the whole world." It must be observed that these were the words of an
Oriental bishop, and a clear confession of the supremacy of the Roman
See. Justinian appeared startled at the atrocity of the proceedings, and
gave orders that Silverius should be sent back to Rome, but the enemies
of the Pope contrived to prevent it, and he was intercepted on his road
toward Rome and carried to a desert island, where he died on the 20th of
June, 538.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 21. St. Aloysius Gonzaga](lots198)

</div>
