<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots021)  [Next](lots023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### January 12.—ST. AELRED, Abbot.

"ONE thing thou lackest." In these words God called Aelred from the
court of a royal Saint, David of Scotland, to the silence of the
cloister. He left the king, the companions of his youth, and a friend
most dear, to obey the call. The conviction that in the world his soul
was in danger alone enabled him to break such ties. Long afterwards the
bitterness of the parting remained fresh in his soul, and he declared
that, "though he had left his dear ones in the body to serve his Lord,
his heart was ever with them." He entered the Cistercian Order, and even
there his yearning for sympathy showed itself in a special attraction to
one among the brethren named Simon. This holy monk had left the world in
his youth, and appeared

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

as one deaf and dumb, so absorbed was he in God. One day Aelred,
forgetting for the moment the rule of perpetual silence, spoke to him.
At once he prostrated himself at his feet in token of his fault; but
Simon's look of pain and displeasure haunted him for many a year, and
taught him to let no human feeling disturb for one moment his union with
God. A certain novice once came to Aelred, saying that he must return to
the world. But Aelred had begged his soul of God, and answered,
"Brother, ruin not thyself; nevertheless thou canst not, even though
thou wouldst." However, he would not listen, and wandered among the
hills, thinking all the while he was going far from the abbey. At sunset
he found himself before a convent strangely like Rieveaux, and so it
was. The first monk he met was Aelred, who fell on his neck, saying,
"Son, why hast thou done so with me? Lo! I have wept for thee with many
tears, and I trust in God that, as I have asked of Him, thou shalt not
perish." The world does not so love its friends. At the command of his
superiors Aelred composed his great works, the *Spiritual Friendship*
and the *Mirror of Charity*. In the latter he says that true love of God
is only to be obtained by joining ourselves in all things to the Passion
of Christ. He died in 1167, founder and Abbot of Rieveaux, the most
austere monastery in England, and Superior of some three hundred monks.

**Reflection**.—When a man has given himself to God, God gives back
friendship with all His other gifts a hundredfold. Friends are then
loved no longer for themselves only, but for God, and that with a love
lively and tender; for God can easily purify feeling. It is not feeling,
but self-love, which corrupts friendship.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 13. St. Veronica of Milan](lots023)

</div>
