<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots128)  [Next](lots130) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### April 21.—ST. ANSELM, Archbishop.

ANSELM was a native of Piedmont. When a boy of fifteen, being forbidden
to enter religion, he for a while lost his fervor, left his home, and
went to various schools in France. At length his vocation revived, and
he became a monk at Bec in Normandy. The fame of his sanctity in this
cloister led William Rufus, when dangerously ill, to take him for his
confessor, and to name him to the vacant see of Canterbury. Now began
the strife of Anselm's life. With new health the king relapsed into his
former sins, plundered the Church lands, scorned the archbishop's
rebukes, and forbade him to go to Rome for the pallium. Anselm went, and
returned only to enter into a more bitter strife with William's
successor, Henry I. This sovereign claimed the right of investing
prelates with the

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

ring and crozier, symbols of the spiritual jurisdiction which belongs to
the Church alone. The worldly prelates did not scruple to call St.
Anselm a traitor for his defence of the Pope's supremacy; on which the
Saint rose, and with calm dignity exclaimed, "If any man pretends that I
violate my faith to my king because I will not reject the authority of
the Holy See of Rome, let him stand forth, and in the name of God I will
answer him as I ought" No one took up the challenge; and to the
disappointment of the king, the barons sided with the Saint, for they
respected his courage, and saw that his cause was their own. Sooner than
yield, the archbishop went again into exile, till at last the king was
obliged to submit to the feeble but inflexible old man. In the midst of
his harassing cares, St. Anselm found time for writings which have made
him celebrated as the father of scholastic theology; while in
metaphysics and in science he had few equals. He is yet more famous for
his devotion to our blessed Lady, whose Feast of the Immaculate
Conception he was the first to establish in the West. He died in 1109.

**Reflection**.—Whoever, like St. Anselm, contends for the Church's
rights, is fighting on the side of God against the tyranny of Satan.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 22. St. Soter, Pope, Martyr](lots130)

</div>
