<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots121)  [Next](lots123) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### April 14.—ST. BENEZET, or Little Bennet.

ST. BENEZET kept his mother's sheep in the country, and as a mere child
was devoted to practices of piety. As many persons were drowned in
crossing the Rhone, Benezet was inspired by God to build a bridge over
that rapid river at Avignon. He obtained the approbation of the bishop,
proved his mission by miracles, and began the work in 1177, which he
directed during seven years. He died when the difficulty of the
undertaking was over, in 1184. This is attested by public monuments
drawn up at that time and still preserved at Avignon, where the story is
in everybody's month. His body was buried upon the bridge itself, which
was not completely finished till four years after his decease, the
structure whereof was attended with miracles from the first laying of
the foundations till it was completed in 1188. Other miracles wrought
after this at his tomb induced the city to build a chapel upon the

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

bridge, in which his body lay nearly five hundred years. But in 1669 a
greater part of the bridge falling down through the impetuosity of the
waters, the coffin was taken up, and being opened in 1670 in presence of
the grand vicar, during the vacancy of the archiepiscopal see, the body
was found entire, without the least sign of corruption; even the bowels
were perfectly sound, and the color of the eyes lively and sprightly,
though, through the dampness of the situation, the iron bars about the
coffin were much damaged with rust. The body was found in the same
condition by the Archbishop of Avignon in 1674, when, accompanied by the
Bishop of Orange and a great concourse of nobility, he performed the
translation of it, with great pomp, into the Church of the Celestines,
this Order having obtained of Louis XIV. the honor of being intrusted
with the custody of his relics till such time as the bridge and chapel
should be rebuilt.

**Reflection**.—Let us pray for perseverance in good works. St.
Augustine says, "When the Saints pray in the words which Christ taught,
they ask for little else than the gift of perseverance."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 15. St. Paternus, Bishop](lots123)

</div>
