<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots207)  [Next](lots209) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_jul"></span>

### July 1.—ST. GAL, Bishop.

ST. GAL was born at Clermont in Auvergne, about the year 489. His father
was of the first houses of that province, and his mother was descended
from the family of Vettius Apagatus, the celebrated Roman who suffered
at

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lyons for the
faith of Christ. They both took special care of the education of their
son, and, when he arrived at a proper age, proposed to have him married
to the daughter of a respectable senator. The Saint, who had taken a
resolution to consecrate himself to God, withdrew privately from his
father's house to the monastery of Cournon, near the city of Auvergne,
and earnestly prayed to be admitted there amongst the monks; and having
soon after obtained the consent of his parents, he with joy renounced
all worldly vanities to embrace religious poverty. Here his eminent
virtues distinguished him in a particular manner, and recommended him to
Quintianus, Bishop of Auvergne, who promoted him to holy orders. The
bishop dying in 527, St. Gal was appointed to succeed him, and in this
new character his humility, charity, and zeal were conspicuous; above
all, his patience in bearing injuries. Being once struck on the head by
a brutal man, he discovered not the least emotion of anger or
resentment, and by this meekness disarmed the savage of his rage. At
another time, Evodius, who from a senator became a priest, having so far
forgotten himself as to treat him in the most insulting manner, the
Saint, without making the least reply, arose meekly from his seat and
went to visit the churches of the city. Evodius was so touched by this
conduct that he cast himself at the Saint's feet, in the middle of the
street, and asked his pardon. From this time they both lived on terms of
the most cordial friendship. St. Gal was favored with the gift of
miracles, and died about the year 553.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. The Visitation of the Blessed Virgin](lots209)

</div>
