<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots259)  [Next](lots261) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### August 18.—ST. HELENA, Empress; ST. AGAPETUS, Martyr.

IT was the pious boast of the city of Colchester, England, for many
ages, that St. Helena was born within its walls; and though this honor
has been disputed, it is certain that she was a British princess. She
embraced Christianity late in life; but her incomparable faith and piety
greatly influenced her son Constantine, the first Christian emperor, and
served to kindle a holy zeal in the

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

hearts of the Roman people. Forgetful of her high dignity, she delighted
to assist at the Divine Office amid the poor; and by her alms-deeds
showed herself a mother to the indigent and distressed. In her eightieth
year she made a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, with the ardent desire of
discovering the cross on which our blessed Redeemer suffered. After many
labors, three crosses were found on Mount Calvary, together with the
nails and the inscription recorded by the Evangelists. It still remained
to identify the true cross of Our Lord. By the advice of the bishop,
Macarius, the three were applied successively to a woman afflicted with
an incurable disease, and no sooner had the third touched her than she
arose, perfectly healed. The pious empress, transported with joy, built
a, most glorious church on Mount Calvary to receive the precious relic,
sending portions of it to Rome and Constantinople, where they were
solemnly exposed to the adoration of the faithful. In the year 312
Constantine found himself attacked by Maxentius with vastly superior
forces, and the very existence of his empire threatened. In this crisis
he bethought him of the crucified Christian God Whom his mother Helena
worshipped, and kneeling down, prayed God to reveal Himself and give him
the victory. Suddenly, at noonday, a cross of fire was seen by his army
in the calm and cloudless sky, and beneath it the words, *In hoc signo
vinces*—"Through this sign thou shalt conquer." By divine command,
Constantine made a standard like the cross he had seen, which was borne
at the head of his troops; and under this Christian ensign they marched
against the enemy, and obtained a complete victory. Shortly after,
Helena herself returned to Rome, where she expired, 328.

ST. AGAPETUS suffered in his youth a cruel martyrdom at Præneste, now
called Palestrina, twenty-four miles from Rome, under Aurelian, about
the year 275. His name is famous in the ancient calendars of the Church
of Rome. Two churches in Palestrina and others in other places are
dedicated to God under his name.

**Reflection**.—St. Helena thought it the glory of her life to find the
cross of Christ, and to raise a temple in its

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

honor. How many Christians in these days are ashamed to make this
life-giving sign, and to confess themselves the followers of the
Crucified!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 19. St. Louis, Bishop](lots261)

</div>
