<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots029)  [Next](lots031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### January 20.—ST. SEBASTIAN, Martyr.

ST. SEBASTIAN was an officer in the Roman army, esteemed even by the
heathen as a good soldier, and honored by the Church ever since as a
champion of Jesus Christ. Born at Narbonne, Sebastian came to Rome about
the year 284, and entered the lists against the powers of evil. He found
the twin brothers Marcus and Marcellinus in prison for the faith, and,
when they were near yielding to the entreaties of their relatives,
encouraged them to despise flesh and blood, and to die for Christ. God
confirmed his words by miracle: light shone around him while he spoke;
he cured the sick by his prayers; and in this divine strength he led
multitudes to the faith, among them the Prefect of Rome, with his son
Tiburtius. He saw his disciples die before him, and one of them came
back from heaven to tell him that his own end was near. It was in a
contest of fervor and charity that St. Sebastian found the occasion of
martyrdom. The Prefect of Rome, after his conversion, retired to his
estates in Campania, and took a great number of his fellow-converts with
him to this place of safety. It was a question whether Polycarp the
priest or St. Sebastian should accompany the neophytes. Each was eager
to stay and face the danger at Rome, and at last the Pope decided that
the Roman church could not spare the services of Sebastian. He continued
to labor at the post of danger till he was betrayed by a false disciple.
He was led before Diocletian, and, at the emperor's command, pierced
with arrows and left for dead. But God raised him up again, and of his
own accord he Went before the emperor and conjured him to stay the

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

persecution of the Church. Again sentenced, he was at last beaten to
death by clubs, and crowned his labors by the merit of a double
martyrdom.

**Reflection**.—Your ordinary occupations will give you opportunities of
laboring for the faith. Ask help from St. Sebastian. He was not a priest
nor a religious, but a soldier.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 21. St. Agnes, Virgin, Martyr](lots031)

</div>
