<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots208)  [Next](lots210) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### July 2.—THE VISITATION OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN.

THE angel Gabriel, in the mystery of the Annunciation, informed the
Mother of God that her cousin Elizabeth had miraculously conceived, and
was then pregnant with a son who was to be the precursor of the Messias.
The Blessed Virgin out of humility concealed the wonderful dignity to
which she was raised by the incarnation of the Son of God in her womb,
but, in the transport of her holy joy and gratitude, determined she
would go to congratulate

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

the mother of the Baptist. "Mary therefore arose," saith St. Luke, "and
with haste went into the hilly country into a city of Judea, and
entering into the house of Zachary, saluted Elizabeth." What a blessing
did the presence of the God-man bring to this house, the first which He
honored in His humanity with His visit! But Mary is the instrument and
means by which He imparts to it His divine benediction, to show us that
she is a channel through which He delights to communicate to us His
graces, and to en, courage us to ask them of Him through her
intercession. At the voice of the Mother of God, but by the power and
grace of her divine Son in her womb, Elizabeth was filled with the Holy
Ghost, and the Infant in her womb conceived so great a joy as to leap
and exult. At the same time Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost,
and by His infused light she understood the great mystery of the
Incarnation which God had wrought in Mary, whom humility prevented from
disclosing it even to a Saint, and an intimate friend. In raptures of
astonishment Elizabeth pronounced her blessed above all other women, and
cried out, "Whence is this to me that the mother of my Lord should come
to me?" Mary, hearing her own praise, sunk the lower in the abyss of her
nothingness, and in the transport of her humility, and melting in an
ecstasy of love and gratitude, burst into that admirable canticle, the
*Magnificat*. Mary stayed with her cousin almost three months, after
which she returned to Nazareth.

**Reflection**.—Whilst with the Church we praise God for the mercies and
wonders which He wrought in this mystery, we ought to apply ourselves to
the imitation of the virtues of which Mary sets us a perfect example.
From her we ought particularly to learn the lessons by which we shall
sanctify our visits and conversation, actions which are to so many
Christians the sources of innumerable dangers and sins.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. St. Heliodorus, Bishop](lots210)

</div>
