<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots266)  [Next](lots268) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### August 25.—ST. LOUIS, King.

THE mother of Louis told him she would rather see him die than commit a
mortal sin, and he never forgot her words. King of France at the age of
twelve, he made the defence of God's honor the aim of his life. Before
two years, he had crushed the Albigensian heretics, and forced them by
stringent penalties to respect the Catholic faith. Amidst the cares of
government, he daily recited the Divine Office and heard two Masses, and
the most glorious churches in France are still monuments of his piety.
When his courtiers remonstrated with Louis for his law that blasphemers
should be branded on the lips, he replied, "I would willingly have my
own lips branded to root out blasphemy from my kingdom." The fearless
protector of the weak and the oppressed, he was chosen to arbitrate in
all the great feuds of his age, between the Pope and the Emperor,
between Henry III. and the English barons. In 1248, to rescue the land
which Christ had trod, he gathered round him the chivalry of France, and
embarked for the East. There, before the infidel, in victory or defeat,
on the bed of sickness or a captive in chains, Louis showed himself ever
the same,—the first, the best, and the bravest of Christian knights.
When a captive at Damietta, an Emir rushed into his tent brandishing a
dagger red with the blood of the Sultan, and threatened to stab him also
unless he would make him a knight, as the Emperor Frederick had
Facardin. Louis calmly replied that no unbeliever could perform the
duties of a Christian knight. In the same captivity he was offered his
liberty on terms lawful in themselves, but enforced by an oath which
implied a blasphemy, and though the infidels held their swords’ points
at his throat, and threatened a massacre of the Christians, Louis
inflexibly refused. The death of his

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

mother recalled him to France; but when order was reestablished he again
set forth on a second crusade. In August, 1270, his army landed at
Tunis, and, though victorious over the enemy, succumbed to a malignant
fever. Louis was one of the victims. He received the Viaticum kneeling
by his camp-bed, and gave up his life with the same joy that he had
given all else for the honor of God.

**Reflection**.—If we cannot imitate St. Louis in dying for the honor of
God, we can at least resemble him in resenting the blasphemies offered
against God by the infidel, the heretic, and the scoffer.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 26. St. Zephyrinus, Pope and Martyr](lots268)

</div>
