<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots255)  [Next](lots257) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### August 14.—ST. EUSEBIUS, Priest.

THE Church celebrates this day the memory of St. Eusebius, who opposed
the Arians, at Rome, with so much zeal. He was imprisoned in his room by
order of the Emperor Constantius, and sanctified his captivity by
constant prayer. Another Saint of the same name, a priest and martyr, is
commemorated on this day. In the reign of Diocletian and Maximian,
before they had published any new edicts against the Christians,
Eusebius, a holy priest, a man eminently endowed with the spirit of
prayer and all apostolical virtues, suffered death for the Faith,
probably in Palestine. The Emperor Maximian happening to be in that
country, complaint was made to Maxentius, president of the province,
that Eusebius distinguished himself by his zeal in invoking and
preaching

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Christ, and the
holy man was seized. Maximian was by birth a barbarian, and one of the
roughest and most brutal and savage of all men. Yet the undaunted and
modest virtue of this stranger, set off by a heavenly grace, struck him
with awe. He desired to save the servant of Christ, but, like Pilate,
would not give himself any trouble or hazard incurring the displeasure
of those whom on all other occasions he despised. Maxentius commanded
Eusebius to sacrifice to the gods, and on the Saint refusing, the
president condemned him to be beheaded. Eusebius, hearing the sentence
pronounced, said aloud, "I thank Your goodness and praise Your power, O
Lord Jesus Christ, that, by calling me to the trial of my fidelity, You
have treated me as one of Yours." He at that instant heard a voice from
heaven saying to him, "If you had not been found worthy to suffer, you
could not be admitted into the court of Christ or to the seats of the
just." Being come to the place of execution, he knelt down, and his head
was struck off.

**Reflection**.—Let us learn, from the example of the Saints, courage in
the service of God. He calls upon us to endure suffering of body and of
mind, if it is necessary, to prove our fidelity to Him; and He promises
to support us by His strength, His light, and His heavenly consolation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 15. The Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary](lots257)

</div>
