<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots143)  [Next](lots145) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### May 3.—THE DISCOVERY OF THE HOLY CROSS.

GOD having restored peace to His Church, by exalting Constantine the
Great to the imperial throne, that pious prince, who had triumphed over
his enemies by the miraculous power of the cross, was very desirous of
expressing his veneration for the holy places which had been honored and
sanctified by the presence and sufferings of our blessed Redeemer on
earth, and accordingly resolved to build a magnificent church in the
city of Jerusalem. St. Helen, the emperor's mother, desiring to visit
the holy places there, undertook a journey into Palestine in 326, though
at that time near eighty years of age; and on her arrival at Jerusalem
was inspired with a great desire to

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

find the identical cross on which Christ had suffered for our sins. But
there was no mark or tradition, even amongst the Christians, to show
where it lay. The heathens, out of an aversion to Christianity, had done
what they could to conceal the place where Our Saviour was buried, by
heaping on it a great quantity of stones and rubbish, and building on it
a temple to Venus. They had, moreover, erected a statue of Jupiter in
the place where Our Saviour rose from the dead. Helen, to carry out her
pious design, consulted every one at Jerusalem and near it whom she
thought likely to assist her in finding out the cross; and was credibly
informed that, if she could find out the sepulchre, she would likewise
find the instruments of the punishment; it being the custom among the
Jews to make a hole near the place where the body of a criminal was
buried, and to throw into it whatever belonged to his execution. The
pious empress, therefore, ordered the profane buildings to be pulled
down, the statues to be broken in pieces, and the rubbish to be removed;
and, upon digging to a great depth, the holy sepulchre, and near it
three crosses, also the nails which had pierced Our Saviour's body, and
the title which had been fixed to His cross, were found. By this
discovery they knew that one of the three crosses was that which they
were in quest of, and that the others belonged to the two malefactors
between whom Our Saviour had been crucified. But, as the title was found
separate from the cross, it was difficult to distinguish which of the
three crosses was that on which our divine Redeemer consummated His
sacrifice for the salvation of the world. In this perplexity the holy
Bishop Macarius, knowing that one of the principal ladies of the city
lay extremely ill, suggested to the empress to cause the three crosses
to be carried to the sick person, not doubting but God would discover
which was the cross they sought for. This being done, St. Macarius
prayed that God would have regard to their faith, and, after his prayer,
applied the crosses singly to the patient, who was immediately and
perfectly recovered by the touch of one of the three crosses, the other
two having been tried without effect. St. Helen, full of joy at having
found the treasure which she had so earnestly sought and so highly
esteemed, built a church on the spot, and

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

lodged the cross there with great veneration, having provided an
extraordinarily rich case for it. She afterwards carried part of it to
the Emperor Constantine, then at Constantinople, who received it with
great veneration; another part she sent or rather carried to Rome, to be
placed in the church which she had built there, called Of the Holy Cross
of Jerusalem, where it remains to this day. The title was sent by St.
Helen to the same church, and placed on the top of an arch, where it was
found in a case of lead in 1492. The inscription in Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin is in red letters, and the wood was whitened. Thus it was in 1492;
but these colors are since faded. Also the words *Jesus* and *Judæorum*
are eaten away. The board is nine, but must have been twelve, inches
long. The main part of the cross St. Helen inclosed in a silver shrine,
and committed it to the care of St. Macarius, that it might be delivered
down to posterity, as an object of veneration. It was accordingly kept
with singular care and respect in the magnificent church which she and
her son built in Jerusalem. St. Paulinus relates that, though chips were
almost daily cut off from it and given to devout persons, yet the sacred
wood suffered thereby no diminution. It is affirmed by St, Cyril of
Jerusalem, twenty-five years after the discovery, that pieces of the
cross were spread all over the earth; he compares this wonder to the
miraculous feeding of five thousand men, as recorded in the Gospel. The
discovery of the cross must have happened about the month of May, or
early in the spring; for St. Helen went the same year to Constantinople,
and from thence to Rome, where she died in the arms of her son on the
18th of August, 326.

**Reflection**.—In every pious undertaking the beginning merely does not
suffice. "Whoso shall persevere unto the end, he shall be saved."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. St. Monica](lots145)

</div>
