<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots275)  [Next](lots277) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### September 2.—ST. STEPHEN, King.

GEYSA, fourth Duke of Hungary, was, with his wife, converted to the
Faith, and saw in a vision the martyr St. Stephen, who told him that he
should have a son who would perfect the work he had begun. This son was
born in 977, and received the name of Stephen. He was most carefully
educated, and succeeded his father at an early age. He began to root out
idolatry, suppressed a rebellion of his pagan subjects, and founded
monasteries and churches all over the land. He sent to Pope Sylvester,
begging him to appoint bishops to the eleven sees he had endowed, and to
bestow on him, for the greater success of his work, the title of king.
The Pope granted his requests, and sent him a cross to be borne before
him, saying that he regarded him as the true apostle of his people. His
devotion was fervent. He placed his realms under the protection of our
blessed Lady, and kept the feast of her Assumption with peculiar
affection. He gave good laws, and saw to their execution. Throughout his
life, we are told, he had Christ on his lips, Christ in his heart, and
Christ in all he did. His only wars were wars of defence, and he was
always successful. God sent him many and sore trials. One by one his
children died, but he bore all with perfect submission to the will of
God. When St. Stephen was about to die, he summoned the bishops and
nobles, and gave them charge concerning the choice of a successor. Then
he urged them to nurture and cherish the

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Catholic Church,
which was still as a tender plant in Hungary, to follow justice,
humility, and charity, to be obedient to the laws, and to show ever a
reverent submission to the Holy See. Then, raising his eyes towards
heaven, he said, "O Queen of Heaven, august restorer of a prostrate
world, to thy care I commend the Holy Church, my people, and my realm,
and my own departing soul." And then, on his favorite feast of the
Assumption, in 1038, he died in peace.

**Reflection**.—"Our duty," says Father Newman, "is to follow the Vicar
of Christ whither he goeth, and never to desert him, however we may be
tried; but to defend him at all hazards and against all corners, as a
son would a father, and as a wife a husband, knowing that his cause is
the cause of God."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. St. Seraphia, Virgin and Martyr](lots277)

</div>
