<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots019)  [Next](lots021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### January 10.—ST. WILLIAM, Archbishop.

WILLIAM BERRUYER, of the illustrious family of the ancient Counts of
Nevers, was educated by Peter the Hermit, Archdeacon of Soissons, his
uncle by the mother's side. From his infancy William learned to despise
the folly and emptiness of the world, to abhor its pleasures, and to
tremble at its dangers. His only delight was in exercises of piety and
in his studies, in which he employed his whole time with indefatigable
application. He was made canon, first of Soissons and afterwards of
Paris; but he soon resolved to abandon the world, and retired into the
solitude of Grandmont, where he lived with great regularity in that
austere Order until finally he joined the Cistercians, then in wonderful
odor of sanctity. After some time he was chosen Prior of the Abbey of
Pontigny, and afterwards became Abbot of Chaalis. On the death of Henri
de Sully, Archbishop of Bourges, William was

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

chosen to succeed him. The announcement of this new dignity which had
fallen on him overwhelmed him with grief, and he would not have accepted
the office had not the Pope and his General, the Abbot of Citeaux,
commanded him to do so. His first care in his new position was to
conform his life to the most perfect rules of sanctity. He redoubled all
his austerities, saying it was incumbent on him now to do penance for
others as well as for himself. He always wore a hair-shirt under his
religious habit, and never added to his clothing in winter or diminished
it in summer; he never ate any flesh-meat, though he had it at his table
for strangers. When he drew near his end, he was, at his request, laid
on ashes in his hair-cloth, and in this posture expired on the 10th of
January, 1209. His body was interred in his cathedral, and, being
honored by many miracles, was taken up in 1217, and in the year
following William was canonized by Pope Honorius III.

**Reflection**.—The champions of faith prove the truth of their teaching
no less by the holiness of their lives than by the force of their
arguments. Never forget that to convert others we must first see to our
own souls.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11. St. Theodosius, The Cenobiarch](lots021)

</div>
