<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots219)  [Next](lots221) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### July 12.—ST. JOHN GUALBERT.

ST. JOHN GUALBERT was born at Florence, A. D. 999. Following the
profession of arms at that troubled period, he became involved in a
blood-feud with a near relative. One Good Friday, as he was riding into
Florence accompanied by armed men, he encountered his enemy in a place
where neither could avoid the other. John would have slain him; but his
adversary, who was totally unprepared to fight, fell upon his knees with
his arms stretched out in the form of a cross, and implored him, for the
sake of Our Lord's holy Passion, to spare his life. St. John said to his
enemy, "I cannot refuse what you ask in Christ's name. I grant you your
life, and I give you my friendship. Pray that God may forgive me my
sin." Grace triumphed. A humble and changed man, he entered the Church
of St. Miniato, which was near; and whilst he prayed, the figure of our
crucified Lord, before which he was kneeling, bowed its head toward him
as if to ratify his pardon. Abandoning the world, he gave himself up to
prayer and penance in the Benedictine Order. Later he was led to found
the congregation called of Vallombrosa, from the shady valley a few
miles from Florence, where he established his first monastery. Once the
enemies of the Saint came to his convent of St. Salvi, plundered it, and
set fire to it, and having treated the monks with ignominy, beat them
and wounded them. St. John rejoiced. "Now," he said, "you are true
monks. Would that I myself had had the honor of being with you when the
soldiers came, that I might have had a share in the glory of your
crowns! " He fought manfully against simony, and in many ways promoted
the interest of the Faith in Italy. After a life of great austerity, he
died whilst the angels were singing round his bed, July 11, 1073.

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

**Reflection**.—The heroic act which merited for St. John Gualbert his
conversion was the forgiveness of his enemy. Let us imitate him in this
virtue, resolving never to revenge ourselves in deed, in word, or in
thought.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 13. St. Eugenius, Bishop](lots221)

</div>
