<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots028)  [Next](lots030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

### January 19.—ST. CANUTUS, King, Martyr.

ST. CANUTUS, King of Denmark, was endowed with excellent qualities of
both mind and body. It is hard to say whether he excelled more in
courage or in conduct and skill in war; but his singular piety eclipsed
all his other endowments. He cleared the seas of pirates, and subdued
several neighboring provinces which infested Denmark with their
incursions. The kingdom of Denmark was elective till the year 1660, and,
when the father of Canutus died, his eldest brother, Harold, was called
to the throne. Harold died after reigning for two years, and Canutus was
chosen to succeed him. He began his reign by a successful war against
the troublesome, barbarous enemies of the state, and by planting the
faith in the conquered provinces. Amid the glory of his victories he
humbly prostrated himself at the foot of the crucifix, laying there his
diadem, and offering himself and his kingdom to the King of kings. After
having provided for the peace and safety of his country, he married
Eltha, daughter of Robert, Earl of Flanders, who proved a spouse worthy
of him. His next concern was to reform abuses at home. For thus purpose
he enacted severe but necessary laws for the strict administration of
justice, and repressed the violence and tyranny of the great, without
respect to persons. He countenanced and honored holy men, and granted
many privileges and immunities to the clergy. His charity and tenderness
towards his subjects made him study by all possible ways to make them a
happy people. He showed a royal munificence in building and adorning
churches, and gave the crown which he wore, of exceeding great value, to
a church in his capital and place of residence, where the kings of
Denmark are yet buried. To the virtues which constitute a great king,
Canutus added those which prove the great saint. A rebellion having
sprung up in his kingdom, the king was surprised at church by the
rebels. Perceiving his danger, he confessed his sins at the foot of the
altar, and received Holy Communion. Stretching out his arms before the
altar, the Saint fervently recommended his soul to his Creator; in this
posture he was struck by a

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

javelin thrown through a window, and fell a victim for Christ's sake.

**Reflection**.—The soul of a man is endowed with many noble powers, and
feels a keen joy in their exercise; but the keenest joy we are capable
of feeling consists in prostrating all our powers of mind and heart in
humblest adoration before the majesty of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 20. St. Sebastian, Martyr](lots030)

</div>
