<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots272)  [Next](lots274) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

### ST. FIAKER, Anchorite.

ST. FIAKER was nobly born in Ireland, and had his education under the
care of a bishop of eminent sanctity who was, according to some, Conan,
Bishop of Soder or the Western Islands. Looking upon all worldly
advantages as dross, he left his country and friends in the flower of
his age, and with certain pious companions sailed over to France, in
quest of some solitude in which he might devote himself to God, unknown
to the rest of the world. Divine Providence conducted him to St. Faro,
who was the Bishop of Meaux, and eminent for sanctity. When St. Fiaker
addressed himself to him, the prelate, charmed with the marks of
extraordinary virtue and abilities which he discovered in this stranger,
gave him a solitary dwelling in a forest called Breuil which was his own
patrimony, two leagues from Meaux. In this place the holy anchorite
cleared the ground of trees and briers, made himself a cell, with a
small garden, and built an oratory in honor of the Blessed Virgin, in
which he spent a great part of the days and nights in devout prayer. He
tilled his garden and labored with his own hands for his subsistence.
The life he led was most austere, and only necessity or charity ever
interrupted his exercises of prayer and heavenly contemplation. Many
resorted to him for advice, and the poor for relief. But, following an
inviolable rule among the Trish monks, he never suffered any woman to
enter the enclosure of his hermitage. St. Chillen, or Kilian, an
Irishman of high birth, on his return from Rome, visited St. Fiaker, who
was his kinsman, and having passed some time under his discipline, was
directed by his advice, with the authority of the bishops, to preach in
that and the neighboring dioceses. This commission he executed with
admirable sanctity and fruit. St. Fiaker died about the year 670, on the
30th of August.

**Reflection**.—Ye who love indolence, ponder well these words of St.
Paul: "If any man will not work, neither let him eat."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 31. St. Raymund Nonnatus](lots274)

</div>
