<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lots197)  [Next](lots199) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001CL82NS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Lives of the Saints*, by Alban Butler, Benziger Bros. ed. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### June 21.—ST. ALOYSIUS GONZAGA.

ALOYSIUS, the eldest son of Ferdinand Gonzaga, Marquis of Castiglione,
was born on the 9th of March, 1568. The first words he pronounced were
the holy names of Jesus and Mary. When he was nine years of age he made
a vow of perpetual virginity, and by a special grace was ever exempted
from temptations against purity. He received his first Communion at the
hands of St. Charles Borromeo. At an early age he resolved to leave the
world, and in a vision was directed by our blessed Lady to join the
Society of Jesus. The Saint's mother rejoiced on learning his
determination to become a religious, but his father for three years
refused his consent. At length St. Aloysius obtained permission to enter
the novitiate on the 25th of November, 1585. He took his vows after two
years, and went through the ordinary course of philosophy and theology.
He was wont to say he doubted whether without penance grace would
continue to make head against I nature, which, when not afflicted and
chastised, tends gradually to relapse into its old state, losing the
habit of suffering

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

acquired by the labor of years. "I am a crooked piece of iron," he said,
"and am come into religion to be made straight by the hammer of
mortification and penance." During his last year of theology a malignant
fever broke out in Rome; the Saint offered himself for the service of
the sick, and he was accepted for the dangerous duty. Several of the
brothers caught the fever, and Aloysius was of the number. He was
brought to the point of death, but recovered, only to fall, however,
into slow fever, which carried him off after three months. He died,
repeating the Holy Name, a little after midnight between the 20th and
21st of June, on the octave-day of Corpus Christi, being Prather more
than twenty-three years of age.

**Reflection**.—Cardinal Bellarmine, the Saint's confessor, testified
that he had never mortally offended God. Yet he chastised his body
rigorously, rose at night to pray, and shed many tears for his sins.
Pray that, not having followed his innocence, you may yet imitate his
penance.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 22. St. Paulinus of Nola](lots199)

</div>
