[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ml00)  [Next](ml02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9ID18/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Mazes and Labyriths*, by W. H. Matthews, \[1922\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# PREFACE

ADVANTAGES out of all proportion to the importance of the immediate aim
in view are apt to accrue whenever an honest endeavour is made to find
an answer to one of those awkward questions which are constantly arising
from the natural working of a child's mind. It was an endeavour of this
kind which formed the nucleus of the inquiries resulting in the
following little essay.

It is true that the effort in this case has not led to complete success
in so far as that word denotes the formulation of an exact answer to the
original question, which, being one of a number evoked by parental
experiments in seaside sand-maze construction, was: "Father, who made
mazes first of all?" On the other hand, one hesitates to apply so harsh
a term as "failure" when bearing in mind the many delightful excursions,
rural as well as literary, which have been involved and the alluring
vistas of possible future research that have been opened up from time to
time in the course of such excursions.

By no means the least of the adventitious benefits enjoyed by the
explorer has been the acquisition of a keener sense of appreciation of
the labours of the archaeologist, the anthropologist, and other, more
special, types of investigator, any one of whom would naturally be far
better qualified to discuss the theme under consideration—at any rate
from the standpoint of his particular branch of learning—than the
present author can hope to be.

The special thanks of the writer are due to Professor W. M. Flinders
Petrie for permission to make use of his diagram of the conjectural
restoration of the

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Labyrinth of
Egypt, Fig. 4, and the view of the shrine of Amenemhat III, [Fig.
2](ml06.htm#img_fig002), also for facilities to sketch the Egyptian
plaque in his collection which is shown in [Fig.
19](ml11.htm#img_fig019) and for drawing the writer's attention thereto;
to Sir Arthur Evans for the use of his illustrations of double axes and
of the Tomb of the Double Axe which appear as Figs.
[9](ml09.htm#img_fig009), [10](ml09.htm#img_fig010),
[11](ml09.htm#img_fig011) and [12](ml10.htm#img_fig012) respectively
([Fig. 8](ml09.htm#img_fig008) is also based on one of his drawings); to
M. Picard (of the *Librairie A. Picard*) for leave to reproduce the
drawing of the Susa mosaic, [Fig. 37](ml11.htm#img_fig037); to Mr. J. H.
Craw, F.S.A. (Scot.), Secretary of the Berwickshire Naturalists' Club,
for the use of the illustrations of sculptured rocks, Figs.
[128](ml20.htm#img_fig128) and [129](ml20.htm#img_fig129); to the Rev.
E. A. Irons for the photograph of the Wing maze, [Fig.
60](ml13.htm#img_fig060), and to the Rev. G. Yorke for the figure of the
Alkborough "Julian's Bower," [Fig. 59](ml13.htm#img_fig059).

The many kind-hearted persons who have earned the gratitude of the
writer by acceding to his requests for local information, or by bringing
useful references to his notice, will perhaps take no offence if he
thanks them collectively, though very heartily, in this place. In most
cases where they are not mentioned individually in the text they will be
found quoted as authorities in the bibliographical appendix. The present
is, however, the most fitting place in which to express a cordial
acknowledgment of the assistance rendered by the writer's friend, Mr. G.
F. Green, whose skill and experience in the photographic art has been of
very great value.

Grateful recognition must also be made of the help and courtesy extended
to the writer by the officials of several libraries, museums, and other
institutions, notably the British Museum, the Society of Antiquaries,
Sion College, and the Royal Horticultural Society.

W. H. M.

*Ruislip, Middlesex*.  
       1922.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](ml02)
