[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ml05)  [Next](ml07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9ID18/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Mazes and Labyriths*, by W. H. Matthews, \[1922\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

# CHAPTER III

### THE EGYPTIAN LABYRINTH (*continued*)

\(ii\) *Accounts of Later Explorers*

A STRUCTURE which evoked so much wonder and admiration in ancient times
can hardly fail to have aroused the curiosity of later generations, but
no serious attempts to locate it seem to have been made by Europeans
until several centuries later. It was then far too late to observe any
of its glories, for it was all but destroyed in Roman times, and a
village sprang up on its site, largely constructed from its debris.

The Italian traveller Gemelli-Careri, who visited Egypt in 1693, refers
to a subterranean labyrinth which he saw in the neighbourhood of the
Pyramids. In the English version of his account we read: ". . . the
Arabs conducted us to see a Labyrinth, where the Ancients bury’d Birds.
We went down a narrow Passage into a Room out of which we crept on our
Bellies through a Hole to certain ways where a man may walk well enough
upright. On both sides of these there are Urns, in which the Birds were
bury’d; there is now nothing in them but a little dust. These Ways are
cut out of a *nitrous* Stone, and run several miles like a City under
ground, which they call a Labyrinth." There is nothing in this
description, however, to suggest that these works had any connection
with the Labyrinth of the ancients.

In 1700 Paul Lucas, the Antiquary to Louis XIV,

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

went on a voyage to Egypt, and, in the book in which he subsequently
published the account of his travels, gives us some idea of the state of
the remains in his time, but his account is very rambling and
unreliable. [Fig. 1](#img_fig001.md) is a view which he gives of part of
the ruins of the alleged labyrinth.

Lucas states that an old Arab who accompanied his party professed to
have explored the interior of the ruins many years before, and to have
penetrated into its subterranean passages to a large chamber surrounded
by several niches, "like little shops," whence endless alleys and other
rooms branched off. By the time of Lucas's visit, however, these
passages could not be traced, and he concluded that they had become
blocked up by debris.

The next explorer to visit the spot seems to have been Dr. Richard
Pococke, whose "Description of the East" appeared in 1743. "We observed
at a great distance," he says, "the temple of the Labyrinth, and being
about a league from it, I observed several heaps as of ruins, covered
with sand, and many stones all round as if there had been some great
building there: they call it the town of Caroon (Bellet Caroon). It
seemed to have been of a considerable breadth from east to west, and the
buildings extended on each side towards the north to the Lake Moeris and
the temple. This without doubt is the spot of the famous Labyrinth which
Herodotus says was built by the twelve kings of Egypt." He describes
what he takes to be the pyramid of the Labyrinth as a building about 165
feet long by 80 broad, very much ruined, and says it is called the
"Castle of Caroon."

The neighbourhood was also explored by the archaeologists who
accompanied that remarkable expedition sent out by Napoleon at the end
of the eighteenth century, and one of them, Jomard, believed that he had
discovered the ruins of the Labyrinth.

In 1843 a Prussian expedition, under K. R. Lepsius, carried out
considerable excavations in the locality and

 

<span id="img_fig001"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig. 1. Egyptian
Labyrinth. Portion of Ruins, &lt;i&gt;circ.&lt;/i&gt; 1700.
(&lt;i&gt;Paul Lucas&lt;/i&gt;)](tn/fig001.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig001.jpg.md)  
Fig. 1. Egyptian Labyrinth. Portion of Ruins, *circ.* 1700. (*Paul
Lucas*)  
</span>

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

<span id="img_fig002"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig. 2. Egyptian
Labyrinth. Shrine of Amenemhat III. (&lt;i&gt;Flinders
Petrie&lt;/i&gt;)](tn/fig002.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig002.jpg.md)  
Fig. 2. Egyptian Labyrinth. Shrine of Amenemhat III. (*Flinders
Petrie*)  
</span>

 

claimed to have established the actual site of the Labyrinth, attaching
great importance to a series of brick chambers which they unearthed. The
data furnished by this party, however, were not altogether of a
convincing character, and it was felt that further evidence was required
before their conclusions could be accepted.

G. M. Ebers, a pupil of Lepsius, and one who did much to popularise the
study of Egyptology by a series of novels, said that, if one climbed the
pyramid hard by, one could see that the ruins of the Labyrinth had a
horseshoe shape, but that was all.

The actual site of the Egyptian Labyrinth was finally identified by
Professor Flinders Petrie in 1888. He found that the brick chambers
which Lepsius took to be part of the Labyrinth were only remains of the
Roman town built by its destroyers, the Labyrinth itself being so
thoroughly demolished that only a great bed of fragments remained. Even
from this dreary waste of stone chips, however, a few items of interest
were discovered, including scattered bits of foundations, a great well,
two door-jambs—one to the north and one to the south—two granite shrines
and part of another, several fragments of statues and a large granite
seated figure of the king who is now generally recognised to have been
the builder of the Labyrinth, namely Amenemhat (or Amenemhe) III of the
XIIth Dynasty (also known as Lampares), who reigned about twenty-three
centuries B.C. [Fig. 2](#img_fig002.md), which, like the diagram shown in
[Fig. 4](#img_fig004.md)., is reproduced by the kind permission of
Professor Petrie from his book "The Labyrinth, Gerzeh and Mazghuneh"
(1912), represents one of the shrines dedicated to the founder.
Sufficient of the original foundations remained to enable the size and
orientation of the building to be roughly determined.

The Labyrinth must have covered an area of about moo feet from east to
west by Boo feet from north to south, and was situated to the east of
Lake Moeris, opposite the ancient town of Arsinoë (Crocodilopolis),

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

and just to the south of the pyramid of Hawara, in the district known
nowadays as the Fayûm.

The mummified remains of the builder of the Labyrinth, King Amenemhat
III, and of his daughter Sebekneferu, have been discovered in this
pyramid, which is symmetrical about the same N.—S. meridian as the
Labyrinth.

Professor Petrie reviewed all that the classic writers had reported
concerning the Labyrinth, and concluded that, in spite of their
differences, each had contributed some item of value. The discrepancies
between the descriptions of Herodotus and Strabo he attributes to the
probable decay or destruction of the upper storey in the intervening
centuries.

Many attempts have been made to visualise the Labyrinth as it existed in
the time of Herodotus. [Fig. 3](#img_fig003.md) shows, in plan, one such
reconstruction, according to the Italian archaeologist Canina. The
actual plan of the Labyrinth would appear to have differed from this in
many respects, judging by the indications found by Professor Petrie. The
latter drew up a tentative restoration based upon the descriptions of
Herodotus and Strabo so far as these tallied with the remains discovered
by him.

He suggests that the shrines which he found formed part of a series of
nine, ranged along the foot of the [pyramid](errata.htm#0.md), each
attached to a columned court, the whole series of courts opening
opposite a series of twenty-seven columns arranged down the length of a
great hall running east and west; on the other side of this hall would
be another series of columned courts, six in number and larger than the
others, separated by another long hall from a further series of six
([Fig. 4](#img_fig004).md).

In spite of the scantiness of the present remains and the discrepancies
between the various reports that have reached us from ancient times, we
can at least be reasonably certain that this, the earliest structure to
which the term "labyrinth" (λαβύρινθος) is known to have been applied,
did actually exist; that it was of the nature of a

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

stupendous architectural monument, that it is of great antiquity—having
been built over 4000 years ago at any rate—and that its site is
definitely known.

Its original object is still a matter of conjecture. It is quite
possible that it was used as a meeting-place for the

<span id="img_fig003"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 3.—Egyptian
Labyrinth. Restored Plan. (&lt;i&gt;Canina&lt;/i&gt;.)](tn/fig003.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig003.jpg.md)  
FIG. 3.—Egyptian Labyrinth. Restored Plan. (*Canina*.)  
</span>

nomes, which would have been about twenty-two in number at the time of
the XIIth Dynasty, but it is perhaps more probable that it was intended
as a sepulchral monument. In any case it is plain, from the fragments of
various gods and goddesses found on the site, that it was a centre of
worship of a great variety of deities.

From an almost illegible inscription on a great weather-beaten block of
granite, deciphered, with great difficulty,

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

as a dedication by a King Ptolemy to a Queen Cleopatra, Professor Petrie
concluded that as late as the beginning of the second century B.C. the
building was still in royal

<span id="img_fig004"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 4.—Egyptian
Labyrinth.&lt;br&gt; Restored Plan of Western Half. (Flinders
Petrie.)](tn/fig004.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig004.jpg.md)  
FIG. 4.—Egyptian Labyrinth.  
Restored Plan of Western Half. (Flinders Petrie.)  
</span>

care, but not very long afterwards it was considerably despoiled.
Whatever may have been its original object, it afforded several
generations the advantages of a most convenient stone-quarry.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The Cretan Labyrinth](ml07.md)
