[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ml07)  [Next](ml09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9ID18/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Mazes and Labyriths*, by W. H. Matthews, \[1922\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

# CHAPTER V

### THE CRETAN LABYRINTH (*continued*)

\(ii\) *The Caverns of Gortyna*

ACCORDING to the Romano-Greek writer Apollodorus, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) whose "Bibliotheke" consisted of a history
of the world from the fall of Troy onwards, Daedalus built the Labyrinth
at Knossos for King Minos on the lines of the Egyptian Labyrinth, but of
only one-hundredth part of the magnitude of the latter. This statement,
which was repeated by various other ancient writers such as Pliny and
Diodorus, caused many subsequent inquirers to look for evidence in Crete
of a building similar to, though smaller than, that described by
Herodotus and Strabo.

Nothing corresponding to such a description appeared to exist, but at
Gortyna, on the south side of Crete, there was a remarkable series of
winding passages, opening on the side of Mount Ida. Some authors of
antiquity, such as the Roman poets Catullus and Claudian, held the
opinion that this cavern, or one of the many other caves or quarries in
Crete, was the real Labyrinth, and this view has been largely
entertained in recent times, right up to the beginning of the present
century.

The first modern traveller of note to explore the cavern was the French
botanist, G. P. de Tournefort,

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

who spent three years, from 1700 to 1702, travelling about Asia Minor
and the Levant.

Tournefort's book, as well as being a mine of information on various
subjects, makes delightful reading, whether in the original French or in
John Ozell's English translation of 1718, from which we quote.

"This famous place," he says, referring to the Labyrinth, which he
visited on July 1, 1700, "is a subterranean Passage in manner of a
Street, which by a thousand Intricacies and Windings, as it were by mere
Chance, and without the least Regularity, pervades the whole Cavity or
Inside of a little Hill at the foot of Mount Ida, southwards, three
miles from Gortyna. The Entrance into this Labyrinth is by a natural
Opening, seven or eight Paces broad, but so low that even a middle-siz’d
Man can't pass through without stooping.

"The Flooring of this Entrance is very rugged and unequal; the Ceiling
flat and even, terminated by divers Beds of Stone, laid horizontally one
upon another.

"The first thing you come at is a kind of Cavern exceeding rustick, and
gently sloping: in this there is nothing extraordinary, but as you move
forward the place is perfectly surprizing; nothing but Turnings and
crooked By-ways. The principal Alley, which is less perplexing than the
rest, in length about 1200 Paces, leads to the further end of the
Labyrinth, and concludes in two large beautiful Apartments, where
Strangers rest themselves with pleasure. Tho’ this Alley divides itself,
at its Extremity, into two or three Branches, yet the dangerous part of
the Labyrinth is not there, but rather at its Entrance, about some
thirty paces from the Cavern on the left hand. If a Man strikes into any
other Path, after he has gone a good way, he is so bewildered among a
thousand Twistings, Twinings, Sinuosities, Crinkle-Crankles and
Turn-again Lanes, that he could scarce ever get out again without the
utmost danger of being lost."

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

He refers to various inscriptions in charcoal, mostly names of former
visitors, and notes various dates ranging from 1444 to 1699. "We too,"
he says, "wrote the Year of the Lord 1700 in three different places,
with a black stone." "After a thorow Examination of the Structure of
this Labyrinth we all concurred in Opinion, that it could never have
been what *Belonius* and some other of the Moderns have fancy’d; namely,
an antient Quarry, out of which were dug the Stones that built the Towns
of Gortyna and Gnossus. Is it likely that they would go for Stone above
a thousand paces deep, into a place so full of odd Turnings? . . .
Again, how could they draw these Stones through a place so pinch’d in,
that we were forc’d to crawl our way out for above a hundred paces
together? Besides, the Mountain is so craggy and full of Precipices that
we had all the difficulty in the World to ride up it. . . . It is
likewise observable, that the Stone of this Labyrinth has neither a good
Hue nor a competent Hardness; it is downright dingy, and resembling that
of the Mountains near which Gortyna stands.

". . . It is therefore much more probable, that the Labyrinth is a
natural Cavity, which in times past some body out of curiosity took a
fancy to try what they could make of, by widening most of those Passages
that were too much straitened. . . . Doubtless some Shepherds having
discovered these subterraneous Conduits, gave occasion to more
considerable People to turn it into this marvellous Maze to serve for an
Asylum in the Civil Wars or to skreen themselves from the Fury of a
Tyrannical Government: at present it is only a Retreat for Bats and the
like."

Tournefort stayed for a while with an ignorant priest, "who would have
persuaded us in his balderdash Italian that there was an ancient
Prophecy wrote on the Walls of the Labyrinth importing that the Czar of
Muscovy was very soon to be Master of the Ottoman Empire and deliver the
Greeks from the Slavery of the Turks." He

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

adds: "Whatever Scrawlings are made upon the Walls of the Labyrinth by
Travellers, these Simpletons swallow down for Prophecies." He mentions
also a labyrinth at Candia, but says it must not be confused with the
Labyrinth of tradition, "which, from antique Medals, appears to have
been in the town of Gnossus."

Dr. Richard Pococke, to whose description of the Egyptian Labyrinth we
referred in Chapter III, paid a visit to Gortyna about forty years after
Tournefort. He says that the "labyrinth" was shown to him, but that it
was evidently nothing more than the quarry out of which the town was
built. He points out that the real Labyrinth was at Knossos and that
nothing was left of it in Pliny's time.

Another French traveller, C. E. Savary, visited the spot about 1788. He
came to the conclusion that this was the Labyrinth of the Minotaur, but
regarded it as something distinct from that built by Daedalus at
Knossos.

A very interesting account of the Gortyna cavern is that contained in
the Journal of C. R. Cockerell, R.A., <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)
who travelled in Southern Europe and the Levant during the years 1810 to
1817. He and his party entered the "labyrinth" by an inconspicuous hole
in the rock in a steep part of the hill (Mount Ida) and found themselves
in an intricately winding passage. They had taken the precaution to
bring with them a great length of string wound upon two sticks, and it
was fortunate that they did so, for "the windings," says Cockerell,
"bewildered us at once, and, my compass being broken, I was quite
ignorant as to where I was. The clearly intentional intricacy and
apparently endless number of galleries impressed me with a sense of
horror and fascination I cannot describe. At every ten steps one was
arrested, and had to turn to right or left, sometimes to choose one of

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

three or four roads. What if one should lose the clue!" He relates how a
poor lunatic had insisted on accompanying them all the way from Candia
and following them into the cavern. This man, together with a boy who
had a lantern, wandered off and caused the rest of the party—except some
Turks, who philosophically remarked that God takes care of madmen—to
feel much alarm on their account. They were, however, discovered again
an hour later, the boy half dead with fright.

Chambers opened off from the passages, and contained much evidence of
former visitors, in the shape of names scratched on the walls, such as
"Spinola," "Hawkins, 1794," "Fiott," and many of a Jewish character. All
of the passage ends were infested with bats, which rose in thousands
when one of the party fired a pistol. Lichens grew here and there, and
in one place arose a spring. There were signs of metallic substances in
the rock, but not sufficient, thought Cockerell, to warrant the
supposition that the place was a mine. The stone was sandy, stratified
and easily cut, and the air was dry. The surface of the rock appeared to
have been prepared with a chisel.

The passage was 8 or 10 feet wide, and from 4 to 10 feet high; in many
places it had fallen in. Cockerell concluded that the excavation was
probably made in the days of Minos as a storehouse for corn and
valuables. He mentions that he was informed by natives that the cavern
extended right through the mountain and was three miles in length; also
that a sow once wandered in and emerged some years later with a litter
of pigs!

About fifty years after Cockerell's visit, the cavern was explored by
Capt. T. A. B. Spratt, R.N., who, in his "Travels and Researches in
Crete" (1865), tells us that the Cretans "have long since walled and
stopped up its inner and unknown extremes, so as not to be lost in its
inner intricacies." He discusses the probable location of the
traditional Labyrinth and concludes that probably

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

the latter is to be found in some similar cavern in the neighbourhood of
Knossos. He mentions that there is, in fact, an excavation in the side
of the ridge overlooking Knossos which the natives state to be the
entrance to extensive catacombs, but that it is choked up by the falling
in of its sides.

He reproduces a sketch by Sieber of the Gortyna Cavern ([Fig.
7](#img_fig007)); this, he says, took the artist three days to make.
Capt. Spratt, by the way, points out that the meander pattern, which is
so common a feature of Greek ornament, and is associated by some writers
with the origin of the labyrinth idea, may very well have been derived
from the square-spiral trenches which are commonly constructed by
Eastern gardeners for irrigational purposes. (See also Chapter VIII.)

Whatever the original purpose and function of the Gortyna Cavern may
have been, it was certainly a "labyrinth" in the extended sense, and no
doubt the classic writers themselves would have had no hesitation in
admitting the use of that word to describe it, but, as we shall see,
discoveries of recent years have considerably diminished its claim to be
considered as the original Labyrinth of the Minotaur.

 

<span id="img_fig007"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig. 7. Cavern of
Gortyna. (&lt;i&gt;Sieber&lt;/i&gt;)](tn/fig007.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig007.jpg)  
Fig. 7. Cavern of Gortyna. (*Sieber*)  
</span>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[23:1](ml08.htm#fr_0) Often erroneously alluded
to as "the Athenian Grammarian."

<span id="fn_1"></span>[26:1](ml08.htm#fr_1) Edited and published by his
son, S. P. Cockerell, in 1903.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. The Cretan Labyrinth (*continued*)](ml09)
