[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ml08)  [Next](ml10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9ID18/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Mazes and Labyriths*, by W. H. Matthews, \[1922\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

# CHAPTER VI

### THE CRETAN LABYRINTH (*continued*)

\(iii\) *Knossos*

A FEW miles to the north-east of Gortyna, and not far south of the north
coast town of Candia, lay, at the base of the hill of Kephala, a few
ruined walls indicating the site of the ancient city of Knossos. These
walls consisted of large blocks of gypsum and bore curious engraved
marks.

For many years Dr. A. J. Evans (now Sir Arthur Evans) had been convinced
that excavation of this site would probably bring to light evidence of a
system of writing which might be of interest in connection with the
origin of the Greek system, but it was not until the year 1900 that he
finally obtained a concession enabling him to explore the spot. The
resulting discoveries were of such an astonishing nature, and of such
absorbing interest, that one is greatly tempted to digress and to
mention them in some detail. However, they have been summarised and
discussed by many able writers (see Appendix III, ii.), and it must
suffice here to refer simply to the main points in which they bear upon
the story of the Labyrinth.

After about two months' work, with a staff of from 80 to 150 men, about
two acres of the remains of a great prehistoric building, showing strong
evidence of having

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

been destroyed by fire, were uncovered, and later excavations showed
that it was yet more extensive, covering altogether about five acres.
Not only this palace, but the multitude of objects found within it, or
associated with it, were of surpassing importance in their bearing on
the nature of the ancient civilisation of which they demonstrated the
existence, and to which Sir A. Evans has given the name "Minoan." Vast
quantities of pottery of widely different designs and workmanship,
written tablets, wall paintings—often of great beauty—reliefs, and
sculptured figures, shrines, seals, jewellery, a royal gaming-board, and
even a throne, were discovered as the work went on, and eventually the
whole area was excavated down to the virgin rock, remains of an earlier
and smaller palace being found beneath the other, and below this again a
great thickness of deposits containing many remains of neolithic man.

By means of occasional discoveries of imported Egyptian objects, by
comparison of Minoan pottery and paintings with some found in Egyptian
tombs, and by various other indications, it was possible to date the
upper remains, say from 1580 B.C. onwards, fairly nearly. The dating of
the older remains is much more difficult, chiefly because, although they
can often be equated with certain periods of Egyptian culture, the
chronology of the latter admits of widely different views, but it seems
safe to say that the earliest traces of the Minoan civilisation date
from quite 3000 years B.C., and possibly many centuries before that.

The earlier palace and town seem to have been built before 2000 B.C. and
destroyed a few centuries after that date. The later palace was begun
somewhere in the eighteenth or nineteenth century B.C., was elaborated
in succeeding centuries, and was sacked and burned, just as it had
attained the height of its glory, about I400 B.C.

The discovery of this palace was one of the first-class "finds" of
archaeology. Those who based their estimates

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

of the architectural capabilities of ancient Crete on their knowledge of
the development of the builder's art in classic Greece, a millennium
later, were amazed to find that in many respects the product of the
older civilisation was superior.

To mention but a few of the most remarkable facts about the palace, it
was of *several storeys*, grouped around a central court and pierced by
"light-wells"; it contained several staircases, one of them at least
being of a very imposing character and composed of *many flights*.
Moreover, it possessed a quite modern system of drainage, with *jointed
underground pipes* and with inspection manholes to the main drains.
Along the west side of the basement ran a long straight gallery flanked
by a series of great storage-rooms or magazines. It was near one end of
this gallery that Dr. Evans discovered a store of tablets with
pictographic inscriptions, in proof of his suspicion that the Phoenician
script was not the original parent of European written language.

Not far from this spot was the room containing the throne (or Worshipful
Master's Chair, as the masonic Dr. Churchward prefers to call it) which
may actually have been occupied by King Minos.

A definite distinction can be recognised between state and domestic
apartments and subsidiary offices and workshops.

To the north-west of the palace was a "stepped theatral area"
(*orchestra*), which suggests the "dancing ground" of Ariadne.

From the point of view of our subject, however, the most interesting
features were the frequent occurrence of the sign of the double axe,
which was obviously an object of great importance in Minoan worship, and
the profusion of evidence concerning the cult of the bull. On the fallen
plaster of one of the walls of a corridor, too, was a repeated meander
pattern, painted in red on a white ground, very suggestive of a sort of
maze ([Fig. 8](#img_fig008).md).

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

The significance of the axe symbol from our point of view lies in its
bearing on the derivation of the word "labyrinth," a question that will
be referred to in rather more detail in a later chapter.

One room of the palace, a stately hall about 80 ft. in length by 26 ft.
in breadth, traversed by a row of square-sectioned pillars, has been
named by its discoverer

<span id="img_fig008"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 8.—Knossos.
Maze-pattern on Wall of Palace. (After
&lt;i&gt;Evans&lt;/i&gt;.)](tn/fig008.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig008.jpg.md)  
FIG. 8.—Knossos. Maze-pattern on Wall of Palace. (After *Evans*.)  
</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "the Hall of the
Double Axes," from the frequent occurrence of this symbol therein. Not
only does the sacred axe occur as a more or less crude engraving on the
stone blocks composing certain pillars in the palace, but little models
of it were found associated with an altar, and, in the Dictaean cave,
some miles distant, several bronze specimens of the axe were discovered
in circumstances which show that they were votive offerings. Sometimes
the sacred symbol was set up on a socketed pedestal

 

<span id="img_fig009"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig. 9. Double
Axe and Stepped Steatite Socket from Dictaean Cave. (Psychro)&lt;br&gt;
(From &lt;i&gt;Archæolagia&lt;/i&gt;, by kind permission of the Society
of Antiquaries, and Sir Arthur Evans)](tn/fig009.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig009.jpg.md)  
Fig. 9. Double Axe and Stepped Steatite Socket from Dictaean Cave.
(Psychro)  
(From *Archæolagia*, by kind permission of the Society of Antiquaries,
and Sir Arthur Evans)  
</span>

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

<span id="img_fig011"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig. 11. Knossos.
View of Cist, showing shape of Double Axe.&lt;br&gt; (From
&lt;i&gt;Archæolagia&lt;/i&gt;, by kind permission of the Society of
Antiquaries and Sir Arthur Evans.)](tn/fig011.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig011.jpg.md)  
Fig. 11. Knossos. View of Cist, showing shape of Double Axe.  
(From *Archæolagia*, by kind permission of the Society of Antiquaries
and Sir Arthur Evans.)  
</span>

 

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> ([Fig.
9](#img_fig009).md). Moreover, in more recent excavations a curious "tomb"
was found (Figs. [10](#img_fig010) and [11](#img_fig011).md) which was
double-axe

<span id="img_fig010"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 10—Knossos.
Plan of Tomb of Double Axes, showing position in which relics were
found.&lt;br&gt; (&lt;i&gt;From&lt;/i&gt;
''&lt;i&gt;Archæolagia&lt;/i&gt;,'' &lt;i&gt;by kind permission of the
Society of Antiquaries and Sir Arthur
Evans&lt;/i&gt;.)](tn/fig010.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig010.jpg.md)  
FIG. 10—Knossos. Plan of Tomb of Double Axes, showing position in which
relics were found.  
(*From* ''*Archæolagia*,'' *by kind permission of the Society of
Antiquaries and Sir Arthur Evans*.)  
</span>

shaped in plan and was evidently the repository of a giant emblem ([Fig.
12](ml10.htm#img_fig012). See plate, [p. 42](ml11.htm#page_42).md).

Long before Dr. Evans' excavations in Crete the great

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> German
archaeologist Schliemann, during his researches at Mycenae on the
mainland, unearthed from one of the graves an ox-head of gold plate,
with a double axe between the upright horns. The double axe was also the
sign of the Zeus worshipped at Labraunda in Caria, a country to the
north-east of Crete, on the mainland of Asia Minor, where the implement
was known as the *labrys*.

The cult of the bull was also much in evidence in the palace remains.
Schliemann, in excavating the site of Tiryns in 1884, came across an
extraordinary wall-painting depicting a man holding one horn of a great
bull whilst he leaps over its back, the animal meanwhile charging at
full speed. Several examples of such scenes have since been discovered,
painted upon walls, engraved on gems, or stamped on seal-impressions.
Amongst the debris of one of the rooms in the palace at Knossos was
found a painting of a scene in which two girls are engaged in dodging
the charge of a bull, whilst a boy, who has evidently just left hold of
its horns, turns a somersault over its back.

Near the main north entrance to the palace was brought to light a large
plaster relief of a bull's head, no doubt originally forming part of the
complete beast. This relief was a masterpiece of Minoan art. It was of
life-size and beautifully coloured, and particular attention had been
given to the modelling and colour of the eye, the fierce stare of which,
in conjunction with the open mouth, conveys a fine effect of frenzied
excitement.

These are only a few examples, amongst many, which go to demonstrate
that the sport of "bull-leaping"—or ταυρωκαθαψια, as it was called by
the Greeks—was beloved of the Minoans and was probably practised in the
precincts of the palace.

In the light of these discoveries Dr. Evans concludes that the palace of
Knossos was the Labyrinth, or House

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

of the Labrys, which gave rise to the classic legend, the idea of the
Minotaur originating in the practice of training captives to participate
in the dangerous sport of bull-leaping. (*Tauros* = bull, hence
*Minotaur* = Bull of Minos.) We will refer further to the etymology of
"labyrinth" in a later chapter. The palace was certainly of sufficient
complexity to render it difficult for the uninitiated to find their way
about it, but the plan of its remains exhibits no resemblance to a
designed labyrinth of the conventional type. There is, however, a
suggestion of the latter in the meander pattern painted on one of the
walls, to which reference has been made above. The notion as to the
Labyrinth having been a prison from which escape was impossible may also
have some connection with two deep pits beneath the palace, whose
function was possibly that of dungeons for prisoners.

In considering the origin of the legend, we must remember that a period
of several centuries elapsed between the destruction of the Knossian
buildings and the first written account of the Labyrinth, and must take
into account the probability that the people who in later ages became
the dominant race in Crete would be likely to make ample use of their
imagination in formulating an explanation of the vast and complicated
ruins of the burnt city, with their mysterious frescoes and enigmatic
symbols.

It may also be borne in mind that the excavations in Crete have by no
means reached a final stage, and that, although no architectural remains
of a plan conforming to the usual conception of a formal labyrinth are
yet forthcoming, there is a possibility that something of the kind may
yet turn up, though indeed the chance seems very remote. Even as this
book is going to press appears an article in *The Times* by Sir Arthur
Evans announcing yet further enthralling discoveries; he finds abundant
signs of a great earthquake, causing ruin over the whole Knossian area,
about i 600 B.C., also evidence

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —including
portable altars and huge ox-skulls—indicating an expiatory sacrifice
recalling Homer's words, "in bulls doth the Earthshaker delight"; and
finally, on a floor-level about thirty feet down, the opening of an
artificial cave with three rough steps leading down to what was
apparently the lair of some great beast. "But here, perhaps," says Sir
Arthur, "it is better for imagination to draw rein."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Etruscan or Italian Labyrinth](ml10.md)
