[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ml20)  [Next](ml22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9ID18/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Mazes and Labyriths*, by W. H. Matthews, \[1922\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

# CHAPTER XVIII

### THE DANCE OR GAME OF TROY

READERS of our previous chapters will have noticed the frequency with
which the name "Troy" is associated with the idea of the labyrinth.

We find this association, for instance, in the case of the "Troy-towns"
of Somerton and Hillbury, the "Walls of Troy" of the Cumberland Marshes
and Appleby (Lincs), and the "Caerdroia" of the Welsh shepherds. In
northern Europe we find it as "Troja" or in such combinations as
"Trojeborg" or "Tröborg."

That this association is not of recent origin we have an interesting
token in a reference which occurs in a fifteenth-century French
manuscript preserved in the British Museum. This manuscript is the
record of a journey made by the Seigneur de Caumont to Jerusalem in
1418, and is entitled "Voyaige d’oultremer en Jhérusalem." Calling at
the island of Crete *en route*, the Seigneur, like most other travellers
on similar occasions, takes occasion to make a few remarks about the
famous legend associated with it. He speaks of the "mervelleuse et
orrible best qui fut appellé Minotaur," who, he says, was confined
within "celle entrigade meson faite par Dedalus, merveilleux maquanit,
lequelle meson fut nominée Labarinte et aujourduy par moultz est
vulguelmant appellé le cipté de Troie."

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

It would seem from the latter observation that the expression
"Troy-town" or "City of Troy" was in general use 500 years ago as a
title for the <span id="img_fig133"></span>

<table data-align="LEFT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><img src="img/fig133.jpg" alt="FIG. 133.—Etruscan Wine-vase from Tragliatella.&lt;br&gt; (Deecke.)" /><br />
FIG. 133.—Etruscan Wine-vase from Tragliatella.<br />
(Deecke.)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Cretan Labyrinth, and seeing that the renaissance of classical learning
was as yet in embryo the inference is that the name was a popular
tradition of some antiquity.

We find the name of Troy definitely associated with the labyrinth long
before this, however, in the crude engravings on the Etruscan wine jar
which we noticed in Chapter VIII., the *oinochoë* from Tragliatella.

The meaning of these figures (Figs. [133](#img_fig133.md),
[134](#img_fig134) and [135](#img_fig135).md) has been much discussed, but
it is now generally agreed that the labyrinth shown has a close
relationship with the operations which are being performed by the group
of armed men, and it is obvious that it is also connected in some way
with the

<span id="img_fig134"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG.
134.—Etruscan Vase. ''Troy Dance'' Details. (Deecke.)](tn/fig134.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig134.jpg.md)  
FIG. 134.—Etruscan Vase. ''Troy Dance'' Details. (Deecke.)  
</span>

famous story of the wars of Troy, as we see by its label "*Truia*." What
is this operation in which the warriors are engaged? We find a helpful
clue in the story

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

related by Virgil (B.C. 70-19) in his great epic of the Aeneid, in which
the poet has embalmed for us the legends current in his time concerning
the wanderings of Aeneas, the reputed son of Anchises and Venus, after
the fall of the city of Troy, which he had fought bravely to defend.

Aeneas, who escaped from the city carrying his father on his shoulders,
led forth also his little son Iulus. It is this boy whom, in the fifth
book of the poem, Virgil pictures as taking part with his companions in
a sport called the *Ludus Trojae* or *Lusus Trojae* (Game of Troy),
sometimes

<span id="img_fig135"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG.
135.—Etruscan Vase. Details, showing Labyrinth and ''retroscript''
label—''TRUIA.'' (Deecke.)](tn/fig135.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig135.jpg.md)  
FIG. 135.—Etruscan Vase. Details, showing Labyrinth and ''retroscript''
label—''TRUIA.'' (Deecke.)  
</span>

simply *Troja*. According to the Roman tradition it was introduced into
Italy by Aeneas, and his son Ascanius imparted it to the Alban kings and
through them to the Romans. The game consisted of a sort of processional
parade or dance, in which some of the participants appear to have been
mounted on horseback. Virgil draws a comparison between the complicated
movements of the game and the convolutions of the Cretan Labyrinth:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Ut quondam Creta fertur Labyrinthus in alta  
parietibus textum caecis iter ancipitemque  
mille viis habuisse dolum, qua signa sequendi  
frangeret indeprensus et irremeabilis error."  
                                   (*Aeneid*, V. 585-591).<span
id="page_159">p. 159</span>

"As when in lofty Crete (so fame reports)  
The Labyrinth of old, in winding walls  
A mazy way inclos’d, a thousand paths  
Ambiguous and perplexed, by which the steps  
Should by an error intricate, untrac’d  
Be still deluded."  
                  (*Trapp's trans*., 1718.)

</div>

The game is also mentioned as a well-established institution by other
Roman writers of a century or so later, such as Suetonius and Tacitus,
and appears to have assumed imposing dimensions at one time, as we see
from a representation of it on the reverse of a medal of Nero, where it
has more of the nature of a military review. It was generally performed
by youths, and only those of good social standing took part.

It will be remembered that we have already had occasion to notice
another ancient dance, or game, in which youthful notabilities were
stated to have taken part, and in which the motions of the dances were
supposed to represent the tortuous paths of the Cretan Labyrinth,
namely, the dance performed by Theseus and his friends on the island of
Delos. This dance was called the "Geranos," or Crane Dance, probably on
account of the fancied resemblance of the attitude of the dancers to
that of cranes in flight, or perhaps on account of actual adornments of
the dancers. (An eighteenth-century German traveller in Russia relates
that the Ostiaks of Siberia had an elaborate Crane Dance, the dancers
being dressed up in the skins of those birds.)

Is there any connection between these two dances, both labyrinthine in
character, the one traditionally based on the windings of the labyrinth
of Knossos, the other compared by Virgil with the latter, but named
after another city famous in ancient legend—to wit, Troy?

In regard to both these cities the events celebrated in the classic
legends were of prehistoric occurrence (in so far as they occurred at
all), and their recital was handed down orally for very many generations
before they

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

became crystallised in the written record, and it is not therefore
surprising if during that time various versions were evolved and
discrepancies of person, place, and time were introduced.

The association of the labyrinth, by some of the Nordic Aryan peoples,
with Troy instead of Knossos may perhaps be accounted for in this way.

The point with which we are most concerned at the moment, however, is
the fact that the figure of the labyrinth, in each case, is connected
with the idea of a ceremonial game or dance.

Another dance, possibly of similar character, associated with Knossos,
is that mentioned in Homer's "Iliad" as having been invented by Daedalus
for Ariadne. Youths with golden swords and maidens crowned with garlands
performed it in ranks.

By analogy with a great number of myths, rites, and ceremonies of
ancient and modern races, some anthropologists have been led to the
conclusion that these Troy and labyrinth dances are only particular
expressions of a very early and widely diffused ceremonial associated
with the awakening of nature in spring, after its winter sleep, or the
release of the imprisoned sun after its long captivity in the toils of
the demon of winter.

In that marvellous compendium of universal folk-lore "The Golden Bough,"
and in the particular volume of it entitled "The Dying God," Sir James
Frazer debates the significance of the classic legends we have
mentioned, and draws the tentative conclusion that Ariadne's dance was
symbolical of the sun's course in the sky, its intention being, "by
sympathetic magic to aid the great luminary to run his race on high."
(See also [p. 92](ml15.htm#page_92)..md) He draws attention to a practice
observed by Chilcotin Indians, during eclipses of the sun, of walking
around a circle leaning on staves, as if to help the sun around its
course (much as a child pushes the partition of a railway compartment to
help the train along).

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

Mr. A. B. Cook, the Cambridge classical archaeologist, points out in
this connection a Knossian coin on which the Minotaur, or rather, a man
with a bull's mask, is shown engaged apparently in a similar rite, the
reverse being occupied by a "swastika" labyrinth.

All this appears highly speculative to the ordinary layman, but nobody
who gives a little attention to the subject can avoid the conclusion
that at any rate there must have existed in very early—possibly
Neolithic—times an extremely widespread and important ceremonial,
generally of a sacrificial type, in connection with the spring
awakening. So deeply seated was this ancient tradition that traces of it
have persisted, with various local modifications, right down to the
present day.

The sword-dances and morris-dances of our own country, most of which but
for the happy genius and industry of Mr. Cecil Sharp and his disciples
would have passed away entirely by the next generation, are undoubtedly
survivals of a ceremonial of this type, particularly the former. They
were performed only on certain fixed annual occasions, and were treated
with great reverence and meticulous attention to detail.

A correspondent writing to *Notes and Queries* in 1870 (Anne Silvester)
laments the fact that "the old British game of *troy*, the vestiges of
which are so rare," is becoming extinct, but does not describe it. No
doubt the writer had in mind some game played in connection with earth
mazes.

It is a pity that we have no record of the actual method of "running the
maze" in this country in past generations. The idea that such
ingeniously designed and care-fully constructed works were made for the
sole purpose of trotting along their convolutions to the centre and out
again, without any symbolic or religious significance or any ceremonial
observance, may be dismissed at once.

As regards their alleged use by the Christian Church

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

for purposes of penance, we have no reliable evidence, and even if we
had we know that such a use would have been of a secondary character.
Most probably they were appropriated to some seasonal observance, as in
fact we know that several of them were within quite recent years, and
were associated with some ritual dance similar in nature to the Crane
Dance or the Dance of Troy. With regard to the word "Troy" itself there
is a possibility that its connection with the dance and the labyrinth
figure may have originated not with the name of a town, but with some
ancient root signifying to wind, or turn; in the case of the Welsh
"Caerdroia," as we have already seen, this suggestion was made long ago.
It may also have some connection with the three-headed monster Trojano
of the ancient Slavonic mythology, who appears in the Persian legends as
Druja, or Draogha, and in the Rig-Veda of India as Maho Druho, the Great
Druh, and who plays throughout the same part as the wintry demon Weyland
Smith (or Wieland) of the northern traditions. In Iceland, as we have
already seen ([p. 150](ml20.htm#page_150).md), the earth mazes are
associated with the latter personage.

We find the word Troi, or Troi-Aldei, applied to certain ceremonial
parades akin to the Troy-dance, in the writings of Neidhart von
Reuenthal, in the early thirteenth century, the accompanying songs being
termed "Troyerlais."

Quite recently a contributor to "Folk Lore" gave the airs of three
popular dances which are performed by the Serbians at the present day
under the names of Trojanka and Trojanac. The correspondent in question
had thought that their names might have some connection with the root
*tri* (= three), with reference to the rhythm of the dances, but the
airs supplied by him certainly would not support this contention. It is
far more probable, as he seems to conclude, that they indicate a
connection with the Dance of Troy. Unfortunately he does not describe
the dances themselves; it would be interesting to

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

know whether they embody any movements suggestive of a labyrinthine
origin or corresponding to the dances described by Homer and Virgil on
the one hand, or to our morris and sword dances on the other.

Another point in this connection which might justify a little enquiry is
the question of the origin of that maze-figure which forms, or used to
form, part of the system of Swedish drill as taught to children in this
country.

With regard to our native dances mentioned above, we may note that every
care has been taken by competent investigators to discover and to
preserve as much as possible of the pure tradition, and we have the
satisfaction of knowing that, narrowly as they escaped oblivion, the
English Folk-Dance Society will see to it that such a danger will not
threaten them again for a very long time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. The Bower of ''Fair Rosamond''](ml22.md)
