[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](syma04)  [Next](syma06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HE6I/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Symbolical Masonry*, by H.L. Haywood, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

# PART ONE: THE FIRST STEP

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span> <span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

### CHAPTER I

### AN INTRODUCTION TO THE FIRST STEP

#### I

In the days before 1717, when the first Grand Lodge of modern
Speculative Freemasonry was organised, the First Degree—it was called
the "Apprentice's Part" then—must have been a less elaborate ceremony
than it is now. In Scotland one Mason could, and often did, make another
merely by communicating the "Mason's word." (What it was we do not know
now.) In England the ceremony was richer than this, but even so was
doubtless very bald as compared with the work as we of the twentieth
century have come to know it. There are many scholars who believe that
the old Freemasonry of Ireland was more complete than that of England
(by this fact they help to explain the famous so-called "schism," and
which was "healed over" in 1813), but even if it was it could not have
compared with the ritual of to-day which has grown to such proportions
as would require a man years of study in order to master its history and
meaning.

It appears that the great revival of Freemasonry which occurred in 1717,
and out of which grew the first Grand Lodge mentioned above, was in
reality a very complete reorganisation of Freemasonry, though it may
well be that no such radical changes were made as some of our more
extreme scholars have believed. The Fraternity prior to that date had
become very much demoralised and divided; lodges had lost touch with
each other; and many

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Masons had no
understanding at all of the meaning of the ceremonies they performed.
After the Fraternity began to make a new start a centre was established
about which Masons could rally and to which they could all furnish their
own traditions and records. In consequence of this it seems that the
ritual grew with such rapidity that after a few years it became
necessary to fabricate more degrees. What had been the First was divided
into the new First and the new Second; what had been the Third was
continued as such, though much amplified. This division was completed by
1738, since which time and by the addition of Preston's lectures, etc.,
the machinery of the degrees has reached its present perfection.

#### II

It is impossible to know exactly how the candidate was given the
"Apprentice's Part" in the old days when Freemasons were still
operatives engaged in the construction of actual buildings, but many
hints have been left us embedded in the Old Charges, as the ancient
Manuscript constitutions and traditions are usually called. E. L.
Hawkins, who edited a well-known Encyclopædia of Freemasonry, collated
all these references and out of them composed a mosaic picture of the
old-time ceremony:

"The meeting was opened with prayer—the legendary history of the Craft
was then read—then the candidate was led forward and instructed to place
his hand on the Volume of the Sacred Law, which was held by one of the
'Seniors,' while the articles binding on all Masons alike were read, at
the conclusion of which a brief obligation was imposed upon the
candidate, all present joining in it; then followed the special charges
for an apprentice,

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

concluding with a longer obligation by which the candidate specially
bound himself to secrecy with regard to what was about to be
communicated to him; then the secrets, whatever they were (modes of
recognition), were entrusted to him, and the proceedings terminated."

Before receiving the First Degree the youth was obliged to prove himself
well qualified, of lawful age, free-born, sound in mind and limb, of
clean habits, and in good repute. At the same time he was compelled to
bind (or "indenture") himself to a Master Mason for a term of years,
usually seven: this master set him his tasks, taught him the methods of
the trade, and saw to it that he faithfully observed the rules and
regulations of the Order and kept inviolate the secrets of the Craft and
of his fellow workmen. At first the Apprentice was little more than a
servant, performing menial tasks; but as his skill increased he was
given more important duties. Meanwhile, "he must be obedient to the
Master without argument or murmuring, respectful to all Freemasons,
courteous, avoiding obscene or uncivil speech, free from slander,
dissension, or dispute. He must not haunt or frequent any tavern or
ale-house, or so much as go into them except it be upon an errand of the
Master or with his consent, using neither cards, dice, or any unlawful
game, 'Christmastime excepted.' He must not steal anything even to the
value of a penny, or suffer it to be done, or shield any one guilty of
theft, but report the fact to the Master with all speed. After seven
long years the Apprentice brought his masterpiece to the lodge—or, in
earlier times, to the Annual Assembly ('bodies not unlike the Grand
Lodges of to-day')—and on strict trial and due examination was declared
a Master. Thereupon he ceased to be a pupil and a servant, passed into
the ranks of Fellowcrafts, and became a free man, capable, for the first
time in his life, of earning his living and

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

choosing his own employer." (See *The Builders*, by Dr. J. F. Newton,
page 129.)

The Apprentice was a learner in those old days; he is a learner still.
The word itself is found in many languages: "apprenti" in French;
"apprendenti" in Italian; "Lehrling" in German; etc.: but whatever its
form it means, at bottom, a "learner." Being a learner he is said to be
in the Porch, and his Apprentice Lodge is said symbolically to be in the
Porch of King Solomon's Temple. Time was when all business was
transacted in a lodge on the First Degree, but now the Apprentice is not
considered a full member of a lodge, and is not entitled to vote, to
hold office, to walk in a funeral procession, or to receive Masonic
burial, though it is true that Grand Jurisdictions differ somewhat among
themselves in these last-mentioned details.

In a symbolical sense the Apprentice may be likened to a human embryo
about to be born into a new world; he does not have power over himself,
and he does not know anything about the new life upon which he is
entering, and therefore it is necessary that he follow his guides with
implicit and unquestioning obedience, for not otherwise can he advance a
step.

From one end to another, accordingly, the great note struck in the First
Degree is Obedience, and this virtue—it is a virtue in all strict senses
of the word, though many young men of to-day have grown to dislike that
fact—is impressed upon his heart by every device of symbolism, by every
art of ceremony.

In learning any art Obedience must come first, Obedience to the teachers
and Obedience to the rules. The boy who learns to ride a bicycle must
obey the laws of equilibrium with slavish carefulness; a girl must
abjectly follow the laws of music if she would become the mistress of
her piano; and so is it in every trade and in every

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

accomplishment, for he who would master an art must begin as a servant
of its regulations, whether it be moulding iron, planting corn, or
writing poems. This is not the slavery that leads to slavery; it is the
slavery that leads to freedom, for after one has mastered the technique
of his art his mind is set loose to work with power. If the vice of our
day is slipshod work and slovenly art it is because our young people are
lacking in the patience and in the perseverance to win mastership. But
the young man who passes through the First Degree learns differently;
the Craft causes the great importance and necessity of obedience to bite
deeply into his heart, and he is made to know that no man can ever
become a master who scamps his work.

#### III

If obedience must come first in order to master an art or a craft so it
is the first of virtues in that which is the most difficult of all the
greater arts—<span class="small">LIFE</span> itself. This is the truth
which the First Degree emphasises above all else. If the candidate is to
be a builder in the speculative (that is, in the moral, intellectual,
and spiritual) sense, building and built upon, he must learn to serve
the laws of that difficult architecture. If he thinks of himself as a
student learning a Royal Art he must obey the rules of that Art. If he
considers himself a babe passing into birth and into a new world, he
must place himself under the laws according to which that life can alone
fulfill itself. If he pictures himself as a type of "the natural man"
(if one may thus use the old theological expression) in his ignorance,
his raw untutored condition, seeking to live the life of the spirit
which rises above ignorance as a temple rises above the crown of a hill,
above all he must learn to know and to obey the awful but benignant
statutes of the soul.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

Of all the various interpretations—they vary as much in value as in
theory—of the First Degree, one of the noblest that I have ever
discovered is that given by Dr. J. D. Buck in an essay published in *The
New Age* (Volume VII, page 161): "Reflect a moment on the condition of
the candidate on first entering the lodge room. He is not only in
darkness, going he knows not where, to meet, he knows not what, and
guided solely by the J.D., but he bears the mark of abject slavery. He
is spared the shame of nakedness and the pride of apparel, and his feet
are neither shod nor bare. He is poor and penniless, no external thing
to help or recommend him. The old life with all its accessories has
dropped from him as completely as though he were dead. He is to enter on
a new life in a new world. His intrinsic character alone is to determine
his progress and his future status. If he is worthy and well qualified,
and duly and truly prepared for this, and, if he understands and
appreciates what follows in symbols, ceremonies, and instruction, the
old life in him will be dead for ever."

These eloquent sentences make abundantly clear the importance of the
First Degree, which is the Drama of Beginnings; for, though the
Apprentice himself is but a babe, a beginner, a learner, not for that
reason is the ceremony to be made easy or careless, but quite the
opposite, for it carries within itself all the dignity and the mystery
of birth. Therefore should a lodge see to it that the "Apprentice's
Part" is conducted with solemnity and with beauty; its impressions are
the candidate's first experience of Masonry, and they will consequently
remain with him the longest and influence him the most.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Petition for Membership](syma06)
