[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](syma52)  [Next](syma54) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HE6I/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Symbolical Masonry*, by H.L. Haywood, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

### CHAPTER XLIX

### THE LION'S PAW

#### I

The Mackey Encyclopædia article on this subject is very brief, as may be
seen from the following: "A mode of recognition so called because of the
rude resemblance made by the hand and fingers to a lion's paw. It refers
to the 'Lion of the tribe of Judah.'" This is true as far as it goes,
but it doesn't go far enough, for it leaves unanswered the questions of
origin and interpretation. Nor does the companion article on the "Lion
of the Tribe of Judah" give us much more information. If Mackey
refrained from saying more because he knew no more we can sympathise
with him, seeing that at this late day there is still very little known
about the matter. But we have learned something since Mackey wrote,
enough maybe, to set us on the track toward a satisfactory understanding
of the matter.

Owing to its appeal to the imagination, and to the fear and reverence it
has ever aroused, the lion has often been a favourite with symbolists,
especially religious symbolists. Our modern anthropologists and
folk-lore experts have furnished us with numberless examples of this,
even among primitive folk now living, who are sometimes found
worshipping the animal. Among the early peoples of India the lion was
often used, and generally with the same significance, as standing for
"the divine spirit in man." Among the early Egyptians it was still more
venerated, as may be learned from their monuments, their temples, and
especially their sphinxes; if we may trust

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

our authorities in the matter, the Nile dwellers used it as a symbol of
the life-giving power of the sun and the sun's ability to bring about
the resurrection of vegetation in the spring time. In some of the
sculpture left by the Egyptians to illustrate the rites of the Egyptian
Mysteries the candidate is shown lying on a couch shaped like a lion
from which he is being raised from the dead level to a living
perpendicular. The bas-reliefs at Denderah make this very plain, though
they represent the god Osiris being raised instead of a human candidate.
"Here," writes J. E. Harrison in her very interesting little book on
"Ancient Art and Ritual," "the God is represented first as a mummy
swathed and lying flat on his bier. Bit by bit he is seen raising
himself up in a series of gymnastically impossible positions, till he
rises . . . all but erect, between the outstretched wings of Isis, while
before him a male figure holds the Crux Ansata, the 'cross with a
handle,' the Egyptian symbol of life."

#### II

The *crux ansata* was, as Miss Harrison truly says, the symbol of life.
Originally a stick, with a cross-piece at the top for a handle, it was
used to measure the overflow of the Nile: but inasmuch as it was this
overflow that carried fertility into Egypt, the idea of a life-giving
power gradually became transferred to the instrument itself, in the same
manner that we attribute to a writer's "pen" his ability to use words. A
few of our Masonic expositors, among whom Albert Pike may be numbered,
have seen in the *crux ansata* the first form of that Lion's Paw by
which the Masonic Horus is raised. If this be the case, the Lion's Paw
is a symbol of life-giving power, an interpretation which fits in very
well with our own position as outlined in the two preceding sections.

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

#### III

But it is also possible to trace the Lion's Paw symbolism to another
source. Among the Jews the lion was sometimes used as the emblem of the
Tribe of Judah; as the Messiah was expected to spring from that Tribe
the Lion was also made to refer to him, as may be seen in the fifth
verse of the fifth chapter of the Book of Revelation, where Jesus Christ
is called the "Lion of the Tribe of Judah." It was from this source,
doubtless, that the Comacines, the great Cathedral Builders of the
Middle Ages, who were always so loyal to the Scriptures, derived their
habitual use of the lion in their sculptures. Of this, Leader Scott, the
great authority on the Comacines, writes that, "My own observations have
led me to the opinion that in Romanesque or Transition architecture,
i.e., between A.D. 1000 and 1200, the lion is to be found between the
columns and the arch—the arch resting upon it. In Italian Gothic, i.e.,
from A.D. 1200 to 1500, it is placed beneath the column. In either
position its significance is evident. In the first, it points to Christ
as the door of the church; in the second, to Christ, the pillar of
faith, springing from the tribe of Judah." Since the cathedral builders
were in all probability among the ancestors of Freemasons it is possible
that the Lion symbolism was inherited from the Comacines.

#### IV

During the cathedral building period, when symbolism was flowering out
on all sides in mediæval life, the lion was one of the most popular
figures in the common animal mythology, as may be learned from the
Physiologus, the old book in which that mythology has been preserved.
According to this record, the people believed that the

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

whelps of the lioness were born dead and that at the end of three days
she would howl above them until they were awakened into life. In this
the childlike people saw a symbol of Christ's resurrection after He had
lain dead three days in the tomb; from this it naturally resulted that
the lion came to be used as a symbol of the Resurrection, and such is
the significance of the picture of a lion howling above the whelps, so
often found in the old churches and cathedrals.

The early Freemasons, so the records show, read both these
meanings,—Christ and Resurrection,—into the symbol as they used it. And
when we consider that most of Freemasonry was Christian in belief down
at least to the Grand Lodge era, it is reasonable to suppose that the
Lion symbol may have been one of the vestiges of that early belief
carried over into the modern system. If this be the case the Lion's Paw
has the same meaning, whether we interpret it, with Pike, as an Egyptian
symbol, or with Leader Scott, as a Christian emblem, since it stands for
the life-giving power, a meaning that perfectly accords with its use in
the Third Degree. This also brings it into harmony with our
interpretation of Eternal Life for in both its Egyptian and its
Christian usages it refers to a raising up to life in this world, and
not to a raising in the world to come.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter L. The Emblems](syma54)
