[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](syma56)  [Next](syma58) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HE6I/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Symbolical Masonry*, by H.L. Haywood, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

### CHAPTER LIII

### THE EMBLEMS (Continued)

### I

The Forty-seventh Problem of Euclid. Here is a symbol the sovereign
importance of which has been recognised by almost every student of our
mysteries. Hoffman wrote a book about it; Sydney Klein devoted a
magnificent study to it which will be found published in the
Transactions of the Lodge Quatuor Coronati under the title of "The Great
Symbol"; Dr. Anderson used it on the title page of his Constitutions and
therein described it "as the foundation of all Masonry if duly
observed"; scholars have vied with each other in attempting to uncover
all the riches stowed away among its lines and angles.

Most of these interpreters, it must be said, have shown considerable
dissatisfaction with the account of the Problem as given in the Lecture.
There it is said that it was discovered by Pythagoras and that he was so
overjoyed by it that he sacrificed a hecatomb to celebrate his
discovery. This has behind it the authority of Vitruvius but even so it
is hardly credible and that for the following reasons: the Problem was
known to the Egyptians long before Pythagoras, and it is not possible
that Pythagoras, who forbade the killing of animals, should have
sacrificed a herd of oxen so needlessly; also, the explanation that this
Problem is to teach us to be lovers of the arts and sciences is not very
convincing.

Those who would defend the Monitor here urge that

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

while the three, four, five triangle may have been used before
Pythagoras he may have been the first to understand the Problem as a
whole; that his "hecatomb" may have been made of wax figures of oxen, as
was sometimes the practice; and that the Problem is so important to
mathematics that it may well stand as an emblem of all arts and
sciences. Between these two views one may take his choice.

#### II

Whatever may be the attitude of our authorities to the Monitorial
interpretation they are all agreed that the Symbol is of the greatest
importance. Dionysius Lardner, in his edition of "Euclid," writes: "It
is by the influence of this proposition and that which establishes the
similitude of equilateral triangles (in the sixth book) that geometry
has been brought under the dominion of algebra; and it is upon the same
principle that the whole science of trigonometry is founded." The
Encyclopædia Britannica calls it "one of the most important in the whole
of geometry, and one which has been celebrated since the earliest times.
. . . On this theorem almost all geometrical measurement depends, which
cannot be directly obtained." On its Masonic uses, our interpreters have
written with equal enthusiasm; thus one, Brother J. F. Thompson, says
that "in it are concealed more ancient symbolism than all other symbols
used by, or incident to, our order. . . . In it we find concealed the
jewels of the Worshipful Master, the Senior, and Junior Wardens," and
also, he might have added, the Apron, the Square, the Tau square, cross,
etc.

The brother who wishes to experiment for himself can easily do so by
drawing the triangle after the following fashion; lay out a base line
four inches in length; at one

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

end erect a vertical three inches high; connect the ends of these two
lines and the figure is drawn; this is not the strictly scientific way
of going about it but it will serve. The point of this procedure is that
whenever the vertical is three and the base is four, the
[hypotenuse](errata.htm#2), or long side, will be five; and the angle at
the juncture of the base and the vertical will always be a right angle.
After this manner a man can always prove a right angle with no
mathematical instruments whatever. What this meant to the ancient
builders, before such instruments were devised, or had come into common
use, is plain to be seen.

#### III

But our concern here is not with the Problem as a geometric theorem but
with it as a Masonic symbol. What is its Masonic meaning? Many answers
can be given to this, none exhaustive, but all valuable; of these I can
suggest but two or three.

If we experiment with a group of numbers falling into the series
corresponding to three, four, five, we will find that they will always
bear the same relationship to each other. In other words, the Problem
establishes a harmonious relationship among numbers apparently
unrelated. Does not this suggest something of the secret of Masonry? We
select a large group of men; they seem to have little in common; but
through our teachings, and the application of our principle of
brotherhood, we are able to unite them into a harmonious fraternity. The
Problem is in this view a symbol of Brotherhood.

The Egyptians made the base line to represent Osiris, the male
principle; the vertical, Isis, or female principle; the
[hypotenuse](errata.htm#3) represented Horus, the product of the two.
Suppose we follow such a method and let the base represent our earthly
nature; the vertical our spiritual

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

nature; by a harmonious adjustment of these two a complete, or perfect
man, will result—the same meaning which we found in the Three Lesser
Lights.

#### IV

Along with these two readings of the symbol we might place an historical
interpretation. The ancient builders, as has been repeatedly said, did
not have algebra and trigonometry, nor were they in possession of
architectural tables or instruments such as we have; nevertheless they
were obliged to fashion right angles in the erection of their buildings;
how could they have done this without the Forty-seventh Problem, a
method so simple that any Apprentice could use it? It is not too much to
say that there would have been no ancient Masonry without the three,
four, five triangle, or the principle embodied in it; therefore it has
for us a peculiar value in that it represents the skill of our early
brethren in surmounting their obstacles. Since this principle is so
essential to the exact sciences we may agree with our Ritual in seeing
in it a symbol of all the arts and sciences. Just as a crown may serve
as an emblem of all government so may this triangle serve as an emblem
of all science. And since Masonry undertakes to make character building
into an art or a science we may also find in the triangle, as Dr.
Anderson said, "the foundation of all Masonry if duly observed."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LIV. Conclusion](syma58)
