[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](syma34)  [Next](syma36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HE6I/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Symbolical Masonry*, by H.L. Haywood, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

### CHAPTER XXXI

### THE ASHLARS

#### I

A further meaning of the Square lies in the fact that it is the tool
used by the workmen whereby to test the Rough and Perfect Ashlars. These
should have been discussed, perhaps, in their usual position in the
First Degree Lecture, but as space forbade a detailed examination of
that Lecture, and as many of the symbols adverted to therein have been
or will be explained in other connections, it may not be inappropriate
to study the Ashlar symbolism in this connection, especially as the
latter is so intimately related to the former.

"Not unnaturally," writes one author, "in times when the earth was
thought to be a Square the Cube had emblematical meanings it could
hardly have for us. From earliest ages it was a venerated symbol, and
the oblong cube signified immensity of space from the base of earth to
the zenith of the heavens." This world-old meaning was incorporated by
the framers of our Ritual in the symbolism of the two Ashlars.

The Rough Ashlar is, according to the Monitor, "a stone, as taken from
the quarry, in its rude and natural state"; a Perfect Ashlar is a "stone
made ready by the hands of the workmen, to be adjusted by the working
tools of the Fellow Craft." In connection with this, it must be
remembered that even the Rough Ashlar is not a mere shapeless stone
found by accident but a stone

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

roughly shaped, suggesting thereby that the Craft is selecting its
materials and not attempting to make something out of nothing.

If the Rough Ashlar signifies the Apprentice coming crude and unfinished
from the quarries of mankind, then the Perfect Ashlar is the man made
complete by the influence of Masonry. When thus understood we may agree
with the words of Brother J. W. Lawrence, whose little volumes of simple
exposition enjoy a popularity justly deserved:

"The Perfect Ashlar, as a symbol, is the summum bonum of Freemasonry.
That is to say, everything else in Masonry leads up to it. The V. of S.
L. describes it, the checkered pavement illustrates it, the Great
Architect no less than the Grand Geometrician desire it and are
satisfied with nothing less. When the Craft has fashioned the Perfect
Ashlar it has nothing else to do."

#### II

The distinction between the Rough and Perfect Ashlars is an eloquent
example of the power of refinement, for the latter does not differ from
the former in its substance, being the same stone as *completed* for
use. Indeed, the word *perfect* properly means *complete*, and suggests
that while none of us may hope ever to become flawless, at least in the
present world, each of us may grow symmetrical—a full-orbed man in body,
mind and spirit—to achieve which is not the least among the ideals of a
Fraternity that asks us to remove all knobs and excrescences that so
often disfigure us and render us unfitted for Fellowship.

Another meaning of the Ashlar symbolism is set forth by certain of the
Old Lectures, in one of which occurs the following paragraphs: "He that
is truly square, well-polished,

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

and uprightly fixed, is qualified to be a member of our most honoured
society. He that trusteth such a person with any engagement is freed
from all trouble and anxiety about the performance of it, for he is
faithful to his trust, his words are the breathings of his heart, and he
is an utter stranger to deceit." This is as well put as Emerson's
description of a Perfect Ashlar man, whose character consists, he says,
"in the power of self-recovery, so that a man cannot have his flank
turned, cannot be outgeneralled, but put him where you will, he stands."

Albert Pike found in the Ashlar symbolism a picture of the true state.
"The Rough Ashlar is the *people*, as a mass, rude and unorganised. The
Perfect Ashlar, cubical stone, symbol of perfection, is the State, the
rules deriving their powers from the consent of the governed; the
constitution and the laws speaking the will of the people; the
government harmonious, symmetrical, efficient—its powers properly
distributed and duly adjusted in equilibrium." If a man objects that
nowhere does such a social Perfect Ashlar exist, Masonry might make
reply in the words of the late Josiah Royce, our noble apostle of the
Gospel of Loyalty: "I believe in the beloved community and in the spirit
which makes it beloved, and in the communion of all who are, in will and
in deed, its members. I see no such community as yet; but none the less
my rule of life is: Act so as to hasten its coming." This is a great
truth greatly said, and as Masonic as it is true.

These interpretations of the Ashlar may seem to differ, but they
harmonise one with another, like the parts of a fitly framed building.
When the Fellow Craft adjusts himself to that which is above him by the
Plumb; to that which is about him by the Level; and when he rightly

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

adjusts the Plumb to the Level with the Square, he will make a Perfect
Ashlar of himself; and when once thus made he will be ready to be fitted
into the Great Temple of the Supreme Architect whose will is the genius
of Masonry.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII. The Middle Chamber](syma36)
