[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](syma06)  [Next](syma08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HE6I/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Symbolical Masonry*, by H.L. Haywood, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

### CHAPTER III

### THE BALLOT

#### I

Freemasonry is a social and moral institution that undertakes to build a
symbolic Temple of which its members are the living stones; inasmuch as
the stability of the structure depends upon the materials of which it is
composed it is obvious that the Craft must exercise every precaution
lest unfit men weaken its walls. To guard against this it makes use of
the secret ballot as an instrument of selection. Because of this most
important use the ballot-box may well be described, as one writer has
phrased it, "a bulwark of the Order. It is no exaggeration to say that
ninety per cent of the trouble and lack of harmony in our lodges arises
from the improper use of the ballot." I believe that this statement is
an exaggeration, for I have observed that many troubles have their
origin elsewhere, but for all that there is much sense in it. The ballot
is to the Order what the sentinel is to an army, what the tyler is to a
lodge.

Performing as it does a function of such major importance it is natural
that the ballot should be the storm-centre of no end of controversies
and arguments. One brother has been led to exclaim that "the ballot
question is the most irritating of all subjects relating to lodge
government and discipline." He had in mind the abuses that creep in
through the employment of the secret unanimous ballot. Such abuses are
evil enough, but it is a question whether they would not be as bad or
worse under any

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

other system, because it would be manifestly impossible to devise any
method for the election of members that would not at some point or other
or in some hands or other lend itself to misuse.

#### II

In the great majority of American jurisdictions a petition is put to the
ballot one month after first reading, though a few shorten the interval
to two weeks. In less than half the jurisdictions no separate ballot is
required for the Second and Third Degrees; and in almost all
jurisdictions a re-ballot is permitted if only one blackball has been
cast: it is almost an invariable rule (and a just one) that a ballot
cannot be reconsidered after the result has been declared. In about half
the states a rejected petitioner may submit another application in six
months: the other states require a year. In no case is a member exempted
from voting save in a few jurisdictions where he may be excused by the
Worshipful Master or by vote of the lodge.

It is almost a landmark in American Freemasonry that no petitioner can
be accepted for membership save by a unanimous ballot. It is at this
particular point that many brethren—some of whom have been among the
leaders of the Craft—have directed their faultfinding, because it
appears to them that such a usage places altogether too much power into
the hands of an individual, so that if a member feel some personal
slight against a petitioner, or has had a private quarrel with him, such
things in no wise militating against the petitioner's real fitness for
membership, it would be unjust that a good man be prevented from
Freemasonry because of such trivial circumstances. English lodges have
long practised the custom of requiring three blackballs, and there is
much to be said

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

in favour of that custom. Others there are who go to the opposite
extreme and demand that a petitioner be elected by a majority merely;
while others go so far as to ask the return of the ancient custom of a
viva voce vote.

My own opinion is that the three blackballs rule is a good one, for it
would appear to steer a middle course between extremes, but for all that
I am quite contented with the system as it now operates in our land. One
may agree with Brother J. G. Gibson (see his "Masonic Problems," page
26) when he says that "the lodge certainly owes more Masonic
consideration to a member than to a petitioner, no matter how
prosperous, popular and prominent the latter may be." If a member
believes that a certain petitioner would be unwelcome to sit with him in
lodge, or would prove disagreeable in Masonic society, the member has
the first rights in the premises, not the petitioner.

The whole question as to how many blackballs should reject is one that
must be decided by experience or expediency. There are no landmarks to
go by, no ancient usages to bind the Order. On the contrary very
different rules apply in different countries, and in the same country
different rules have applied at different times, as is the case with
England where the three blackball rule is now in force, though there was
a time when a unanimous ballot was required. French lodges generally
require one-fifth of the votes cast in order to reject. In other
countries still the grand governing body sets up a minimum
requirement—as, for example, that one-fifth of the ballots are required
to reject—and then leaves it to each subordinate lodge to vary its
practices at will inside that sine qua non.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

### III

There may be room for argument as to how many blackballs should be
required for rejection but on one matter there would appear to be little
ground for dispute: I refer to secrecy. Secrecy of ballot is in keeping
with the genius of the Order as a whole, and Dr. Albert Mackey was well
advised in putting secrecy among his famous twenty-five landmarks. It is
true "that the use of the secret ballot had not even yet begun in 1720,"
but it must be remembered that the rapid growth of, and the many changes
in, the Society since those early years has made secrecy a necessity. If
voting were done openly from the floor it would often happen that a
member, having just but private reasons for believing a petitioner
unworthy, would be driven by the tyranny of numbers to vote with the
crowd. Besides, a negative oral vote might be reported to a rejected
petitioner and bitter and unnecessary feelings be thereby engendered.
Taking it up one side and down the other the present system is as good a
method of balloting as can be devised: it is kind to the petitioner
himself, it is kind to the voter, and it is fair to the lodge.

At the time of writing (1923) the Fraternity is inundated by petitions.
Never before in the entire history of the institution has it been so
snowed under by applications as now; one is reminded of the old
complaint of Dr. Stukely "that the Order ran itself out of breath
through the folly of the members." We are now running ourselves out of
breath. Lodges that once were put to it to reach three hundred members
are now mounting to one thousand or two thousand and in a few cases more
still. In such great bodies it is becoming necessary to devise new
methods for balloting in order to expedite business, and in many cases
the problem has come before

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Grand Lodges with
the result that new ballot legislation, hitherto undreamed of, has been
adopted. It is impossible to go into detail regarding these new usages,
or to deal with them critically, because there are too many experiments
now being tried, and space does not avail. It would be richly worth
while for an individual student, or for a Study Club, to go into this
matter thoroughly; it would prove a rewarding field of research in
present-day jurisprudence, and many other subjects of cognate interest
and importance would be meanwhile encountered, for the whole ballot
system is one that insinuates itself into the very core of Freemasonry.

#### IV

One more word needs to be said. "Be careful how you vote." If you are a
member of a board of directors of a business corporation and you are
balloting on a new member or on the selection of a new cashier or
president your ballot means nothing necessarily more than that you
believe that the candidate is not technically qualified; your blackball
would under no circumstances be considered an insult. If you vote
against a political candidate it may mean, and usually is so considered,
that you disagree with his policies, not that you deem him morally unfit
for office. But when you vote against a petitioner for membership in our
Fraternity it is a different matter, in almost every case, and far more
serious, so far as the man's reputation is concerned, because almost all
the requirements of membership in the Order are of the moral type; you
pass upon the man's <span class="small">CHARACTER</span>. It is unfair
to him to blackball him on mere hearsay; or because you chance to
entertain a merely private grudge against him, or for any reason less
substantial than that he is unfit fundamentally for membership. The
thing to be

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

decided is not whether the petitioner is prosperous, or popular, but
whether he will make a true Mason, a helpful brother, a desirable
associate in the lodge room. If you have valid reasons for believing
that a petitioner would not thus qualify it is your duty to vote against
him; but you should not vote against him, if he be recommended by the
committee on investigation, for any lesser reasons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Worthy and Well-Qualified](syma08)
