[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](syma53)  [Next](syma55) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HE6I/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Symbolical Masonry*, by H.L. Haywood, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

### CHAPTER L

### THE EMBLEMS

#### I

The Weeping Virgin. This monument symbol was unknown to the Ritual in
the eighteenth century; it is not now found in European systems, nor
even in some American jurisdictions. According to such slender evidence
as we possess it seems to have been invented by Jeremy Cross, the famous
New Hampshire ritualist and pupil of Thomas Smith Webb, though some deny
this. According to one tradition, Cross borrowed the idea from a
tombstone; according to another he adapted an old picture of Isis
weeping over the dead Osiris. Whatever may be the truth of the matter,
the symbol is not of such importance as many others. It is an elaborate
construction utterly lacking in that quality of naturalness and
inevitableness which is found in all the older emblems, so that its very
artificiality and complexity invites every man to fashion his own
interpretation. Until new light is thrown on its origin we can make no
better use of it than is made by the Lecture itself, where it is
transformed into a kind of allegorical picture of Hiram's death.

#### II

The Temple. The great Temple of Solomon was erected on a table of rock
which crowned a Jerusalem hill called Mount Moriah. This hill itself
occupies a most conspicuous place in Hebrew tradition, according to
which it was variously the spot where Adam was created, where

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Cain and Abel
sacrificed, where Noah built his altar at the subsidence of the Flood,
where Abraham offered Isaac, and David erected his altar. The
Mohammedans, who inherited so much from the Jews, described it as the
"Centre of the World," and "The Gate of Heaven," and Mohammed persuaded
his followers that it was from this same hill that he had made his
famous "ascent to heaven."

The Temple which Solomon erected there by the assistance of Hiram of
Tyre has had an even larger place in the traditions of mankind. Few
realise now how high that Temple on Mount Moriah towered in the history
of the olden world, and how the story of its building haunted the
legends and traditions of times following. Many a church in the Middle
Ages was patterned on it, and many a writer, such as Durandus and
Bunyan, used it as a symbol of religious truth. In making so much of
their symbolism to cluster about this dream-haunted building the early
Masons were only following in the footsteps of many others.

Until a half century ago Masonic writers believed that our Craft had
been organised during the building of the Temple, even in detail, and
that the Order had survived from then until the present. To-day, there
is no need to say, we cannot hold that position, at least, many of us
cannot. We have a fairly accurate conception of the size and form of the
structure, and we know that it was built by Phœnician workmen, even as
our legend asserts, for archæologists have uncovered Phœnician Masons’
Marks on the original foundation stones. What the actual historical
connection between the Temple Building and our own Fraternity was still
remains covered by obscurity. But while we wait for future research to
establish that connection, or lack of connection, we need not abate our
interest in the Temple or minimise its importance

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

to our Ritual, for the Masonry of to-day is interested in it as a symbol
rather than as history.

How the Temple found its way into our system is also a debated question.
If we accept Vibert's contention that "there is no evidence that we
possessed it at all before the eighteenth century" we are still left
with the question on our hands, How did it come to be adopted at that
time? In 1724 Villalpandus exhibited a large model in London,
accompanied by an explanatory handbook, and this created an immense
amount of interest in the subject. Some have believed that the
Freemasons of that period were so caught by this wave of interest that
they worked it into their symbolism; but Brother S. P. Johnston, who
went through the records with a fine-toothed comb, announced that he was
unable to find one shred of evidence to support this theory. ("A.Q.C.,"
vol. XII, p. 135.) Brother Rylands, who was second to none as a Masonic
scholar, supported this position in the following statement: "No
satisfactory reason has so far been offered why the Temple of Solomon
and its builders have been selected to play an important part in one
division of our legendary history."

Since Brother Rylands wrote the above sentence, Brother A. E. Waite has
come forth with a theory that seems reasonable whether it can be
accepted as a "satisfactory" reason or not. Holding as he does that many
of the Speculatives who were "accepted" during the eighteenth century
were Kabbalists in one degree or another he believes that we may have
inherited the Temple symbolism from that source. The Kabbalists had made
the Temple one of their principal symbols for more than four hundred
years and many of their interpretations were strikingly similar to ours.
If we accept the theory of Kabbalistic influence—as I, myself, am
inclined to do, at least to a certain extent—we may well believe that
our

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

use of the Temple was borrowed from that very influential group of
teachers. Be that as it may, we shall always retain the Temple
symbolism, for nothing could more adequately portray that which is the
great ideal of our Craft—the building up of a Divine human brotherhood
here among men.

The Temple was built of wood and stone, and metals taken from the earth;
but these materials were so prepared, and so adjusted one to another
that a miracle of solemn beauty resulted. We also are gathering together
materials which seem earthly or common—men with their fleshly nature,
their appetites and passion—and we hope so to prepare and to shape them
that in the very act of brotherly union a holy structure of heavenly
loveliness will come into existence, a House not made with Hands, in
which our human nature will be transfigured. The Temple of Solomon was
not an ordinary house of worship, for the worshippers remained in the
outer courts; nor was it patterned after the earth or the sun as other
temples were, for its entrance faced the East instead of the West. By
its orientation and its construction it suggested the system of Heaven
and it was designed to be God's dwelling place among men. We also would
build a House for God; but whereas the Jews would have Him dwell in a
Temple of Stone, we would fain prepare for Him a Temple of Flesh; and
our hope is that through the regeneration of men, and through their
banding together in a fraternity, the All Highest will tabernacle with
us, so that God and Man may abide together in a Holy Eternal House.

#### III

The Pot of Incense. The use of incense in worship is almost as old and
as universal as religion itself. In ancient days when the gods were
supposed to be merely

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

magnified invisible human beings it was believed that they would enjoy
sweet odours as much as men did, so incense was burned on the altar that
they might inhale its "unctuous smoke." Where the custom of slaughtering
animals on the altar was in use incense was also employed to cover up
the odour; this was especially necessary in warm climates where the
malodorousness of a dead carcass soon became intolerable. As religious
rites became more spiritualised the burning of incense was usually
retained, but in a more symbolic way. Thus, in both the Old and the New
Testaments, incense is used as an emblem of prayer, as many texts will
testify. In the early Christian period when occultism began to take
root, the occultists employed incense in their magic rites, believing it
to possess some mysterious potency, like a spell. At the time of the
Reformation the custom of using incense in Christian churches became
almost abandoned, at least by Protestant bodies, but there is a tendency
abroad now to renew the custom, not for any occult or theological
purpose but simply to add to the pleasures of the church ceremonies.

In Masonry incense is now used only as a symbol "typifying prayer," and
such is its significance in the Third Degree lecture. But it must he
noted—for it is usually overlooked, in spite of the Ritual's insistence
on it—that our symbol is not only the incense itself, but also the pot,
or vessel, in which it is kept. If incense means prayer then the pot of
incense means the human heart from which prayers arise, and the purport
of the symbol is to remind us that only such prayers are acceptable to
God as rise from a spirit guileless and pure.

#### IV

The Beehive. Both the Bee and the Beehive have been used symbolically
from a very old time. In some cases,

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

for what reason it is now hard to guess, the Bee was made the emblem of
heaven, as may be seen in certain old Hindoo pictures of the god Krishna
wherein Bees hover over the deity's head, and also in similar early
pictures of Jesus. Both the Persians and the Egyptians sometimes
embalmed their dead in honey because they believed it to possess
antiseptic properties; out of this custom, we may believe, arose the
latter habit of using the Bee as a symbol of immortality. Alexander the
Great, so it is said, was embalmed in this manner; and so, also, were
certain of the Merovingian kings. The last fact may explain why the Bee
has so often been used symbolically by the French, and why Napoleon, to
lend the lustre of age to his upstart dynasty, adopted the insect as his
royal emblem. The Bee was used as a symbol of immortality by the
Mithraic cult, so popular in the time of the Cæsars, and also by the
early Christians, as the catacomb pictures still witness.

The Bee was also used in another order of symbolism. Theocritus tells a
charming tale in his Idylls of how Cupid complained to Venus of bee
stings and how the goddess archly replied: "Thou too art like a bee, for
although a tiny child, yet how terrible are the wounds thou dost
inflict!" Anacreon includes the same conceit in his Odes as do other
Greek poets, as well as a few of their more modern imitators, such as
Manuel de Villegas, the Castilian; Felice Zappi, and even the German,
Lessing. Sometimes one will see bees flying about the head of Cupid on
old Greek pottery; this is to suggest that as bees steal honey from the
rose so does love steal honey from the lips of maidens; and as the
stings of the bee are very painful so are the sharp darts of love.

Bees were not domesticated in Europe until the age of the monasteries,
when the monks considered a hive an essential part of the equipment,
owing to which custom

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

the Beehive came to be used frequently in Christian symbolism. In their
exhortations to the monks the church fathers would point to the hive as
an example of industry. In the old Ely cathedral of England a woman
weeping over a broken beehive evidently represents a home when ravaged
by indolence or drunkenness.

The Egyptians called the bees "an obedient people" because of their
faithfulness to the rules of the hive and to order. They are a
far-sighted people, always preparing for the future, and their
industriousness has become proverbial. Alas! as many Masters have
learned, in the lodge as in the hive, there are often many drones! The
brother who could discover a remedy for the drone evil would lay the
whole Fraternity under everlasting indebtedness to his genius. The bees,
as we know, kill their drones with scant ceremony; that would be a
swift, but unhappy manner of disposing of ours! How to destroy the
dronishness without killing the drone, that, as Hamlet would say, is the
problem!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LI. The Emblems (Continued)](syma55)
