[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](syma32)  [Next](syma34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HE6I/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Symbolical Masonry*, by H.L. Haywood, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

### CHAPTER XXIX

### DUE FORM

Of the Obligation of the Fellow Craft there is no need to speak inasmuch
as the general topic of Obligations was dealt with in an earlier
section; but it may be wise here to add to the previous discussion a
very brief comment on that "due form" in which the oath is made. As the
details are necessarily secret they must be passed by though it may be
said that all the postures seem to be arranged about the square thereby
suggesting that in order to keep the covenant a candidate must be
"square" through and through, in every limb of his body; so that not one
faculty or organ shall be permitted to violate those principles and
secrets of Freemasonry to which the candidate obligates himself.

In ordinary every-day life, we make a distinction between *form* and
*formality*. The man who overvalues the manner of doing things, or who
does not put his conscience into his forms, we call a formalist, and
that rightly. He may have the veneer of a gentleman, but the heart of a
cad; he may perform the external functions of morality but remain all
the while like one of those white-washed sepulchres of which Jesus
speaks. Formality is pretence, mockery, unreality. But our abhorrence of
formalism must not blind us to the necessity of form, for the manner of
our behaviour is itself a kind of language and speaks with "the voice of
the sign" about the realities of character. I may love or admire you
greatly, but if I do not express my regard through actions that you can
understand

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

you may live and die in ignorance of it. We lift the hat, shake hands,
step aside for ladies, surrender our seats to the aged, observe the
propriety of dress, etc., and all because *manners* are so essential a
form of social communion that, as Emerson says, if they were lost to the
world some gentleman would be obliged to re-invent them.

Now it needs to be observed that while Masonry must not become formal
lest it die, and while it must ever be as clean and natural as the
blowing clover and the falling rain, yet must it use forms, and nowhere
are they more manifestly needed than in taking the Obligation. In that
connection—as in others—we call them *due forms* because they are *due*
to the Order in the nature of things, and they are nothing other than
the candidate's manner of expressing to his brethren his whole hearted
determination to keep to the last letter all the duties, principles and
secrets to which he therein binds himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX. Working Tools of a Fellow Craft](syma34)
