<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mlc06)  [Next](mlc08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486280926/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0037Z6FKE/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of China*, by Edward T.C. Werner, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

## Chapter V

# Myths of the Stars

## Astrological Superstitions

According to Chinese ideas, the sun, moon, and planets influence
sublunary events, especially the life and death of human beings, and
changes in their colour menace approaching calamities. Alterations in
the appearance of the sun announce misfortunes to the State or its head,
as revolts, famines, or the death of the emperor; when the moon waxes
red, or turns pale, men should be in awe of the unlucky times thus
fore-omened.

The sun is symbolized by the figure of a raven in a circle, and the moon
by a hare on its hind-legs pounding rice in a mortar, or by a
three-legged toad. The last refers to the legend of Ch’ang Ô, detailed
later. The moon is a special object of worship in autumn, and moon-cakes
dedicated to it are sold at this season. All the stars are ranged into
constellations, and an emperor is installed over them, who resides at
the North Pole; five monarchs also live in the five stars in Leo, where
is a palace called Wu Ti Tso, or ‘Throne of the Five Emperors.’ In this
celestial government there are also an heir-apparent, empresses, sons
and daughters, and tribunals, and the constellations receive the names
of men, animals, and other terrestrial objects. The Great Bear, or
Dipper, is worshipped as the residence of the Fates, where the duration
of life and other events relating to mankind are measured and meted out.
Fears are excited by unusual phenomena among the heavenly bodies.

Both the sun and the moon are worshipped by the <span id="page_177">p.
177</span> Government in appropriate temples on the east and west sides
of Peking.

## Various Star-gods

Some of the star-gods, such as the God of Literature, the Goddess of the
North Star, the Gods of Happiness, Longevity, etc., are noticed in other
parts of this work. The cycle-gods are also star-gods. There are sixty
years in a cycle, and over each of these presides a special star-deity.
The one worshipped is the one which gave light on the birthday of the
worshipper, and therefore the latter burns candles before that
particular image on each succeeding anniversary. These cycle-gods are
represented by most grotesque images: “white, black, yellow, and red;
ferocious gods with vindictive eyeballs popping out, and gentle faces as
expressive as a lump of putty; some looking like men and some like
women.” In one temple one of the sixty was in the form of a hog, and
another in that of a goose. “Here is an image with arms protruding out
of his eye-sockets, and eyes in the palms of his hands, looking downward
to see the secret things within the earth. See that rabbit,
Minerva-like, jumping from the divine head; again a mud-rat emerges from
his occipital hiding-place, and lo! a snake comes coiling from the brain
of another god—so the long line serves as models for an artist who
desires to study the fantastic.”

## Shooting the Heavenly Dog

In the family sleeping-apartments in Chinese houses hang pictures of
Chang Hsien, a white-faced, long-bearded man with a little boy by his
side, and in his hand a bow and arrow, with which he is shooting the
Heavenly <span id="page_178">p. 178</span> Dog. The dog is the Dog-star,
and if the ‘fate’ of the family is under this star there will be no son,
or the child will be short-lived. Chang Hsien is the patron of
child-bearing women, and was worshipped under the Sung dynasty by women
desirous of offspring. The introduction of this name into the Chinese
pantheon is due to an incident in the history of Hua-jui Fu-jên, a name
given to Lady Fei, concubine of Mêng Ch’ang, the last ruler of the Later
Shu State, A.D. 935–964. When she was brought from Shu to grace the
harem of the founder of the Sung dynasty, in A.D. 960, she is said to
have preserved secretly the portrait of her former lord, the Prince of
Shu, whose memory she passionately cherished. Jealously questioned by
her new consort respecting her devotion to this picture, she declared it
to be the representation of Chang Hsien, the divine being worshipped by
women desirous of offspring. Opinions differ as to the origin of the
worship. One account says that the Emperor Jên Tsung, of the Sung
dynasty, saw in a dream a beautiful young man with white skin and black
hair, carrying a bow in his hand. He said to the Emperor: “The star
T’ien Kou, Heavenly Dog, in the heavens is hiding the sun and moon, and
on earth devouring small children. It is only my presence which keeps
him at bay.”

On waking, the Emperor at once ordered the young man’s portrait to be
painted and exhibited, and from that time childless families would write
the name Chang Hsien on tablets and worship them.

Another account describes Chang Hsien as the spirit of the star Chang.
In the popular representations Chang Hsien is seen in the form of a
distinguished personage drawing a bow. The spirit of the star Chang
<span id="page_179">p. 179</span> is supposed to preside over the
kitchen of Heaven and to arrange the banquets given by the gods.

## The Sun-king

The worship of the sun is part of the State religion, and the officials
make their offerings to the sun-tablet. The moon also is worshipped. At
the harvest moon, the full moon of the eighth month, the Chinese bow
before the heavenly luminary, and each family burns incense as an
offering. Thus “100,000 classes all receive the blessings of the
icy-wheel in the Milky Way along the heavenly street, a mirror always
bright.” In Chinese illustrations we see the moon-palace of Ch’ang O,
who stole the pill of immortality and flew to the moon, the fragrant
tree which one of the genii tried to cut down, and a hare pestling
medicine in a mortar. This refers to the following legend.

The sun and the moon are both included by the Chinese among the stars,
the spirit of the former being called T’ai-yang Ti-chün, ‘the Sun-king,’
or Jih-kung Ch’ih-chiang, ‘Ch’ih-chiang of the Solar Palace,’ that of
the latter T’ai-yin Huang-chün, ‘the Moon-queen,’ or Yüeh-fu Ch’ang O,
‘Ch’ang O of the Lunar Palace.’

Ch’ih-chiang Tzŭ-yü lived in the reign of Hsien-yüan Huang-ti, who
appointed him Director of Construction and Furnishing.

When Hsien-yüan went on his visit to Ô-mei Shan, a mountain in
Ssuch’uan, Ch’ih-chiang Tzŭ-yü obtained permission to accompany him.
Their object was to be initiated into the doctrine of immortality.

The Emperor was instructed in the secrets of the doctrine by T’ai-i
Huang-jên, the spirit of this famous mountain, who, when he was about to
take his departure, <span id="page_180">p. 180</span> begged him to
allow Ch’ih-chiang Tzŭ-yü to remain with him. The new hermit went out
every day to gather the flowering plants which formed the only food of
his master, T’ai-i Huang-jên, and he also took to eating these flowers,
so that his body gradually became spiritualized.

## The Steep Summit

One day T’ai-i Huang-jên sent him to cut some bamboos on the summit of
Ô-mei Shan, distant more than three hundred *li* from the place where
they lived. When he reached the base of the summit, all of a sudden
three giddy peaks confronted him, so dangerous that even the monkeys and
other animals dared not attempt to scale them. But he took his courage
in his hands, climbed the steep slope, and by sheer energy reached the
summit. Having cut the bamboos, he tried to descend, but the rocks rose
like a wall in sharp points all round him, and he could not find a
foothold anywhere. Then, though laden with the bamboos, he threw himself
into the air, and was borne on the wings of the wind. He came to earth
safe and sound at the foot of the mountain, and ran with the bamboos to
his master. On account of this feat he was considered advanced enough to
be admitted to instruction in the doctrine.

## The Divine Archer

The Emperor Yao, in the twelfth year of his reign (2346 B.C.), one day,
while walking in the streets of Huai-yang, met a man carrying a bow and
arrows, the bow being bound round with a piece of red stuff. This was
Ch’ih-chiang Tzŭ-yü. He told the Emperor he was a skilful archer and
could fly in the air on the wings of <span id="page_181">p.
181</span> the wind. Yao, to test his skill, ordered him to shoot one of
his arrows at a pine-tree on the top of a neighbouring mountain. Ch’ih
shot an arrow which transfixed the tree, and then jumped on to a current
of air to go and fetch the arrow back. Because of this the Emperor named
him Shên I, ‘the Divine Archer,’ attached him to his suite, and
appointed him Chief Mechanician of all Works in Wood. He continued to
live only on flowers.

## Vanquishes the Wind-spirit

At this time terrible calamities began to lay waste the land. Ten suns
appeared in the sky, the heat of which burnt up all the crops; dreadful
storms uprooted trees and overturned houses; floods overspread the
country. Near the Tung-t’ing Lake a serpent, a thousand feet long,
devoured human beings, and wild boars of enormous size did great damage
in the eastern part of the kingdom. Yao ordered Shên I to go and slay
the devils and monsters who were causing all this mischief, placing
three hundred men at his service for that purpose.

Shên I took up his post on Mount Ch’ing Ch’iu to study the cause of the
devastating storms, and found that these tempests were released by Fei
Lien, the Spirit of the Wind, who blew them out of a sack. As we shall
see when considering the thunder myths, the ensuing conflict ended in
Fei Lien suing for mercy and swearing friendship to his victor,
whereupon the storms ceased.

## Dispels the Nine False Suns

After this first victory Shên I led his troops to the banks of the Hsi
Ho, West River, at Lin Shan. Here he discovered that on three
neighbouring peaks nine <span id="page_182">p. 182</span> extraordinary
birds were blowing out fire and thus forming nine new suns in the sky.
Shên I shot nine arrows in succession, pierced the birds, and
immediately the nine false suns resolved themselves into red clouds and
melted away. Shên I and his soldiers found the nine arrows stuck in nine
red stones at the top of the mountain.

## Marries the Sister of the Water-spirit

Shên I then led his soldiers to Kao-liang, where the river had risen and
formed an immense torrent. He shot an arrow into the water, which
thereupon withdrew to its source. In the flood he saw a man clothed in
white, riding a white horse and accompanied by a dozen attendants. He
quickly discharged an arrow, striking him in the left eye, and the
horseman at once took to flight. He was accompanied by a young woman
named Hêng O  <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21), the younger sister of
Ho Po, the Spirit of the Waters. Shên I shot an arrow into her hair. She
turned and thanked him for sparing her life, adding: “I will agree to be
your wife.” After these events had been duly reported to the Emperor
Yao, the wedding took place.

## Slays Various Dangerous Creatures

Three months later Yao ordered Shên I to go and kill the great
Tung-t’ing serpent. An arrow in the left eye laid him out stark and
dead. The wild boars also were all caught in traps and slain. As a
reward for these <span id="page_183">p. 183</span> achievements Yao
canonized Shên I with the title of Marquis Pacifier of the Country.

## Builds a Palace for Chin Mu

About this time T’ai-wu Fu-jên, the third daughter of Hsi Wang Mu, had
entered a nunnery on Nan-min Shan, to the north of Lo-fou Shan, where
her mother’s palace was situated. She mounted a dragon to visit her
mother, and all along the course left a streak of light in her wake. One
day the Emperor Yao, from the top of Ch’ing-yün Shan, saw this track of
light, and asked Shên I the cause of this unusual phenomenon. The latter
mounted the current of luminous air, and letting it carry him whither it
listed, found himself on Lo-fou Shan, in front of the door of the
mountain, which was guarded by a great spiritual monster. On seeing Shên
I this creature called together a large number of phoenixes and other
birds of gigantic size and set them at Shên I. One arrow, however,
settled the matter. They all fled, the door opened, and a lady followed
by ten attendants presented herself. She was no other than Chin Mu
herself. Shên I, having saluted her and explained the object of his
visit, was admitted to the goddess’s palace, and royally entertained.

“I have heard,” said Shên I to her, “that you possess the pills of
immortality; I beg you to give me one or two.” “You are a well-known
architect,” replied Chin Mu; “please build me a palace near this
mountain.” Together they went to inspect a celebrated site known as
Pai-yü-kuei Shan, ‘White Jade-tortoise Mountain,’ and fixed upon it as
the location of the new abode of the goddess. Shên I had all the spirits
of the mountain to work for him. The walls were built of jade,
sweet-smelling <span id="page_184">p. 184</span> woods were used for the
framework and wainscoting, the roof was of glass, the steps of agate. In
a fortnight’s time sixteen palace buildings stretched magnificently
along the side of the mountain. Chin Mu gave to the architect a
wonderful pill which would bestow upon him immortality as well as the
faculty of being able at will to fly through the air. “But,” she said,
“it must not be eaten now: you must first go through a twelve months’
preparatory course of exercise and diet, without which the pill will not
have all the desired results.” Shên I thanked the goddess, took leave of
her, and, returning to the Emperor, related to him all that had
happened.

## Kills Chisel-tooth

On reaching home, the archer hid his precious pill under a rafter, lest
anyone should steal it, and then began the preparatory course in
immortality.

At this time there appeared in the south a strange man named Tso Ch’ih,
‘Chisel-tooth.’ He had round eyes and a long projecting tooth. He was a
well-known criminal. Yao ordered Shên I and his small band of brave
followers to deal with this new enemy. This extraordinary man lived in a
cave, and when Shên I and his men arrived he emerged brandishing a
padlock. Shên I broke his long tooth by shooting an arrow at it, and Tso
Ch’ih fled, but was struck in the back and laid low by another arrow
from Shên I. The victor took the broken tooth with him as a trophy.

## Hêng Ô flies to the Moon

Hêng Ô, during her husband’s absence, saw a white light which seemed to
issue from a beam in the roof, while a most delicious odour filled every
room. By the <span id="page_185">p. 185</span> aid of a ladder she
reached up to the spot whence the light came, found the pill of
immortality, and ate it. She suddenly felt that she was freed from the
operation of the laws of gravity and as if she had wings, and was just
essaying her first flight when Shên I returned. He went to look for his
pill, and, not finding it, asked Hêng Ô what had happened.

<span id="img_p184"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Hêng Ô Flies to the
Moon](tn/p184.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/p184.jpg)  
Hêng Ô Flies to the Moon  
</span>

The young wife, seized with fear, opened the window and flew out. Shên I
took his bow and pursued her. The moon was full, the night clear, and he
saw his wife flying rapidly in front of him, only about the size of a
toad. Just when he was redoubling his pace to catch her up a blast of
wind struck him to the ground like a dead leaf.

Hêng Ô continued her flight until she reached a luminous sphere, shining
like glass, of enormous size, and very cold. The only vegetation
consisted of cinnamon-trees. No living being was to be seen. All of a
sudden she began to cough, and vomited the covering of the pill of
immortality, which was changed into a rabbit as white as the purest
jade. This was the ancestor of the spirituality of the *yin*, or female,
principle. Hêng Ô noticed a bitter taste in her mouth, drank some dew,
and, feeling hungry, ate some cinnamon. She took up her abode in this
sphere.

As to Shên I, he was carried by the hurricane up into a high mountain.
Finding himself before the door of a palace, he was invited to enter,
and found that it was the palace of Tung-hua Ti-chün, otherwise Tung
Wang Kung, the husband of Hsi Wang Mu.

## The Sun-palace and the Bird of Dawn

The God of the Immortals said to Shên I: “You must not be annoyed with
Hêng Ô. Everybody’s fate is <span id="page_186">p. 186</span> settled
beforehand. Your labours are nearing an end, and you will become an
Immortal. It was I who let loose the whirlwind that brought you here.
Hêng O, through having borrowed the forces which by right belong to you,
is now an Immortal in the Palace of the Moon. As for you, you deserve
much for having so bravely fought the nine false suns. As a reward you
shall have the Palace of the Sun. Thus the *yin* and the *yang* will be
united in marriage.” This said, Tung-hua Ti-chün ordered his servants to
bring a red Chinese sarsaparilla cake, with a lunar talisman.

“Eat this cake,” he said; “it will protect you from the heat of the
solar hearth. And by wearing this talisman you will be able at will to
visit the lunar palace of Hêng O; but the converse does not hold good,
for your wife will not have access to the solar palace.” This is why the
light of the moon has its birth in the sun, and decreases in proportion
to its distance from the sun, the moon being light or dark according as
the sun comes and goes. Shên I ate the sarsaparilla cake, attached the
talisman to his body, thanked the god, and prepared to leave. Tung Wang
Kung said to him: “The sun rises and sets at fixed times; you do not yet
know the laws of day and night; it is absolutely necessary for you to
take with you the bird with the golden plumage, which will sing to
advise you of the exact times of the rising, culmination, and setting of
the sun.” “Where is this bird to be found?” asked Shên I. “It is the one
you hear calling *Ia! Ia!* It is the ancestor of the spirituality of the
*yang*, or male, principle. Through having eaten the active principle of
the sun, it has assumed the form of a three-footed bird, which perches
on the *fu-sang* tree \[a tree said to grow at the place where the sun
rises\] in <span id="page_187">p. 187</span> the middle of the Eastern
Sea. This tree is several thousands of feet in height and of gigantic
girth. The bird keeps near the source of the dawn, and when it sees the
sun taking his morning bath gives vent to a cry that shakes the heavens
and wakes up all humanity. That is why I ordered Ling Chên-tzŭ to put it
in a cage on T’ao-hua Shan, Peach-blossom Hill; since then its cries
have been less harsh. Go and fetch it and take it to the Palace of the
Sun. Then you will understand all the laws of the daily movements.” He
then wrote a charm which Shên I was to present to Ling Chên-tzŭ to make
him open the cage and hand the golden bird over to him.

The charm worked, and Ling Chên-tzŭ opened the cage. The bird of golden
plumage had a sonorous voice and majestic bearing. “This bird,” he said,
“lays eggs which hatch out nestlings with red combs, who answer him
every morning when he starts crowing. He is usually called the cock of
heaven, and the cocks down here which crow morning and evening are
descendants of the celestial cock.”

## Shên I visits the Moon

Shên I, riding on the celestial bird, traversed the air and reached the
disk of the sun just at mid-day. He found himself carried into the
centre of an immense horizon, as large as the earth, and did not
perceive the rotatory movement of the sun. He then enjoyed complete
happiness without care or trouble. The thought of the happy hours passed
with his wife Hêng O, however, came back to memory, and, borne on a ray
of sunlight, he flew to the moon. He saw the cinnamon-trees and the
frozen-looking horizon. Going to a secluded spot, he found Hêng O there
all alone. On seeing him she was <span id="page_188">p. 188</span> about
to run away, but Shên I took her hand and reassured her. “I am now
living in the solar palace,” he said; “do not let the past annoy you.”
Shên I cut down some cinnamon-trees, used them for pillars, shaped some
precious stones, and so built a palace, which he named Kuang-han Kung,
‘Palace of Great Cold.’ From that time forth, on the fifteenth day of
every moon, he went to visit her in her palace. That is the conjunction
of the *yang* and *yin*, male and female principles, which causes the
great brilliancy of the moon at that epoch.

Shên I, on returning to his solar kingdom, built a wonderful palace,
which he called the Palace of the Lonely Park.

From that time the sun and moon each had their ruling sovereign. This
*régime* dates from the forty-ninth year (2309 B.C.) of Yao’s reign.

When the old Emperor was informed that Shên I and his wife had both gone
up to Heaven he was much grieved to lose the man who had rendered him
such valuable service, and bestowed upon him the posthumous title of
Tsung Pu, ‘Governor of Countries.’ In the representations of this god
and goddess the former is shown holding the sun, the latter the moon.
The Chinese add the sequel that Hêng O became changed into a toad, whose
outline is traceable on the moon’s surface.

## Star-worship

The star-deities are adored by parents on behalf of their children; they
control courtship and marriage, bring prosperity or adversity in
business, send pestilence and war, regulate rainfall and drought, and
command angels and demons; so every event in life is determined <span
id="page_189">p. 189</span> by the ‘star-ruler’ who at that time from
the shining firmament manages the destinies of men and nations. The
worship is performed in the native homes either by astrologers engaged
for that purpose or by Taoist priests. In times of sickness, ten paper
star-gods are arranged, five good on one side and five bad on the other;
a feast is placed before them, and it is supposed that when the bad have
eaten enough they will take their flight to the south-west; the
propitiation of the good star-gods is in the hope that they will expel
the evil stars, and happiness thus be obtained.

The practical effect of this worship is seen in the following examples
taken from the Chinese list of one hundred and twenty-nine lucky and
unlucky stars, which, with the sixty cycle-stars and the twenty-eight
constellations, besides a vast multitude of others, make up the
celestial galaxy worshipped by China’s millions: the Orphan Star enables
a woman to become a man; the Star of Pleasure decides on betrothals,
binding the feet of those destined to be lovers with silver cords; the
Bonepiercing Star produces rheumatism; the Morning Star, if not
worshipped, kills the father or mother during the year; the Balustrade
Star promotes lawsuits; the Three-corpse Star controls suicide, the
Peach-blossom Star lunacy; and so on.

## The Herdsman and the Weaver-girl

In the myths and legends which have clustered about the observations of
the stars by the Chinese there are subjects for pictorial illustration
without number. One of these stories is the fable of Aquila and Vega,
known in Chinese mythology as the Herdsman and the Weaver-girl. The
latter, the daughter of the Sun-god, <span id="page_190">p.
190</span> was so constantly busied with her loom that her father became
worried at her close habits and thought that by marrying her to a
neighbour, who herded cattle on the banks of the Silver Stream of Heaven
(the Milky Way), she might awake to a brighter manner of living.

No sooner did the maiden become wife than her habits and character
utterly changed for the worse. She became not only very merry and
lively, but quite forsook loom and needle, giving up her nights and days
to play and idleness; no silly lover could have been more foolish than
she. The Sun-king, in great wrath at all this, concluded that the
husband was the cause of it, and determined to separate the couple. So
he ordered him to remove to the other side of the river of stars, and
told him that hereafter they should meet only once a year, on the
seventh night of the seventh month. To make a bridge over the flood of
stars, the Sun-king called myriads of magpies, who thereupon flew
together, and, making a bridge, supported the poor lover on their wings
and backs as if on a roadway of solid land. So, bidding his weeping wife
farewell, the lover-husband sorrowfully crossed the River of Heaven, and
all the magpies instantly flew away. But the two were separated, the one
to lead his ox, the other to ply her shuttle during the long hours of
the day with diligent toil, and the Sun-king again rejoiced in his
daughter’s industry.

At last the time for their reunion drew near, and only one fear
possessed the loving wife. What if it should rain? For the River of
Heaven is always full to the brim, and one extra drop causes a flood
which sweeps away even the bird-bridge. But not a drop fell; all the
heavens were clear. The magpies flew joyfully in myriads, making a way
for the tiny feet of the little lady. <span id="page_191">p.
191</span> Trembling with joy, and with heart fluttering more than the
bridge of wings, she crossed the River of Heaven and was in the arms of
her husband. This she did every year. The husband stayed on his side of
the river, and the wife came to him on the magpie bridge, save on the
sad occasions when it rained. So every year the people hope for clear
weather, and the happy festival is celebrated alike by old and young.

These two constellations are worshipped principally by women, that they
may gain cunning in the arts of needlework and making of fancy flowers.
Water-melons, fruits, vegetables, cakes, etc., are placed with incense
in the reception-room, and before these offerings are performed the
kneeling and the knocking of the head on the ground in the usual way.

## The Twenty-eight Constellations

Sacrifices were offered to these spirits by the Emperor on the marble
altar of the Temple of Heaven, and by the high officials throughout the
provinces. Of the twenty-eight the following are regarded as
propitious—namely, the Horned, Room, Tail, Sieve, Bushel, House, Wall,
Mound, Stomach, End, Bristling, Well, Drawn-bow, and Revolving
Constellations; the Neck, Bottom, Heart, Cow, Female, Empty, Danger,
Astride, Cock, Mixed, Demon, Willow, Star, Wing, are unpropitious.

The twenty-eight constellations seem to have become the abodes of gods
as a result of the defeat of a Taoist Patriarch T’ung-t’ien Chiao-chu,
who had espoused the cause of the tyrant Chou, when he and all his
followers were slaughtered by the heavenly hosts in the terrible
catastrophe known as the Battle of the Ten Thousand Immortals. Chiang
Tzŭ-ya as a reward conferred on <span id="page_192">p. 192</span> them
the appanage of the twenty-eight constellations. The five planets,
Venus, Jupiter, Mercury, Mars, and Saturn, are also the abodes of
stellar divinities, called the White, Green, Black, Red, and Yellow
Rulers respectively. Stars good and bad are all likewise inhabited by
gods or demons.

## A Victim of Ta Chi

Concerning Tzŭ-wei Hsing, the constellation Tzŭ-wei (north circumpolar
stars), of which the stellar deity is Po I-k’ao, the following legend is
related in the *Fêng shên yen i*.

Po I-k’ao was the eldest son of Wên Wang, and governed the kingdom
during the seven years that the old King Was detained as a prisoner of
the tyrant Chou. He did everything possible to procure his father’s
release. Knowing the tastes of the cruel King, he sent him for his harem
ten of the prettiest women who could be found, accompanied by seven
chariots made of perfumed wood, and a white-faced monkey of marvellous
intelligence. Besides these he included in his presents a magic carpet,
on which it was necessary only to sit in order to recover immediately
from the effects of drunkenness.

Unfortunately for Po I-k’ao, Chou’s favourite concubine, Ta Chi,
conceived a passion for him and had recourse to all sorts of ruses to
catch him in her net; but his conduct was throughout irreproachable.
Vexed by his indifference, she tried slander in order to bring about his
ruin. But her calumnies did not at first have the result she expected.
Chou, after inquiry, was convinced of the innocence of Po. But an
accident spoiled everything. In the middle of an amusing *séance* the
monkey which had been given to the King by Po perceived some <span
id="page_193">p. 193</span> sweets in the hand of Ta Chi, and, jumping
on to her body, snatched them from Her. The King and his concubine were
furious, Chou had the monkey killed forthwith, and Ta Chi accused Po
I-k’ao of having brought the animal into the palace with the object of
making an attempt on the lives of the King and herself. But the Prince
explained that the monkey, being only an animal, could not grasp even
the first idea of entering into a conspiracy.

Shortly after this Po committed an unpardonable fault which changed the
goodwill of the King into mortal enmity. He allowed himself to go so far
as to suggest to the King that he should break off his relations with
this infamous woman, the source of all the woes which were desolating
the kingdom, and when Ta Chi on this account grossly insulted him he
struck her with his lute.

For this offence Ta Chi caused him to be crucified in the palace. Large
nails were driven through his hands and feet, and his flesh was cut off
in pieces. Not content with ruining Po I-k’ao, this wretched woman
wished also to ruin Wen Wang. She therefore advised the King to have the
flesh of the murdered man made up into rissoles and sent as a present to
his father. If he refused to eat the flesh of his own son he was to be
accused of contempt for the King, and there would thus be a pretext for
having him executed. Wen Wang, being versed in divination and the
science of the *pa kua*, Eight Trigrams, knew that these rissoles
contained the flesh of his son, and to avoid the snare spread for him he
ate three of the rissoles in the presence of the royal envoys. On their
return the latter reported this to the King, who found himself helpless
on learning of Wen Wang’s conduct. <span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

Po I-k’ao was canonized by Chiang Tzu-ya, and appointed ruler of the
constellation Tzu-wei of the North Polar heavens.

## Myths of Time

T’ai Sui is the celestial spirit who presides over the year. He is the
President of the Ministry of Time. This god is much to be feared.
Whoever offends against him is sure to be destroyed. He strikes when
least expected to. T’ai Sui is also the Ministry itself, whose members,
numbering a hundred and twenty, are set over time, years, months, and
days. The conception is held by some writers to be of Chaldeo-Assyrian
origin.

The god T’ai Sui is not mentioned in the T’ang and Sung rituals, but in
the Yüan dynasty (A.D. 1280–1368) sacrifices were offered to him in the
College of the Grand Historiographer whenever any work of importance was
about to be undertaken. Under this dynasty the sacrifices were offered
to T’ai Sui and to the ruling gods of the months and of the days. But
these sacrifices were not offered at regular times: it was only at the
beginning of the Ch’ing (Manchu) dynasty (1644–1912) that it was decided
to offer the sacrifices at fixed periods.

## The Planet Jupiter

T’ai Sui corresponds to the planet Jupiter. He travels across the sky,
passing through the twelve sidereal mansions. He is a stellar god.
Therefore an altar is raised to him and sacrifices are offered on it
under the open sky. This practice dates from the beginning of the Ming
dynasty, when the Emperor T’ai Tsu ordered sacrifices to this god to be
made throughout the Empire. According to some authors, he corresponds to
the god <span id="page_195">p. 195</span> of the twelve sidereal
mansions. He is also variously represented as the moon, which turns to
the left in the sky, and the sun, which turns to the right. The diviners
gave to T’ai Sui the title of Grand Marshal, following the example of
the usurper Wang Mang (A.D. 9–23) of the Western Han dynasty, who gave
that title to the year-star.

## Legend of T’ai Sui

The following is the legend of T’ai Sui.

T’ai Sui was the son of the Emperor Chou, the last of the Yin dynasty.
His mother was Queen Chiang. When he was born he looked like a lump of
formless flesh. The infamous Ta Chi, the favourite concubine of this
wicked Emperor, at once informed him that a monster had been born in the
palace, and the over-credulous sovereign ordered that it should
immediately be cast outside the city. Shên Chên-jên, who was passing,
saw the small abandoned one, and said: “This is an Immortal who has just
been born.” With his knife he cut open the caul which enveloped it, and
the child was exposed.

His protector carried him to the cave Shui Lien, where he led the life
of a hermit, and entrusted the infant to Ho Hsien-ku, who acted as his
nurse and brought him up.

The child’s hermit-name was Yin Ting-nu, his ordinary name Yin No-cha,
but during his boyhood he was known as Yin Chiao, *i.e.* ‘Yin the
Deserted of the Suburb,’ When he had reached an age when he was
sufficiently intelligent, his nurse informed him that he was not her
son, but really the son of the Emperor Chou, who, deceived by the
calumnies of his favourite Ta Chi, had taken him for an evil monster and
had him cast out of the palace. His mother had been thrown down from an
upper storey <span id="page_196">p. 196</span> and killed. Yin Chiao
went to his rescuer and begged him to allow him to avenge his mother’s
death. The Goddess T’ien Fei, the Heavenly Concubine, picked out two
magic weapons from the armoury in the cave, a battle-axe and club, both
of gold, and gave them to Yin Chiao. When the Shang army was defeated at
Mu Yeh, Yin Chiao broke into a tower where Ta Chi was, seized her, and
brought her before the victor, King Wu, who gave him permission to split
her head open with his battle-axe. But Ta Chi was a spiritual
hen-pheasant (some say a spiritual vixen). She transformed herself into
smoke and disappeared. To reward Yin Chiao for his filial piety and
bravery in fighting the demons, Yü Ti canonized him with the title T’ai
Sui Marshal Yin.

According to another version of the legend, Yin Chiao fought on the side
of the Yin against Wu Wang, and after many adventures was caught by Jan
Têng between two mountains, which he pressed together, leaving only Yin
Chiao’s head exposed above the summits. The general Wu Chi promptly cut
it off with a spade. Chiang Tz\[u)\]-ya subsequently canonized Yin
Chiao.

## Worship of T’ai Sui

The worship of T’ai Sui seems to have first taken place in the reign of
Shên Tsung (A.D. 1068–86) of the Sung dynasty, and was continued during
the remainder of the Monarchical Period. The object of the worship is to
avert calamities, T’ai Sui being a dangerous spirit who can do injury to
palaces and cottages, to people in their houses as well as to travellers
on the roads. But he has this peculiarity, that he injures persons and
things not in the district in which he himself is, but in those
districts which adjoin it. Thus, if some constructive work is <span
id="page_197">p. 197</span> undertaken in a region where T’ai Sui
happens to be, the inhabitants of the neighbouring districts take
precautions against his evil influence. This they generally do by
hanging out the appropriate talisman. In order to ascertain in what
region T’ai Sui is at any particular time, an elaborate diagram is
consulted. This consists of a representation of the twelve terrestrial
branches or stems, *ti chih*&gt; and the ten celestial trunks, *t’ien
kan,* indicating the cardinal points and the intermediate points,
north-east, north-west, south-east, and south-west. The four cardinal
points are further verified with the aid of the Five Elements, the Five
Colours, and the Eight Trigrams. By using this device, it is possible to
find the geographical position of T’ai Sui during the current year, the
position of threatened districts, and the methods to be employed to
provide against danger. <span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[198:1](mlc07.htm#fr_21) She is the same as
Ch’ang Ô, the name Hêng being changed to Ch’ang because it was the
tabooed personal name of the Emperors Mu Tsung of the T’ang dynasty and
Chên Tsung of the Sung dynasty.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Myths of Thunder, Lightning, Wind, and Rain](mlc08)

</div>
