<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mlc00)  [Next](mlc02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486280926/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0037Z6FKE/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of China*, by Edward T.C. Werner, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

# Preface

The chief literary sources of Chinese myths are the *Li tai shên hsien
t’ung chien*, in thirty-two volumes, the *Shên hsien lieh chuan*, in
eight volumes, the *Fêng shên yen i*, in eight volumes, and the *Sou
shên chi*, in ten volumes. In writing the following pages I have
translated or paraphrased largely from these works. I have also
consulted and at times quoted from the excellent volumes on Chinese
Superstitions by Père Henri Doré, comprised in the valuable series
*Variétés Sinologiques*, published by the Catholic Mission Press at
Shanghai. The native works contained in the Ssŭ K’u Ch’üan Shu, one of
the few public libraries in Peking, have proved useful for purposes of
reference. My heartiest thanks are due to my good friend Mr Mu
Hsüeh-hsün, a scholar of wide learning and generous disposition, for
having kindly allowed me to use his very large and useful library of
Chinese books. The late Dr G.E. Morrison also, until he sold it to a
Japanese baron, was good enough to let me consult his extensive
collection of foreign works relating to China whenever I wished, but
owing to the fact that so very little work has been done in Chinese
mythology by Western writers I found it better in dealing with this
subject to go direct to the original Chinese texts. I am indebted to
Professor H.A. Giles, and to his publishers, Messrs Kelly and Walsh,
Shanghai, for permission to reprint from *Strange Stories from a Chinese
Studio* the fox legends given in Chapter XV.

This is, so far as I know, the only monograph on Chinese mythology in
any non-Chinese language. Nor do the native works include any scientific
analysis or philosophical treatment of their myths. <span id="page_8">p.
8</span>

My aim, after summarizing the sociology of the Chinese as a prerequisite
to the understanding of their ideas and sentiments, and dealing as fully
as possible, consistently with limitations of space (limitations which
have necessitated the presentation of a very large and intricate topic
in a highly compressed form), with the philosophy of the subject, has
been to set forth in English dress those myths which may be regarded as
the accredited representatives of Chinese mythology—those which live in
the minds of the people and are referred to most frequently in their
literature, not those which are merely diverting without being typical
or instructive—in short, a true, not a distorted image.

Edward Theodore Chalmers Werner

Peking  
*February* 1922

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](mlc02)

</div>
