[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tsm03)  [Next](tsm05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

### CHAPTER I

# Beira, Queen of Winter

Dark Beira was the mother of all the gods and goddesses in Scotland. She
was of great height and very old, and everyone feared her. When roused
to anger she was as fierce as the biting north wind and harsh as the
tempest-stricken sea. Each winter she reigned as Queen of the Four Red
Divisions of the world, and none disputed her sway. But when the sweet
spring season drew nigh, her subjects began to rebel against her and to
long for the coming of the Summer King, Angus of the White Steed, and
Bride, his beautiful queen, who were loved by all, for they were the
bringers of plenty and of bright and happy days. It enraged Beira
greatly to find her power passing away, and she tried her utmost to
prolong the winter season by raising spring storms and sending blighting
frost to kill early flowers and keep the grass from growing.

Beira lived for hundreds and hundreds of years. The reason she did not
die of old age was because,

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

at the beginning of every spring, she drank the magic waters of the Well
of Youth which bubbles up in the Green Island of the West. This was a
floating island where summer was the only season, and the trees were
always bright with blossom and laden with fruit. It drifted about on the
silver tides of the blue Atlantic, and sometimes appeared off the
western coasts of Ireland and sometimes close to the Hebrides. Many bold
mariners have steered their galleys up and down the ocean, searching for
Green Island in vain. On a calm morning they might sail past its shores
and yet never know it was near at hand, for oft-times it lay hidden in a
twinkling mist. Men have caught glimpses of it from the shore, but while
they gazed on its beauties with eyes of wonder, it vanished suddenly
from sight by sinking beneath the waves like the setting sun. Beira,
however, always knew where to find Green Island when the time came for
her to visit it.

The waters of the Well of Youth are most potent when the days begin to
grow longer, and most potent of all on the first of the lengthening days
of spring. Beira always visited the island on the night before the first
lengthening day--that is, on the last night of her reign as Queen of
Winter. All alone in the darkness she sat beside the Well of Youth,
waiting for the dawn. When the first faint beam of light appeared in the

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

eastern sky, she drank the water as it bubbled fresh from a crevice in
the rock. It was necessary that she should drink of this magic water
before any bird visited the well and before any dog barked. If a bird
drank first, or a dog barked ere she began to drink, dark old Beira
would crumble into dust.

As soon as Beira tasted the magic water, in silence and alone, she began
to grow young again. She left the island and, returning to Scotland,
fell into a magic sleep. When, at length, she awoke, in bright sunshine,
she rose up as a beautiful girl with long hair yellow as buds of broom,
cheeks red as rowan berries, and blue eyes that sparkled like the summer
sea in sunshine. Then she went to and fro through Scotland, clad in a
robe of green and crowned with a chaplet of bright flowers of many hues.
No fairer goddess was to be found in all the land, save Bride, the
peerless Queen of Summer.

As each month went past, however, Beira aged quickly. She reached full
womanhood in midsummer, and when autumn came on her brows wrinkled and
her beauty began to fade. When the season of winter returned once again,
she became an old and withered hag, and began to reign as the fierce
Queen Beira.

Often on stormy nights in early winter she wandered about, singing this
sorrowful song:--

 

<span id="img_02400"></span>

[![BEIRA&lt;BR&gt; &lt;I&gt;From a drawing by John Duncan,
A.R.S.A&lt;/I&gt;.](tn/02400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/02400.jpg)  
BEIRA  
*From a drawing by John Duncan, A.R.S.A*.  

 

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

O life that ebbs like the seal  
  I am weary and old, I am weary and old--  
Oh! how can I happy be  
  All alone in the dark and the cold.

I'm the old Beira again,  
  My mantle no longer is green,  
I think of my beauty with pain  
  And the days when another was queen.

My arms are withered and thin,  
  My hair once golden is grey;  
’Tis winter--my reign doth begin--  
  Youth's summer has faded away.

Youth's summer and autumn have fled--  
  I am weary and old, I am weary and old.  
Every flower must fade and fall dead  
  When the winds blow cold, when the winds blow cold.

The aged Beira was fearsome to look upon. She had only one eye, but the
sight of it was keen and sharp as ice and as swift as the mackerel of
the ocean. Her complexion was a dull, dark blue, and this is how she
sang about it:--

Why is my face so dark, so dark?  
  So dark, oho! so dark, ohee!  
Out in all weathers I wander alone  
  In the mire, in the cold, ah me!

Her teeth were red as rust, and her locks, which lay heavily on her
shoulders, were white as an aspen covered with hoar frost. On her head
she wore a spotted mutch. <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) All her
clothing was grey,

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

and she was never seen without her great dun-coloured shawl, which was
drawn closely round her shoulders.

It is told that in the days when the world was young Beira saw land
where there is now water and water where there is now land.

Once a wizard spoke to her and said: "Tell me your age, O sharp old
woman."

Beira answered: "I have long ceased to count the years. But I shall tell
you what I have seen. Yonder is the seal-haunted rock of Skerryvore in
the midst of the sea. I remember when it was a mountain surrounded by
fields. I saw the fields ploughed, and the barley that grew upon them
was sharp and juicy. Yonder is a loch. I remember when it was a small
round well. In these days I was a fair young girl, and now I am very old
and frail and dark and miserable."

It is told also that Beira let loose many rivers and formed many lochs,
sometimes willingly and sometimes against her will, and that she also
shaped many bens and glens. All the hills in Ross-shire are said to have
been made by Beira.

There was once a well on Ben Cruachan, in Argyll, from which Beira drew
water daily. Each morning at sunrise she lifted off the slab that
covered it, and each evening at sunset she laid it above the well again.
It happened that one evening she forgot to cover the well. Then the

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

proper order of things was disturbed. As soon as the sun went down the
water rose in great volume and streamed down the mountain side, roaring
like a tempest-swollen sea. When day dawned, Beira found that the valley
beneath was filled with water. It was in this way that Loch Awe came to
be.

Beira had another well in Inverness-shire which had to be kept covered
in like manner from sunset till sunrise. One of her maids, whose name
was Nessa, had charge of the well. It happened that one evening the maid
was late in going to the well to cover it. When she drew near she beheld
the water flowing so fast from it that she turned away and. ran for her
life. Beira watched her from the top of Ben Nevis, which was her
mountain throne, and cried: "You have neglected your duty. Now you will
run for ever and never leave water."

The maiden was at once changed into a river, and the loch and the river
which runs from it towards the sea were named after her. That is why the
loch is called Loch Ness and the river the river Ness.

Once a year, when the night on which she was transformed comes round,
Ness (Nessa) arises out of the river in her girl form, and sings a sad
sweet song in the pale moonlight. It is said that her voice is clearer
and more beautiful than that of

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

any bird, and her music more melodious than the golden harps and silvern
pipes of fairyland.

In the days when rivers broke loose and lochs were made, Beira set
herself to build the mountains of Scotland. When at work she carried on
her back a great creel filled with rocks and earth. Sometimes as she
leapt from hill to hill her creel tilted sideways, and rocks and earth
fell from it into lochs and formed islands. Many islands are spoken of
as "spillings from the creel of the big old woman".

Beira had eight hags who were her servants. They also carried creels,
and one after the other they emptied out their creels until a mountain
was piled up nigh to the clouds.

One of the reasons why Beira made the mountains was to use them as
stepping stones; another was to provide houses for her giant sons. Many
of her sons were very quarrelsome; they fought continually one against
another. To punish those of them who disobeyed her, Beira shut the
offenders up in mountain houses, and from these they could not escape
without her permission. But this did not keep them from fighting. Every
morning they climbed to the tops of their mountain houses and threw
great boulders at one another. That is why so many big grey boulders now
lie on steep slopes and are scattered through the valleys. Other giant
sons of Beira dwelt in deep

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

caves. Some were horned like deer, and others had many heads. So strong
were they that they could pick up cattle and, throwing them over their
shoulders, carry them away to roast them for their meals. Each giant son
of Beira was called a Fooar. <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4)

It was Beira who built Ben Wyvis. She found it a hard task, for she had
to do all the work alone, her hag servants being busy elsewhere. One
day, when she had grown very weary, she stumbled and upset her creel.
All the rocks and earth it contained fell out in a heap, and formed the
mountain which is called Little Wyvis.

The only tool that Beira used was a magic hammer. When she struck it
lightly on the ground the soil became as hard as iron; when she struck
it heavily on the ground a valley was formed. After she had built up a
mountain, she gave it its special form by splintering the rocks with her
hammer. If she had made all the hills of the same shape, she would not
have been able to recognize one from another.

After the mountains were all formed, Beira took great delight in
wandering between them and over them. She was always followed by wild
animals. The foxes barked with delight when they beheld her, wolves
howled to greet her, and

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

eagles shrieked with joy in mid-air. Beira had great herds and flocks to
which she gave her protection-nimble-footed deer, high-horned cattle,
shaggy grey goats, black swine, and sheep that had snow-white fleeces.
She charmed her deer against the huntsmen, and when she visited a deer
forest she helped them to escape from the hunters. During early winter
she milked the hinds on the tops of mountains, but when the winds rose
so high that the froth was blown from the milking pails, she drove the
hinds down to the valleys. The froth was frozen on the crests of high
hills, and lay there snow-white and beautiful. When the winter torrents
began to pour down the mountain sides, leaping from ledge to ledge, the
people said: "Beira is milking her shaggy goats, and streams of milk are
pouring down over high rocks."

Beira washed her great shawl in the sea, for there was no lake big
enough for the purpose. The part she chose for her washing is the strait
between the western islands of Jura and Scarba. Beira's "washing-pot" is
the whirlpool, there called Corry-vreckan. It was so named because the
son of a Scottish king, named Breckan, was drowned in it, his boat
having been upset by the waves raised by Beira.

Three days before the Queen of Winter began her work her hag servants
made ready the water

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

for her, and the Corry could then be heard snorting and fuming for
twenty miles around. On the fourth day Beira threw her shawl into the
whirlpool, and tramped it with her feet until the edge of the Corry
overflowed with foam. When she had finished her washing she laid her
shawl on the mountains to dry, and as soon as she lifted it up, all the
mountains of Scotland were white with snow to signify that the great
Queen had begun her reign.

Now, the meaning of this story is that Beira is the spirit of winter.
She grows older and fiercer as the weeks go past, until at length her
strength is spent. Then she renews her youth, so that she may live
through the summer and autumn and begin to reign once again. The ancient
people of Scotland saw that during early winter torrents poured down
from the hills, and in this Beira fable they expressed their belief that
the torrents were let loose by the Winter Queen, and that the lochs
were, at the beginning, formed by the torrents that sprang from magic
wells. They saw great boulders lying on hillsides and in valleys, and
accounted for their presence in these places by telling how they were
flung from mountain tops by the giant sons of Beira.

In the next chapter the story will be told of the coming of Angus and
Bride, the King and Queen of Summer and Plenty, and of the stormy
conflicts

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

waged during the closing weeks of winter and the early weeks of spring
between Beira and Angus-the-Ever-Young, who comes from the fabled Green
Isle of the West-the land of eternal summer and perpetual youth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[25:1](tsm04.htm#fr_3) The old Scottish name for
a woman's cap.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[29:1](tsm04.htm#fr_4) Pronounced Foo'ar. The
Anglo-Irish rendering is "Fomorian", but the Irish Fomorians are
different from the Scottish.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Coming of Angus and Bride](tsm05)
