[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bai00) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/076614531X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Buddhism and Immortality*, by William Sturgis Bigelow, \[1908\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

# BUDDHISM

# AND

# IMMORTALITY

THE view of the Immortality of Man which I have the privilege of stating
is, broadly speaking, that of the Buddhist religion. But Buddhism, like
many other great religions, is divided into main churches and subdivided
into sects: and we find conspicuously two broad divisions, commonly
called Northern and Southern Buddhism,—the former having its recognized
centre in the north of India, in Nepaul; the latter in Ceylon. The
history, the significance, and the relations of these two divisions
constitute <span id="page_4">p. 4</span> a vast field of study, into
which we cannot attempt to enter to-night.

What I have to say relates primarily to the Northern or Nepaulese
Buddhism, and more especially to the doctrines of the two closely allied
sects which represent that form of Buddhism in Japan. These sects are
known respectively as the Tendai and the Shingon. The whole of Northern
Buddhism is closely allied to Brahminism, with which it is historically
directly connected. There is a close resemblance in the tenets and
doctrines of the two religions, even in their superficial aspects; and
the more deeply they are studied, the closer is the connection found to
be. The forms of religious service are essentially the same in both; and
even in Japan to-day the <span id="page_5">p. 5</span> greater part of
the Shingon and Tendai ritual is not in Japanese but in Sanscrit, and is
identical with that which has been in use in India since before the time
of Buddha,—so long before, in fact, that there is no historic record of
its origin, and there is reason to believe that it antedates written
history altogether. It certainly appears to be the oldest ritual now in
actual use in the world. A similar correspondence between India and
Japan is found to hold essentially good in regard to those special
presentations or aspects of the great central force of the universe,
which are embodied in anthropomorphic forms and recognized as separate
deities.

It may be said in passing, that for the understanding of such a vast and
<span id="page_6">p. 6</span> intricate system of thought, or even of so
small a part of it as we have to consider here, the student handicaps
himself with needless difficulties if he begins by classifying it under
some such customary heading as Pantheism, Polytheism, Monotheism,
Materialism, Idealism, and the like. We all carry in our intellectual
pockets a quantity of gummed labels bearing the names of such familiar
categories, which we are ready to attach to any new packet of documents,
however large, after examining the first one or two, and we then expect
to find that all the rest fit exactly into the Procrustean limits that
we habitually associate with that particular title. Whereas in the
present case the exact contrary is the fact; and we find, on the one
hand, that there <span id="page_7">p. 7</span> is ample room to attach
almost every label that the mind of man has conceived; and, on the
other, that each one is by itself inadequate.

Starting, therefore, without prejudice of any sort, I am going to try to
set before you, in such brief outline as the allotted time allows, an
epitome or digest of the teaching of these two Buddhist sects, the
Tendai and the Shingon, in regard to the special subject to consider
which this lectureship has been established,—the Immortality of Man.
Part of what I have to say is of such elementary simplicity that I
almost apologize for saying it, and indeed only do so to be sure that we
start together. Part, again, though less simple, is familiar doctrine
that may be heard here in the West in any <span id="page_8">p. 8</span>
lecture room or from any pulpit. And part, again, lies so remote from
our ordinary Occidental habits of thought that I shall hold myself
fortunate if I can succeed in making it intelligible.

The generous founder of this annual lecture chose the title well, in
assuming the existence of something called man, and restricting the
discussion to the question of how long that something lasts. Consciously
or unconsciously, we all make the same assumption; for it has been well
said that "to doubt our own existence is to call in question the very
existence of our doubt." In this attitude we have the support alike of
the oldest religion and the newest science; for Poincaré, in his latest
scientific work, <span id="page_9">p. 9</span> after discussing in
detail the theories of force and matter and motion, of electricity and
light and ether, sums up the state of the most modern knowledge in these
concise words,—"Something exists."

However reckless and extravagant this statement may seem, let us accept
it provisionally, and further, for convenience, let us give this
something a name. Let us provisionally call it ourselves,—you and I,—Ito
each one of us,—and see what are some of the most obvious things to be
said about it. What do we mean by it? What did Descartes mean by it when
he said: "I think,—therefore I am"; and thereby implied the inevitable
correlative: "I do not think,—therefore I am not"? What <span
id="page_10">p. 10</span> is the "I"? What is the "thought"? Are they
the same thing or different things? Can either exist without the other?

Let us consider for a moment the ordinary popular view. According to
this, man is a compound of a material and tangible part called the body
and an immaterial and intangible part called the soul.

The facts about the body are simple, obvious, and familiar. Its
existence is as certain as that of the rest of the material universe,
and, except during life, it obeys the same laws. This is a fact of
observation like any other; for instance, like the fact that fire burns
or that water runs down hill.

The case of the soul is less simple. Being invisible and intangible, its
existence <span id="page_11">p. 11</span> is commonly assumed on two
grounds. First, by inference, through its apparent effects. Second, by
what we call self-consciousness. Under the head of effects we recognize,
as most obvious, the formation and maintenance of unstable chemical
compounds not formed by inorganic matter, and the building up of these
compounds through intermediate stages of structure into a coöperative
organism acting as an individual until death, when it ceases to act as a
unit and disintegrates like any other unstable chemical product. The
very fact of death, therefore, is evidence of the existence of something
besides inorganic matter during life.

Secondly, as regards self-consciousness. We are all, as we familiarly
say, <span id="page_12">p. 12</span> conscious of our own existence.
Under this statement we habitually include, in more or less confusion,
several distinct elements.

First, the existence of our material bodies as objects of sensory
perception, like any other material objects, such as chairs, tables, or
other peoples’ bodies, the only essential limitation being that no
sensory organ can perceive itself. The eye sees the hand, but the eye
does not see itself. To suppose it could would be a contradiction in
terms, for normal sensation implies disturbance of a normal equilibrium
by an external stimulus.

Second, of certain sensations, pleasurable or painful, originating not
outside but inside the body itself.

Third, of certain disturbances apparently <span id="page_13">p.
13</span> not of material origin, that we classify as passions or
emotions.

Fourth, of what we call aptitudes and their opposites.

Fifth, of desires or inclinations and their opposites.

Lastly, of something of a wholly different character, consciously closer
to the centre than anything else, and differing from the other forms in
being the only form of consciousness to which we are not passive. This
we call will. We say, I feel sensation, pain, or emotion; but we never
say, I feel my will. It is always subjective and active.

These are the main facts, simply stated, in the commonest terms of daily
life. Let us look at them at a different angle. I once asked Dr. Holmes,
toward the end of his life, the question, <span id="page_14">p.
14</span> "What is a man?" He answered, without hesitation, "A series of
states of consciousness."

The word "series" introduces the element of time, the relation of which
to states of consciousness is empirical and not essential. Broadly
speaking, certain states of consciousness associated directly or
indirectly with matter occur in sequence in every-day human experience,
but the same states may occur simultaneously under exceptional
circumstances. It is well known that in the sudden presence of imminent
and apparently certain death, the accumulated states of consciousness of
a lifetime sometimes revive simultaneously in a single flash. The events
of the whole past are seen down to the most minute and remote details,
like a landscape <span id="page_15">p. 15</span> under a flash of
lightning. Dr. Holmes himself had had this experience on one occasion,
just before losing consciousness altogether while drowning, and the
memory of the occurrence persisted after resuscitation. But if, in
answering my question, he had left out the one word "series," Dr.
Holmes’s definition would have been identical with that of Buddhism,
which is this,—"A man consists of states of consciousness."

Now, from this point of view, the whole question of the Immortality of
Man is bound up with the question of the persistence of these states.
This persistence depends on their character and origin. Some may persist
longer than others. The states of consciousness that we recognize in
every action <span id="page_16">p. 16</span> of daily life are obviously
divisible into two classes, namely, those that originate from without
and those that originate from within. The first are conditioned by space
and time, the latter are not.

Let us take a homely illustration, the simpler the better. Each of you,
let us say, had breakfast this morning. While you were eating it you
were conscious of it, how it looked and tasted, and these states of
consciousness were imposed on your minds from the outside by the action
of matter on matter,—the matter of the breakfast on the matter of your
nerves of sight and taste. This action is as constant as any other
purely mechanical action, and if your sensory and nervous machinery is
in normal running order, the resulting <span id="page_17">p. 17</span>
states of consciousness are as constant as the cause that produces them.
All these forms of consciousness, I repeat, were imposed on your minds
from without in the form of distinct sensations, as we call them,
sensations existing at that particular time and place.

Again, you are conscious of being in this hall to-night. As before, this
consciousness is imposed on your minds from without in the form of
distinct sensations existing at this particular time and place. You see
the hall and the audience exactly as you saw your breakfast-room and
your breakfast.

Now, think, for a moment, of your breakfasts. Where and when is that
thought? Is it here and now, or there and then? Plainly it is here and
now, because you are here, now, and it is <span id="page_18">p.
18</span> your thought. Equally plainly it is there and then, or it
would not be the thought of this morning's breakfast. It is therefore
both. Now a state of consciousness conditioned by two mutually exclusive
opposites is unconditioned by either. In other words, your thought is
unconditioned by space and time.

By what, then, is it conditioned? The answer is as important as it is
obvious. It is conditioned by your will,—the act of volition that calls
the thought of the breakfast into being, and not by the direct sensory
impressions, whose forms and sum it reproduces. Herein lies the
fundamental difference between the consciousness of the breakfast as you
eat it, and the consciousness of it that you, being in <span
id="page_19">p. 19</span> another place, create by an act of will twelve
hours afterward.

This second state of consciousness is conditioned only by the will, and
we can make it what we choose. If our mental machinery is in good
working order, we can recall the breakfast exactly as it was. This we
call memory. Or, if we like, we can increase or diminish or alter it in
any particular. For coffee and rolls, we may substitute ortolans and
peacocks’ tongues, and so on. There is no limit to it. This we call
imagination; and what I want to emphasize is that memory and imagination
are identical in being states of consciousness produced by the will, and
differ only in the closeness of their correspondence with antecedent
states.'

Here, then, at the outset are two <span id="page_20">p. 20</span>
opposite ways in which states of consciousness may be produced. First,
from without, by matter acting on matter, either through contact, direct
or indirect, or by means of vibrations, such as those of sound and
light. This we may call, for convenience, the sensory origin of
consciousness, since it involves direct relation through the senses with
the great machinery of external nature,—machinery which goes at its own
rate and in its own way, and acts as a stimulus to consciousness on the
one hand and a pendulum or balance wheel to it on the other. Second,
from within, by the action of the will.

Is there a third way? Obviously there is. Suppose we disconnect the
pendulum of material nature from one <span id="page_21">p. 21</span> end
of the machine and the guiding motive power of the will from the other,
the wheels will keep on turning for a time by their own momentum, and
states of consciousness will ensue which are apparently spontaneous. The
most familiar instance of this is in common dreams. Such states of
consciousness, having neither guide on the one hand nor check on the
other, are usually dislocated and confused, but in this respect there
is, of course, a vast range of difference. A dream may be, and commonly
is, incoherent to the point of grotesqueness. It may be anything from
that up to a logical continuous sequence, as distinct and vivid as a
waking reality. In a well-known and often cited case, such a sequence
continued night after night in the form <span id="page_22">p. 22</span>
of a separate dream-life, with its own events and incidents, until the
dreamer found himself literally unable to tell which of the two
alternate lives he was leading was the real one. Each had its orderly
succession of days and nights, and going to sleep in one meant waking up
in the other. Each was real while it lasted, the other being the dream
until he came back to it, when the conditions were again reversed. It is
well to bear this case in mind as a good illustration of an important,
though elementary, fact, namely, that every complete state of
consciousness is real to itself, and unreal to other states.

We have, then, broadly speaking, three separate and definite ways in
which states of consciousness may originate,—one external, and two
internal; <span id="page_23">p. 23</span> namely, through the senses, by
the will, and spontaneously. The first, in a normal organism,—and we are
not considering here any pathological conditions whatever,—is as regular
and invariable as the order of external nature, on which it is based.
The second conforms to external nature or deviates from it, as we
choose. When it conforms, we call it memory. When it deviates, we call
it imagination. The third is generally irregular, and depends on the
momentum or impetus of the thinking machinery itself.

I have spoken so far of external and internal stimuli as exciting
consciousness, and most of you have accepted these terms without giving
them a second thought. Internal and external, <span id="page_24">p.
24</span> subjective and objective, ego and non-ego, self and the rest
of the universe,—these categories are not only familiar, but from our
western point of view fundamental, and represent the first great obvious
distinction which at once underlies and dominates most, if not all, of
our religious, philosophical, and scientific thought. Consciously or
unconsciously, we habitually think of ourselves and the universe in
those terms.

Let us examine them a little more closely. Internal and
external—external to what?

Certainly, not external to consciousness, in the Buddhist view, for they
are consciousness, and nothing else. To say that they are external to it
is a contradiction in terms. They exist only in <span id="page_25">p.
25</span> consciousness. If they are external to it, they cease to
exist.

External to the body, then? This is more like it. The body is a material
object; and whatever else it may be in its relation to the phenomena of
its own organic life, it is itself matter in its relation to other
matter.

What, then, do we mean by matter as we ordinarily understand the word?
For practical purposes we commonly mean aggregations of centres of
vibration whose rate lies between the lowest infra-red and the highest
ultra-violet which are the normal working limits of our senses.

What are the simplest and most obvious characteristics of such matter,
essential conditions of its existence by virtue of which it is matter?
There <span id="page_26">p. 26</span> are of course two, time and space.
This is a commonplace. Yet it is of fundamental importance in this
connection. For if, as I have tried to show you, certain states of
consciousness, namely, the mechanical or sensory forms, have their
origin in the action of matter on matter, then those states of
consciousness will necessarily be subject in form to the two conditions
of which I have just spoken.

This point is fundamental and vital. It is the turning-point on which
the whole question of immortality hinges. Matter is conditioned by space
and time. Direct sensory consciousness, being based on matter, is
necessarily equally so conditioned. But states of consciousness not
based on matter are not.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

Now, the space and time relations of matter may be summed up in one
word, separateness; those of consciousness in the opposite term, unity.

This seems too obvious to be worth stating. One chair is separate from
another chair, one tree from another tree, one animal body from another
animal body,—nor can you, by any means, make two into one. But with
consciousness the exact contrary is true. Unity, not separateness, is
the essential characteristic. Two men cannot sit in the same chair at
the same time, but any number of men can think of the same chair at the
same time. This seems a proposition of childish simplicity, and so it
is, but it is the turning-point of the whole matter. I repeat, the
essential characteristic of <span id="page_28">p. 28</span> matter is
separateness. That of consciousness is unity. You cannot make two chairs
one. You cannot make the consciousness of a chair anything but one, no
matter how many minds it occurs in. A proof of this last proposition, if
proof were needed, is in the use of language. You speak of a chair to
your neighbor. The word corresponds to a definite state of consciousness
in you which you want to excite in him. If the word chair fails to do
so, if it excites a different state, or none, language is useless. Human
intercourse is based on the assumption that states of consciousness,
whether called up by the arbitrary signal of a word or by direct sensory
impressions, are constant in every mind, and identical in all minds. If
it were not so, we <span id="page_29">p. 29</span> should be
incontinently reduced to chaos.

So far we have dealt with states of consciousness as external and
internal to the body. But how about the body itself? We have considered
it as the vehicle or medium of transmission of mechanical stimuli from
external sources to the conscious centre, which for convenience we have
regarded as a sort of dial or indicator hung midway between the senses
on the one hand and the will on the other. It is like the dial of a
watch. The hands go at a definite rate exactly in time with the
movements of the physical universe. That is sensory consciousness. But
you can set them anywhere you like by rotating the appropriate knob.
That is volitional consciousness. We have classed <span id="page_30">p.
30</span> such sensory stimuli as external. But how shall we class
stimuli that arise within the body itself? How about physical pain?

The case here is essentially identical with that of other sensory
stimuli. You touch a knife. This is ordinary sensation. You cut your
finger with it. Pain ensues. Either case is an instance of the impact of
matter on matter,—the matter-of the knife on the matter of your nervous
terminations. The pain lasts more or less till the cut is well, the
local disturbances of inflammation and repair still acting directly on
the nerves of sensation, the same nerves through which both the touch
and the cut were originally felt. The practical difference is that the
pain is a danger signal. It shows that something <span id="page_31">p.
31</span> is wrong. That something may be a cut, or the grating of a
rheumatic joint, or a neuralgic pain, but in every case something is
wrong. When a pain is due to external injury, natural selection fosters
its avoidance. Avoiding pain means avoiding injury. Pain is therefore,
primarily, an element in the conservation of the life of the individual,
and therefore of the species, in the presence of outside attacks, and it
is to be regarded as in this respect like any other element in the
process of natural selection.

In this connection the following stages are gone through:—

1\. Animals who feel pain and avoid it, thereby avoiding injury, tend to
be preserved by natural selection, as against those who do not.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

2\. This habitual action of avoidance becomes reflex by habit, the
withdrawal of a hand when pricked or burnt finally becoming automatic,
and accomplished by a short circuit of the nervous telegraph wires
without the intervention of consciousness.

3\. In natural selection, as elsewhere, an ounce of prevention is worth
a pound of cure, and the recognition and avoidance of pain as it occurs
is amplified, still by natural selection, into recognition and avoidance
of the source of pain as it approaches. And, by association rendered
keen by inherited experience, the pain itself is in a measure
anticipated, this anticipation being associated with the simultaneous
desire to escape from it; and the combination of these two forms of
consciousness, <span id="page_33">p. 33</span> like two metals fused
into an alloy, in which neither is recognizable, produces what appears
to be a new and wholly different form, which we classify as an emotion
and call fear.

The other emotions have a similar origin. Anger, for example, is the
combination of the recognition of approaching danger and the desire to
repel it. I need not multiply instances to suggest to you that all the
so-called lower passions and emotions are nothing but the accumulated
effects of natural selection acting on single cases in favor of the
conservation of the species, this action being favored and aided by the
tendency of habitual action to become reflex. In this latter element
lies their danger as well as their advantage. In a perfect organism they
are absolutely <span id="page_34">p. 34</span> under the control of the
will, which is another way of saying that many of them cease to exist.

These passions and emotions are transmitted in accordance with another
law stated by . Darwin, namely, that the traits most sure to be
inherited are those which have been inherited longest, they being
necessarily most directly concerned with the persistence of the type.

First in this classification comes the need of safety; then of food.
Both these are the immediate needs of the individual, and are therefore
selfish, centripetal, and exclusive.

Then come the multiform needs connected with reproduction. These are of
two kinds, those connected with the individual and those connected <span
id="page_35">p. 35</span> with offspring. The former are, like the need
of safety and food, essentially centripetal and selfish, though capable
of expansion. The latter are centrifugal, altruistic, and inclusive.

From the need of food, the need of safety, and the individual interests
connected with reproduction spring the selfish lower emotions, such as
anger, hate, fear, jealousy.

The unselfish forms of love, especially of parental love, by a mere
expansion of terms become charity and altruism, and later by admixture
of other elements, such as imagination and desire, become hope and
faith. Maternal love is the source and origin of all human virtues. This
is not a figure of speech. It is a fact of evolution.

Desire is the momentum of a checked <span id="page_36">p. 36</span>
reflex. Aptitudes are reflexes of slightly greater complexity, and as a
rule not concerned directly with type preservation. We say that a boy
has an aptitude for music, but not an aptitude for eating.

So we may for convenience add another to our list of the forms of
consciousness. We began with the sensory impressions in their five
familiar forms. We added sensations of pleasure and pain arising within
the body itself. We then saw that certain reactions to these impressions
concerned in the preservation of the type were filtered out and fostered
by natural selection, emphasized and strengthened by habit and its
consequent reflexes, till their origin was for the most part lost to
view, and they reappeared in the form <span id="page_37">p. 37</span> of
abstract passions, emotions, aptitudes, etc., forms of consciousness so
remote from that from which they sprang that they are almost
unrecognizable in their disguise.

So far we have been concerned only with the ordinary experience of human
life as everybody knows it, and the count up to this point is
essentially complete.

Is there anything else?

I have again and again referred to the will, and you have understood me
without a moment's hesitation. This will is a part of the normal
consciousness of each one of you, yet it is neither a part of sensation
nor emotion, but on the contrary is capable of dominating both.

What is it? Ask your own consciousness. <span id="page_38">p. 38</span>
Sensations originate outside and inside the body; emotions, inside. But
the will is deeper than either, and they are both objective to it. We
cannot classify it with anything else. We cannot describe it in terms of
any other form of consciousness. We are conscious through our bodies and
of our bodies, but the consciousness of the will is direct. We cannot
separate ourselves from it. We cannot stand off and examine it. We
cannot modify it by anything else. It itself modifies everything within
its scope. Other forms of consciousness are objective in their relation
to it, but it is never objective to them. It may be overpowered by
sensations, emotions, or passions, through its own weakness or their
strength. It often is. <span id="page_39">p. 39</span> But its attitude
towards them, whether resisting or directing them, is always essentially
and necessarily active. It exists in no other form than the subjective
form. It is inconceivable in any other form. If it is not active, it is
not will. There is nothing in our consciousness deeper. It underlies and
overlies and permeates all other forms, and, moreover,—what is of
immeasurably more importance,—it can, if need be, create them. This last
is the central fact to which all that I have said leads up. Fully to
realize this is to hold the key to immortality. Will is the assertion of
a form of consciousness from the centre outward. When this is opposed by
another form of consciousness, intruding from the circumference inward,
we recognize a hindrance <span id="page_40">p. 40</span> to the free
action of the will, and we talk of "necessity." But such intrusive forms
are, as we have seen, ultimately and essentially of material origin.
They come from or through the body,—the material, separate personality.
If it were not for these, the will would act freely. The separate
personal consciousness with its offshoots is therefore the only obstacle
to complete freedom of the will. Complete freedom of the will is
complete freedom of consciousness, and complete freedom of consciousness
from the habitual and empirical limitations of personality is complete
freedom of the will. The terms are interchangeable. The only will that
is not free is the personal will.

Descartes said, "I think, therefore <span id="page_41">p. 41</span> I
am." It is an imperfect formula at best, but it would have been a better
statement had he said, "I am conscious, therefore I am"; and best of all
had he said, "I will, therefore I am."

Now, is there anything more? How about the "self"? How about the
so-called character? Is there nota separate "self" back of it all,—a
"self" that feels and wills, but is neither feeling nor volition, any
more than the finger is the pin that pricks it or the nervous stimulus
that moves it? Surely it would seem there must be. Surely the existence
of such a separate self would seem to be the basis of all human actions.
Even at the beginning of this lecture, our starting-point was to assume
that "something exists," and provisionally to call that something
ourselves.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

What do we mean by the "self"? Obviously it is a limitation of some
sort. What limits it? What shuts off the self from the rest of the
universe? We are so small, the universe is so great, we say. Yet all we
know of the universe is inside our heads. Are our heads, then, of cosmic
dimensions? Or is the universe smaller than it seems? There is an
inconsistency here somewhere. If the universe will go into a man's head,
what is there about the man that is smaller than the universe?

Put in this way, the question answers itself. The man's material body is
smaller, and that is the only thing about him that is. His mind, that
is, his consciousness, is larger, and, what is more, it is indefinitely
larger. It could take in a dozen universes, or a <span id="page_43">p.
43</span> million, as easily as one. Consciousness has no dimensions.

But, you may say, if a man consists of states of consciousness, what,
then, are the limitations of the "self"? If these states of
consciousness may include the universe, and more too, why is not the
self co-extensive with the universe?

Now, this is exactly what it is. The self is co-extensive with the
universe. The difference between organic beings is merely how much of
themselves they realize. The separate personality is real only in terms
of matter and in such forms of consciousness as originate or are
expressed in terms of material existence.

The self is believed to be a separate entity only because of the
overwhelming <span id="page_44">p. 44</span> preponderance in human life
of sensory experience, which through habit, fostered by natural
selection, tends to impose its laws on all human consciousness. This is
the fundamental fact of human life. Consciousness is continuous and
universal. Matter is separate and particular. But we habitually think in
terms of matter. In short, we live in terms of matter. It is only on
those terms that we live at all. If we deviate from them in the
slightest degree, our earthly career is promptly terminated by the
simple law of natural selection, the survival of the fittest to survive.

Each man therefore carries in himself the conditions and limitations of
his own universe, and it is for him to <span id="page_45">p. 45</span>
say how large that universe shall be. Habitual actions always tend to
become reflex, and the more attention he pays to his own separate
material existence, the more restricted his universe becomes. It is a
tautology to say that attention to individual physical needs, physical
sensations, and the centripetal reflexes growing from them, tends to
perpetuate and insure physical existence. On the other hand, everything
that tends away from self, such as unselfish love, parental love, and
the altruistic centrifugal reflexes developed from them, tends to
expansion; and the larger the included circle of altruistic action is,
the smaller the danger becomes of perpetuating the restrictions of
separate individual existence imposed by natural selection <span
id="page_46">p. 46</span> acting in and through the material world.

This conflict of the centripetal and centrifugal forces, of which the
so-called self is the centre, is the basis of morality. Broadly
speaking, what is done for one's self is bad; what is done for some one
else is good. Consciously or unconsciously, this idea lies at the
foundation of all the highest moral teaching. The highest virtues are
those that conduce to the extinction of terrestrial types. The struggle
for existence is the struggle for terrestrial, that is, material
existence. If a selfish man and an altruist are wrecked on a desert
island with only food enough for one, the selfish man will survive. The
penalty of altruism is extermination. Yet no one <span id="page_47">p.
47</span> would maintain for a moment that the altruist is not the
higher type of man.

If I have been so fortunate as to make the subject clear up to this
point, you will understand that the material self is the fixed point
from which man is measured. To expand the consciousness away from it
means spiritual growth. To contract toward it means spiritual
deterioration. To work away from it means, in familiar language, virtue;
to work toward it, vice.

To work toward it requires no effort whatever. A man has only to let
himself go, to make himself passive to the law of the survival of the
fittest, and he drops there as naturally as a stone falls, if he is
dominated, as most men are, by the lower reflexes. The upper altruistic
reflexes will eventually <span id="page_48">p. 48</span> carry him the
other way as they become strong enough. But the commonest condition of
the human race is the natural passive tendency to gravitate to the
centre, on the one hand, opposed by the active force of the will and of
whatever higher reflexes a man may have, on the other. As before, we
come back to the will as the determinant factor.

If you have followed me so far, you will follow me a step further. If a
man consists of states of consciousness, as the Buddhist doctrine
affirms, then so far as any of them cease, the man ceases. So far as any
of them last, the man lasts, and lasts as long as they do, and no
longer.

Have we any evidence on how long they last?

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

A good deal. Let us take *a priori* evidence first. Those qualities,
said Darwin, that have been longest inherited are surest to be
inherited. And the same is true of the states of consciousness. Those
which are formed most slowly dissolve most slowly.

Sensory impressions come in a perpetual shower, and the drops for the
most part dry as soon as they fall. Ninety-nine hundredths of our
sensory impressions are transitory. Most of them do not call for action
of any sort, any more than the passing landscape seen from a car window.

But certain ones do call for action; and if they are repeated often
enough, that action becomes first habitual, then reflex or automatic,
and any further stimulus of the same sort tends to be <span
id="page_50">p. 50</span> dealt with primarily by that habitual reflex,
and only secondarily by the consciousness and will. Now it is the sum of
a number of such habitual reflexes acting singly or together that we
call character. It may be changed—it is changed more or less—during an
ordinary life, but it is part of the makeup of every individual at
birth. Where does it come from? From the parents?

The fact of the resemblance of offspring to parents is a matter of
everyday knowledge all over the world. In the West we call it an
illustration of heredity or atavism, the persistence of a parental or
ancestral type. In the East it is regarded as an illustration of rebirth
or reincarnation. There is no mystery about it. There is no disagreement
<span id="page_51">p. 51</span> in regard to the facts. The West,
talking in general colloquial terms of body and soul, regards the body
inherited from the parents—that is, the physical and material body—as
the determinant factor, the mould to which all non-physical qualities
necessarily conform, because they are in some way produced by or derived
from it.

The East, on the other hand, regarding the collection of qualities
familiarly expressed by the term "soul" as dominant, says that a soul
has renewed its relations with the material world by rebirth, and
gradually, in the process of normal growth, has forced the matter with
which it is associated into more or less the same shape that it had
before, just as the seed in the course of normal growth forces the
inorganic <span id="page_52">p. 52</span> matter of the air and soil
into the shape of the plant from which it came. In Japanese the process
is habitually known and spoken of by this resemblance. The Japanese word
for it is <span class="smallcaps">INGWA</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">IN</span> meaning seed and <span
class="smallcaps">KWA</span> flower. Of late years in the West the
Sanscrit word <span class="smallcaps">KARMA</span> has come to be
somewhat loosely used with the same general meaning, though some of the
highest Buddhist authorities in Japan are inclined to restrict the
meaning of Karma to one element of the process.

It is beyond my scope to-night to draw comparisons or present arguments.
My business is simply to state the facts as they appear from the
Buddhist standpoint. But I cannot help calling attention to one or two
points <span id="page_53">p. 53</span> bearing on the general problem of
heredity versus rebirth:—

First. If material constitution, that is, inheritance, which makes for
identity, modified by the tendency to variation, is the cause of
character, then, as the laws of matter do not vary, we have no way of
accounting for the tendency to variation itself. It is an unknown *x*,
an ultimate fact with nothing behind it.

Whereas, if the psychical characteristics—the soul, to take the shortest
word—are the dominant factor, the tendency to variation follows as a
matter of course.

Second. If material constitution is the cause of character, the range of
variation ought to be equally great in different forms of animal life;
for <span id="page_54">p. 54</span> instance, in men, sheep, and
herring. Whereas, if the variation is determined by the character, we
ought to find the greatest variation where the characters are most
complex,—which we do.

Third. Family resemblance often asserts itself most clearly in the
second generation. And it will be noticed that the very close
resemblance of a child to a grandparent is generally associated with two
facts,—one, that the ancestor in question has been dead less than ten
years; the other, that the very marked resemblance occurs but once, no
matter how numerous the grandchildren may be. Heredity by physical
transmission offers no explanation of either fact. Whereas, from three
to ten years is the ordinary interval for <span id="page_55">p.
55</span> reincarnation, and the single resemblance is the natural
result of the rebirth of a single soul.

The apparent bearing of Mendel's law here is too obvious to be
overlooked. But it is perhaps too early to be sure just what is behind
Mendel's law. Now, if character reincarnates, what becomes of it between
whiles, between the time of one man's death and the next man's birth?

Let me remind you of Darwin again. "Those characteristics are most sure
to be transmitted which have been longest transmitted." But as I have
tried to show you, character is built up of reflexes which are
essentially and necessarily the oldest things about the individual
organism. Therefore, according to Darwin, the character is <span
id="page_56">p. 56</span> exactly what we should expect to find
transmitted.

But this does not answer the question of what becomes of it in the
interval between death and birth. A living man's character we know, but
a dead body has no character. If that character persists, it must be
somewhere in the mean time. There is a gap here to be filled up.

Is there?

Let me ask you to recall that subject of breakfast. Remember that no
consciousness but immediate sensory consciousness is conditioned by
space and time. Remember that immediate sensory consciousness depends on
the action of the matter of the external universe on the matter of the
body, and stops at death. And then consider <span id="page_57">p.
57</span> the question of what has become of the reincarnating entity in
the interval. From the point of view of that entity the interval as we
know it does not exist, and it is our error to suppose that it does,—an
error arising as usual from our disastrous habit of thinking in terms
based on matter.

Is, then, rebirth in one's own family the only alternative?

By no means. The soul follows its strongest ties. These are generally
the family ties, but not always; and the soul always finds its own level
where its own character is most at home. If it is too sensual and
self-absorbed, that is, too centripetal, to find a human birth at all,
it will find its birth as an animal; and if it is not only too
self-centred but too actively hostile to <span id="page_58">p. 58</span>
everything outside itself to find a birth even as an animal, it will be
born lower still.

On the other hand, if its main trait is centrifugal and altruistic, it
will be born where those qualities have fullest play in a higher state
of existence.

This higher state is mainly altruistic. The animal kingdom is mainly
selfish. Human life is partly one and partly the other.

Now, a word in conclusion about the material environment and incidents
of a given life. I have said that consciousness is continuous. That
means you cannot, so to speak, pick up a single idea alone any more than
you can pick up a single knot in the middle of a fish-net. You may pick
up any knot you like, but you will get also what <span id="page_59">p.
59</span> is tied to it. And if, at any point of the summed-up
consciousness of a man's life, there is tied the record of an injury
done to another man, that record will infallibly remain tied; and when,
in a later life, in disentangling the threads of his own existence in
terms of time and space, he comes again to that particular point, that
injury will return against him with the accuracy of a spring which
expends when released the exact energy required to compress it, and the
blow he receives will be just as hard as the blow he gave. Action and
reaction are equal and opposite.

From a higher point of view the case may be put in this way.
Consciousness is continuous. Therefore, there is but one ultimate
consciousness. <span id="page_60">p. 60</span> All beings are therefore
one; and when one man strikes another, he strikes all men, including
himself. Just when and where and how in terms of space and time he feels
his own blow depends on circumstances, but sooner or later he will. A
good deed comes back to the doer in just the same way.

I just said that consciousness is one, and all beings are therefore one.
The difference in beings, therefore, is how much they realize of this
universal consciousness. The process of evolution is the process of
increase of the amount realized. The only thing that prevents a man from
realizing the whole of it is the accumulated habit of countless
generations of thinking in terms of self, that is, of the material self.
It was not the fault of our <span id="page_61">p. 61</span> struggling
predecessors on this planet that they thought in these terms. Natural
selection took care of that. They had to, or die.

This universal consciousness is what all existence started from and is
returning to. How easily it can be reached by organized beings depends
on their place in the scale of evolution. The fish is farther from it
than the dog, and the dog farther than we, and we farther than higher
beings. The important thing to us is that, having evolved to the stage
of human beings on our road to it, we can now see where we are going,
and can greatly increase our speed if we like.

There are two ways in which this may be done. Character, as I have so
often said, is habitual consciousness; <span id="page_62">p. 62</span>
and I have compared the consciousness, that is, the man, to the dial of
a watch that registers either the movement of external nature or the
impulse of the will. The two ways of growth correspond to this. In
Buddhism they are called respectively the Objective or Exterior and the
Subjective or Interior Methods or Systems. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

One is through the external acts of daily life, by so ordering them that
the lower reflexes are gradually eliminated and the higher ones left and
developed. In other words, by doing good actions.

The other is internal, through the <span id="page_63">p. 63</span>
alteration of the character and consciousness by the direct action of
the will.

The first involves the simple practice of ordinary morality. It is safe
and sure, and for people occupied with the ordinary affairs of life,
usually the best. The character is gradually altered, just as it was
built up, by contact with the external world. The ordinary process of
evolutionary growth is accelerated, but there is no break in it.

The second way equally involves the practice of morality in daily life.
In addition, it involves the direct action of the will on the character.
It is generally difficult, and except for people of thoroughly good
character, or under the guidance of people of thoroughly good character,
liable to be dangerous. <span id="page_64">p. 64</span> The reason is
obvious. In most people the character, especially in the lower reflexes,
is stronger than the will, even when the will does not habitually aid
and abet them. In a direct conflict between will and character, the
character is apt to get the upper hand. I have spoken of the external
material universe as a sort of pendulum or balance wheel to the
organism. In the present case the simile is exact. It goes at a certain
rate, and keeps the delicate machinery of the human consciousness from
deviating very far from that rate. It limits, to a certain extent, the
amount of good or harm a man can do to other men and consequently to
himself. But if the balance wheel is disconnected even temporarily, as
in meditation, the first tendency of the <span id="page_65">p. 65</span>
clock is to obey the pressure of the mainspring, and run down violently
and perhaps disastrously. If we try to check this pressure with the key,
we hold it in very unstable equilibrium. And if we try with the key to
make the hands go at any even rate, it is almost impossible.

Now, the spring is the character, and the key is the will, and if the
character is bad, the result is disastrous, because in most people, as I
have repeated so often, natural selection has made the lower reflexes
strongest, and it is consequently those that come into play first.

Such exercise of the will acting directly on the character has two
effects: It expands the consciousness, and solidifies the character by
strengthening <span id="page_66">p. 66</span> the reflexes. But if the
consciousness is expanded and the reflexes are strengthened in the
direction of matter, the clock-hands are going round the wrong way, and
the second state of the man is worse than the first.

The ultimate object of life is to acquire freedom from the limitations
of the material world by substituting volitional for sensory
consciousness. They are limitations to be outgrown. There is a story of
the last century that Emerson was stopped in the street by an excited
member of the now forgotten sect of Millerites, who exclaimed, "Mr.
Emerson, do you know that the world is going to be destroyed in ten
days?" "Well," said Emerson, "I don't see but we <span id="page_67">p.
67</span> shall get along just as well without it."

That is good Buddhist doctrine.

The next step—the next step of the human race—is to learn how, as
Emerson says, to get along without it, and without the limitations of
thought that long contact with it has engendered. They are very hard to
shake off. Even our ideas,—I use the plural advisedly, for hardly any
two people agree completely,—our ideas of the highest possible state of
existence are generally anthropomorphic, and based on the familiar
experience of daily life. We imagine ourselves celestial beings with
celestial bodies, but those bodies have a close resemblance to our own.

Such beings, if we may trust the <span id="page_68">p. 68</span> highest
authorities, have the aspect of human beings. They have arms and legs
and eyes and ears, noses and mouths, and none of these organs appear to
be atrophied from disuse. Their pleasures may be more refined than ours
and more intense, their bodies of finer matter than ours; but they are
still separate individuals, and in so far forth their existence is
governed by the laws of separation, which are the laws of matter. The
distinctions of subject and object, of ego and non-ego, of external and
internal, of active and passive, still hold good, and such beings live
under the same laws of action and reaction and interaction that govern
us. The highest form of happiness we can conceive for them is <span
id="page_69">p. 69</span> expressed in expanded terms of our own lives,
in an inexhaustible opportunity for the satisfaction of an inexhaustible
desire, whether for work or play or worship.

Such glorified celestial existence is the final goal of most religions.
In Northern Buddhism it is not the goal, but an intermediate step in
normal evolution between the human consciousness and the infinite
consciousness, and the difference between these is as great as that
between the dimensions of the material physical body and the whole
physical universe.

You are all more or less familiar with that extraordinary entity upon
whose inferential existence the lines of modern scientific research seem
to converge, the interstellar ether, which <span id="page_70">p.
70</span> seems likely to prove the ultimate form of matter out of which
everything comes and into which everything must eventually return. You
know the seemingly contradictory qualities that the hypothesis of its
existence involves,—how it is perfectly rigid and perfectly elastic,
perfectly dense and perfectly penetrable, hot and cold, heavy and light,
and so on as far as we like to go. But, as I have said, antinomies
cannot condition existence; and all this simply means that the ether is
unconditioned, an entity of no properties but of all possibilities, or,
more exactly, not an entity at all, but an infinite possibility.

To our minds it may serve as a symbol of an idea we cannot well <span
id="page_71">p. 71</span> grasp without a symbol, the idea of
unconditioned consciousness.

From this the universe has come. To this the universe and everything in
it returns. We have come a long way up the scale of evolution guided by
natural selection. We have come to the point where we can begin to do
our own selecting. We can understand something of the rules of the game,
and see something of the board in our immediate neighborhood, although
our consciousness is so cramped and shriveled and atrophied by long
contact with the limitations of material existence that we can barely
and dimly realize the immensity of that which is at once our origin and
our goal.

But we have our choice. It is not <span id="page_72">p. 72</span> the
world, but the universe, that is all before us where to choose. We may
take as much or as little of it as we like. We may take the smallest
part or the whole. But only the whole is free. The parts are conditioned
by relations with space and time and each other, and if we choose a
part, we must take with it the adjoining connected parts. That is the
price. The Hindus have long since put this into a popular saying,—"What
will you have?" said God to man. "Take it, and pay for it."

But the choice is ours. You remember how well Emerson has said this in
that great poem called "Days," that begins—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Daughters of Time, the hypocritic Days,  
 Muffled and dumb like barefoot dervishes, <span id="page_73">p.
73</span>  
 And marching single in an endless file,  
 Bring diadems and fagots in their hands.  
 To each they offer gifts after his will,  
 Bread, kingdoms, stars, and sky that holds them all."</span>

</div>

Never, perhaps, has the choice been better stated. Bread, the symbol of
the evanescent needs of daily physical life; kingdoms, of power; the
stars, of the highest knowledge of material things; and the sky that
holds them all, of the last and greatest alternative, the ultimate
expansion of consciousness that knows neither limit nor boundary. Only
in this expanded consciousness is the will free. Only in limited forms
is its freedom hampered. The so-called necessity that seems to oppose it
is made up of the limitations of personality and material existence.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

There is a Japanese proverb that says, "There are many roads up the
mountain, but it is always the same moon that is seen from the top." The
Japanese themselves, with a liberality worthy of imitation, apply this
saying to different forms of religious belief. The mountain may well
typify matter, and the summit the highest accessible point on which a
climber can stand and maintain his separate individual existence in
terms of consciousness drawn from the material world. This peak may be
accessible by any religion, or without any religion; but Buddhism and
its genetically associated systems look beyond. The mountain top is the
apotheosis of personal existence, the highest form of consciousness that
can be expressed in terms <span id="page_75">p. 75</span> of separate
individuality,—a sublime elevation, where many a pilgrim is content to
pause. Below him are the kingdoms; above him are the stars; and kingdoms
and stars alike are his. But it is not the end. Deeper than the
kingdoms, and higher than the stars, is the sky that holds them all. And
there alone is peace,—that peace that the material world cannot
give,—the peace that passeth understanding trained on material
things,—infinite and eternal peace,—the peace of limitless consciousness
unified with limitless will.

That peace is <span class="smallcaps">NIRVANA</span>.

<span id="page__002"></span>

<span class="small"><span class="small">The Riverside Press  
CAMBRIDGE . MASSACHUSETTS  
U . S . A</span></span>

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[62:1](bai01.htm#fr_0) In Japanese *Kengyo* and
*Mikkyo*, literally, "Apparent" and "Non-apparent Systems." Occasional
erroneous translation of these terms as "Revealed" and "Secret or
Esoteric Doctrine" has led to some popular misconceptions.

 
