[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index.md) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh1_470.md) 
[Next](bh1_472.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 1:469

*Narrated*

Narrates Ibn Sirin:

Abu Huraira said, "Allah's Apostle led us in one of the two 'Isha'
prayers (Abu Huraira named that prayer but I forgot it)." Abu Huraira
added, "He prayed two Rakat and then finished the prayer with Tasllm. He
stood up near a piece of wood Lying across the mosque and leaned on it
in such a way as if he was angry. Then he put his right hand over the
left and clasped his hands by interlacing his fingers and then put his J
right cheek on the back of his left hand. The people who were in haste
left the mosque through its gates. They wondered whether the prayer was
reduced. And amongst them were Abu Bakr and 'Umar but they hesitated to
ask the Prophet. A long-handed man called Dhul-Yadain asked the Prophet,
'O Allah's Apostle! Have you; forgotten or has the prayer been reduced?'
The Prophet replied, 'I have neither forgotten nor has the prayer been
reduced' The Prophet added, 'Is what Dhul Yadain has said true?' They
(the people) said, 'Yes, it is true.' The Prophet stood up again and led
the prayer, completing the remaining prayer, forgotten by him, and
performed Talsrm, and then said, 'Allahu Akbar.' And then he did a
prostration as he used to prostrate or longer than that. He then raised
his head saying, 'Allahu Akbar; he then again said, 'Allahu Akbar', and
prostrated as he used to prostrate or longer than that. Then he raised
his head and said, 'Allahu Akbar.' " (The subnarrator added, "I think
that they asked (Ibn Sirin) whether the Prophet completed the prayer
with Taslim. He replied, "I heard that 'Imran bin Husain had said, 'Then
he (the Prophet) did Taslim.")

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1:470: Fudail bin Sulaiman: Musa bin 'Uqba said, I saw Salim bin
'Abdullah looking for some ...](bh1_472.md)
