[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index.md) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh1_76)  [Next](bh1_78.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 1:78

*Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:*

that he differed with Hur bin Qais bin Hisn Al-Fazari regarding the
companion of the Prophet Moses. Meanwhile, Ubai bin Ka'b passed by them
and Ibn 'Abbas called him saying, "My friend (Hur) and I have differed
regarding Moses' companion whom Moses asked the way to meet. Have you
heard Allah's Apostle mentioning something about him? Ubai bin Ka'b
said: "Yes, I heard the Prophet mentioning something about him (saying)
while Moses was sitting in the company of some Israelites, a man came
and asked him: "Do you know anyone who is more learned than you? Moses
replied: "No." So Allah sent the Divine Inspiration to Moses: '--Yes,
Our slave Khadir is more learned than you. Moses asked Allah how to meet
him (Al-Khadir). So Allah made the fish a sign for him and he was told
when the fish was lost, he should return (to the place where he had lost
it) and there he would meet him (Al-Khadir). So Moses went on looking
for the sign of the fish in the sea. The servant-boy of Moses said: 'Do
you remember when we betook ourselves to the rock, I indeed forgot the
fish, none but Satan made me forget to remember it. On that Moses said,
'That is what we have been seeking.' So they went back retracing their
footsteps, and found Kha,dir. (and) what happened further about them is
narrated in the Holy Qur'an by Allah." (18.54 up to 18.82)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1:79: Abu Musa: The Prophet said, The example of guidance and
knowledge with which ...](bh1_78.md)
