[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh1_366) 
[Next](bh1_368) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 1:367

*Narrated 'Abdul 'Aziz:*

Anas said, 'When Allah's Apostle invaded Khaibar, we offered the Fajr
prayer there yearly in the morning) when it was still dark. The Prophet
rode and Abu Talha rode too and I was riding behind Abu Talha. The
Prophet passed through the lane of Khaibar quickly and my knee was
touching the thigh of the Prophet . He uncovered his thigh and I saw the
whiteness of the thigh of the Prophet. When he entered the town, he
said, 'Allahu Akbar! Khalbar is ruined. Whenever we approach near a
(hostile) nation (to fight) then evil will be the morning of those who
have been warned.' He repeated this thrice. The people came out for
their jobs and some of them said, 'Muhammad (has come).' (Some of our
companions added, "With his army.") We conquered Khaibar, took the
captives, and the booty was collected. Dihya came and said, 'O Allah's
Prophet! Give me a slave girl from the captives.' The Prophet said, 'Go
and take any slave girl.' He took Safiya bint Huyai. A man came to the
Prophet and said, 'O Allah's Apostles! You gave Safiya bint Huyai to
Dihya and she is the chief mistress of the tribes of Quraiza and
An-Nadir and she befits none but you.' So the Prophet said, 'Bring him
along with her.' So Dihya came with her and when the Prophet saw her, he
said to Dihya, 'Take any slave girl other than her from the captives.'
Anas added: The Prophet then manumitted her and married her."

Thabit asked Anas, "O Abu Hamza! What did the Prophet pay her (as
Mahr)?" He said, "Her self was her Mahr for he manumitted her and then
married her." Anas added, "While on the way, Um Sulaim dressed her for
marriage (ceremony) and at night she sent her as a bride to the Prophet
. So the Prophet was a bridegroom and he said, 'Whoever has anything
(food) should bring it.' He spread out a leather sheet (for the food)
and some brought dates and others cooking butter. (I think he (Anas)
mentioned As-SawTq). So they prepared a dish of Hais (a kind of meal).
And that was Walrma (the marriage banquet) of Allah's Apostle ."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1:368: 'Aisha: Allah's Apostle used to offer the Fajr prayer and
some believing women...](bh1_368)
