[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh1_500) 
[Next](bh1_502) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 1:499

*Narrated 'Amr bin Maimuin:*

'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said, "While Allah's Apostle was praying beside the
Ka'ba, there were some Quraish people sitting in a gathering. One of
them said, 'Don't you see this (who does deeds just to show off)? Who
amongst you can go and bring the dung, blood and the abdominal contents
(intestines, etc). of the slaughtered camels of the family of so and so
and then wait till he prostrates and put that in between his shoulders?'
The most unfortunate amongst them ('Uqba bin Abi Mu'ait) went (and
brought them) and when Allah's Apostle prostrated, he put them between
his shoulders. The Prophet remained in prostration and they laughed so
much so that they fell on each other. A passerby went to Fatima, who was
a young girl in those days. She came running and the Prophet was still
in prostration. She removed them and cursed upon the Quraish on their
faces. When Allah's Apostle completed his prayer, he said, 'O Allah!
Take revenge on Quraish.' He said so thrice and added, 'O Allah! take
revenge on 'Amr bin Hisham, 'Utba bin Rabia, Shaiba bin Rabi'a, Al-Walid
bin'Utba, Umaiya bin Khalaf, 'Uqba bin Abi Mu'ait and 'Umar a bin
Al-Walid." Abdullah added, "By Allah! I saw all of them dead in the
battle field on the day of Badr and they were dragged and thrown in the
Qalib (a well) at Badr: Allah's Apostle then said, 'Allah's curse has
descended upon the people of the Qalib (well).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1:500: Ibn Shihab: Once'Umar bin 'Abdul 'Aziz delayed the prayer
and 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair ...](bh1_502)
