[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index.md) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh1_103.md) 
[Next](bh1_105.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 1:104

*Narrated Said:*

Abu Shuraih said, "When 'Amr bin Said was sending the troops to Mecca
(to fight 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair) I said to him, 'O chief! Allow me to
tell you what the Prophet said on the day following the conquests of
Mecca. My ears heard and my heart comprehended, and I saw him with my
own eyes, when he said it. He glorified and praised Allah and then said,
"Allah and not the people has made Mecca a sanctuary. So anybody who has
belief in Allah and the Last Day (i.e. a Muslim) should neither shed
blood in it nor cut down its trees. If anybody argues that fighting is
allowed in Mecca as Allah's Apostle did fight (in Mecca), tell him that
Allah gave permission to His Apostle, but He did not give it to you. The
Prophet added: Allah allowed me only for a few hours on that day (of the
conquest) and today (now) its sanctity is the same (valid) as it was
before. So it is incumbent upon those who are present to convey it (this
information) to those who are absent." Abu- Shuraih was asked, "What did
'Amr reply?" He said 'Amr said, "O Abu Shuraih! I know better than you
(in this respect). Mecca does not give protection to one who disobeys
(Allah) or runs after committing murder, or theft (and takes refuge in
Mecca).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1:105: Abu Bakra: The Prophet said. No doubt your blood,
property, the sub-narrator ...](bh1_105.md)
