[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index.md) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh1_02)  [Next](bh1_04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 1:4

*Narrated Said bin Jubair:*

Ibn 'Abbas in the explanation of the Statement of Allah. 'Move not your
tongue concerning (the Quran) to make haste therewith." (75.16) Said
"Allah's Apostle used to bear the revelation with great trouble and used
to move his lips (quickly) with the Inspiration." Ibn 'Abbas moved his
lips saying, "I am moving my lips in front of you as Allah's Apostle
used to move his." Said moved his lips saying: "I am moving my lips, as
I saw Ibn 'Abbas moving his." Ibn 'Abbas added, "So Allah revealed 'Move
not your tongue concerning (the Qur'an) to make haste therewith. It is
for us to collect it and to give you (O Muhammad) the ability to recite
it (the Qur'an) (75.16-17) which means that Allah will make him (the
Prophet ) remember the portion of the Qur'an which was revealed at that
time by heart and recite it. The Statement of Allah: And 'When we have
recited it to you (O Muhammad through Gabriel) then you follow its
(Qur'an) recital' (75.18) means 'listen to it and be silent.' Then it is
for Us (Allah) to make It clear to you' (75.19) means 'Then it is (for
Allah) to make you recite it (and its meaning will be clear by itself
through your tongue). Afterwards, Allah's Apostle used to listen to
Gabriel whenever he came and after his departure he used to recite it as
Gabriel had recited it."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1:5: Ibn 'Abbas: Allah's Apostle was the most generous of all the
people, and he used ...](bh1_04.md)
