[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh1_634) 
[Next](bh1_636) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 1:633

*Narrated Al-Aswad:*

"We were with 'Aisha discussing the regularity of offering the prayer
and dignifying it. She said, 'When Allah's Apostle fell sick with the
fatal illness and when the time of prayer became due and Adhan was
pronounced, he said, 'Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in prayer.' He
was told that Abu Bakr was a soft-hearted man and would not be able to
lead the prayer in his place. The Prophet gave the same order again but
he was given the same reply. He gave the order for the third time and
said, 'You (women) are the companions of Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to lead
the prayer.' So Abu Bakr came out to lead the prayer. In the meantime
the condition of the Prophet improved a bit and he came out with the
help of two men one on each side. As if I was observing his legs
dragging on the ground owing to the disease. Abu Bakr wanted to retreat
but the Prophet beckoned him to remain at his place and the Prophet was
brought till he sat beside Abu Bakr." Al-A'mash was asked, "Was the
Prophet praying and Abu Bakr following him, and were the people
following Abu Bakr in that prayer?" Al-A'mash replied in the affirmative
with a nod of his head. Abu Muawiya said, "The Prophet was sitting on
the left side of Abu Bakr who was praying while standing."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1:634: 'Aisha: When the Prophet became seriously ill and his
disease became ...](bh1_636)
