[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index.md) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh1_166.md) 
[Next](bh1_168.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 1:167

*Narrated 'Ubaid Ibn Juraij:*

I asked 'Abdullah bin 'Umar, "O Abu 'Abdur-Rahman! I saw you doing four
things which I never saw being done by anyone of you companions?"
'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "What are those, O Ibn Juraij?" I said, "I
never saw you touching any corner of the Ka'ba except these (two) facing
south (Yemen) and I saw you wearing shoes made of tanned leather and
dyeing your hair with Hinna; (a kind of dye). I also noticed that
whenever you were in Mecca, the people assume l,hram on seeing the new
moon crescent (1st of Dhul-Hijja) while you did not assume the Ihlal
(Ihram)--(Ihram is also called Ihlal which means 'Loud calling' because
a Muhrim has to recite Talbiya aloud when assuming the state of
Ihram)--till the 8th of Dhul-Hijja (Day of Tarwiya). 'Abdullah replied,
"Regarding the corners of Ka'ba, I never saw Allah's Apostle touching
except those facing south (Yemen) and regarding the tanned leather
shoes, no doubt I saw Allah's Apostle wearing non-hairy shoes and he
used to perform ablution while wearing the shoes (i.e. wash his feet and
then put on the shoes). So I love to wear similar shoes. And about the
dyeing of hair with Hinna; no doubt I saw Allah's Apostle dyeing his
hair with it and that is why I like to dye (my hair with it). Regarding
Ihlal, I did not see Allah's Apostle assuming Ihlal till he set out for
Hajj (on the 8th of Dhul-Hijja)."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1:168: Um-'Atiya: that the Prophet at the time of washing his
deceased daughter had said...](bh1_168.md)
