[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index.md) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh1_85)  [Next](bh1_87.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 1:87

*Narrated Abu Jamra:*

I was an interpreter between the people and Ibn 'Abbas. Once Ibn 'Abbas
said that a delegation of the tribe of'Abdul Qais came to the Prophet
who asked them, "Who are the people (i.e. you)? (Or) who are the
delegates?" They replied, "We are from the tribe of Rabi'a." Then the
Prophet said to them, "Welcome, O people (or said, "O delegation (of
'Abdul Qais).") Neither will you have disgrace nor will you regret."
They said, "We have come to you from a distant place and there is the
tribe of the infidels of Mudar intervening between you and us and we
cannot come to you except in the sacred month. So please order us to do
something good (religious deeds) and that we may also inform our people
whom we have left behind (at home) and that we may enter Paradise (by
acting on them.)" The Prophet ordered them to do four things, and
forbade them from four things. He ordered them to believe in Allah
Alone, the Honorable the Majestic and said to them, "Do you know what is
meant by believing in Allah Alone?" They replied, "Allah and His Apostle
know better." Thereupon the Prophet said, "(That means to testify that
none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and that Muhammad is His
Apostle, to offer prayers perfectly, to pay Zakat, to observe fasts
during the month of Ramadan, (and) to pay Al-Khumus (one fifth of the
booty to be given in Allah's cause)." Then he forbade them four things,
namely Ad-Dubba.' Hantam, Muzaffat (and) An-Naqir or Muqaiyar(These were
the names of pots in which alcoholic drinks used to be prepared). The
Prophet further said, "Memorize them (these instructions) and tell them
to the people whom you have left behind."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1:88: 'Abdullah bin Abi Mulaika: 'Uqba bin Al-Harith said that he
had married the daughter of Abi Ihab ...](bh1_87.md)
