[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index.md) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh1_329.md) 
[Next](bh1_331.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 1:330

*Narrated 'Aisha:*

(the wife of the Prophet) We set out with Allahs Apostle on one of his
journeys till we reached Al-Baida' or Dhatul-Jaish, a necklace of mine
was broken (and lost). Allah's Apostle stayed there to search for it,
and so did the people along with him. There was no water at that place,
so the people went to Abu- Bakr As-Siddiq and said, "Don't you see what
'Aisha has done? She has made Allah's Apostle and the people stay where
there is no water and they have no water with them." Abu Bakr came while
Allah's Apostle was sleeping with his head on my thigh, He said, to me:
"You have detained Allah's Apostle and the people where there is no
water and they have no water with them.

So he admonished me and said what Allah wished him to say and hit me on
my flank with his hand. Nothing prevented me from moving (because of
pain) but the position of Allah's Apostle on my thigh. Allah's Apostle
got up when dawn broke and there was no water. So Allah revealed the
Divine Verses of Tayammum. So they all performed Tayammum. Usaid bin
Hudair said, "O the family of Abu Bakr! This is not the first blessing
of yours." Then the camel on which I was riding was caused to move from
its place and the necklace was found beneath it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1:331: Jabir bin 'Abdullah: The Prophet said, I have been given
five things which were not given ...](bh1_331.md)
