[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m13a016) 
[Next](m13a018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

### SECTION XVII

"Vasudeva said, 'Concentrating his mind, O Yudhishthira. the regenerate
Rishi Upamanyu, with hands joined together in reverence uttered this
abstract of names (applying to Mahadeva), commencing from the
beginning.'

"Upamanyu said, 'I shall adore that great Deity who deserves the
adorations of all creatures, by uttering those names that are celebrated
over all the worlds,--names some of which were uttered by the Grandsire
Brahma, some by the Rishis, and some of which occur in the Vedas and the
Vedangas. Those names have been applied (unto the great Deity) by
persons that are eminent. Those names of him that are, again, true and
fraught with success and are capable of accomplishing all the purposes
which the utterer may have in view, have been applied unto Mahadeva by
Tandi after calling them from the Vedic lore with the aid of his
devotion. Indeed, with those names that have been uttered by many
well-known persons of righteousness and by ascetics conversant with all
the spiritual principles. I shall adore him who is the foremost, who is
the first, who leads to heaven, who is ready to confer benefits upon all
creatures, and who is auspicious. Those names have been heard everywhere
in the universe, having spread from the region of Brahma (where they
were originally invented). All of them are fraught with the element of
Truth. With those names I shall adore him who is Supreme Brahman, who
has been declared (unto the universe) by the Vedas, and who is Eternal.
I shall now tell thee, O chief of Yacht's race those names. Do thou hear
them with rapt attention. Thou art a devoted worshipper of the Supreme
Deity. Do thou worship the illustrious Bhava, distinguishing him above
all the deities. And because thou art devoted to him, I shall therefore,
recite those names in thy hearing. Mahadeva is Eternal Brahman. Persons
endued with Yoga; Yoga's achievements are unable to know in even a
hundred years, the glory and puissance of the great Deity in their
entirety. Verily, the beginning, middle or end of Mahadeva cannot be
apprehended by the very deities. Indeed, when the case is such, who is
there O Madhava, that can recite the attributes of Mahadeva in their
entirety? For all that, I shall through the grace of that illustrious
and supreme Deity of perfect wisdom, extended to me for my devotion to
him, recite his attributes as embodied in an abstract of few words and
letters. The Supreme Lord is incapable of being adored by any one if he
does not grant his permission to the adorer. As regards myself, it is
only when I become fortunate enough to receive his permission that I
succeed in adoring him. I shall indicate only a few names of that great
Deity who is without birth and without destruction, who is the original
cause of the universe, who is endued with the highest Soul, and whose
origin is unmanifest. Hear, O Krishna, a few names, that were uttered by
Brahma himself, of that giver of boons, that adorable deity, that
puissant one who has the universe for his form, and who is possessed of
supreme wisdom. These names that I shall recite

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

are extracted from the ten thousand names that the great Grandsire had
uttered in days of yore, as ghee is extracted from curds. As gold
represents the essence of rocky mountains, as honey represents the
essence of flowers, as Manda represents the extract from ghee, even so
have these names been extracted from and represent the essence of those
ten thousand names that were uttered by Grandsire Brahma. This abstract
of names is capable of cleansing every sin, however heinous. It
possesses the same merit that is attached to the four Vedas. It should
be comprehended with attention by spiritual aspirants and engraved on
the memory. These names [fraught](errata.htm#9) with auspiciousness,
leading to advancement, destructive of Rakshasas, <span
id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87) and great cleansers should be imparted to
only him that is devoted to the great Lord, to him that has faith, to
him that believes. Unto him that has no faith, him that is an
unbeliever, him that has not subjugated his soul, it should never be
communicated. That creature, O Krishna, who cherishes malice towards the
illustrious Mahadeva who is the original cause of everything, who is the
Supreme Soul, and who is the great Lord, has certainly to go to hell
with all his ancestors before and all his children after him. This
abstract of names that I shall recite to thee is looked upon as
Yoga. <span id="fr_88"></span>[2](#fn_88) This is looked upon as the
highest object of meditation. This is that which one should constantly
recite as *Japya*. This is equivalent to Knowledge. This is the highest
Mystery. If one, even during his last moments, recites it or hears it
recited unto him, one succeeds in attaining to the highest end. This is
holy. This is auspicious, this is fraught with every kind of benefit.
This is the best of all things. Brahma, the Grandsire of all the
universe, having in days of old composed it, assigned to it the foremost
place among all excellent hymns. From that time, this hymn to the
greatness and glory of the high-souled Mahadeva, which is held in the
highest esteem by all the deities, has come to be regarded as the king
of all hymns. This king of all hymns was first conveyed from the region
of Brahman to heaven, the region of the celestials. Tandi then obtained
it from heaven. Hence is it known as the hymn composed by Tandi. From
heaven Tandi brought it down on Earth. It is the most auspicious of all
auspicious things, and is capable of cleansing the heart from all sins
however heinous. O thou of mighty arms, I shall recite to thee that best
of all hymns. This hymn relates to him who is the Veda of the Vedas, and
the most ancient of all ancient objects, to him who is the energy of all
energies, and the penance of all penances; to him who is the most
tranquil of all creatures endued with tranquillity, and who is the
splendour of all splendours; to him who is looked upon as the most
restrained of all creatures that are restrained, and him who is the
intelligence of all creatures endued with intelligence; to him who is
looked upon as the deity of all deities, and the Rishi of all Rishis; to
him who is regarded as the sacrifice of all sacrifices and the most
auspicious

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

of all things fraught with auspiciousness; to him who is the Rudra of
all Rudras and the effulgence of all things endued with effulgence; to
him who is the Yogin of all Yogins, and the cause of all causes; to him
from whom all the worlds start into existence, and unto whom all the
worlds return when they cease to exist; to him who is the Soul of all
existent creatures, and who is called Hara of immeasurable energy. Hear
me recite those thousand and eight names of the great Sarva. Hearing
those names, O foremost of all men, thou shalt be crowned with fruition
in respect of all thy wishes,--Om! thou art Immobile, thou art Fixed,
thou art Puissant, thou art Terrible, thou art Foremost, thou art
boon-giving, and thou art Superior. <span id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89)
Thou art the Soul of all creatures, thou art celebrated over all
creatures, thou art all things, thou art the Creator of all, and thou
art Bhava." <span id="fr_90"></span>[2](#fn_90) Thou art the bearer of
matted locks on thy head. Thou wearest animal skins for thy vestments.
Thou wearest a crest of matted hair on thy head like the peacock. Thou
art he who has the whole universe for thy limbs. <span
id="fr_91"></span>[3](#fn_91) Thou art the Creator of all things. Thou
art Hara in consequence of thy being the destroyer of all things. Thou
art he that has eyes resembling those of the gazelle. Thou art the
destroyer of all creatures. Thou art the supreme enjoyer of all things.
Thou art that Pravritti whence all actions flow. Thou art that Nivritti
or abstention from acts. Thou art observant of fasts and vows, thou art
Eternal, thou art Unchangeable. Thou art he that residest in crematoria,
thou art the possessor of the six well-known attributes of Lordship and
the rest, thou residest in the heart of every creature, thou art he that
enjoys all things with the senses, thou art the grinder of all sinful
creatures. <span id="fr_92"></span>[4](#fn_92) Thou art he that deserves
the salutations of all, thou art of great feats, thou art he that has
penances for his wealth, thou createst all the elements at thy will,
thou concealest thy real nature by putting on the guise of a lunatic.
Thou art the Master of all the worlds and of all living creatures. Thou
art of immeasurable form, thou art of vast body, thou art of the form of
Righteousness, thou art of great fame, thou art of high Soul, thou art
the Soul of all creatures, thou hast the universe for thy form. <span
id="fr_93"></span>[5](#fn_93) Thou art of vast jaws (for thou swallowest
the

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

universe when the time comes for the dissolution of all things). Thou
art the protector of all the lokas (the worlds). Thou art the soul
residing in the inner heart and as such devoid of *ahamkara* originating
from ignorance <span id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94) and is one and
undivided; Thou art *anandam* (gladness). Thou art he whose car is borne
by mules. Thou art he that protects Jiva from the thunderbolt of
rebirth. Thou art adorable. Thou art obtained by purity and
self-restraint and vows. Thou art again the refuge of all kinds of vows
and observances including purity and self-restraint. <span
id="fr_95"></span>[2](#fn_95) Thou art the celestial artificer that is
conversant with every art. Thou art Self-create (for no one has created
thee). Thou art the beginning of all creatures and things. Thou art
Hiranyagarbha, the Creator of all things. Thou art inexhaustible
puissance and felicity. <span id="fr_96"></span>[3](#fn_96) Thou hast a
hundred eyes, thou hast eyes of vast power. Thou art Soma. <span
id="fr_97"></span>[4](#fn_97) Thou art he that causest all righteous
creatures assume shapes of glory for shining in the firmament. Thou art
Chandramas, thou art Surya, thou art the planet Saturn, thou art the
descending node (of the moon), thou art the ascending node, thou art
Mangala (Mars), and thou art Vrihaspati (Jupiter) and Sukra (Venus),
thou art Vudha (Mercury) thou art the worshipper of Atri's wife, thou
art he who shot his shaft in wrath at Sacrifice when Sacrifice fled away
from him in the form of a deer. Thou art sinless. <span
id="fr_98"></span>[5](#fn_98) Thou art possessed of penances that have
conferred upon thee the power of creating the universe. Thou art
possessed of penances that have rendered thee capable of destroying the
universe. Thou art high minded (in consequence of thy great liberality
towards thy devotees). Thou fulfillest the wishes of all who resign
themselves to thee. Thou art the maker of the year (for it is thou

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

who settest the wheel of Time revolving, by assuming the form of the sun
and the planets). Thou art Mantra (in the form of Pranava and other
sacred words and syllables). Thou art the authority for all acts (in the
form of the Vedas and the scriptures). Thou art the highest Penance.
Thou art devoted to Yoga. Thou art he who merges himself in Brahman (by
Yoga-abstraction). Thou art the great seed (being the cause of causes).
Thou art the displayer of what is unmanifest in the manifest form in
which the universe exists. Thou art possessed of infinite might. Thou
art he whose seed is gold. <span id="fr_99"></span>[1](#fn_99) Thou art
omniscient, (being as thou art all things and the great knower). Thou
art the cause of all things. Thou art he that has the seed of action
(*viz*., ignorance and desire) for the means of sojourning from this
world to the other and the other to this. <span
id="fr_100"></span>[2](#fn_100) Thou hast ten arms. Thou hast winkless
eyes (for thou seest at all times). Thou hast a blue throat (in
consequence of thy bearing in thy throat the poison that arose upon
churning the ocean and which, if not so borne, was capable of destroying
the universe). Thou art the Lord of Uma. Thou art the origin of all the
infinite forms that occur in the universe. Thou art he whose superiority
is due to thyself. Thou art a hero in might (in consequence of thy
having achieved such grand feats as the quick destruction of the triple
city of the Asuras). Thou art inert matter (which cannot move unless
co-existing with the Soul). Thou art all the tattwas (subjects of
enquiry as counted by the Sankhyas). Thou art the ordainer and ruler of
the tattwas. Thou art the chief of those beings that wait upon thee and
are called Ganas. <span id="fr_101"></span>[3](#fn_101) Thou coverest
infinite space. <span id="fr_102"></span>[4](#fn_102) Thou art Kama, the
God of Desire. Thou art conversant with Mantras (in the sense of
knowledge being thy penance). <span id="fr_103"></span>[5](#fn_103) Thou
art the highest Mantra for thou art that philosophy which consists in
the ascertainment of the nature and attributes of the soul (and its
differences from the Non-soul). Thou art the cause of the universe
(since all that exists has sprung from thy Soul). Thou art universal
destroyer (for all that ceases to exist becomes merged unto thee who art
as

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

the unmanifest Brahman). Thou bearest in one of thy hands the calabash,
and in another thou holdest the bow; in another hand thou bearest shafts
and in another thou bearest a skull. Thou bearest the thunder-bolt. Thou
art armed with the hundred-killer. <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104)
Thou art armed with the sword. Thou wieldest the battle-axe. Thou art
armed with the Sula (trident). Thou art adorable. Thou host the
sacrificial ladle in one of thy hands. Thou art of beautiful form. Thou
art endued with abundant energy. Thou givest in the most liberal measure
all that tends to adorn those that are devoted to thee. Thou wearest a
turban on thy head. Thou art of beautiful face. Thou art he who swells
with splendour and puissance. Thou art he that is humble and modest.
Thou art exceedingly tall. Thou art he who has the senses for thy
rays. <span id="fr_105"></span>[2](#fn_105) Thou art the greatest of
preceptors. Thou art Supreme Brahman (being a state of pure felicitous
existence). <span id="fr_106"></span>[3](#fn_106) Thou art he that took
the shape of a jackal (for consoling the Brahmana who, when insulted by
a wealthy Vaisya, had resolved to commit suicide). Thou art he whose
object are all crowned with fruition, of themselves and without waiting
for the puissance (derivable from penances). Thou art one who bears a
bald head (as the sign of the mendicant order). Thou art one who does
good to all creatures. Thou art unborn. Thou hast innumerable forms.
Thou bearest all kinds of fragrance on thy person. The matted locks on
thy head had sucked up the river Ganga when it first fell from heaven
(although they again gave out the waters at the earnest solicitations of
king Bhagiratha). Thou art the giver of [sovereignty](errata.htm#10) and
lordship. <span id="fr_107"></span>[4](#fn_107) Thou art a Brahmacharin
without having ever fallen away from the rigid vow of continence. Thou
art distinguished for thy sexual continence. Thou always liest on thy
back. Thou hast thy abode in Puissance. <span
id="fr_108"></span>[5](#fn_108) Thou hast three matted locks on thy
head. Thou art he that is clad in rags. Thou art Rudra (in consequence
of thy fierceness). Thou art the celestial generalissimo, and thou art
all pervading. Thou art he that moves about during the day. Thou art he
that moves about in the night. <span id="fr_109"></span>[6](#fn_109)
Thou

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

art of fierce wrath. Thou art possessed of dazzling effulgence (born of
Vedic study and penances). Thou art the slayer of the mighty Asura who
had come in the form of an infuriate elephant for destroying thy sacred
city of Varanasi. Thou art the slayer of such Daityas as become the
oppressors of the universe. Thou art Kala or Time which is the universal
destroyer. Thou art the supreme ordainer of the universe. Thou art a
mine of excellent accomplishments. Thou art of the form of the lion and
the tiger. Thou art he that is clad in the skin of an elephant. Thou art
the Yogin who deceives Time by transcending its irresistible influence.
Thou art the original sound. <span id="fr_110"></span>[1](#fn_110) Thou
art the fruition of all desires. Thou art he that is adored in four
ways. <span id="fr_111"></span>[2](#fn_111) Thou art a night-wanderer
(like Vetala and others). Thou art he that wanders in the company of
spirits. Thou art he that wanders in the company of ghostly beings. Thou
art the Supreme Lord of even Indra and the other celestials. Thou art he
that hast multiplied himself infinitely in the form of all existent and
non-existent things. Thou art the upholder of both Mahat and all the
innumerable combinations of the five primal elements. Thou art the
primeval Ignorance or Tamas that is known by the name of Rahu. Thou art
without measure and hence infinite. Thou art the supreme End that is
attained by the Emancipate. Thou art fond of dancing. Thou art he that
is always engaged in dancing. Thou art he that causes others to dance.
Thou art the friend of the universe. Thou art he whose aspect is calm
and mild. Thou art endued with penances puissant enough to create and
destroy the universe. Thou art he who binds all creatures with the bonds
of thy illusion. Thou art he that transcends destruction. Thou art he
who dwells on the mount Kailasa. Thou transcendest all bonds and art
unattached in respect of all things, like Space. Thou art possessed of a
thousand arms. Thou art victory. Thou art that perseverance which is the
cause of success or victory. Thou art without idleness or
procrastination that interferes with persevering activity. Thou art
dauntless. Thou art fear, Thou art he who put a stop to Vali's
sacrifice. <span id="fr_112"></span>[3](#fn_112) Thou fulfillest the
desires of all thy devotees. Thou art the destroyer of Daksha's
sacrifice. Thou art amiable. Thou art slightly amiable. Thou art
exceedingly fierce and robbest all creatures of their energy. Thou art
the slayer of the Asura Vala. Thou art always cheerful. Thou art of the
form of wealth which is coveted by all. Thou hast never been
vanquished. <span id="fr_113"></span>[4](#fn_113) There is none more
adorable than thou. Thou art he who

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

utters deep roars (in the form of Ocean). Thou art that which is so deep
that no one can measure it (because thou art of the form of space). Thou
art he whose puissance and the might of whose companions and of the bull
have never been measured by anybody. Thou art the tree of the world
(whose roots extend upwards and branches hang downwards). Thou art the
banian. <span id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_114) Thou art he that sleeps on
a human leaf when the universe, after dissolution, becomes one infinite
expanse of water. Thou art he that shows compassion to all worshippers
assuming as thou listest, the form of Hari or Hara or Ganesa or Arka or
Agni or Wind, etc. Thou art possessed of teeth that are exceedingly
sharp (since thou art competent to chew innumerable worlds even as one
munches nuts and swallows them speedily). Thou art of vast dimensions in
respect of thy forms. Thou art possessed of a mouth that is hast enough
to swallow the universe at once. Thou art he whose troops are adored
everywhere. <span id="fr_115"></span>[2](#fn_115) Thou art he who
dispelled all the fears of the deities when the prince of elephants had
to be captured. Thou art the seed of the universe. Thou art he who has
for his vehicle the same bull that forms again the device on his banner
in battle. Thou hast Agni for thy soul. Thou art Surya who has green
steeds yoked unto his car. Thou art the friend of Jiva. Thou art he that
is conversant with the proper time for the accomplishment of all
religious acts. Thou art he unto whom Vishnu paid his adorations (for
obtaining his celebrated discus). Thou art the sacrifice being in the
form of Vishnu. Thou art the ocean. Thou art the Barabanala Mare's head
that ranges within the ocean, ceaselessly vomitting fire and drinking
the saline waters as if they were sacrificial butter. Thou art Wind, the
friend of Agni. Thou art of tranquil soul like the ocean when at rest
and unstirred by the mildest breeze. Thou art Agni that drinks the
libations of clarified butter poured in sacrifices with the aid of
Mantras. Thou art he whom it is difficult to approach. Thou art he whose
effulgence spreads over the infinite universe. Thou art ever skilful in
battle. Thou art well conversant with the time when one should engage in
battle so that victory may be achieved. Thou art that science which
treats of the motions of heavenly bodies. <span
id="fr_116"></span>[3](#fn_116) Thou art of the form of success or
victory. Thou art he whose body is Time (for thy body is never subject
to destruction). Thou art a householder for thou wearest a tuft of hair
on thy head Thou art a Sanyasin for thy head is bald. Thou wearest
matted locks on thy head (being, as thou art, a Vanaprastha). <span
id="fr_117"></span>[4](#fn_117) Thou art distinguished for

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

thy fiery rays (for the effulgent path by which the righteous proceed is
identical with thee). Thou art he that appears in the firmament in the
heart encased in the body of every creature. <span
id="fr_118"></span>[1](#fn_118) Thou art he who enters into the cranium
(brain) of every creature. Thou bearest the wrinkles of age. Thou
bearest the bamboo flute. Thou hast also the tabour. Thou bearest the
musical instrument called Tali. Thou hast the wooden vessel used for
husking grain. Thou art he who covers that illusion which covers
Yama. <span id="fr_119"></span>[2](#fn_119) Thou art an astrologer
inasmuch as thy understanding is always directed towards the motion of
the wheel of time which is made up of the luminaries in the firmament.
Thou art Jiva whose understanding is directed to things that are the
result of the attributes of Sattwa, Rajas, and Tamas. Thou art that in
which all things merge when dissolution overtakes them. Thou art stable
and fixed, there being nothing in thee that is subject to change or
mutation of any kind. Thou art the Lord of all creatures. Thy arms
extend all over the vast universe. Thou art displayed in innumerable
forms that are but fractions of thyself. Thou pervadest all
things. <span id="fr_120"></span>[3](#fn_120) Thou art he that has no
mouth (for thou enjoyest not the objects of thy own creation). Thou art
he who frees thy creatures from the bonds of the world. Thou art easily
attainable. <span id="fr_121"></span>[4](#fn_121) Thou art he that
manifested himself with a golden mail. <span
id="fr_122"></span>[5](#fn_122) Thou art he that appears in the phallic
emblem. 'Thou art he that wanders in the forests in quest of fowls and
animals. Thou art he that wanders over the Earth. Thou art, he that is
omnipresent. Thou art the blare that is produced by all the trumpets
blown in the three worlds. Thou art he that has all creatures for his
relatives. <span id="fr_123"></span>[6](#fn_123) Thou art of the form of
a snake (for thou art identical with the mighty Naga named Sesha). Thou
art he that lives in mountain caves (like Jaigishavya), or any other
Yogin. Thou art identical with Guha (the celestial generalissimo). Thou
wearest garlands of flowers. Thou art he who enjoys the happiness that
springs from the possession of worldly objects. <span
id="fr_124"></span>[7](#fn_124) Thou art he from whom all creatures have
derived

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

their three states of birth, existence, and destruction. Thou art he
that upholds all things that exist or occur in the three stages of time
*viz*., the Past, the Present, and the Future. Thou art he that frees
creatures from the effects of all acts belonging to previous lives as
well as those accomplished in the present life and from all the bonds
due to Ignorance and Desire. Thou art he who is the binder or Asura
chiefs. Thou art he who is the slayer of foes in battle. <span
id="fr_125"></span>[1](#fn_125) Thou art that which is attainable by
knowledge alone. Thou art Durvasas. Thou art he who is waited upon and
adored by all the righteous. Thou art he who causes the fall of even
Brahma and the others. Thou art he that gives unto all creatures the
just share of joy and grief that each deserves according to his own
acts. Thou art he that is incomparable. Thou art well conversant with
the shares that are given and appropriated in sacrifices. <span
id="fr_126"></span>[2](#fn_126) Thou residest in every place. Thou
wanderest everywhere. Thou art he that has mean vestments. <span
id="fr_127"></span>[3](#fn_127) Thou art Vasava. Thou art immortal. Thou
art identical with the Himavat mountains. Thou art the maker of pure
gold. Thou art without acts. Thou upholdest in thyself the fruits of all
acts. Thou art the foremost of all creatures that are regarded as
upholders. <span id="fr_128"></span>[4](#fn_128) Thou art he that has
bloody eyes. Thou art he that has eyes whose vision extends over the
infinite universe. Thou art he that has a car whose wheels are ever
victorious. Thou art he that is possessed of vast learning. Thou art he
that accepts thy devotees for thy servants. Thou art he that restrains
and subjugates thy senses. Thou art he that acts. Thou wearest clothes
whose warp and woof are made of snakes. Thou art Supreme. Thou art he
who is the lowest of the celestials. <span
id="fr_129"></span>[5](#fn_129) Thou art he that is well-grown. Thou
ownest the musical instrument called Kahala. Thou art the giver of every
wish. Thou art the embodiment of grace in all the three stages of Time,
*viz*., the Past, the Present, and the Future. Thou art possessed of
might that is always well spent. Thou art he who had assumed the form of
Valarama (the elder brother of Krishna). Thou art the foremost of all
colleted things, being Emancipation or the highest of all ends to which
creatures attain. Thou art the giver of all things. Thy face is turned
towards all directions, Thou art he from whom diverse creatures have
sprung even as all forms have sprung from space or are modifications or
that primal element. Thou art

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

he who falls into the pit called body. <span
id="fr_130"></span>[1](#fn_130) Thou art he that is helpless (for,
falling into the pit constituted by the body, thou canst not transcend
the sorrow that is thy portion). Thou residest in the firmament of the
heart. Thou art exceedingly fierce in form. Thou art the Deity called
Ansu. Thou art the companion of Ansu and art called Aditya. Thou art
possessed of innumerable rays. Thou art endued with dazzling effulgence.
Thou hast the speed of the Wind. <span id="fr_131"></span>[2](#fn_131)
Thou art possessed of speed that is greater than that of the Wind. Thou
art possessed of the speed of the mind. Thou art Nishachara as thou
enjoyest all things, being invested with Ignorance. <span
id="fr_132"></span>[3](#fn_132) Thou dwellest in every body. Thou
dwellest with Prosperity as thy companion. Thou art he that imparts
knowledge and instruction. Thou art he who imparts instruction in utter
silence. Thou art he that observes the vow of taciturnity (for thou
instructest in silence). Thou art he who passes out of the body, looking
at the soul. <span id="fr_133"></span>[4](#fn_133) Thou art he that is
well adored. Thou art the giver of thousands (since the lord of all the
treasures derived those treasures of his from thee). Thou art the prince
of birds, (being Garuda the son of Vinata and Kasyapa). Thou art the
friend that renders aid. Thou art possessed of exceeding effulgence (for
thy splendour is like that of a million suns risen together). Thou art
the Master of all created beings. Thou art he who provokes the
appetites. Thou art the deity of Desire. Thou art of the form of lovely
women that are coveted by all. Thou art the tree of the world. Thou art
the Lord of Treasures. Thou art the giver of fame. Thou art the Deity
that distributes unto all creatures the fruits (in the form of joys and
griefs) of their acts. Thou art thyself those fruits which thou
distributest. Thou art the most ancient (having existed from a time when
there was no other existent thing). Thou art competent to cover with a
single footstep of thine all the three worlds. Thou art Vamana (the
dwarf) who deceived the Asura chief Vali (and depriving him of his
sovereignty restored it unto Indra). Thou art the Yogin crowned with
success (like Sanatkumara and others). Thou art a great Rishi (like
Vasishtha and others). Thou art one whose objects are always crowned
with success (like Rishava or Dattatreya). Thou art a Sanyasin (like
Yajnavalkya and others). Thou art he that is adorned with the marks of
the mendicant order. Thou art he that is without such marks. <span
id="fr_134"></span>[5](#fn_134) Thou art he that transcends the usages
of the mendicant order. Thou art he that assures all creatures from
every sort of fear. Thou art

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

without any passions thyself (so that glory and humiliation are alike to
thee). Thou art he that is called the celestial generalissimo. Thou art
that Visakha who took his rise from the body of the celestial
generalissimo when Indra hurled his thunder-bolt at him. Thou art
conversant with the sixty tattwas or heads of enquiry in the universe.
Thou art the Lord of the senses (for these achieve their respective
functions guided by thee). Thou art he that is armed with the
thunder-bolt (and that rives the mountains). Thou art infinite. Thou art
the stupefier of Daitya ranks in the field of battle. Thou art he that
moves his car in circles among his own ranks and that makes similar
circles among the ranks of his foes and who conies back safe and sound
after devastating then. Thou art he that is conversant with the lowest
depth of the world's ocean (in consequence of thy knowledge of Brahman).
Thou art he called Madhu (who has founded the race in which Krishna has
taken his birth). Thou hast eyes whose colour resembles that of honey.
Thou art he that has taken birth after Vrihaspati. <span
id="fr_135"></span>[1](#fn_135) Thou art he that does the acts which
Adhyaryus have to do in sacrifices. Thou art he who is always adored by
persons whatever their modes of life. Thou art devoted to Brahman. Thou
wanderest amongst the habitations of men in the world (in consequence of
thy being a mendicant). Thou art he that pervadest all beings. Thou art
he that is conversant with truth. Thou knowest and guidest every heart.
Thou art he that overspreads the whole universe. Thou art he that
collects or stores the good and bad acts of all creatures in order to
award them the fruits thereof Thou art he that lives during even the
night that follows the universal dissolution. Thou art the protector
wielding the bow called Pinaka. Thou residest in even the Daityas that
are the marks at which shootest thy arrows. Thou art the author of
prosperity. Thou art the mighty ape Hanuman that aided Vishnu in the
incarnation of Rama in his expedition against Ravana. Thou art the lord
of those Ganas that are thy associates, Thou art each member of those
diverse Ganas. Thou art he that gladdens all creatures. Thou art the
enhancer of the joys of all. <span id="fr_136"></span>[2](#fn_136) Thou
takest away the sovereignty and prosperity of even such high beings as
Indra and others. Thou art the universal slayer in the form of Death.
Thou art he that resides in the four and sixty *Kalas*. Thou art very
great. Thou art the Grandsire (being the sire of the great sire of all).
Thou art the supreme phallic emblem that is adored by both deities and
Asuras. Thou art of agreeable and beautiful features. Thou art he who
presides over the variety of evidences and tendencies for action and
non-action. Thou art the lord of vision. Thou art the Lord of Yoga (in
consequence of thy withdrawing all the senses into the heart and
combining them together in that place). Thou art

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

he that upholds the Krita and the other ages (by causing them to run
ceaselessly). Thou art the Lord of seeds (in consequence of thy being
the giver of the fruits of all acts good and bad). Thou art the original
cause of such seeds. Thou actest in the ways that have been pointed out
in the scriptures beginning with those that treat of the Soul. Thou art
he in whom reside might and the other attributes. Thou art the
Mahabharata and other histories of the kind. Thou art the treatises
called Mimansa. Thou art Gautama (the founder of the science of
dialectics). Thou art the author of the great treatise on Grammar that
has been named after the Moon. Thou art he who chastises his foes. Thou
art he whom none [can](errata.htm#11) chastise. Thou art he who is
sincere in respect of all his religious acts and observances. Thou art
he that becomes obedient to those that are devoted to thee. Thou art he
that is capable of reducing others to subjection. Thou art he who
foments quarrels among the deities and the Asuras. Thou art he who has
created the four and ten worlds (beginning with Bhu). Thou art the
protector and cherisher of all Beings commencing from Brahma and ending
with the lowest forms of vegetable life (like grass and straw). Thou art
the Creator of even the five original elements. Thou art he that never
enjoys anything (for thou art always unattached). Thou art free from
deterioration. Thou art the highest form of felicity. Thou art a deity
proud of his might. Thou art Sakra. Thou art the chastisement that is
spoken of in treatises on morality and is inflicted on offenders. Thou
art of the form of that tyranny which prevails over the world. Thou art
of pure Soul. Thou art stainless (being above faults of every kind).
Thou art worthy of adoration. Thou art the world that appears and
disappears ceaselessly. Thou art he whose grace is of the largest
measure. Thou art he that has good dreams. Thou art a mirror in which
the universe is reflected. Thou art he that has subjugated all internal
and external foes. Thou art the maker of the Vedas. Thou art the maker
of those declarations that are contained in the Tantras and the Puranas
and that are embodied in language that is human. <span
id="fr_137"></span>[1](#fn_137) Thou art possessed of great learning.
Thou art the grinder of foes in battle. Thou art he that resides in the
awful clouds that appear at the time of the universal dissolution. Thou
art most terrible (in consequence of the dissolution of the universe
that thou bringest about). Thou art he who succeeds in bringing all
persons and all things into thy subjection. Thou art the great
Destroyer. Thou art he that has fire for his energy. Thou art he whose
energy is mightier than fire. Thou art the [Yuga-fire](errata.htm#12)
that consumes all things. Thou art he that is capable of being gratified
by means of sacrificial libations. Thou art water and other liquids that
are poured in sacrifices with the aid of Mantras. Thou art in the form
of the Deity of Righteousness, the distributor of the fruits that attach
to acts good and bad. Thou art the giver of felicity. Thou art always
endued with effulgence. Thou art of the form of fire. Thou art of the
complexion of the emerald. Thou art

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

always present in the phallic emblem. Thou art the source of
blessedness. Thou art incapable of being baffled by anything in the
prosecution of your objects. Thou art the giver of blessings. Thou art
of the form of blessedness. Thou art he unto whom is given a share of
sacrificial offerings. Thou art he who distributes unto each his share
of that is offered in sacrifices. Thou art endued with great speed. Thou
art he that is dissociated from all things. Thou art he that is
possessed of the mightiest limb. Thou art he that is employed in the act
of generation. Thou art of a dark complexion, (being of the form of
Vishnu). Thou art of a white complexion (being of the form of Samva, the
son of Krishna). Thou art the senses of all embodied creatures. Thou art
possessed of vast feet. Thou hast vast hands. Thou art of vast body.
Thou art endued with wide extending fame. Thou hast a vast head. <span
id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_138) Thou art of vast measurements. Thou art
of vast vision. Thou art the home of the darkness of ignorance. Thou art
the Destroyer of the Destroyer. Thou art possessed of vast years. Thou
hast vast lips. Thou art he that has vast cheeks. Thou hast a vast nose.
Thou art of a vast throat. Thou hast a vast neck. Thou art he that tears
the bond of body. <span id="fr_139"></span>[2](#fn_139) Thou hast a vast
chest. Thou hast a vast bosom. Thou art the inner soul which resides in
all creatures. Thou hast a deer on thy lap. Thou art he from whom
innumerable worlds hang down like fruits hanging down from a tree. Thou
art he who stretches his lips at the time of the universal dissolution
for swallowing the universe. Thou art the ocean of milk. Thou hast vast
teeth. Thou hast vast jaws. Thou hast a vast bristle. <span
id="fr_140"></span>[3](#fn_140) Thou hast hair of infinite length. Thou
hast a vast stomach. Thou hast matted locks of vast length. Thou art
ever cheerful. Thou art of the form of grace. Thou art of the form of
belief. Thou art he that has mountains for his bow (or weapons in
battle). Thou art he that is full of affection to all creatures like a
parent towards his offspring. Thou art he that has no affection. Thou
art unvanquished. Thou art exceedingly devoted to (Yoga)
contemplation. <span id="fr_141"></span>[4](#fn_141) Thou art of the
form of the tree of the world. <span id="fr_142"></span>[5](#fn_142)
Thou art he that is indicated by the tree of the world. <span
id="fr_143"></span>[6](#fn_143) Thou art never satiated when eating
(because of thy being of the form of fire, for of all elements, fire is
never satiated with the quantity offered it for consumption).

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Thou art he that has the Wind for thy vehicle
for going from place to place (in consequence of thy identity with
fire). Thou art he that rangest over hills and little eminences. Thou
art he that has his residence on the mountains of Meru. Thou art the
chief of the celestials. Thou hast the Atharvans for thy head. Thou hast
the Samans for thy mouth. Thou hast the thousand Richs for thy
immeasurable eyes. Thou hast the Yajushes for thy feet and hands. <span
id="fr_144"></span>[1](#fn_144) Thou art the Upanishads. Thou art the
entire body of rituals (occurring in the scriptures). Thou art all that
is mobile. Thou art he whose solicitations are never unfulfilled. Thou
art he who is always inclined to grace. Thou art he that is of beautiful
form. Thou art of the form of the good that one does to another. Thou
art that which is dear. Thou art he that always advances towards thy
devotees (in proportion as these advance for meeting thee). Thou art
gold and other precious metals that are held dear by all. Thy effulgence
is like that of burnished gold. Thou art the navel (of the universe).
Thou art he that makes the fruits of sacrifices grow (for the benefit of
those that perform sacrifices to thy glory). Thou art of the form of
that faith and devotion which the righteous have in respect of
sacrifices. Thou art the artificer of the universe. Thou art all that is
immobile (in the form of mountains and other inert objects). Thou art
the two and ten stages of life through which a person passes. <span
id="fr_145"></span>[2](#fn_145) Thou art he that causes fright (by
assuming the intermediate states between the ten enumerated). Thou art
the beginning of all things. Thou art he that unites Jiva with Supreme
Brahman through Yoga. Thou art identifiable with that Yoga which causes
such a union between Jiva and Supreme Brahman. Thou art unmanifest
(being the deepest stupefaction). Thou art the presiding deity of the
fourth age (in consequence of thy identity with lust and wrath and
cupidity and other evil passions that flow from that deity). <span
id="fr_146"></span>[3](#fn_146) Thou art eternal Time (because of thy
being of the form of that ceaseless succession of birth and death that
goes on in the universe). Thou art of the form of the Tortoise. <span
id="fr_147"></span>[4](#fn_147) Thou art worshipped by the Destroyer
himself. Thou livest in the midst of associates. Thou admittest thy
devotees as members of thy Gana. Thou

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

hast Brahma himself for the driver of thy car. Thou sleepest on
ashes. <span id="fr_148"></span>[1](#fn_148) Thou protectest the
universe with ashes. <span id="fr_149"></span>[2](#fn_149) Thou art he
whose body is made of ashes. <span id="fr_150"></span>[3](#fn_150) Thou
art the tree that grants the fruition of all wishes. Thou art of the
form of those that constitute thy Gana. Thou art the protector of the
four and ten regions. Thou transcendent all the regions. Thou art full,
(there being no deficiency). Thou art adored by all creatures. Thou art
white (being pure and stainless). Thou art he that has his body, speech
and mind perfectly stainless. Thou art he who has attained to that
purity of existence which is called Emancipation. Thou art he who is
incapable of being stained by impurity of any kind. Thou art he who has
been attained to by the great preceptors of old. Thou residest in the
form of Righteousness or duly in the four modes of life. Thou art that
Righteousness which is of the form of rites and sacrifices. Thou art of
the form of that skill which is possessed by the celestial artificer of
the universe. Thou art he who is adored as the primeval form of the
universe. Thou art of vast arms. Thy lips are of a coppery hue. Thou art
of the form of the vast waters that are contained in the Ocean. Thou art
exceedingly stable and fixed (being of the form of mountains and hills).
Thou art Kapila. Thou art brown. Thou art all the hues whose mixture
produces white. Thou art the period of life. Thou art ancient. Thou art
recent. Thou art a Gandharva. Thou art the mother of the celestials in
the form of Aditi (or the mother of all things, in the form of Earth).
Thou art Garuda, the prince of birds, born of Vinata by Kasyapa,
otherwise called Tarkshya. Thou art capable of being comprehended with
ease. Thou art of excellent and agreeable speech. Thou art he that is
armed with the battle-axe. Thou art he that is desirous of victory. Thou
art he that assists others in the accomplishment of their designs. <span
id="fr_151"></span>[4](#fn_151) Thou art an excellent friend. <span
id="fr_152"></span>[5](#fn_152) Thou art he that bears a Vina made of
two hollow gourds. Thou art of terrible wrath (which thou displayest at
the time of the universal dissolution). Thou ownest for thy offspring,
beings higher than men and deities (*viz*., Brahma and Vishnu). Thou art
of the form of that Vishnu who floats on the waters after the universal
dissolution. Thou devourest all things with great ferocity. Thou art he
that procreates offspring. Thou art family and race, continuing from
generation to generation.

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Thou art the blare that a bamboo flute gives
out. Thou art faultless. Thou art he every limb of whose body is
beautiful. Thou art full of illusion. Thou dost good to others without
expecting any return. Thou art Wind. Thou art Fire. Thou art the bonds
of the worlds which bind Jiva. Thou art the creator of those bonds. Thou
art the tearer of such bonds. Thou art he that dwells with even the
Daityas (who are the foes of all sacrifices). Thou dwellest with those
that are the foes of all acts (and that have abandoned all acts). Thou
art of large teeth, and thou art of mighty weapons. Thou art he that has
been greatly censured. Thou art he that stupefied the Rishis dwelling in
the Daruka forest. Thou art he that did good unto even thy detractors,
*viz*., those Rishis residing in the Daruka forest. Thou art he who
dispels all fears and who dispelling all the fears of those Rishis gave
them Emancipation. Thou art he that has no wealth (in consequence of his
inability to procure even his necessary wearing apparel). Thou art the
lord of the celestials. Thou art the greatest of the gods (in
consequence of thy being adored by even Indra and others that are
regarded as the highest of the celestials). Thou art an object of
adoration with even Vishnu. Thou art the slayer of those that are the
foes of the deities. Thou art he that resides (in the form of the snake
Sesha) in the nethermost region. <span id="fr_153"></span>[1](#fn_153)
Thou art invisible but capable of being comprehended, even as the wind
which though invisible is perceived by every body. Thou art he whose
knowledge extends to the roots of everything and unto whom all things,
even in their inner nature, are known. Thou art the object that is
enjoyed by him that enjoys it. Thou art he among the eleven Rudras who
is called Ajaikapat. Thou art the sovereign of the entire universe. Thou
art of the form of all Jivas in the universe (in consequence of thy
being covered by the three well-known attributes of Sattwa, Rajas, and
Tamas). Thou art he that is not subject to those three attributes. Thou
art he that transcends all attributes and is a state of pure existence
which is incapable of being described with the aid of any adjective that
language can yield. Thou art the prince of physicians called
Dhanwantari. Thou art a comet (in consequence of the calamities that
flow from thee unto the sinful). Thou art the celestial generalissimo
called Skanda. Thou art the king of the Yakshas, called Kuvera, who is
thy inseparable associate and who is the Lord of all treasures in the
world. Thou art Dhatri. Thou art Sakra. Thou art Vishnu. Thou art Mitra.
Thou art Tashtri (the celestial artificer). Thou art the Pole Star. Thou
art he that upholds all things. Thou art he called Prabhava amongst the
Vasus. Thou art the wind which is capable of going everywhere (being the
Sutra-atma that connects all things in the universe with a thread). Thou
art Aryaman. Thou art Savitri. Thou art Ravi. Thou art that ancient king
of great celebrity known by the name of Ushangu. Thou art he who
protects all creatures in diverse ways. Thou art Mandhatri (because of
thy competence to gratify all creatures). Thou art he from whom all
creatures start into life. Thou art he who exists in diverse

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

form. Thou art he who causes the diverse hues to exist in the universe.
Thou art he who upholds all desires and all attributes (because of these
flowing from thee). Thou art he who has the lotus on thy navel. <span
id="fr_154"></span>[1](#fn_154) Thou art he within whose womb are
innumerable mighty creatures. Thou art of face as beautiful as the moon.
Thou art wind. Thou art fire. Thou art possessed of exceeding might.
Thou art endued with tranquillity of soul. Thou art old. Thou art he
that is known with the aid of Righteousness. <span
id="fr_155"></span>[2](#fn_155) Thou art Lakshmi. Thou art the maker of
the field of those actions (by which persons adore the supreme Deity).
Thou art he who lives in the field of action. Thou art the soul of the
field of action. Thou art the medicine or provoker of the attributes of
sovereignty and the others. <span id="fr_156"></span>[3](#fn_156) All
things lie in thee (for, as the Srutis declare, all things becomes one
in thee, thyself being of the nature of that unconsciousness which
exhibits itself in dreamless slumber). Thou art the lord of all
creatures endued with life-breaths. Thou art the god of the gods. Thou
art he who is attached to felicity. Thou art Sat (in the form of cause).
Thou art Asat (in the form of effect). Thou art he who possesses the
best of all things. Thou art he who resides on the mountains of Kailasa.
Thou art he who repairs to the mountains of Himavat. Thou washest away
all things besides thee like a mighty current washing away trees and
other objects standing on its banks. Thou art the maker of Pushkara and
other large lakes and pieces of natural water. Thou art possessed of
knowledge of infinite kinds. Thou art the giver of infinite blessings.
Thou art a merchant (who conveys the goods of this country to that
country and brings the goods of that country to this for the convenience
of human beings). Thou art a carpenter. Thou art the tree (of the world
that supplies the timber for thy axe). Thou art the tree called Vakula
(*Mimusops Elengi, Linn*.) Thou art the sandal-wood tree (*Santalum
album, Linn*.). Thou art the tree called Chcchada (*Alstonia Scholaris*,
syn *Echitis*, *Scholaris, Roxb*.). Thou art he whose neck is very
strong. Thou art he whose shoulder joint is vast. Thou art not restless
(but endued with steadiness in all thy acts and in respect of all thy
faculties). Thou art the principal herbs and plants with their produce
(in the form of rice and wheat and the other varieties of grain). Thou
art he that grants success upon others in respect of the objects upon
which they bestow their heart. Thou art all the correct conclusions in
respect of both the Vedas and Grammar. <span
id="fr_157"></span>[4](#fn_157) Thou art he who utters leonine roars.
Thou art endued with leonine fangs. Thou ridest on the back of a lion
for performing thy journeys. Thou ownest

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

a car that is drawn by a lion. Thou art he called the truth of
truth. <span id="fr_158"></span>[1](#fn_158) Thou art he whose dish or
plate is constituted by the Destroyer of the universe. <span
id="fr_159"></span>[2](#fn_159) Thou art always engaged in seeking the
good of the worlds. Thou art he who rescues all creatures from distress
(and leads them to the felicity of Emancipation). Thou art the bird
called Saranga. Thou art a new (Young) swan. Thou art he who is
displayed in beauty in consequence of the crest thou bearest on thy head
(like the cock or the peacock). Thou art he who protects the place where
assemblies of the wise sit for dispensing justice. Thou art the abode of
all creatures. Thou art the cherisher of all creatures. Thou art Day and
Night (which are the constituent elements of Eternity). Thou art he that
is without fault and therefore, never censured. Thou art the upholder of
all creatures. Thou art the refuge of all creatures. Thou art without
birth. Thou art existent. Thou art ever fruitful. Thou art endued with
Dharana and Dhyana and Samadhi. Thou art the steed Uchchaisravas. Thou
art the giver of food. Thou art he who upholds the life-breaths of
living creatures. Thou art endued with patience. Thou art possessed of
intelligence. Thou art endued with exertion and cleverness. Thou art
honoured by all. Thou art the giver of the fruits of Righteousness and
sin. Thou art the cherisher of the senses (for the senses succeed in
performing their respective functions in consequence of thee that
presidest over them). Thou art the lord of all the luminaries. Thou art
all collections of objects. Thou art he whose vestments are made of
cowhides. Thou art he who dispels the grief of his devotees. Thou hast a
golden arm. Thou art he who protects the bodies of Yogins who seek to
enter their own selves. Thou art he who has reduced to nothingness all
his foes. <span id="fr_160"></span>[3](#fn_160) Thou art he the measure
of whose gladness is very great. Thou art he who achieved victory over
the deity of desire that is irresistible. Thou art he who has subjugated
his senses. Thou art the note called Gandhara in the musical octave.
Thou art he who has an excellent and beautiful home (in consequence of
its being placed upon the delightful mountains of Kailasa). Thou art he
who is ever attached to penances. Thou art of the form of cheerfulness
and contentment. Thou art he called vast or infinite. <span
id="fr_161"></span>[4](#fn_161) Thou art he in whose honour the foremost
of hymns has been composed. Thou art he whose dancing is characterised
by vast strides and large leaps. Thou art he who is adored with
reverence by the diverse tribes of Apsaras. Thou art he who owns a vast
standard (bearing the device of the bull). Thou art the mountains of
Meru. Thou art he who roves among all the summits

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

of that great mountain. Thou art so mobile that it is very difficult to
seize thee. Thou art capable of being explained by preceptors to
disciples, although thou art incapable of being described in words. Thou
art of the form of that instruction which preceptors impart to
disciples. Thou art he that can perceive all agreeable scents
simultaneously or at the same instant of time. Thou art of the form of
the porched gates of cities and palaces. Thou art of the form of the
moats and ditches that surround fortified towns and give the victory to
the besieged garrison. Thou art the Wind. Thou art of the form of
fortified cities and towns encompassed by walls and moats. Thou art the
prince of all winged creatures, (being, as thou art, of the form of
Garuda). Thou art he who multiplies the creation by union with the
opposite sexes. Thou art the first of all in respect of virtues and
knowledge. Thou art superior to even him who is the first of all in
virtues and knowledge. Thou transcendest all the virtue and knowledge.
Thou art eternal and immutable as also dependent on thyself. Thou art
the master and protector of the deities and Asuras. Thou art the master
and protector of all creatures. Thou art he who wears a coat of mail.
Thou art he whose arms are competent to grind all foes. Thou art an
object of adoration with even him who is called Suparvan in
heaven. <span id="fr_162"></span>[1](#fn_162) Thou art he who grants the
power of bearing or upholding all things. <span
id="fr_163"></span>[2](#fn_163) Thou art thyself capable of bearing all
things. Thou art fixed and steady (without being at all unstable). Thou
art white or pure (being, as thou art, without any stain or blot). Thou
bearest the trident that is competent to destroy (all things). <span
id="fr_164"></span>[3](#fn_164) Thou art the grantor of bodies or
physical forms unto those that constantly revolve in the universe of
birth and death. Thou art more valuable than wealth. Thou art the
conduct or way of the righteous (in the form of goodness and courtesy).
Thou art he who had torn the head of Brahma after due deliberation (and
not impelled by mere wrath). Thou art he who is marked with all those
auspicious marks that are spoken of in the sciences of palmistry and
phrenology and other branches of knowledge treating of the physical
frame as the indicator of mental peculiarities. Thou art that wooden bar
which is called the Aksha of a car and, therefore, art thou he who is
attached to the car represented by the body. Thou art attached to all
things (in consequence of thy pervading all things as their soul). Thou
art endued with very great might, being as thou art a hero of heroes.
Thou art the Veda. Thou art the Smritis, the Itihasas, the Puranas, and
other scriptures. Thou art the illustrious deity of every sacred shrine.
Thou art he who has the Earth for his car. Thou art the inert elements
that enter into

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

the composition of every creature. Thou art he who imparts life into
every combination of those inert element. Thou art the Pranava and other
sacred Mantras that instil life into dead matter. Thou art he that casts
tranquil glances. Thou art exceedingly harsh (in consequence of thy
being the destroyer of all things). Thou art he in whom are innumerable
precious attributes and possessions. Thou hast a body that is red. Thou
art he who has all the vast oceans as so many ponds filled for thy
drinking. <span id="fr_165"></span>[1](#fn_165) Thou art the root of the
tree of the world. Thou art exceedingly beautiful and shinest with
surpassing grandeur. Thou art of the form of ambrosia or nectar. Thou
art both cause and effect. Thou art an ocean of penances (being as thou
art a great Yogin). Thou art he that desirous of ascending to the
highest state of existence. Thou art he that has already attained to
that state. Thou art he who is distinguished for the purity of his
conduct and acts and observances. Thou art he who possessed of great
fame (in consequence of the Righteousness of his behaviour). Thou art
the ornament of armies (being as thou art of the form of prowess and
courage), Thou art he who is adorned with celestial ornaments. Thou art
Yoga. Thou art he from whom flow eternal time measured by Yugas and
Kalpas. Thou art he who conveys all creatures from place. <span
id="fr_166"></span>[2](#fn_166) Thou art of the form of Righteousness
and sin and their intermixture (such as are displayed in the successive
Yugas). Thou art great and formless. Thou art he who slew the mighty
Asura that had approached against the sacred city of Varanasi in the
form of an infuriate elephant of vast proportions. Thou art of the form
of death. Thou givest to all creatures such fruition of their wishes as
accords with their merits. Thou art approachable. Thou art conversant
with all things that are beyond the ken of the senses. Thou art
conversant with the Tattwas (and therefore, thoroughly fixed). Thou art
he who incessantly shines in beauty. Thou wearest garlands that stretch
down from thy neck to the feet. Thou art that Hara who has the Moon for
his beautiful eye. Thou art the salt ocean of vast expanse. Thou art the
first three Yugas (*viz*., Krita, Treta, and Dwapara). Thou art he whose
appearance is always fraught with advantage to others. Thou art he who
has three eyes (in the form of the scriptures, the preceptor, and
meditation). Thou art he whose forms are exceedingly subtile (being as
thou art the subtile forms of the primal elements). Thou art he whose
ears are bored for wearing jewelled Kundalas. Thou art the bearer of
matted locks. Thou art the point (in the alphabet) which indicates the
nasal sound. Thou art the two dots *i.e.*, Visarga (in the Sanskrit
alphabet which indicate the sound of the aspirated *H*). Thou art
possessed of an excellent face. Thou art the shaft that is shot by the
warrior for encompassing the destruction of his foe. Thou art all the
weapons that are used by warriors. Thou art endued with patience capable

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

of bearing all things. Thou art he whose knowledge has arisen from the
cessation of all physical and mental functions. <span
id="fr_167"></span>[1](#fn_167) Thou art he who has become displayed as
Truth in consequence of the cessation of all other faculties. Thou art
that note which, arising from the region called Gandhara, is exceedingly
sweet to the ear. Thou art he who is armed with the mighty bow (called
Pinaka). Thou art he who is the understanding and the desires that exist
in all creatures, besides being the supreme upholder of all beings. Thou
art he from whom all acts flow. Thou art that wind which rises at the
time of the universal dissolution and which is capable of churning the
entire universe even as the staff in the hands of the dairy-maid churns
the milk in the milkpot. Thou art he that is full. Thou art he that sees
all things. Thou art the sound that arises from slapping one palm
against another. Thou art he the palm of whose hand serves as the dish
or plate whence to take his food. Thou art he who is possessed of an
adamantine body. Thou art exceedingly great. Thou art of the form of an
umbrella. Thou art he who has an excellent umbrella. Thou art well-known
to be identical with all creatures. Thou art he who having put forth
three feet covered all the universe with two and wanted space for the
remaining one. Thou art he whose head is bald. Thou art he whose form is
exceedingly ugly and fierce. Thou art he who has undergone infinite
modifications and become all things in the universe. Thou art he who
bears the well-known badge of Sanyasa, *viz*., the stick. Thou art he
who has a Kunda. Thou art he who is incapable of being attained to by
means of acts. Thou art he who is identical with the green-eyed king of
beasts (*viz*., the lion). Thou art of the form of all the points of the
compass. Thou art he who is armed with the thunder. Thou art he who has
a hundred tongues. Thou art he who has a thousand feet and thousand
heads. <span id="fr_168"></span>[2](#fn_168) Thou art the lord and chief
of the celestials. Thou art he that is made up of all the gods. Thou art
the great Master or preceptor. Thou art he who has a thousand arms. Thou
art he who is competent to obtain the fruition of every wish. Thou art
he whose protection is sought by every one. Thou art he who is the
creator of all the worlds. Thou art he who is the great cleanser of all
from every kind of sin, in the form of shrines and sacred waters. Thou
art he who has three high Mantras. <span id="fr_169"></span>[3](#fn_169)
Thou art the youngest son of Aditi and Kasyapa, (being in the form of
the dwarf who is otherwise known by the name of Upendra and who beguiled
the Asura Vali of his lordship of the three worlds and restored it to
the chief of the celestials). Thou art both black and
[tawny](errata.htm#13) (being of the form which is known as Hari-Hara).
Thou art the maker of

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

the Brahmana's rod. <span id="fr_170"></span>[1](#fn_170) Thou art armed
with the hundred-killer, the noose, and the dart. Thou art he that took
his birth within the primeval lotus.

Thou art he who is endued with a vast womb. Thou art he who has the
Vedas in his womb. Thou art he who takes his rise from that infinite
waste of waters which succeeds the dissolution of the universe. Thou art
he who is endued with rays of effulgent light. Thou art the creator of
the Vedas. Thou art he who studies the Vedas. Thou art he who is
conversant with the meaning of the Vedas. Thou art devoted to Brahman.
Thou art the refuge of all persons devoted to Brahman. Thou art of
infinite forms. Thou art the bearer of innumerable bodies. Thou art
endued with irresistible prowess. <span id="fr_171"></span>[2](#fn_171)
Thou art the soul or nature that transcends the three universal
attributes (of Sattwa, Rajas, and Tamas). Thou art the lord of all
Jivas. Thou art endued with the speed of the wind. Thou art possessed of
the fleetness of the mind. Thou art always smeared with sandal-paste.
Thou art the end of the stalk of the primeval lotus. <span
id="fr_172"></span>[3](#fn_172) Thou art he who brought the celestial
cow Surabhi down from a superior station to an inferior one by
denouncing a curse upon her. <span id="fr_173"></span>[4](#fn_173) Thou
art that Brahma who was unable to see thy end. Thou art adorned with a
large wreath of Karnikara flowers. Thou art adorned with a diadem of
blue gems. Thou art the wielder of the bow called Pinaka. Thou art the
master of that knowledge which treats of Brahman. <span
id="fr_174"></span>[5](#fn_174) Thou art he who has subjugated his
senses by the aid of thy knowledge of Brahman. Thou art he who bearest
Ganga on thy head. <span id="fr_175"></span>[6](#fn_175) Thou art the
husband of Uma, the daughter of Himavat. Thou art mighty (in consequence
of thy having assumed the form of the vast Boar for raising the
submerged Earth). Thou art he who protects the universe by assuming
diverse incarnations. Thou art worthy of adoration. Thou art that
primeval Being with the equine head who recited the Vedas with a
thundering voice. Thou art he whose grace is very great. Thou art the

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

great subjugator. Thou art he who has slain all his foes (in the form of
passions). Thou art both white and tawny (being as thou art half male
and half female). <span id="fr_176"></span>[1](#fn_176) Thou art
possessed of a body whose complexion is like that of gold. <span
id="fr_177"></span>[2](#fn_177) Thou art he that is of the form of pure
joy, (being, as thou art, above the five sheathes which the Jiva
consists of, *viz*., the Anna-maya, the Prana-maya, the Mano-maya, the
Vijnana-maya, and the Ananda-maya ones). Thou art of a restrained soul.
Thou art the foundation upon which rests that Ignorance which is called
Pradhana and which, consisting of the three attributes of Sattwa, Rajas,
and Tamas is the cause whence the universe has sprung. Thou art he whose
faces are [turned](errata.htm#14) to every direction. <span
id="fr_178"></span>[3](#fn_178) Thou art he who has three eyes (in the
forms of the Sun, the Moon, and Fire). Thou art he who is superior to
all creatures (in consequence of thy righteousness whose measure is the
greatest). Thou art the soul of all mobile beings. Thou art of the form
of the subtile soul (which is incapable of being perceived). Thou art
the giver of immortality in the form of Emancipation as the fruit of all
acts of righteousness achieved by creatures without the desire of
fruits. <span id="fr_179"></span>[4](#fn_179) Thou art the preceptor of
even those that are the gods of the gods. Thou art Vasu, the son of
Aditi. Thou art he who is endued with innumerable rays of light, who
brings forth the universe, and who is of the form of that Soma which is
drunk in sacrifices. Thou art Vyasa, the author of the Puranas and other
sacred histories. Thou art the creations of Vyasa's brain (because of
thy being identical with the Puranas and other sacred histories) both
abridged and unabridged. Thou art the sum total of Jivas. Thou art the
Season. Thou art the Year. Thou art the Month. Thou art the Fortnight.
Thou art those sacred Days that end or conclude these periods. Thou art
the Kalas. Thou art the Kashthas. Thou art the Lavas. Thou art the
Matras. Thou art the Muhurtas and Days and Nights. Thou art the
Kshanas. <span id="fr_180"></span>[5](#fn_180) Thou art the soil upon
which the tree of the universe stands. Thou art the seed of all
creatures \[being of the form of that Unmanifest Chaitanya
(consciousness) endued with Maya or illusion whence all creatures
spring\]. Thou art Mahattatwa. Thou art the sprout of Jiva, (being of
the form of Consciousness which springs up after Mahattatwa). Thou art
Sat or Effect. Thou art Asat or Cause. Thou art Manifest (being seizable
by the senses). Thou art the Father. Thou art the Mother. Thou art the
Grandfather. Thou art the door to Heaven (because of thy identity with
Penances). Thou art the door of the generation of all creatures (because
of thy identity with desire). Thou art the door of

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Emancipation (because of thy identity with the
absence of Desire which alone can lead to the merging into Brahman).
Thou art those acts of righteousness which lead to the felicity of
heaven. Thou art Nirvana (or that cessation of individual or separate
existence which is Emancipation). Thou art the gladdener (who gives all
kinds of joy to every creature). Thou art that region of Truth (to which
they that are foremost in righteousness attain). Thou art superior to
even that region of Truth which is attainable by the righteous. Thou art
he who is the creator of both the deities and the Asuras. Thou art he
who is the refuge of both the deities and the Asuras. Thou art the
preceptor of both the deities and the Asuras (being as thou art of the
form of both Vrihaspati and Sukra). Thou art he who is ever victorious.
Thou art he who is ever worshipped by the deities and the Asuras. Thou
art he who guides the deities and the Asuras even as the Mahamatra
guides the elephant. Thou art the refuge of all the deities and the
Asuras. Thou art he who is the chief of both the deities and the Asuras
(being as thou art of the form of both India and Virochana). Thou art he
who is the leader in battle of both the deities and the Asuras (being as
thou art of the form of Karttikeya and Kesi, the leaders of the
celestial and the Daitya armies). Thou art he who transcends the senses
and shines by himself. Thou art of the form of the celestial Rishis like
Narada and others. Thou art the grantor of boons unto the deities and
Asuras (in the form of Brahman and Rudra). Thou art he who rules the
hearts of the deities and the Asuras. Thou art he into whom the universe
enters (when it is dissolved). Thus art the refuge of even him who is
the ruler of the hearts of both the deities and the Asuras. Thou art he
whose body is made up of all the deities. <span
id="fr_181"></span>[1](#fn_181) Thou art he who has no Being superior to
thee of whom to think. Thou art he who is the inner soul of the deities.
Thou art he who has sprung from his own self. Thou art of the form of
immobile things. Thou art he who covers the three worlds with three
steps of his. Thou art possessed of great learning. Thou art stainless.
Thou art he who is freed from the quality of Rajas. Thou art he who
transcends destruction. Thou art he in whose honour hymns should be
sung. Thou art the master of the irresistible elephant represented by
Time. Thou art of the form of that lord of Tigers who is worshipped in
the country of the Kalingas. <span id="fr_182"></span>[2](#fn_182) Thou
art he who is called the lion among the deities (in consequence of the
pre-eminence of thy prowess). Thou art he who is the foremost of men.
Thou art endued with great wisdom. Thou art he who first takes a share
of the offerings in sacrifice. Thou art imperceptible. Thou art the
sum-total of all the deities. Thou art he in whom penances predominate.
Thou art always in excellent Yoga. Thou art auspicious. Thou art armed
with the thunder-bolt. Thou art the source whence the weapons called
Prasas have taken their origin. Thou art he

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

whom thy devotees attain to in diverse ways. Thou art Guha (the
celestial generalissimo). Thou art the supreme limit of felicity. <span
id="fr_183"></span>[1](#fn_183) Thou art identical with thy creation.
Thou art he who rescues thy creatures from death (by granting them
Emancipation). Thou art the cleanser of all including Brahma himself.
Thou art of the form of bulls and other horned animals. Thou art he who
is fond of mountain summits. Thou art the planet Saturn. Thou art
Kuvera, the chief of the Yakshas. Thou art complete faultlessness. Thou
art he who inspires gladness. Thou art all the celestials united
together. Thou art the cessation of all things. Thou art all the duties
that appertain to all the modes of life. Thou art he who has an eye on
his forehead. Thou art he who sports with the universe as his marble
ball. Thou art of the form of deer. Thou art endued with the energy that
is of the form of knowledge and penance. Thou art the lord of all
immobile things (in the form of Himavat and Meru). Thou art he who has
subjugated his senses by various regulations and vows. Thou art he whose
objects have all been fulfilled. Thou art identical with Emancipation.
Thou art different from him whom we worship. Thou hast truth for thy
penances. Thou art of a pure heart. Thou art he who presides over all
vows and fasts (in consequence of thy being the giver of their fruits).
Thou art the highest (being of the form of Turiya). Thou art Brahman.
Thou art the highest refuge of the devotees. Thou art he who transcends
all bonds (being Emancipate). Thou art freed from the *linga* body. Thou
art endued with every kind of prosperity. Thou art he who enhances the
prosperity of thy devotees. Thou art that which is incessantly
undergoing changes.'

"I have thus, 'O Krishna, hymned the praises of the illustrious Deity by
reciting his names in the order of their importance. Who is there that
can hymn the praises of the lord of the universe, that great Lord of all
who deserves our adorations and worship and reverence, whom the very
gods with Brahma at their head are unable to praise and whom the Rishis
also fail to sing? Aided, however, by my devotion to him, and having
received his permission, I have praised that Lord of sacrifices, that
Deity of supreme puissance, that foremost of all creatures endued with
intelligence. By praising with these names that enhance one's
auspiciousness of the great lord of blessedness, a worshipper of devoted
soul and pure heart succeeds in attaining to his own self. These names
constitute a hymn that furnishes the best means of attaining to Brahman.
With the aid of this hymn one is sure to succeed in attaining to
Emancipation. Rishis and the deities all praise the highest deity by
uttering this hymn. Hymned by persons of restrained soul Mahadeva
becomes gratified with those that hymn his praises so. The illustrious
deity is always full of compassion towards his devotees. Endued with
omnipotence, he it is that gives Emancipation to those that worship him.
So also, they among men that are foremost, that are possessed of faith
and devotion hear and recite for others

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

and utter with reverence the praises of that highest and eternal Lord
*viz*. Isana, in all their successive lives and adore him in thought,
word, and deed, and adoring him thus at all times, *viz*. when they are
lying or seated or walking or awake or opening the eyelids or shutting
them, and thinking of him repeatedly, become objects of reverence with
all their fellowmen and derive great gratification and exceeding joy.
When a creature becomes cleansed of all his sins in course of millions
of births in diverse orders of being, it is then that devotion springs
up in his heart for Mahadeva. It is through good luck alone that
undivided devotion to Bhava who is the original cause (of the universe)
fully springs up in the heart of one that is conversant with every mode
of worshipping that great Deity. <span id="fr_184"></span>[1](#fn_184)
Such stainless and pure devotion to Rudra, that has singleness of
purpose and that is simply irresistible in its course, is seldom to be
found among even the deities, and never among men. It is through the
grace of Rudra that such devotion arises in the hearts of human beings.
In consequence of such devotion, men, identifying themselves wholly with
Mahadeva, succeed in attaining to the highest success. The illustrious
Deity who is always inclined to extend his grace towards them that seek
him with humility, and throw themselves with their whole soul upon him
rescues them from the world. Except the great Deity who frees creatures
from rebirth, all other gods constantly nullify the penances of men, for
men have no other source of puissance that is as great as these. <span
id="fr_185"></span>[2](#fn_185) It was even thus Tandi of tranquil soul,
resembling Indra himself in splendour, praised the illustrious Lord of
all existent and non-existent things,--that great Deity clad in animal
skins. Indeed, Brahma had sung this hymn in the presence of Sankara.
Thou art a Brahmana (being conversant with Brahman and devoted to those
that are conversant with Brahman). Thou shalt, therefore, comprehend it
well. This is cleansing, and washes away all sins. This confers Yoga and
Emancipation and heaven and contentment. He who recites this hymn with
undivided devotion to Sankara succeeds in attaining to that high end
which is theirs that are devoted to the doctrines of the Sankhya
philosophy. That worshipper who recites this hymn daily for one year
with singleness of devotion succeeds in obtaining the end that he
desires. This hymn is a great mystery. It formerly resided in the breast
of Brahma the Creator. Brahma imparted it unto Sakra. Sakra imparted
unto Mrityu. Mrityu imparted it unto the Rudras. From the Rudras Tandi
got it. Indeed Tandi acquired it in the region of Brahman as the reward
of his severe austerities. Tandi communicated it to Sukra, and Sukra of
Bhrigu's race communicated it

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

to Gautama. Gautama in his turn, O descendant of Madhu, communicated it
to Vaivaswata-Manu. Manu communicated it unto Narayana of great
intelligence, numbered among the Sadhyas and held exceedingly dear by
him. The illustrious Narayana, numbered among the Sadhyas and possessed
of glory that knows no diminution, communicated it to Yama. Vaivaswat
Yama communicated it to Nachiketa. Nachiketa, O thou of Vrishni's race,
communicated to Markandeya. From Markandeya, O Janarddana, I obtained it
as the reward of my vows and fasts. To thee, O slayer of foes, I
communicate that hymn unheard by others. This hymn leads to heaven. It
dispels disease and bestows long life. This is worthy of the highest
praise, and is consistent with the Vedas.'

"Krishna continued, 'That person, O Partha, who recites this hymn with a
pure heart observing the vow of Brahmacharyya, and with his senses under
control, regularly for one whole year, succeeds in obtaining the fruits
of a horse-sacrifice. Danavas and Yakshas and Rakshasas and Pisachas and
Yatudhanas and Guhyakas and snakes can do no injury to him.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_87"></span>[74:1](m13a017.htm#fr_87) *i.e.*, if recited, it
destroys all fear or Rakshasas, for these either fly away at its sound
or are even killed.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[74:2](m13a017.htm#fr_88) *i.e.*, it has the
merit that is attached to either Meditation or Yoga.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[75:1](m13a017.htm#fr_89) Both *Sthira* and
*Sthanu* imply immutability or freedom from change.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[75:2](m13a017.htm#fr_90) The commentator
explains that *Bhava* is here used in the sense of that from which all
things now and into which all things merge when the universal
dissolution comes. Or, it may imply, mere existence, without reference,
that is, to any attribute by which it is capable of being described or
comprehended.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[75:3](m13a017.htm#fr_91) *i.e.*, *Virat* or
vast or Infinite.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[75:4](m13a017.htm#fr_92) The task of rendering
these names is exceedingly difficult. In the original, many of these
names are such that they are capable of more than one interpretation.
The commentator often suggests more than one meaning. Each name would
require a separate note for explaining all its bearings. *Niyata* is
literally one who is observant of fasts and vows and who has restrained
his senses. Hence it means an ascetic. Mahadeva is an ascetic. *Smasanu*
is either a crematorium, the place where dead creatures lie down, or, it
may mean Varanasi, the sacred city of Siva, where creatures dying have
not to take rebirth. Siva is both a resident of crematoria and of
Varanasi.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[75:5](m13a017.htm#fr_93) Or, the universe is
displayed in thee.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[76:1](m13a017.htm#fr_94) Probably, what is said
here is that Mahadeva is the Pratyag Soul free from ignorance.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[76:2](m13a017.htm#fr_95) By *Niyama* is meant
purity both internal and external, contentedness, with whatever is got,
penances, Vedic studies, meditation on the Deity, etc.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[76:3](m13a017.htm#fr_96) *Nidhi* implies the
largest number that can be named in Arithmetical notation. Hence, it
implies, as the commentator correctly explains, the possessor of
inexhaustible felicity and gladness.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[76:4](m13a017.htm#fr_97) *Sahasraksha* is
either Indra or possessor of innumerable eyes in consequence of
Mahadeva's being identical with the universe. *Visalaksha* is one whose
eyes are of vast power, because the Past and the Future are seen by them
even as the Present. *Soma* implies either the Moon or the juice of the
Soma *i.e.* the libations poured in the sacrificial fire. All righteous
persons, again, become luminaries in the firmament. It is Mahadeva that
makes them so *i.e.*, he is the giver of glorious forms to those that
deserve them.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[76:5](m13a017.htm#fr_98) Many of these names
require comments to be intelligible. *Ketu* is no plant but Hindu
astronomers name the descending node of the Moon by that name. Hence
Rahu is the ascending node of the Moon. *Graha*, is that which seizes;
*Grahapati* is *Mangala*, so called for its malevolence, *Varah* is
*Vrihaspati* or Jupiter, who is the counterself of *Sukra* or Venus. In
Hindu mythology, *Sukra* is a male person, the preceptor of the Daityas
and Asuras. *Atri* is *Vudha* or Mercury, represented as the sons of
*Atri*. *Atryahnamaskarta* is *Durvasas* who was the son of Atri's wife,
got by the lady through a boon of Mahadeva. Daksha's Sacrifice sought to
fly away from Siva, but the latter pursued it and shot his arrow at it
for destroying it downright.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[77:1](m13a017.htm#fr_99) *Suvarna-retas* is
explained by the commentator as follows: At first he created water and
then cast his seed into it. That seed became a golden egg. It may also
mean that *Mahadeva* is *Agni* or the deity of fire, for gold represents
the seed of Agni.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[77:2](m13a017.htm#fr_100) The sense is this:
*Jiva* carries that seed of acts, *i.e.*, Ignorance and Desire, with
him. In consequence of this seed, *Jiva* travels from one world into
another ceaselessly. This seed, therefore, is the conveyance or the
means of locomotion of *Jiva*. Mahadeva is *Jiva*. The soul is called
the rider, and the body is the car that bears the Soul on it.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[77:3](m13a017.htm#fr_101) *Ganapati* is
*Ganesa*, the eldest son of *Mahadeva*. The Ganas are mighty beings that
wait upon Mahadeva. This make up the first hundred names. The
commentator takes *Avala* and *Gana* together.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[77:4](m13a017.htm#fr_102) *Digvasas* means
nude. The Puranas say that for stupefying the wives of certain ascetics,
Mahadeva became nude on one occasion. The real meaning, however, is that
he is capable of covering and does actually cover even infinite space.
In the sense of nude, the word means one that has empty space for his
cover or vestments.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[77:5](m13a017.htm#fr_103) The meaning is that
with thee Knowledge is penance instead of actual physical austerities
being so. This is only another way of saying that thou hast *Jnanamayam
Tapah*.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[78:1](m13a017.htm#fr_104) *Sataghni* a killer
of hundred; Wilson thinks it was a kind of rocket.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[78:2](m13a017.htm#fr_105) *Harikesa* means one
having the senses for one's rays, *i.e.*, one who displays all objects
before the soul through the doors of the senses. The meaning is that
Mahadeva is he through whose puissance the mind succeeds in acquiring
knowledge through the senses.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[78:3](m13a017.htm#fr_106) *Krishna* is
explained by the commentator thus. *Krish* is a word signifying *Bhu* or
Existence. The letter *n* (the palatal one) signifies *nivritti*. Hence
Krishna is *anandatanmatra*.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[78:4](m13a017.htm#fr_107) Kaparddin is thus
explained by the commentator *Kam Jalam pivati iti kapah*. So called
because of the incident noted in the text, for the matted locks of
Mahadeva had sucked up the river Ganga when it first fell from heaven.
Then *Rit* means sovereignty or lordship. *Riddah* is one that gives
sovereignty. Combining the two, the compound *Kaparddin* is formed.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[78:5](m13a017.htm#fr_108) *Nabhah* means space
which implies puissance. That *Nabhah* is the *sthala* or abode of
Mahadeva. The Bengal texts which read *Nabhastala* are vicious.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[78:6](m13a017.htm#fr_109) The deities are said
to move about during the day, while the Asuras and Rakshasas during the
night. What is said, therefore, here is that thou art the deities and
thou art their foes of the Daityas and others.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[79:1](m13a017.htm#fr_110) Sound, only when
manifested, becomes perceptible. When unmanifest and lying in the womb
of eternal space, it is believed to have an existence. Unmanifest
Brahman is frequently represented as *anahatah savdah* or unstruck
sound.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[79:2](m13a017.htm#fr_111) These four ways are
as enumerated by commentator, *Visva*, *Taijasa*, *Prajna*,
*Sivadhyana*.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[79:3](m13a017.htm#fr_112) It may also mean
that thou art he called Buddha who preached against all sacrifices.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[79:4](m13a017.htm#fr_113) The commentator
explains that Mahadeva's defeat at the hands of Krishna in the city of
Vana was due to Mahadeva's kindness for Krishna, even as Krishna broke
his own vow of never taking up arms in the battle of Kurukshetra, for
honouring his worshipper Bhishma who had vowed that he would compel
Krishna to take up arms.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[80:1](m13a017.htm#fr_114) The sense is this:
when the universal destruction cones and all becomes a mighty expanse of
water, there appears a banian tree under whose shade the immortal *Rishi
Markandeya* sees a boy who is *Mahavishnu*.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[80:2](m13a017.htm#fr_115) It may also mean
that thou art he at whose approach all the *Daitya* troops fled in all
directions.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[80:3](m13a017.htm#fr_116) *i.e.*, thou art
Time itself. This is the implication.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[80:4](m13a017.htm#fr_117) By these three names
what is indicated is that Mahadeva is a householder, it Sanyasin and a
forest-recluse. House-holders bear a tuft of hair on their heads,
Sanyasins have bald heads, while forest recluses or Vanaprasthis have
matted locks.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[81:1](m13a017.htm#fr_118) The sense is that
Brahman is felt by every one in the firmament of his own heart.
Mahadeva, as identical with Brahman is displayed in the heart that is
within the physical case. Hence, he may be said to take birth or appear
in his effulgence within every one's body.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[81:2](m13a017.htm#fr_119) *Kalakatankatah* is
explained by the commentator as follows:--*Kala* is *Yama*. He is
covered over with the illusion of the Supreme Deity. This all covering
illusion, again, has the Supreme Deity for its cover. Thou art that
Supreme Deity.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[81:3](m13a017.htm#fr_120) *Vibhaga* and
*Sarvaga*, the commentator explains, are used for indicating that thou
art the universe as *Vyashti* and *Samashti*.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[81:4](m13a017.htm#fr_121) Some editions read
*susaranab*, meaning thou art he who well protects the universe.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[81:5](m13a017.htm#fr_122) The golden mail
being the illusion of the Supreme Deity in consequence of which the
universe has become displayed.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[81:6](m13a017.htm#fr_123) Thou art *Pasupati*;
*atodyah pratodanarhah pasavah yasya iti*.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[81:7](m13a017.htm#fr_124) The commentator
explains that *Tarangavit*, which is literally conversant with waves
means one that is acquainted with the joys or pleasures that arise from
the possession or enjoyment of worldly things, for such joys may truly
be likened to waves which appear and disappear on the bosom of the sea
or ocean of Eternity.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[82:1](m13a017.htm#fr_125) The commentator
explains that the binder of Asura chiefs refers to the Supreme Deity's
form of Vishnu in which he had bound Vali, the chief of the Asuras. The
plural form has reference to successive Kalpas.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[82:2](m13a017.htm#fr_126) The sense is that
thou art he that is well conversant with the ritual of sacrifices.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[82:3](m13a017.htm#fr_127) Or, it may mean that
thou art he that has no vestments, for no vestments can cover thy vast
limbs.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[82:4](m13a017.htm#fr_128) Those that uphold
others are, for example, the elephants that stand at the different
points of the compass, the snake Sesha, etc. What is said here is that
thou art the best of all these or all such beings.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[82:5](m13a017.htm#fr_129) The sense is that
thou art Vishnu who is the foremost of the celestials and thou art Agni
who is the lowest of the celestials; *i.e.*, thou art all the
celestials.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[83:1](m13a017.htm#fr_130) The body is as it
were a pit into which the soul falls, determined by Desire and
Ignorance.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[83:2](m13a017.htm#fr_131) *Vasu*, the
commentator explains, indicates the Wind, for it means that which
establishes all things into itself.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[83:3](m13a017.htm#fr_132) *Nisachara* is one
acting through *nisa*, or *Avidya*, *i.e.*, one who enjoys all objects,
implying *Jiva* invested with Ignorance.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[83:4](m13a017.htm#fr_133) The Soul can view
the Soul or itself, if it can transcend the body with the aid of Yoga.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[83:5](m13a017.htm#fr_134) The commentator
explains that the first word means that thou art *Hansa* and that the
second word means thou art *Paramahansa*.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[84:1](m13a017.htm#fr_135) *Varhaspatya* is a
word that is applied to a priest. The deities first got their priest for
assisting them at their sacrifices. Human beings then got theirs. Those
born after Vrihaspati are Vrihaspatyas.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[84:2](m13a017.htm#fr_136) This word
*Nandivardhanah* may also mean he that withdraws or takes away the joys
previously conferred.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[85:1](m13a017.htm#fr_137) The language of the
*Veda* is divine. That of the scriptures is human.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[86:1](m13a017.htm#fr_138) Literally, crown of
the head.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[86:2](m13a017.htm#fr_139) *i.e.*, that
succeeds in effecting his Emancipation.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[86:3](m13a017.htm#fr_140) *Mahanakha* refers
to the incarnation of *Narasingha* or the Man-lion assumed for slaying
the *Daitya Hiranyakasipu*, the father of Prahlada. *Maharoman* has
reference to the form of the mighty or vast Boar that the Supreme Deity
assumed for raising the submerged Earth on his tusks.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[86:4](m13a017.htm#fr_141) *Mahamuni* may mean
either one that is very *mananasilah* or one that is exceedingly
taciturn.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[86:5](m13a017.htm#fr_142) How the world has
been likened to a tree has been explained in the Moksha sections of the
Santi Parvan.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[86:6](m13a017.htm#fr_143) This is explained in
the sense of no one being able to enquire after Brahman unless he has a
body, however subtile, with the necessary senses and understanding. It
may also mean that the tree of the world furnishes evidence of the
existence of the Supreme Deity.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[87:1](m13a017.htm#fr_144) Both the vernacular
translators have rendered many of these names most carelessly. The
Burdwan translator takes *Yaju* as one name and *Padabhuja* as another.
This is very absurd.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[87:2](m13a017.htm#fr_145) These are the ten
previously enumerated, beginning with residence in the mother's womb and
ending with death as the tenth, with heaven the eleventh and
Emancipation the twelfth.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[87:3](m13a017.htm#fr_146) It should be
remembered that Kali which is either the age of sinfulness or the
presiding deity of that age and, therefore, a malevolent one, is highly
propitious to Emancipation. The world being generally sinful, those who
succeed in living righteously in this age or under the sway of this
malevolent deity, very quickly attain to heaven if heaven be their
object, or Emancipation if they strive for Emancipation.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[87:4](m13a017.htm#fr_147) Implying that thou
assumest the form of the constellation called the Great Bear, and moving
onward in space causest the lapse of Time. This constellation, in Hindu
astronomy, is known by the name of *Sisumara* because of its resemblance
with the form of a tortoise.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[88:1](m13a017.htm#fr_148) The word *bhashma*,
meaning ashes, literally signifies anything that dispels, tears off all
bonds, and cures every disease. Ashes are used by Sanyasins for rubbing
their bodies as a mark of their having consumed every sin and cut off
every bond and freed themselves from all diseases.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[88:2](m13a017.htm#fr_149) Mahadeva gave a
quantity of ashes to his devotees for protecting them from sin.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[88:3](m13a017.htm#fr_150) Vide the story of
Mankanaka. The *Rishi* of that name, beholding vegetable juice issuing
from his body, began to dance in joy. The whole universe, overpowered by
a sympathetic influence, began to dance with him. At this, for
protecting the universe, Mahadeva showed himself to Mankanaka and,
pressing his fingers, brought out a quantity of ashes, thus showing that
his body was made of ashes.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[88:4](m13a017.htm#fr_151) *Anukari* literally
means an accessory. In the form of Vishnu or Krishna, the Supreme Deity
addrest himself to aid Arjuna in slaying Bhishma.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[88:5](m13a017.htm#fr_152) As Krishna the
friend of Arjuna.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[89:1](m13a017.htm#fr_153) In the Pauranik
myth, the Earth is described as being supported in empty space by a
mighty snake called Sesha. Mahadeva is that Sesha, otherwise called
*Ananta*.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[90:1](m13a017.htm#fr_154) *i.e.*, Mahavishnu,
from whose navel arose the primeval lotus within which was born Brahma.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[90:2](m13a017.htm#fr_155) The Bombay text has
a misprint. It reads *Punya-chanchu* for *Punya-chunchu*. In printing
the commentary also, the well-known grammatical *Sutra vrittanschanchu*
etc. The Burdwan translator repeats the misprint in his rendering. K. P.
Singha avoids it.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[90:3](m13a017.htm#fr_156) The word
*Kurukshetra* or its abbreviation *Kuru* means the field or department
of action. It means also the actual field, so called, on which king
*Kuru* performed his penances, and which is so sacred that its very dust
cleanses a person of all sins.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[90:4](m13a017.htm#fr_157) The commentator
explains that *Siddharthah* means *Siddhantah*, and that the following
compound is its adjective.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[91:1](m13a017.htm#fr_158) Literally, the Soul
of real existence.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[91:2](m13a017.htm#fr_159) People eat off
plates of silver or gold or of other metals. Mahadeva has for his plate
*Kala* or destroyer of the universe. Both the vernacular translators
have erred in rendering this word. K. P. Singha takes the compound as
really consisting of two names, etc.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[91:3](m13a017.htm#fr_160) The sense is that
Mahadeva is the foremost of *Sadhakas* or worshippers engaged in
acquiring a particular object, for he has emaciated or reduced to
nothingness all his foes in the form of all passions good and evil.
*Prakarshena tanukritah arayah kamadayo yena sah*.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[91:4](m13a017.htm#fr_161) *Narah* is thus
explained by the commentator.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[92:1](m13a017.htm#fr_162) The commentator
explains that he who is called *Suparvan* in heaven is otherwise called
*Mahan*.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[92:2](m13a017.htm#fr_163)
*Sarva-sahana-samarthya pradah* as the commentator explains. Hence, it
means that Mahadeva is he who makes creatures competent to bear all
things, *i.e.* all griefs and all joys, as also the influence all
physical objects that is quietly borne without life being destroyed.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[92:3](m13a017.htm#fr_164) The etymology of
*Hara* is thus explained by the commentator; *Hanti iti ha sulah*; *tam
rati* or *adatte*. This is very fanciful.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[93:1](m13a017.htm#fr_165) The sense is this: a
*nipana* is a shallow pond or ditch where cattle drink. The very oceans
are the *nipanas* or *Mahadeva*.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[93:2](m13a017.htm#fr_166) The commentator
thinks that this has reference to the incarnation of *Trivikrama*
*i.e.*, the dwarf suddenly expanding his form till with two steps he
covered Heaven and Earth and demanded space for his third step.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[94:1](m13a017.htm#fr_167) *i.e.*, thou art
possessed of Yoga knowledge.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[94:2](m13a017.htm#fr_168) The two together
form one name.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[94:3](m13a017.htm#fr_169) These are *Vija*,
*Sakti*, and *Kilakani*. A *kakud* is a hump or elevated place in the
body.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[95:1](m13a017.htm#fr_170) The thin bamboo rod
in the hand of the Brahmana is mightier than the thunderbolt of Indra.
The thunder scorches all existing objects upon which it falls. The
Brahmana's rod (which symbolizes the Brahmana's might in the form of his
curse) blasts even unborn generations. The might of the rod is derived
from Mahadeva.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[95:2](m13a017.htm#fr_171) *Sayambhuvah
Tigmatejah* is one name. The commentator explains that Brahman could not
look at Mahadeva; hence this reference to his prowess.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[95:3](m13a017.htm#fr_172) Brahma, after his
birth within the primeval lotus, became desirous of seeing the end of
the stalk of that lotus. He went on and on, without succeeding to find
what he sought. The meaning of the word, therefore, by implication is
that Mahadeva is infinite.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[95:4](m13a017.htm#fr_173) Once Brahma asked
Surabhi to bear evidence before Vishnu to the statement that Brahma has
seen the foremost part of Siva. Surabhi having given false evidence out
of fear for Brahma was cursed by Siva that her offspring will eat unholy
substances.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[95:5](m13a017.htm#fr_174) *Uma* is another
name for *Brahmavidya*.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[95:6](m13a017.htm#fr_175) Falling from the
celestial regions, the river Ganga was held by Mahadeva on his head,
among his matted locks. At the earnest solicitations of King Bhagiratha
he gave her out so that flowing along the surface of the Earth she met
the ocean, first passing over the spot where the ashes of Bhagiratha's
ancestors, the sixty thousand sons of king Sagara of the solar race,
lay.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[96:1](m13a017.htm#fr_176) This form is called
*Hara-Gauri*, as explained before.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[96:2](m13a017.htm#fr_177) Some texts read
*Pritatma*, implying one of contented soul. The reading noticed by the
commentator is *Pitatma*, meaning gold-complexioned. The Burdwan
translator takes *Pritatma* as one name. This is not correct.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[96:3](m13a017.htm#fr_178) Mahadeva is
represented as possessed of five heads, four on four sides and one
above.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[96:4](m13a017.htm#fr_179)
*Amritogovrisherwarah* is one name.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[96:5](m13a017.htm#fr_180) These are names for
different portions of time.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[97:1](m13a017.htm#fr_181) The Srutis declare
that Fire is his head, the Sun and the Moon are his eyes, etc.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[97:2](m13a017.htm#fr_182) Mahadeva has an
image in the country of the Kalingas that is called *Vyaghreswara*.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[98:1](m13a017.htm#fr_183) *Kantah* is thus
explained. *Kasya Sukhasya antah sima*.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[99:1](m13a017.htm#fr_184) Undivided, *i.e.*,
having nothing else for its object, *Sarva-bhavatah* is *bhagvat*. The
sense is that unless one becomes conversant with all the modes of
worshipping Bhava, *i.e.*, in thought, word and deed, and unless one has
special good luck, one cannot have such devotion to Bhava.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[99:2](m13a017.htm#fr_185) There are numerous
instances of the gods having become alarmed at the penances of men and
done their best to nullify those penances by despatching celestial
nymphs for attracting them of carnal pleasures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XVIII](m13a018)
