[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m13a002) 
[Next](m13a004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION III

"Yudhishthira said, 'If, O prince, Brahmanahood be so difficult of
attainment by the three classes (Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras), how
then did the high souled Viswamitra, O king, though a Kshatriya (by
birth), attain to the status of a Brahmana? I desire to know this, O
sire. Therefore, do thou truly relate this matter to me. That powerful
man, O sire, by virtue of his austerities, destroyed in a moment the
hundred sons of the high-souled Vasishtha. While under the influence of
anger, he created numerous evil spirits and Rakshasas of mighty vigour
and resembling the great destroyer Kala himself. The great and learned
race of Kusika, numbering hundreds of regenerate sages and belauded by
the Brahmanas, was founded in this world of men by him. Sunasepha of
austere penances, the son of Richika, having been sought to be slain as
an animal in the great sacrifice of Amvarisha, obtained his deliverance
through Viswamitra. Harishchandra, having pleased the gods at a
sacrifice, became a son of the wise Viswamitra. For not having honoured
their eldest brother Devarat, whom Viswamitra got as a son from the
gods, the other fifty brothers of his were cursed, and all of them
became Chandalas. Trisanku, the son of Ikshwaku, through the curse of
Vasistha became a Chandala, and when abandoned by

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

his friends, and remaining suspended with his head downwards in the
lower regions, was translated to heaven at the pleasure of Viswamitra.
Viswamitra had a large river, by name Kausika, that was frequented by
celestial Rishis. This sacred and auspicious stream was frequented by
the gods and regenerate Rishis. For disturbing his devotions, the famous
celestial nymph Rambha of fine bracelets, was cursed and metamorphosed
into a rock. Through fear of Viswamitra the glorious Vasishtha, in olden
times, binding himself with creepers, threw himself down into a river
and again rose released from his bonds. In consequence of this, that
large and sacred river become thenceforth celebrated by the name of
Vipasa. <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) He prayed to the glorious and
puissant Indra who was pleased with him and absolved him from a
curse. <span id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3) Remaining on the northern side
of the firmament, he sheds his lustre from a position in the midst of
the seven regenerate *Rishis*, <span id="fr_4"></span>[3](#fn_4) and
Dhruva the son of Uttanpada <span id="fr_5"></span>[4](#fn_5). These are
his achievements as well as many others. O descendant of Kuru, as they
were performed by a Kshatriya, my curiosity has been roused in this
matter. Therefore, O foremost one of Bharata's race, do thou relate this
matter to me truly. How without casting off his corporeal frame and
taking another tenement of flesh could he become a Brahmana? Do thou, O
sire, truly relate this matter to me as thou hast related to me the
story of Matanga. Matanga was born as a Chandala, <span
id="fr_6"></span>[5](#fn_6) and could not attain to Brahmanahood,(with
all his austerities) but how could this man attain to the status of a
Brahmana?"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[11:1](m13a003.htm#fr_2) Literally, the releaser
from bonds.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[11:2](m13a003.htm#fr_3) Refers to the curse
pronounced on Viswamitra by the son of Vasishtha, when the former acted
as the priest of Trisanku. The curse was that Viswamitra would partake
of canine flesh by officiating as the priest of one who himself was the
partaker of such flesh. It is said that at a time of great scarcity,
Viswamitra was obliged to resort to dog's flesh for food, and that as he
was about to cook it, Indra pounced upon it and took it away.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[11:3](m13a003.htm#fr_4) The constellation of the
Great Bear.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[11:4](m13a003.htm#fr_5) The Pole Star.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[11:5](m13a003.htm#fr_6) Matanga was begotten
upon a Brahmana woman by a Sudra father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section IV](m13a004)
