[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m13a034.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XXXV

"Bhishma said, 'O blessed king, Brahmana, by birth alone, becomes an
object of adoration with all creatures and are entitled, as guests, to
eat the first portion of all cooked food. <span
id="fr_260"></span>[2](#fn_260.md) From them flow all the great objects of
life (*viz*., Righteousness and Wealth and Pleasure and Emancipation).
They are the friends of all creatures in the universe. They are again
the mouths of the deities (for food poured into their mouths is eaten by
the deities). Worshipped with reverence, they wish us prosperity by
uttering words fraught with auspiciousness. Disregarded by our foes, let
them be enraged with these, and let them wish evil unto those detractors
of theirs, uttering words fraught with severe curses. In this
connection, persons conversant with ancient history repeat the following
verses sung of old respecting how in ancient times the Creator, after
having created the Brahmanas, ordained their duties.--A Brahmana should
never do anything else than what has been ordained for him. Protected,
they should protect others. By conducting themselves in this way, they
are sure to attain to what is mightily advantageous for them. By doing
those acts that are ordained for them, they are sure to obtain
Brahma-prosperity. Ye shall become the exemplars of all creatures, and
reins for restraining them. A Brahmana possessed of learning should
never do that which is laid down

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

for the Sudras. By doing such acts, a Brahmana loses merit <span
id="fr_261"></span>[1](#fn_261.md). By Vedic study he is sure to obtain
prosperity and intelligence and energy and puissance competent to scorch
all things, as also glory of the most exalted kind. By offering
oblations of clarified butter unto the deities, the Brahmanas attain to
high blessedness and become worthy of taking the precedence of even
children in the matter of all kinds of cooked food, and endued with
Brahma-prosperity. <span id="fr_262"></span>[2](#fn_262.md) Endued with
faith that is fraught with compassion towards all creatures, and devoted
to self-restraint and the study of the Vedas, ye shall attain to the
fruition of all your wishes. Whatever things exist in the world of men,
whatever things occur in the region of the deities, can all be achieved
acquired with the aid of penances and knowledge and the observance of
vows and restraints. I have thus recited to thee, O sinless one, the
verses that were sung by Brahma himself. Endued with supreme
intelligence and wisdom, the Creator himself ordained this, through
compassion for the Brahmanas. The puissance of those among them that are
devoted to penances is equal to the might of kings. They are verily
irresistible, fierce, possessed of the speed of lightning, and
exceedingly quick in what they do. There are amongst them those that are
possessed of the might of lions and those that are possessed of the
might of tigers. Some of them are endued with the might of boars, some
with that of the deer, and some with that of crocodiles. Some there are
amongst them whose touch resembles that of snakes of virulent poison,
and some whose bite resembles that of sharks. Some amongst them are
capable of compassing by speech alone the destruction of those that are
opposed to them; and some are competent to destroy by a glance only of
their eyes. Some, amongst them, as already said, are like snakes of
virulent poison, and some of them are possessed of very mild
dispositions. The dispositions, O Yudhisthira, of the Brahmanas, are of
diverse kinds. The Mekalas, the Dravidas, the Lathas, the Paundras, the
Konwasiras, the Saundikas, the Daradas, the Darvas, the Chauras, the
Savaras, the Varvaras, the Kiratas, the Yavanas, and numerous other
tribes of Kshatriyas, have become degraded into the status of Sudras
through the wrath of Brahmanas. In consequence of having disregarded the
Brahmanas, the Asuras have been obliged to take refuge in the depths of
the ocean. Through the grace of the Brahmanas, the deities have become
denizens of the happy regions of Heaven. The element of space or ether
is incapable of being touched. The Himavat mountains are incapable of
being moved from their site. The current of Ganga is incapable of being
resisted by a dam. The Brahmanas are incapable of being subjugated.
Kshatriyas are incapable

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

of ruling the Earth without cultivating the good will of the Brahmanas.
The Brahmanas are high-souled beings. They are the deities of the very
deities. Do thou always worship them with gifts and obedient services:
if, indeed, thou wishest to enjoy the sovereignty of the whole Earth
with her belt of seas. The energy and might of Brahmanas, O sinless one,
become abated in consequence of the acceptance of gift. Thou shouldst
protect thy race. O king, from those Brahmanas that do not desire to
accept gifts!'" <span id="fr_263"></span>[1](#fn_263.md)

 

(*Anusasana Parva Continued in Volume XI*)

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_260"></span>[160:2](m13a035.htm#fr_260.md) The sense is that
one becomes a Brahmana by birth alone, without the aid of those
purificatory rites that have been laid down in the scriptures. When food
is cooked, none else than a Brahmana is entitled in the first portion
thereof.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[161:1](m13a035.htm#fr_261.md) The commentator
thinks that *saudram karma* has especial reference to the service of
others. Hence what is interdicted for the Brahmanas is the service of
others.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[161:2](m13a035.htm#fr_262.md) In this country to
this day, when food is prepared in view of guests invited to a house, no
portion of such food can be offered to any one before it is dedicated to
the deities and placed before those for whom it is intended. An
exception, however, is made for children. What is stated here is that a
good Brahmana can take the precedence of even children in the matter of
such food.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[162:1](m13a035.htm#fr_263.md) What is stated here
is that those Brahmanas that do not accept gifts are very superior.
Their energy and might are great. Bhishma directs Yudhishthira to be
always careful of how he would treat such superior Brahmanas. After
*rakshyam*, the words *swakulam* are understood. The Burdwan translator
misunderstands the second line of the verse.
