[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m13a022) 
[Next](m13a024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XXIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'I desire thee, O grandsire, to tell me what the
ordinances are that have been laid down by the acts touching the deities
and the (deceased) ancestors on occasions of Sraddhas.'

"Bhishma said, 'Having purified oneself (by baths and other purificatory
acts) and then going through the well-known auspicious rites, one should
carefully do all act relating to the deities in the forenoon, and all
acts relating to the *Pitris* in the afternoon. What is given to men
should be given in the midday with affection and regard. That gift which
is made

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

untimely is appropriated by Rakshasas. <span
id="fr_210"></span>[1](#fn_210) Gifts of articles that have been leapt
over by any one, o been licked or sucked, that are not given peacefully,
that have been seen by women that are impure in consequence of their
season having come, do not produce any merit. Such gifts are regarded as
the portion belonging to the Rakshasas. Gifts of articles that have been
proclaimed before many people or from which a portion has been eaten by
a Sudra, or that have been seen or licked by a dog, form portions of
Rakshasas. Food which is mixed with hair or in which there are worms, or
which has been stained with spittle or saliva or which has been gazed at
by a dog or into which tear-drops have fallen or which has been trodden
upon should be known as forming the portion of Rakshasa. Food that has
been eaten by a person incompetent to utter the syllable Om, or that has
been eaten by a person bearing arms, O Bharata, or that has been eaten
by a wicked person should be known to form the portion of
Rakshasas. <span id="fr_211"></span>[2](#fn_211) The food that is eaten
by a person from which a portion has already been eaten by another, or
which is eaten without a part thereof having been offered to deities and
guests and children, is appropriated by Rakshasas. Such stained food, if
offered to the deities and *Pitris* is never accepted by them but is
appropriated by Rakshasas. The food offered by the three regenerate
classes in Sraddhas, in which Mantras are either not uttered or uttered
incorrectly and in which the ordinances laid down in the scriptures are
not complied with, if distributed to guests and other people, is
appropriated by Rakshasas. The food that is distributed to guests
without having been previously dedicated to the deities or the Pitris
with the aid of libation on the sacred fire, which has been stained in
consequence of a portion thereof having been eaten by a person that is
wicked or of irreligious behaviour, should be known to form the portion
of Rakshasas.'

"'I have told thee what the portions are of the Rakshasas. Listen now to
me as I lay down the rules for ascertaining who the Brahmana is that is
deserving of gift. <span id="fr_212"></span>[3](#fn_212) All Brahmanas
that have been outcasted (on account of the commission of heinous sins),
as also Brahmanas that are idiots and out of mind, do not deserve to be
invited to Sraddhas in which offerings are made to either the deities or
the *Pitris*. That Brahmana who is afflicted with leucoderma, or he that
is destitute of virility, or he that has got leprosy, or he that has got
phthisis or he that is labouring under epilepsy (with delusions of the
sensorium),

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

or he that is blind, should not, O king, be invited. <span
id="fr_213"></span>[1](#fn_213) Those Brahmanas that practise the
calling of physicians, those that receive regular pay for worshipping
the images of deities established by the rich, or live upon the service
of the deities, those that are observant of vows from pride or other
false motives, and those that sell Soma, do not deserve to be invited.
Those Brahmanas that are, by profession, vocalists, or dancers or
players or instrumental musicians, or reciters of sacred books, or
warriors and athletes, do not, O king, deserve to be invited. Those
Brahmanas who pour libations on the sacred fire for Sudras, or who are
preceptors of Sudras, or who as servants of Sudra masters, do not
deserve to be invited. That Brahmana who is paid for his services as
preceptor, or who attends as pupil upon the lectures of some preceptor
because of some allowance that is granted to him, does not deserve to be
invited, for both of them are regarded as sellers of Vedic lore. That
Brahmana who has been once induced to accept the gift of food in a
Sraddha at the very outset, as also he who has married a Sudra wife,
even if possessed of every kind of knowledge do not deserve to be
invited. <span id="fr_214"></span>[2](#fn_214) Those Brahmanas that are
destitute of their domestic fire, and they that attend upon corpses,
they that are thieves, and they that have otherwise fallen away do not,
O king, deserve to be invited. <span id="fr_215"></span>[3](#fn_215)
Those Brahmanas whose antecedents are not known or are vile, and they
that are Putrika-putras, do not, O king, deserve to be invited on
occasions of Sraddhas. <span id="fr_216"></span>[4](#fn_216) That
Brahmana who gives loans of money, or he who subsists upon the interest
of the loans given by him, or he who lives by sale of living creatures,
does not deserve, O king, to be invited. Persons who have been
subjugated by their wives, or they who live by becoming the paramours of
unchaste women, or they who abstain from their morning and evening
prayers do not deserve, O king, to be invited to Sraddhas.'

"'Listen now to me as I mention who the Brahmana is that has been
ordained for acts done in honour of the deities and the Pitris. Indeed,
I shall tell thee what those merits, are in consequence of which one may
become a giver or a recipient of gifts in Sraddhas (notwithstanding the
faults mentioned above). <span id="fr_217"></span>[5](#fn_217) Those
Brahmanas that are observant of the

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

rites and ceremonies laid down in the scriptures, or they that are
possessed of merit, or they that are conversant with the Gayatri, or
they that are observant of the ordinary duties of Brahmanas, even if
they happen to betake themselves to agriculture for a living, are
capable, O king, of being invited to Sraddhas. If a Brahmana happens to
be wellborn, he deserves to be invited to Sraddhas notwithstanding his
profession of arms for fighting the battle of others. <span
id="fr_218"></span>[1](#fn_218) That Brahmana, however, O son, who
happens to betake himself to trade for a living should be discarded
(even if possessed of merit). The Brahmana who pours libations every day
on the sacred fire, or who resides in a fixed habitation, who is not a
thief and who does the duties of hospitality to guests arrived at his
house, deserves, O king, to be invited to Sraddhas. The Brahmana, O
chief of Bharata's race, who recites the Savitri morning, noon, and
night, or who subsists upon eleemosynary charity, who is observant of
the rites and ceremonies laid down in the scriptures for persons of his
order, deserves, O king, to be invited to Sraddhas. <span
id="fr_219"></span>[2](#fn_219) That Brahmana who having earned wealth
in the morning becomes poor in the afternoon, or who poor in the morning
becomes wealthy in the evening or who is destitute of malice, or is
stained by a minor fault, deserves, O king, to be invited to Sraddhas.
That Brahmana who is destitute of pride or sin, who is not given to dry
disputation, or who subsists upon alms obtained in his rounds of
mendicancy from house to house deserves, O king, to be invited to
sacrifices. One who is not observant of vows, or who is addicted to
falsehood (in both speech and conduct), who is a thief, or who subsists
by the sale of living creatures or by trade in general, becomes worthy
of invitation to Sraddhas, O king, if he happens to offer all to the
deities first and subsequently drink Soma. That man who having acquired
wealth by foul or cruel means subsequently spends it in adoring the
deities and discharging the duties of hospitality, becomes worthy, O
king, of being invited to Sraddhas. The wealth that one has acquired by
the sale of Vedic lore, or which has been earned by a women, or which
has been gained by meanness (such as giving false evidence in a court of
law), should never be given to Brahmanas or spent in making offerings to
the Pitris. That Brahmana, O chief of Bharata's race, who upon the
completion of a Sraddha that is performed with his aid, refuses to utter
the words '*astu swadha*,' incurs the sin of swearing falsely in a suit
for land. <span id="fr_220"></span>[3](#fn_220) The time for performing
Sraddha, O Yudhishthira, is that

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

when one obtains a good Brahmana and curds and ghee and the sacred day
of the new moon, and the meat of wild animals such as deer and
others. <span id="fr_221"></span>[1](#fn_221) Upon the completion of a
Sraddha performed by a Brahmana the word Swadha should be uttered. If
performed by a Kshatriya the words that should be uttered are--*Let thy
Pitris be gratified*.--Upon the completion of a Sraddha performed by a
Vaisya, O Bharata, the words that should be uttered are--Let everything
become inexhaustible.--Similarly, upon the conclusion of a Sraddha
performed by a Sudra, the word that should be uttered is *Swasti*,--In
respect of a Brahmana, the declaration regarding *Punyaham* should be
accompanied with the utterance of the syllable Om. In the case of a
Kshatriya, such declaration should be without the utterance of syllable
Om. In the rites performed by a Vaisya, the words that should be
uttered, instead of beings the syllable Om, are,--Let the deities be
gratified. <span id="fr_222"></span>[2](#fn_222)--Listen now to me as I
tell thee the rites that should be performed, one after another,
conformably to the ordinances, (in respect of all the orders). All the
rites that go by the name of *Jatakarma*, O Bharata, are indispensable
in the case of all the three orders (that are regenerate). All these
rites, O Yudhishthira, in the case of both Brahmanas and Kshatriyas as
also in that of Vaisyas are to be performed with the aid of mantras. The
girdle of a Brahmana should be made of Munja grass. That for one
belonging to the royal order should be a bowstring. The Vaisya's girdle
should be made of the Valwaji grass. Even this is what has been laid
down in the scriptures. Listen now to me as I expound to thee what
constitutes the merits and faults of both givers and recipients of
gifts. A Brahmana becomes guilty of a dereliction of duty by uttering a
falsehood. Such an act on his part is sinful. A Kshatriya incurs four
times and a Vaisya eight times the sin that a Brahmana incurs by
uttering a falsehood. A Brahmana should not eat elsewhere, having been
previously invited by a Brahmana. By eating at the house of the person
whose invitation has been posterior in point of time, he becomes
inferior and even incurs the sin that attaches to the slaughter of an
animal on occasions other than those of sacrifices. <span
id="fr_223"></span>[3](#fn_223) So also, if he eats elsewhere after
having been invited by a person of the royal order or a Vaisya, he falls
away from his position and incurs half the sin that attaches to the
slaughter of an animal on occasions other than those of sacrifices. That
Brahmana, O king, who eats on occasions of such rites as are performed
in honour of the deities or the Pitris by Brahmanas and Kshatriyas and
Vaisyas, without having performed his ablutions, incurs the sin of
uttering an untruth for a cow. That Brahmana,

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

\[paragraph continues\] O king, who eats on occasions of similar rites
performed by persons belonging to the three higher orders, at a time
when he is impure in consequence either of a birth or a death among his
cognates, through temptation, knowing well that he is impure incurs the
same sin. <span id="fr_224"></span>[1](#fn_224) He who lives upon wealth
obtained under false pretences like that of sojourns to sacred places or
who solicits the giver for wealth pretending that he would spend it in
religious acts, incurs, O monarch, the sin of uttering a
falsehood. <span id="fr_225"></span>[2](#fn_225) That person, belonging
to any of the three higher orders, O Yudhishthira, who at Sraddhas and
on other occasions distributes food with the aid of Mantras, unto such
Brahmanas as do not study the Vedas and as are not observant of vows, or
as have not purified their conduct, certainly incurs sin.'

"Yudhishthira said,--'I desire, O grandsire, to know by giving unto whom
the things dedicated to the deities and the Pitris, one may earn the
amplest rewards.'

"[Bhishma](errata.htm#20) said,--'Do thou, Yudhishthira, feed those
Brahmanas whose spouses reverently wait for the remnants of the dishes
of their husbands like tillers of the soil waiting in reverence for
timely showers of rain. One earn great merit by making gifts unto those
Brahmanas that are always observant of pure conduct, O king, that are
emaciated through abstention from all luxuries and even full meals, that
are devoted to the observances of such vows as lead to the emaciation of
the body, and that approach givers with the desire of obtaining gifts.
By making gifts unto such Brahmanas as regard conduct in this light of
food, as regard conduct in the light of spouses and children, as regard
conduct in the light of strength, as regard conduct in the light of
their refuge for crossing this world and attaining to felicity in the
next, and as solicit wealth only when wealth is absolutely needed, one
earns great merit. By making gifts unto those persons, O Yudhishthira,
that having lost everything through thieves or oppressors, approach the
giver, one acquires great merit. <span id="fr_226"></span>[3](#fn_226)
By making gifts unto such Brahmanas as solicit food from the hands of
even a poor person of their order who has just got something from
others, one earns great merit. By making gifts unto such Brahmanas as
have lost their all in times of universal distress and as have been
deprived of their spouses on such occasions, and as come to givers with
solicitations for alms, one acquires great merit. By making gifts unto
such Brahmanas as are observant of vows, and as place themselves

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

voluntarily under painful rules and regulations, as are respectful in
their conduct to the declaration laid down in the Vedas, and as come to
solicit wealth for spending it upon the rites necessary to complete
their vows and other observances, one earns great merit. By making gifts
unto such Brahmanas as live at a great distance from the practices that
are observed by the sinful and the wicked, as are destitute of strength
for want of adequate support, and as are very poor in earthly
possessions, one earns great merit. By making gifts unto such Brahmanas
as have been robbed of all their possessions by powerful men but as are
perfectly innocent, and as desire to fill their stomachs any how
without, that is, any scruples respecting the quality of the food they
take, one earns great merit. By making gifts unto such Brahmanas as beg
on behalf of others that are observant of penances and devoted to them
and as are satisfied with even small gifts, one earns great merit. Thou
hast now, O bull of Bharata's race, heard what the declarations are of
the scriptures in respect of the acquisition of great merit by the
making of gifts. Listen now to me as I expound what those acts are that
lead to hell or heaven. They, O Yudhishthira, that speak an untruth on
occasions other than those when such untruth is needed for serving the
purpose of the preceptor or for giving the assurance of safety to a
person in fear of his life, sink into hell <span
id="fr_227"></span>[1](#fn_227). They who ravish other people's spouses,
or have sexual congress with them, or assist at such acts of
delinquency, sink in hell. They who rob others of their wealth or
destroy the wealth and possessions of other people, or proclaim the
faults of other people, sink in hell. They who destroy the containers of
such pieces of water as are used by cattle for quenching thirst, as
injure such buildings as are used for purposes of public meetings, as
break down bridges and causeways, and as pull down houses used for
purposes of habitation, have to sink to hell. They who beguile and cheat
helpless women, or girls, or aged dames, or such women as have been
frightened, have to sink to hell. They who destroy the means of other
people's living, they who exterminate the habitations of other people,
they who rob others of their spouses, they who sow dissensions among
friends, and they who destroy the hopes of other people, sink into hell.
They who proclaim the faults of others, they who break down bridges or
causeways, they who live by following vocations laid down for other
people, and they who are ungrateful to friends for services received,
have to sink in hell. They who have no faith in the Vedas and show no
reverence for them, they who break the

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

vows made by themselves or oblige others to break them, and they who
fall away from their status through sin, sink in hell. They who betake
themselves to improper conduct, they who take
[exorbitant](errata.htm#22) rates of interest, and they who make unduly
large profits on sales, have to sink in hell. They who are given to
gambling, they who indulge in wicked acts without any scruple, and they
who are given to slaughter of living creatures, have to sink in hell.
They who cause the dismissal by masters of servants that are hoping for
rewards or are expectant of definite need or are in the enjoyment of
wages or salaries or are waiting for returns in respect of valuable
services already rendered, have to sink in hell. They who themselves eat
without offering portions thereof unto their spouse or their sacred
fires or their servants or their guests, and they who abstain from
performing the rites laid down in the scriptures for honouring the
Pitris and deities, have to sink in hell. They who sell the Vedas, they
who find fault with the Vedas, and they who reduce the Vedas into
writing, have all to sink in hell. <span id="fr_228"></span>[1](#fn_228)
They who are out of the pale of the four well-known modes of life, they
who betake themselves to practices interdicted by the Srutis and the
scriptures, and they who live by betaking themselves to acts that are
wicked or sinful or that do not belong to their order of birth, have to
sink in hell. They who live by selling hair, they who subsist by selling
poisons, and they who live by selling milk, have to sink in hell. They
who put obstacles in the path of Brahmanas and kine and maidens, O
Yudhishthira, have to sink in hell. They who sell weapons, they who
forge weapons, they who make shafts, and they who make bows, have to
sink in hell. 'I hey who obstruct paths and roads with stones and thorns
and holes have to sink in hell. They who abandon and cast off preceptors
and servants and loyal followers without any offence, O chief of
Bharata's race, have to sink in hell. They who set bullocks to work
before the animals attain to sufficient age, they who bore the noses of
bullocks and other animals for controlling them the better while
employed in work, and they who keep animals always tethered, have to
sink in hell. Those kings that do not protect their subjects while
forcibly taking from them a sixth share of the produce of their fields,
and they who, though able and possessed of resources, abstain from
making gifts, have to sink in hell. They who abandon and cast off
persons that are endued with forgiveness and self-restraint and wisdom,
or those with whom they have associated for many years, when these are
no longer of services to them, have to sink in hell. Those men who
themselves eat without giving portions of the food to children and aged
men and servants, have to sink in hell.'

"'All these men enumerated above have to go to hell. Listen now to me, O
bull of Bharata's race, as I tell thee who those men are that

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

ascend to heaven. The man who transgresses against a Brahmana by
impeding the performances of all such acts in which the deities are
adored, becomes afflicted with the loss of all his children and animals.
(They who do not transgress against Brahmanas by obstructing their
religious acts ascend to heaven). Those men, O Yudhishthira, who follow
the duties as laid down in the scriptures for them and practise the
virtues of charity and self-restraint and truthfulness, ascend to
heaven. Those men who having acquired knowledge by rendering obedient
services to their preceptors and observing austere penances, become
reluctant to accept gifts, succeed in ascending to heaven. Those men
through whom other people are relieved and rescued from fear and sin and
the impediments that lie in the way of what they wish to accomplish and
poverty and the afflictions of disease, succeed in ascending to heaven.
Those men who are endued with a forgiving disposition, who are possessed
of patience, who are prompt in performing all righteous acts, and who
are of auspicious conduct, succeed in ascending to heaven. Those men who
abstain from honey and meat, who abstain from sexual congress with the
spouses of other people, and who abstain from wines and spirituous
liquors, succeed in ascending to heaven. Those men that help in the
establishment of retreats for ascetics, who become founders of families,
O Bharata, who open up new countries for purposes of habitation, and lay
out towns and cities succeed in ascending to heaven. Those men who give
away cloths and ornaments, as also food and drink, and who help in
marrying others, succeed in ascending to heaven. <span
id="fr_229"></span>[1](#fn_229) Those men that have abstained from all
kinds of injury or harm to all creatures, who are capable of enduring
everything, and who have made themselves the refuge of all creatures,
succeed in ascending to heaven. Those men who wait with humility upon
their fathers and mothers, who have subjugated their senses, and who are
affectionate towards their brothers, succeed in ascending to heaven.
Those men that subjugate their senses notwithstanding the fact of their
being rich in worldly goods and strong in might and in the enjoyment of
youth, succeed in ascending to heaven. Those men that are kind towards
even those that offend against them, that are mild of disposition, that
have an affection for all who are of mild behaviour, and that contribute
to the happiness of others by rendering them every kind of service in
humility, succeed in ascending to heaven. Those men that protect
thousands of people, that make gifts unto thousands of people, and that
rescue thousands of people from distress, succeed in ascending to
heaven. Those men who make gifts of gold and of kine, O chief of
Bharata's race, as also those of conveyances and animals, succeed in
ascending to heaven. Those men who make gifts of such articles as are
needed in marriages, as also those of serving men and

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

maids, and cloths and robes, succeed in ascending to heaven <span
id="fr_230"></span>[1](#fn_230). Those men who make public
pleasure-houses and gardens and wells, resting houses and buildings for
public meetings and tanks for enabling cattle and men to quench their
thirst, and fields for cultivation, O Bharata, succeed in ascending to
heaven. <span id="fr_231"></span>[2](#fn_231) Those men who make gifts
of houses and fields and populated villages unto persons that solicit
them, succeed in ascending to heaven. Those men who having themselves
manufactured juicy drinks of sweet taste and seeds and paddy or rice,
make gifts of them unto others succeed in ascending to heaven. Those men
who being born in families high or low beget hundreds of children and
live long lives practising compassion and keeping wrath under complete
subjection, succeed in ascending to heaven. I have thus expounded to
thee, O Bharata, what the rites are in honour of the deities and the
Pitris which are performed by people for the sake of the other world,
what the ordinances are in respect of making gifts, and what the views
are of the Rishis of former times in respect of both the articles of
gift and the manner of giving them.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_210"></span>[120:1](m13a023.htm#fr_210) One makes gifts
unto the deities, the *Pitris*, and unto human beings. There is a time
for each kind of gift. If made untimely, the gift, instead of producing
any merit, becomes entirely futile, if not sinful. Untimely gifts are
appropriated by Rakshasas. Even food that is taken untimely, does not
strengthen the body but goes to nourish the Rakshasas and other evil
beings.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[120:2](m13a023.htm#fr_211) *i.e.*, any food, a
portion of which has been eaten by any of these persons, is unworthy of
being given away. If given, it is appropriated by Rakshasas. One
incompetent to utter Om is, of course, a Sudra.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[120:3](m13a023.htm#fr_212) The speaker, by
first mentioning who are unworthy, means to point out those that are
worthy.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[121:1](m13a023.htm#fr_213) *Apasmara* is a
peculiar kind of epilepsy in which the victim always thinks that he is
pursued by some monster who is before his eyes. When epilepsy is
accompanied by some delusion of the sensorium, it comes to be called by
Hindu physicians as *Apasmara*.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[121:2](m13a023.htm#fr_214) An *Agrani* or
*Agradani* is that Brahmana unto whom the food and other offerings to
the *Preta* in the first Sraddha are given away. Such a person is
regarded as fallen.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[121:3](m13a023.htm#fr_215) When corpses are
taken to crematoria, certain rites have to be performed upon them before
they can be consumed. Those Brahmanas that assist at the performance of
those rites are regarded as fallen.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[121:4](m13a023.htm#fr_216) Sometimes the
father of a daughter bestows her upon a bridegroom under the contract
that the son born of that daughter by her husband should be the son of
the daughter's father. Such a son, who is dissociated from the race of
his own father, is called a *Putrika-putra*.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[121:5](m13a023.htm#fr_217) *Anugraham* is that
merit in consequence of which faults become neutralised and the stained
person may come to be regarded as deserving.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[122:1](m13a023.htm#fr_218) As Drona,
Aswatthaman, Kripa, Rama and others.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[122:2](m13a023.htm#fr_219) *Uditastamita*
means one who having earned wealth spends it all in gifts.
*Astamitodita* is one who though poor at first succeed in earning wealth
afterwards; *i.e.*, one who having become rich, keeps that wealth for
spending it on good purposes.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[122:3](m13a023.htm#fr_220) Upon the completion
of a Sraddha, the Brahmana who is officiating at it should utter the
words *yukta* which means well-applied. Certain other words such as
*Swadha*, etc., have to be uttered. The meaning is that the Brahmana who
assists the performer of the Sraddha by reciting the Mantras should,
upon completion, say unto the performer that the Sraddha is
well-performed. As the custom is, these words are still uttered by every
Brahmana officiating at Sraddhas.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[123:1](m13a023.htm#fr_221) K. P. Singha
wrongly renders the word *somakshayah* as equivalent to *somarasah*.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[123:2](m13a023.htm#fr_222) Upon the conclusion
of a Sraddha or other rites, the Brahmana who officiates at it,
addresses certain other Brahmanas that are invited on the occasion and
says,--Do you say *Punyaham*--The Brahmana addressed say,--Om, let it be
*Punyaham*!--By *Punyaham* is meant sacred day.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[123:3](m13a023.htm#fr_223) The fact is, the
slaughter of animals in a sacrifice leads to no sin but if slaughtered
for nothing (*i.e.*, for purposes of food only), such slaughter leads to
sin.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[124:1](m13a023.htm#fr_224) One is said to
become impure when a birth or a death occurs among one's cognates of
near degree. The period of impurity varies from one day to ten days in
case of Brahmanas. Other periods have been prescribed for the other
orders. During the period of impurity one cannot perform one's daily
acts of worship, etc.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[124:2](m13a023.htm#fr_225) In this country, to
this day, there are many persons that go about begging, stating that
they desire to go to Banaras or other places of the kind. Sometimes alms
are sought on the ground of enabling the seeker to invest his son with
the sacred thread or perform his father's *Sraddha*, etc. The Rishi
declares such practices to be sinful.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[124:3](m13a023.htm#fr_226) Literally that are
afraid of thieves and others. The sense, of course, is that have
suffered at the hands of thieves and others and are still trembling with
fear.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[125:1](m13a023.htm#fr_227) The two exceptions
have been much animadverted upon by unthinking persons. I have shown
that according to the code of morality, that is in vogue among people
whose [Christianity](errata.htm#21) and civilisation are unquestionable,
a lie may sometimes be honourable. However casuists may argue, the world
is agreed that a lie for saving life and even property under certain
circumstances, and for screening the honour of a confiding woman, is not
inexcusable. The goldsmith's son who died with a lie on his lips for
saving the Prince Chevalier did a meritorious act. The owner also who
hides his property from robbers, cannot be regarded as acting
dishonourably.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[126:1](m13a023.htm#fr_228) By selling the
Vedas is meant the charging of fees for teaching them. As regards the
Vedas, the injunction in the scriptures is to commit them to memory and
impart them from mouth to mouth. Hence to reduce them into writing was
regarded as a transgression.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[127:1](m13a023.htm#fr_229) In this country to
this day, the act of marrying a helpless person with a good girl by
paying all the expenses of the marriage, is regarded as an act of
righteousness. Of course, the man that is so married is also given
sufficient property for enabling him to maintain himself and his wife.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[128:1](m13a023.htm#fr_230) Articles needed in
marriages are, of course, girls and ornaments.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[128:2](m13a023.htm#fr_231) *Vapra* has various
meanings. I think, it means here a field. Large waste lands often
require to be enclosed with ditches and causeways. Unless so reclaimed,
they cannot be fit for cultivation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XXIV](m13a024)
