[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m13a012.md) 
[Next](m13a014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

### SECTION XIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'What should a man do in order to pass pleasantly
through this and the other world. How, indeed, should one conduct
oneself? What practices should one adopt with this end in view?'

"Bhishma said, 'One should avoid the three acts that are done with the
body, the four that are done with speech, the three that are done with
the mind, and the ten paths of action. The three acts that are done with
the body and should be wholly avoided are the destruction of the lives
of other creatures, theft or appropriation of what belongs to other
persons, and the enjoyment of other people's wives. The four acts that
are done with speech, O king, and that should never be indulged in or
even thought of, are evil conversation, harsh words, publishing other
people's faults, and falsehood. Coveting the possessions of others,
doing injury to others, and disbelief in the ordinances of the Vedas,
are the three acts done with the mind which should always be
avoided. <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30.md) Hence, one should never do
any evil act in word, body, or mind. By doing good and evil acts, one is
sure to enjoy or endure the just consequences thereof. Nothing can be
more certain than this.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[36:1](m13a013.htm#fr_30.md) I give, in the
affirmative form of speech, the three mental acts that are directed to
be avoided. In the original, these are given in the negative form.
Absence of coveting the possessions of others is the act that is
directed to be followed. So compassion for all creatures is prescribed;
and, lastly, the belief is directed to be entertained that acts have
fruits, for the Vedas declare as such. He that does not believe that
acts have fruits disbelieve the very Vedas which of course, is a sinful
act.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XIV](m13a014.md)
