[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m13b053) 
[Next](m13b055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION LXXXIX

"Bhishma continued, 'Listen to me, O Yudhishthira, as I tell thee what
those optional Sraddhas are that should be performed under the different
constellations and that were first spoken of by Yama unto king
Sasavindu. <span id="fr_137"></span>[4](#fn_137) That man who always
performs the Sraddha under the constellation Krittika is regarded as
performing a sacrifice after establishing the

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

sacred fire. Such a person, freed from fear, ascends to heaven with his
children. He that is desirous of children should perform the Sraddha
under the constellation Rohini, while he that is desirous of energy
should do it under the constellation Mrigasiras. By performing the
Sraddha under the constellation Ardra, a man becomes the doer of fierce
deeds. A mortal, by performing the Sraddha under Punarvasu, makes such
again by agriculture. The man that is desirous of growth and advancement
should perform the Sraddha under Pushya. By doing it under the
constellation Aslesha one begets heroic children. By doing it under the
Maghas one attains to pre-eminence among kinsmen. By doing it under the
prior Phalgunis, the doer of it becomes endued with good fortune. By
doing the Sraddha under the later Phalgunis one attains to many
children; while by performing it under Hasta, one attains to the
fruition of one's wishes. By performing it under the constellation
Chitra one obtains children endued with great beauty. By doing it under
the constellation Swati, one makes much profit by trade. The man that
desires children acquires the fruition of his wish by performing the
Sraddha under the constellation Visakha. By doing it under Anuradha one
becomes a king of kings. <span id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_138) By making
offerings in honour of the Pitris under the constellation Jyeshtha with
devotion and humility, one attains to sovereignty, O foremost one of
Kuru's race. By doing the Sraddha under Mula one attains to health, and
by doing it under the prior Ashadha, one acquires excellent fame. By
performing it under the later Ashadha one succeeds in roving over the
whole world, freed from every sorrow. By doing it under the
constellation Abhijit one attains to high knowledge. By doing it under
Sravana one, departing from this world, attains to a very high end. The
man that performs the Sraddha under the constellation Dhanishtha becomes
the ruler of a kingdom. By doing it under the constellation presided
over by Varuna (*viz*., Satabhisha), one attains to success as a
physician. By performing the Sraddha under the constellation of the
prior Bhadrapada one acquires large property in goats and sheep; while
by doing it under the later Bhadrapada one acquires thousands of kine.
By performing the Sraddha under the constellation Revati one acquires
much wealth in utensils of white brass and copper. By doing it under
Aswini one acquires many steeds, while under Bharani one attains to
longevity. Listening to these ordinances about the Sraddha, king
Sasavindu acted accordingly, and succeeded in easily subjugating and
ruling the whole earth.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_137"></span>[145:4](m13b054.htm#fr_137) All religious acts
are either *nitya* or *kamya*. The former imply acts that are obligatory
and by doing which no particular merit is acquired but by not doing
which sin is incurred. The latter imply those optional acts which, if
done, produce merit but which, if omitted, leads to no sin.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[146:1](m13b054.htm#fr_138) Literally, 'set in
motion a body of kings,' *i.e.*, become an Overlord."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XC](m13b055)
