[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m13b128) 
[Next](m13b130) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CLXIV

"Bhishma said, 'If one does acts oneself that are good or causes others
to accomplish them, one should then expect to attain to the merits of
righteousness. Similarly, if one does acts oneself that are evil, and
causes others to accomplish them, one should never expect to attain to
the merits of righteousness. <span id="fr_364"></span>[2](#fn_363) At
all times, it is Time that, entering the understandings of all
creatures, sets them to acts of righteousness or unrighteousness, and
then confer felicity or misery upon them. When a person, beholding the
fruits of Righteousness, understands Righteousness to be superior, it is
then that he inclines towards Righteousness and puts faith in it. One,
however, whose understanding is not firm, fails to put faith in it, As
regards faith in Righteousness, it is this (and nothing else). To put
faith in Righteousness is the indication of the wisdom of all persons.
One that is acquainted with both (*i.e.*, what should be done and what
should not be done), with a view to opportuneness, should, with care and
devotion, achieve what is right. Those Righteous men who have in this
life been blessed with affluence, acting of their own motion, take
particular care of their souls so that they may not, in their next
lives, have to take birth as persons with the attribute of Passion
predominating in them. Time (which is the supreme disposer of all
things) can never make Righteousness the cause of misery. One should,
therefore, know that the soul which is righteous is certainly pure
(*i.e.*, freed from the element of evil and misery). As regards
Unrighteousness, it may be said that, even when of large proportions, it
is incapable of

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

even touching Righteousness which is always protected by Time and which
shines like a blazing fire. These are the two results achieved by
Righteousness, *viz*., the stainlessness of the soul and
unsusceptibility of being touched by Unrighteousness. Verily,
Righteousness is fraught with victory. Its effulgence is so great that
it illumines the three worlds. A man of wisdom cannot catch hold of a
sinful person and forcibly cause him to become righteous. When seriously
urged to act righteously, the sinful only act with hypocrisy, impelled
by fear. They that are righteous among the Sudras never betake
themselves to such hypocrisy under the plea that persons of the Sudra
order are not permitted to live according to any of the four prescribed
modes. I shall tell thee particularly what the duties truly are of the
four orders. So far as their bodies are concerned, the individuals
belonging to all the four orders have the five primal elements for the
constituent ingredients. Indeed, in this respect, they are all of the
same substance. For all that, distinctions exist between them in respect
of both practices relating to life or the world and the duties of
righteousness. Notwithstanding these distinctions, sufficient liberty of
action is left to them in consequence of which all individuals may
attain to an equality of condition. The regions of felicity which
represent the consequences or rewards of Righteousness are not eternal,
for they are destined to come to an end. Righteousness, however, is
eternal. When the cause is eternal, why is the effect not so? <span
id="fr_365"></span>[1](#fn_364) The answer to this is as follows. Only
that Righteousness is eternal which is not promoted by the desire of
fruit or reward. (That Righteous, however, which is prompted by the
desire of reward, not eternal. Hence, the reward though undesired that
attaches to the first kind of Righteousness, *viz*., attainment of
identity with Brahman, is eternal. The reward, however, that attaches to
that Righteousness prompted by desire of fruit. Heaven is not
eternal). <span id="fr_366"></span>[2](#fn_365) All men are equal in
respect of their physical organism. All of them, again, are possessed of
souls that are equal in respect of their nature. When dissolution comes,
all else dissolve away. What remains is the inceptive will to achieve
Righteousness. That, indeed, reappears (in next life) of itself. <span
id="fr_367"></span>[3](#fn_366) When such is the result (that is, when
the enjoyments and endurance of this life are due to the acts of a past
life), the inequality of lot discernible among human beings cannot be
regarded in any way anomalous. So also, it is seen that those creatures

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

that belong to the intermediate orders of existence are equally subject,
in the matter of their acts, to the influence of example.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_362"></span>[387:1](m13b128.htm#fr_363) What is stated here
is this; the condition of all living creatures is determined by their
acts of this and past lives.. Nature, again, is the cause of acts. What
of felicity and misery, therefore, one sees in this world, must be
ascribed to these two causes. As regards the self also, O Yudhishthira,
thou art not freed from that universal law. Do thou, therefore, cease to
cherish doubts of any kind. If thou seest a learned man that is poor, or
an ignorant man that is wealthy, if thou seest exertion failing and the
absence of exertion leading to success. thou must always ascribe the
result to acts and Nature.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[387:2](m13b129.htm#fr_364) What is stated here
is this; one may become righteous by accomplishing oneself righteous
deeds or inducing or helping others to do them. Similarly, one becomes
unrighteous by doing oneself acts that are evil or by inducing or
helping others to do them.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[388:1](m13b129.htm#fr_365) Righteousness leads
to regions of felicity. The former is said to be eternal. While the
latter are not so. The question asked (or doubt raised) is why is the
effect not eternal when the cause is eternal? It is explained below.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[388:2](m13b129.htm#fr_366) There are two kinds
of Righteousness, *viz*., *nishkama* and *sakama*. The former leads to
attainment of Brahma, the latter to heaven and felicity. Brahma is
eternal; the latter not so. *Nishkama* Righteousness being eternal,
leads to an eternal reward. Sakama Righteousness not being so, does not
lead to an eternal reward. The word *Kala* here means *Sankalpa*, hence
*Dhruvahkalah* means nishkama Dharma.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[388:3](m13b129.htm#fr_367) Here, *Calah* means
'*Sankalpa*'.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CLXV](m13b130)
