[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m13b069) 
[Next](m13b071) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CV

"Yudhishthira said, 'Tell me, O chief of Bharata's race, how the eldest
brother should behave towards his younger brothers and how the younger
brothers should behave towards their eldest brother.'

"Bhishma said, 'Do thou, O son, always behave towards thy younger
brothers as their eldest brother should. Thou art always the eldest of
all these thy brothers. That high conduct which the preceptor should
always adopt towards his disciples should be adopted by thee towards thy
younger brothers. If the preceptor happens to be unendued with wisdom,
the disciple cannot possibly behave towards him in a respectful or
proper way. If the preceptor happens to be possessed of purity and
highness of conduct, the disciple also succeeds in attaining to conduct
of the same kind, O Bharata. The eldest brother should at times be blind
to the acts of his younger brothers, and though possessed of wisdom
should at times act as if he does not understand their acts. If the
younger brothers be guilty of any transgression, the eldest brother
should correct them by indirect ways and means. If there be good
understanding among brothers and if the eldest brother seek to correct
his younger brothers by direct or ostensible means, persons that are
enemies, O son of Kunti, that are afflicted with sorrow at the sight of
such good understanding and who, therefore, always seek to bring about a
disunion, set themselves to disunite the brothers and cause dissension
among them. It is the eldest brother that enhances the prosperity of the
family or destroys it entirely. If the eldest brother happens to be
unendued with sense and wicked in behaviour, he brings about the
destruction of the whole family. The eldest brother who injures his
younger brothers ceases to be regarded as the eldest and forfeits his
share in the family property and deserves to be checked by the king.
That man who acts deceitfully, has, without doubt, to go to regions of
grief and every kind of evil. The birth of such a person serves no
useful purpose even as the flowers of the cane. <span
id="fr_222"></span>[2](#fn_221) That family in which a sinful person

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

takes birth becomes subject to every evil. Such a person brings about
infamy, and all the good acts of the family disappear. Such among the
brothers as are wedded to evil acts forfeit their shares of the family
property. In such a case; the eldest brother may appropriate the whole
Yautuka property without giving any portion thereof to his younger
brothers. If the eldest brother makes any acquisition, without using the
paternal property and by going to a distant place he may appropriate for
his own use, such acquisitions, without giving any share thereof to his
younger brothers. If unseparated brothers desire (during the lifetime of
their father) to portion the family property, the father should give
equal shares unto all his sons. If the eldest brother happens to be of
sinful acts and undistinguished by accomplishments of any kind he may be
disregarded by his younger brothers. If the wife or the younger brother
happens to be sinful, her or his good must still be looked after.
Persons conversant with the efficacy of righteousness say that
righteousness is the highest good. The Upadhyaya is superior to even ten
Acharyas. The sire is equal to ten Upadhyayas. The mother is equal to
ten sires or even the whole earth. There is no senior equal to the
mother Verily, she transcends all in respect of the reverence due to
her. <span id="fr_223"></span>[1](#fn_222) It is for this reason that
people regard the mother to deserve so much reverence. After the father
has ceased to breathe, O Bharata, the eldest brother should be regarded
as the father. It is the eldest brother who should assign unto them
their means of support and protect and cherish them. All the younger
brothers should bow to him and obey his authority. Indeed, they should
live in dependence upon him even as they did upon their father while he
was alive. So far as the body is concerned, O Bharata, it is the father
and the mother that create it. That birth, however, which the Acharya
ordains, is regarded as the true birth, that is, besides, really
unfading and immortal. The eldest sister, O chief of Bharata's race, is
like unto the mother The wife of the eldest brother also is like unto
the mother, for the younger brother, in infancy, receives, suck from
her.'" <span id="fr_224"></span>[2](#fn_223)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_221"></span>[207:2](m13b070.htm#fr_222) The flower of the
cane cannot be plucked for being offered to the deities.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[208:1](m13b070.htm#fr_223) An *Acharya* is an
ordinary instructor. He is called an *Upadhyaya* who teaches the Vedas.
The Upadhyaya is greater than even ten *Acharyas* or ordinary teachers.
The father, again, deserves ten times as much respect as is paid to the
Upadhyaya. As regards the mother, again, the reverence due to her is
greater than what is due to the father. The mother is equal to the whole
earth.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[208:2](m13b070.htm#fr_224) Many of the verses
of this Lesson are from Manu. The relative positions of the Acharya, the
Upadhyaya, the father, and the mother, as given in verse 15, is not
consistent with Manu. verse 15 would show that the *Upadhyaya* was
regarded as very much superior of the *Acharya*. In Manu, II--140-41, he
is called an *Acharya* who taught all the Vedas, without any
remuneration. He, on the other hand, who taught a particular Veda for a
living, was called an *Upadhyaya*. The first line of verse 19
corresponds with Manu, II--148. The sense is that that birth which one
derives from one's parents is subject to death; while the birth derived
from the preceptor is true regeneration, unfading and immortal. It is a
question whether any other nation paid such respect to persons employed
in teaching.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CVI](m13b071)
