[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m13b077) 
[Next](m13b079) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

### SECTION CXIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Abstention from injury, the observance of the Vedic
ritual, meditation, subjugation of the senses, penances, and obedient
services rendered to the preceptors,--which amongst these is fraught
with the greatest merit with respect to a person?'

"Vrihaspati said, All these six are fraught with merit. They are
different doors of piety. I shall discourse upon them presently. Do thou
listen to them, O chief of the Bharatas! I shall tell thee what
constitutes the highest good of a human being. That man who practises
the religion of universal compassion achieves his highest good. That man
who keeps under control the three faults, *viz*., lust, wrath, and
cupidity, by throwing them upon all creatures (and practises the virtue
of compassion), attains to success <span
id="fr_255"></span>[1](#fn_254). He who, from motives of his own
happiness, slays other harmless creatures with the rod of chastisement,
never attains to happiness, in the next world. That man who regards all
creatures as his own self, and behaves towards them as towards his own
self, laying aside the rod of chastisement and completely subjugating
his wrath, succeeds in attaining to happiness. The very deities, who are
desirous of a fixed abode, become stupefied in ascertaining the track of
that person who constitutes himself the soul of all creatures and looks
upon them all as his own self, for such a person leaves no track
behind. <span id="fr_256"></span>[2](#fn_255) One should never do that
to another which one regards as injurious to one's own self. This, in
brief, is the rule of Righteousness. One by acting in a different way by
yielding to desire, becomes guilty of unrighteousness. In refusals and
gifts, in happiness and misery, in the agreeable, and the disagreeable,
one should judge of their effects by a reference to one's own
self. <span id="fr_257"></span>[3](#fn_256) When One injures another,
the injured turns round and injures the injurer. Similarly, when one
cherishes another, that other cherishes the cherisher. One should frame
one's rule of conduct according to this. I have told thee what
Righteousness is even by this subtile way.'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'The preceptor of the deities, possessed of
great intelligence, having said this unto king Yudhishthira the just,
ascended upwards for proceeding to Heaven, before our eyes.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_254"></span>[235:1](m13b078.htm#fr_255) *Kama* and *krodha*
are mentioned: but the use of *cha* gives by implication cupidity. What
is meant by *nidhaya sarvabhuteshu* is, dividing them into infinite
small parts, to cast them off from oneself to others. It is painful to
see how the Burdwan translators misunderstand verses 2 and 3. They read
*Hanti* for *Hanta* and write ridiculous nonsense.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[235:2](m13b078.htm#fr_256) In the first line,
after *Sarvabhutani*, *atmatwena* is understood. The sense of this verse
seems to be this; such a man leaves no trace behind him, for he becomes
identified with Brahma, He is, therefore, said to be *apada*. The
deities on the other hand, are *padaishinah*, for they desire a fixed
abode such as heaven or a spot fraught with felicity.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[235:3](m13b078.htm#fr_257) The sense is that
when one refuses a solicitation one should think how one would feel if
another were to refuse the solicitations one addressed to that other. So
with regard to the rest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CXIV](m13b079)
