[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m13b051) 
[Next](m13b053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

### SECTION LXXXVII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Thou hast discoursed to me, O thou of righteous
soul, on the duties of the four orders. Do thou, after the same manner,
Q king, discourse to me now on all the ordinances respecting the Sraddha
(of deceased ancestors).'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed by Yudhishthira, the son of
Santanu set himself to declare unto him the following ritual, consistent
with the ordinance of the Sraddha.'

"Bhishma said, 'Listen, O king, with close attention, to me as I
discourse to you on the ritual of the Sraddha. That ritual is
[auspicious](errata.htm#116), worthy of praise, productive of fame and
progeny, and is regarded as a sacrifice, O scorcher of foes, in honour
of the Pitris. Gods or Asuras or human beings, Gandharvas or Uragas or
Rakshasas, Pisachas or Kinnaras,--every one should always worship the
Pitris. It is seen that people worship the Pitris first, and gratify the
deities next by offering them their adorations. Hence, one should always
worship the Pitris with every care. <span
id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_131) It is said, O king, that the Sraddha
performed in honour of the Pitris is performable afterwards. But this
general rule is restrained by a special one (which directs that the
Sraddha in honour of the Pitris should be performed on the afternoon of
the day of the New moon). <span id="fr_132"></span>[2](#fn_132) The
(deceased) grandsires become gratified with the Sraddha that may be
performed on any day. I shall, however, tell thee now what the merits
and demerits are of the respective lunar days (in view of their
adaptability to the performance of the Sraddha). I shall discourse to
thee, O sinless one, what fruits are attained on what days by performing
the Sraddha. Do thou listen to me with close attention. By adoring the
Pitris on the first day of the lighted fortnight, one obtains in one's
abode beautiful spouses capable of producing many children all possessed
of desirable accomplishments. By performing the Sraddha on the second
day of the lighted fortnight one gets many daughters. By performing it
on the third day, one acquires many steeds. By performing it on the
fourth day, one gets a large herd of smaller animals (such as goats and
sheep) in [one's](errata.htm#117) house. They, O king, who perform the
Sraddha on the fifth day, get many sons. Those men who perform the
Sraddha on the sixth day acquire great splendour. By performing it on
the seventh day, O monarch, one acquires great fame. By performing it on
the eighth day one makes great profits

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

in trade. By performing it on the ninth day one acquires many animals of
uncloven hoofs. By performing it on the tenth day one acquires much
wealth in kine. By performing it on the eleventh day one becomes the
possessor of much wealth in clothes and utensils (of brass and other
metals). Such a man also obtains many sons all of whom become endued
with Brahma splendour. By performing the Sraddha on the twelfth day one
always beholds, if one desires, diverse kinds of beautiful articles made
of silver and gold. By performing the Sraddha on the thirteenth day one
attains to eminence over one's kinsmen. Without doubt, all the young men
in the family of him who performs the Sraddha on the fourteenth day meet
with death. Such a man becomes entangled in war, By performing the
Sraddha on the day of the new moon, one obtains the fruition of every
wish. In the dark fortnight, all the days commencing with the tenth (and
ending with that of the new moon), leaving only the fourteenth day out,
are laudable days for the performance of the Sraddha. Other days of that
fortnight are not so. Then, again, as the dark fortnight is better than
the lighted one, so the afternoon of the day is better than the forenoon
in the matter of the Sraddha.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_131"></span>[143:1](m13b052.htm#fr_131) The commentator
explains that the Pitris should be worshipped on the day of the New
moon, the deities should then be worshipped on the first day of the
lighted fortnight. Or, on any other day of the lighted fortnight, the
*Pitri*-sacrifice or [*Sraddha*](errata.htm#118) should be performed
first; the *Deva*-sacrifice or *Ishti* should then be performed.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[143:2](m13b052.htm#fr_132) *Anwaharyam*, the
commentator explains, is *paschatkartavyam*, *i.e.*, subsequently
performable (subsequent, *i.e.*, to the worship of the gods). There is a
special ordinance, however, which lays down that the
[*Sraddha*](errata.htm#119) should be performed on the afternoon of the
day of the new moon. The gods should be adored on the first day of the
lighted fortnight. Hence, owing to this especial ordinance, the
[*Sraddha*](errata.htm#120) must precede the worship of the gods, and
not succeed it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section LXXXVIII](m13b053)
