[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m13b097) 
[Next](m13b099) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CXXXIII

"Maheswara said, 'Searching your memories, excellent are the duties ye
all have recited. Listen all of you now to me as I declare some
mysteries relating to religion and duty. Only those persons whose
understanding has been set on religion and who are possessed of faith,
should be instructed in respect of those mysteries of duty and religion
that are fraught with high merits. Hear what the merits are that become
his who, with heart free from anxiety, gives food everyday, for a month,
to kine and contents himself with one meal a day throughout such period.
The kine are highly blessed. They are regarded as the most sacred of all
sacred things. Verily, it is they that are upholding the three worlds
with the deities, the Asuras, and human beings. Respectful services
rendered to them are fraught with high merit and grave consequences.
That man who every day gives food to kine advances every day in
religious merit. Formerly, in the Krita age I had expressed my approval
of these creatures. Afterwards Brahman, born of the primeval lotus,
solicited me (to show kindness towards kine). <span
id="fr_294"></span>[1](#fn_293) It is for this reason that a bull to
this day stands as the device on my standard overhead. I always sport
with kine. Hence should kine be worshipped by all. Kine are possessed of
great power. They are givers of boons. If worshipped, they would grant
boons. That person who gives food to kine even for a single day receives
from those beneficent creatures for that act a fourth part of the merits
he may win by all his good acts in life.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_293"></span>[275:1](m13b098.htm#fr_294) *Anujnatah*
literally implies permitted. These creatures, *i.e.*, the kine, were
permitted by me, means, perhaps, that they became my favourites.
Brahman, it is said, solicited Maheswara to accept some kine in gift.
The latter did accept some, and adopt from that time the device of the
bull on his flag.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CXXXIV](m13b099)
