[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m13b126) 
[Next](m13b128) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CLXII

"Vaisampayana said, 'After Krishna, the son of Devaki, had said these
words, Yudhishthira once more asked Bhishma the son of Santanu, saying,
'O thou of great intelligence; O foremost of all persons conversant with
duties, which, indeed, of the two, direct perception and the scriptures,
is to be regarded as authority for arriving at a conclusion?'

"Bhishma said, 'I think, there is no doubt in this. Listen to me, O thou
of great wisdom! I shall answer thee. The question thou hast asked is
certainly proper. It is easy to cherish doubt. But the solution of that
doubt is difficult. Innumerable are the instances, in respect of both
direct perception and audition (or the scriptures), in which doubts may
arise. Certain persons, who delight in the name of logicians, verily
imagining themselves to be possessed of superior wisdom, affirm that
direct perception is the only authority. They assert that nothing,
however true, is existent which is not [directly](errata.htm#228)
perceivable; or, at least they doubt the existence of those objects.
Indeed, such assertions involve an absurdity and they who make them are
of foolish understanding, whatever may be their pride of learning. If,
on the other hand, thou doubtest as to how the one (indivisible Brahman)
could be the cause, I answer that one would understand it only after a
long course of years and with the assistance of Yoga practised without
idleness. Indeed, O Bharata, one that lives according to such means as
present themselves (without, *i.e.*, one's being wedded to this or that
settled mode of life), and one that is devoted (to the solution of the
question), would be capable of understanding it. None else, truly, is
competent for comprehending it. When one attains to the very end of
reasons (or reasoning processes), one then attains to that excellent and
all comprehending knowledge--that vast mass of effulgence which
illumines all the universe (called Brahma). That knowledge, O king,
which is derived from reason (or inferences) can scarcely be said to be
knowledge. Such knowledge should be rejected. It should be noted that it
is not defined or comprehended by the word. It should, therefore, be
rejected!'" <span id="fr_355"></span>[2](#fn_354)

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

"[Yudhisthira](errata.htm#229) said, 'Tell me, O grandsire, which among
these (four) is most authoritative, *viz*., direct perception, inference
from observation, the science of Agama or scriptures, and diverse kinds
of practices that distinguish the good.'

"Bhishma said, 'While Righteousness is sought to be destroyed by wicked
persons possessed of great might, it is capable of being protected for
the time being by those that are good exerting themselves with care and
earnestness. Such protection, however, avails not in the long run, for
destruction does overtake Righteousness at the end. Then, again,
Righteousness often proves a mask for covering Unrighteousness, like
grass and straw covering the mouth of a deep pit and concealing it from
the view. Hear, again, O Yudhisthira! In consequence of this, the
practices of the good are interfered with and destroyed by the wicked.
Those persons who are of evil conduct, who discard the Srutis--indeed,
those wicked wights who are haters of Righteousness,--destroy that good
course of conduct (which could otherwise be set up as a standard).
Hence, doubts attach to direct perception, inference, and good
conduct. <span id="fr_356"></span>[1](#fn_355) Those, therefore, among
the good that are possessed of understanding born of (or cleansed by)
the scriptures and that are ever contented, are to be regarded as the
foremost. Let those that are anxious and deprived of tranquillity of
soul, approach these. Indeed, O Yudhishthira., do thou pay court to them
and seek of them the solutions of thy doubt! <span
id="fr_357"></span>[2](#fn_356) Disregarding both pleasure and wealth
which always follow cupidity and awakened into the belief that only
Righteousness should be sought, do thou, O Yudhishthira, wait upon and
ask those persons (for enlightening thyself). The conduct of those
persons never

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

goes wrong or meets with destruction, as also their sacrifices and Vedic
study and rites. Indeed, these three, *viz*., conduct as consisting of
overt acts, behaviour in respect of (mental) purity, and the Vedas
together constitute Righteousness.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'O grandsire, my understanding is once more
stupefied by doubt. I am on this side the ocean, employed in searching
after the means of crossing it. I do not, however, behold the other
shore of the ocean! If these three, *viz*., the Vedas, direct perception
(or acts that are seen), and behaviour (or, mental purity) together
constitute what is to be regarded as authority, it can be alleged that
there is difference between them. Righteousness then becomes really of
three kinds, although it is one and indivisible.'

"Bhishma said, 'Righteousness is sometimes seen to be destroyed by
wicked wights of great power. If thou thinkest, O king, that
Righteousness should really be of three kinds, my reply is that thy
conclusion is warranted by reason. The truth is that Righteousness is
one and indivisible, although it is capable of being viewed from three
different points. The paths (indications) of those three that constitute
the foundation of Righteousness have each been laid down. Do thou act
according to the instructions laid down. Thou shouldst never wrangle
about Righteousness and then seek to have those doubts solved into which
thou mayst arrive. O chief of the Bharatas, let no doubts like these
ever take possession of thy mind! Do thou obey what I say without
scruple of any kind. Follow me like a blind man or like one who, without
being possessed of sense himself, has to depend upon that of another.
Abstention from injury, truth, absence of wrath (or forgiveness), and
liberality of gifts,--these four, O king, that hast no foe, do thou
practise, for these four constitute eternal Righteousness! Do thou also,
O mighty-armed prince, pursue that conduct towards the Brahmanas which
is consistent with what has been observed towards them by thy sires
[and](errata.htm#230) grandsires. These are the principal indications of
Righteousness. That man of little intelligence who would destroy the
weight of authority by denying that to be a standard which has always
been accepted as such would himself fail to become an authority among
men. Such a man becomes the cause of much grief in the world. Do thou
reverence the Brahmanas and treat them with hospitality. Do thou always
serve them in this way. The universe rests on them. Do thou understand
them to be such!'

"Yudhishthira said, 'Tell me, O grandsire, what the respective ends are
of those that hate Righteousness and of those that adore and observe
it!'

"Bhishma said, 'Those men that hate Righteousness are said to have their
hearts overwhelmed by the attributes of passion and darkness. Such men
have always to go to Hell. Those men, on the other hand, O monarch, who
always adore and observe Righteousness, those men

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

who are devoted to truth and sincerity, are called good. They always
enjoy the pleasures or felicity of heaven. In consequence of their
waiting upon their preceptors with reverence their hearts always turn
towards Righteousness. Verily, they who adore Righteousness attain to
the regions of the deities. Those individuals, whether human beings or
deities who divest themselves of cupidity and malice and who emaciate or
afflict their bodies by the observance of austerities, succeed, in
consequence of the Righteousness which then becomes theirs to attain to
great felicity. Those that are gifted with wisdom have said that the
Brahmanas, who are the eldest sons of Brahmana, represent Righteousness.
They that are righteous always worship them, their hearts regarding them
with as much love and affection as a hungry man's stomach entertains for
ripe and delicious fruits.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'What is the appearance presented by those that are
wicked, and what are those acts which they that are called good are to
do? Explain to me this, O holy one! Indeed, tell me what the indications
are of the good and the wicked.'

"Bhishma said, 'They that are wicked are evil in their practices,
ungovernable or incapable of being kept within the restraints of rules,
and foul mouthed. They, on the other hand, they are good, are always
good in their acts. Verily, the acts these men do are regarded as the
indications of that course of conduct which is called good. They that
are good or righteous, O monarch, never answer the two calls of nature
on the public road, or in the [midst](errata.htm#231) of a cow-pen, or
on a field of paddy, After feeding the five they take their own
food. <span id="fr_358"></span>[1](#fn_357) They never talk while
eating, and never go to sleep with wet hands (*i.e.*, without rubbing
them dry with towels or napkins). Whenever they see any of the
following, they circumambulate them for showing them reverence, *viz*.,
a blazing fire, a bull, the image of a deity, a cow-pen, a place where
four roads meet, and an old and virtuous Brahmana. They give the way,
themselves standing aside, unto those that are old, those that are
afflicted with burdens, ladies, those that hold high appointments in the
village or town administration, Brahmanas, kine, and kings. The
righteous or good man is he that protects his guests, servants and other
dependents, his own relatives, and all those that seek his protection.
Such a man always welcomes these with the usual enquiries of politeness.
Two times have been appointed by the deities for human beings to take
their food, *viz*., morning and evening. During the interval one should
not eat anything. By following this rule about eating, one is said to
observe a fast. As the sacred fire waits for libations to be poured upon
it when the hour for *Homa* arrives, even so a woman, when her
functional period is over, expects an act of congress with her husband.
One that

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

never approaches one's spouses at any other time save after the
functional period, is said to observe the vow of Brahmacharya. Amrita
(nectar), Brahmanas, and kine,--these three are regarded as equal.
Hence, one should always worship, with due rites, Brahmanas and kine.
One does not incur any fault or stain by eating the meat of animals
slain in sacrifices with the aid of Tantras from the Yajur Veda. The
flesh of the back-bone, or that of animals not slain in sacrifice,
should be avoided even as one avoids the flesh of one's own son. One
should never cause one's guest to go without food whether when one
resides in one's own country or in a foreign land. After completing
one's study one should present the Dakshina unto one's preceptor. When
one sees one's preceptor, one should congratulate him with reverence and
worshipping him present him a seat. By worshipping one's preceptor, one
increases the period of one's life as also one's fame and prosperity.
One should never censure the old, nor send them on any business <span
id="fr_359"></span>[1](#fn_358). One should never be seated when any one
that is old is standing. By acting in this way one protects the duration
of one's life. One should never cast one's eyes on a naked woman, nor a
naked man. One should never indulge in sexual congress except in
privacy. One should eat also without being seen by others. Preceptors
are the foremost of Tirthas; the heart is the foremost of all sacred
objects; knowledge is the foremost of all objects of search; and
contentment is the foremost of all happiness. Morning and evening one
should listen to the grave counsels of those that are aged. One attains
to wisdom by constant waiting upon those that are venerable for years.
While reading the Vedas or employed in eating, one should use one's
right hand. One should always keep one's speech and mind under thorough
control, as also one's senses. With well-cooked frumenty, Yavaka,
Krisara, and Havi (clarified butter), one should worship the Pitris and
the deities in the Sraddha called Ashtaka. The same should be used in
worshipping the Planets. One should not undergo a shave without calling
down a blessing upon oneself. If one sneezes, one should be blessed by
those present. All that are ill or afflicted with disease, should be
blessed. The [extension](errata.htm#232) of their lives should be prayed
for. <span id="fr_360"></span>[2](#fn_359) One should never address an
eminent person familiarly (by using the word *Twam*). Under even the
great difficulties one should never do this. To address such a person as
Twam and to slay him are equal, persons of learning are degraded by such
a style of address. Unto those that are inferior, or equal, or unto
disciples, such a word can be used. The heart of the

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

sinful man always proclaims the sins he has committed. Those men who
have deliberately committed sins meet with destruction by seeking to
conceal them from the good. Indeed, they that are confirmed sinners seek
to conceal their sinful acts from others. <span
id="fr_361"></span>[1](#fn_360) Such persons think that their sins are
witnessed by neither men nor the deities. The sinful man, overwhelmed by
his sins, takes birth in a miserable order of being. The sins of such a
man continually grow, even as the interest the usurer charge (on the
loans he grants) increase from day to day. If, having committed a sin,
one seeks to have it covered by righteousness, that sin becomes
destroyed and leads to righteousness instead of other sins. <span
id="fr_362"></span>[2](#fn_361) If a quantity of water be poured upon
salt, the latter immediately dissolves away. Even so when expiation is
performed, sin dissolves away. For these reasons one should never
conceal a sin. Concealed, it is certain to increase. Having committed a
sin, one should confess it in the presence of those that are good. They
would destroy it immediately. If one does not enjoy in good time what
one has stored with hope, the consequence is that the stored wealth
finds another owner after the death of him who has stored it. The wise
have said that the mind of every creature is the true test of
Righteousness. Hence, all creatures in the world have an innate tendency
to achieve Righteousness. One should achieve Righteousness alone or
single-handed. Verily, one should not proclaim oneself Righteous and
walk with the standard of Righteousness borne aloft for purpose of
exhibition. They are said to be traders in Righteousness who practise it
for enjoying the fruits it brings about. One should adore the deities
without giving way to sentiments of pride. Similarly, one should serve
one's preceptor without deceit. One should make arrangements for
securing to oneself invaluable wealth in the hereafter which consists in
gifts made here to deserving persons.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_354"></span>[380:2](m13b127.htm#fr_355) Verses 4 to 9 are
extremely difficult. They represent so many surceases. Nilakantha,
however, has shown great ingenuity in expounding them. In the first line
of 4, <span id="page_381">p. 381</span> *drishtam* refers to
*pratyaksham*, and *srutam* to *sruti* or *agama*. Hence, what is meant
by the first line is,--Innumerable are the cases of both direct
perception and scriptural assertion in which the scriptures are regarded
as more authoritative, and those is which direct perception is regarded
as more authoritative. In 5, the speaker refers to the atomic and other
theories of the creation derived from Reason. Bhishma declares it as his
opinion that all such theories are untenable or groundless. In the first
line of 6, the word *Ekam* implies *Brahma*. The sense is, if thou
thinkest that Brahma alone is the cause of the universe and in thinking
so becomest landed on doubt. The reply to this is that *Yoga* for a long
course of years will enable thee to comprehend the sufficiency of
unassisted Brahma to evolve the universe. In 7, *anekam pranayatram
kalpamanena* refers to one who without leading any particular or settled
mode of life lives just as it suits him to live, that is, who leads the
life of a religious mendicant never thinking of the morrow. In 9,
*anihaddham vacha* implies what is not defined or indicated by the words
of the *Vedas* or scriptures. The Burdwan Pundits have made a mess of
the whole passage, or, rather, of nearly the whole of this section.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[381:1](m13b127.htm#fr_356) *Teshu* is
equivalent to *praryakshanumanachareshu*. The sense, therefore, is that
the three, *viz*., direct perception, inference, and good conduct being,
for these reasons, fallible, the only infallible standard that remain,
is audition or the scriptures, or, as verse 14 puts it, men with
understandings born of the scriptures.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[381:2](m13b127.htm#fr_357) *Atripyantah* are
men who like Yudhishthira are filled with anxiety: as to what they
should do. Seekers after the right are so called.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[383:1](m13b127.htm#fr_358) The five who must
be first fed are the deities, the *Pitris*, the guests, diverse
creatures included under the word *Bhutus*, and lastly relatives.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[384:1](m13b127.htm#fr_359) Some texts read
*nabhibhavet*, meaning one should never vanquish an old man (*i.e.*,
assert one's superiority over him).

<span id="fn_359"></span>[384:2](m13b127.htm#fr_360) In his excellent
work on the *Curiosities of Literature* Mr. D'Israeli attempts to trace
the origin of the custom of uttering a blessing on people who sneeze.
The custom seems, however, to be very ancient and widespread. It exists
to this day in India, among the Hindus at any rate, as it existed in the
days of the Mahabharata.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[385:1](m13b127.htm#fr_361) It seems that the
author is of opinion that one lightens one's sins by admissions before
the wise. To conceal a sin after having committed it proves the
confirmed sinner.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[385:2](m13b127.htm#fr_362) 'Covered by
righteousness' implies 'if, having once tripped, the sinner restrains
himself and engages to do acts of righteousness.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CLXIII](m13b128)
