[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe39119)  [Next](sbe39121.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

### BOOK XXXII. LIEH YÜ-KHÂU.

Lieh Yü-khâu, the surname and name of Lieh-dze, with which the first
paragraph commences, have become current as the name of the Book, though
they have nothing to do with any but that one paragraph, which is found
also in the second Book of the writings ascribed to Lieh-dze. There are
some variations in the two Texts, but they are so slight that we cannot
look on them as proofs that the two passages are narratives of
independent origin.

Various difficulties surround the questions of the existence of
Lieh-dze, and of the work which bears his name. They will be found
distinctly and dispassionately stated and discussed in the 146th chapter
of the Catalogue of the Khien-lung Imperial Library. The writers seem to
me to make it out that there was such a man, but they do not make it
clear when he lived, or how his writings assumed their present form.
There is a statement of Liû Hsiang that he lived in the time of duke Ma
of Käng (B.C. 627-606); but in that case he must have been earlier than
Lâo-dze himself, whom he very frequently quotes. The writers think that
Lift's 'Mû of Käng' should be Mû of Lû (B.C. 409-377), which would make
him not much anterior to Mencius and Kwang-dze; but this is merely an
ingenious conjecture. As to the composition of his chapters, they are
evidently not at first hand from Lieh, but by some one of his disciples;
whether they were current in Kwang-dze's days, and be made use of
various passages from them, or those passages were Kwang-dze's
originally, and taken from him by the followers of Lieh-dze and added to
what fragments they had of their master's teaching;--these are points
which must be left undetermined.

Whether the narrative about Lieh be from Kwang-dze or not, its bearing
on his character is not readily apprehended; but, as we study it, we
seem to understand that his master Wû-zän condemned him as not having
fully attained to the Tâo, but owing his influence with others

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

mainly to the manifestation of his merely human qualities. And this is
the lesson which our author keeps before him, more or less distinctly,
in all his paragraphs. As Lû Shû-kih. says:--

'This Book also sets forth Doing Nothing as the essential condition of
the Tâo. Lieh-dze, frightened at the respect shown to him by the
soup-vendors, and yet by his human doings drawing men to him, disowns
the rule of the heavenly; Hwan of Käng, thinking himself different from
other men, does not know that Heaven recompenses men according to their
employment of the heavenly in them; the resting of the sages in their
proper rest shows how the ancients pursued the heavenly and not the
human; the one who learned to slay the Dragon, but afterwards did not
exercise his skill, begins with the human, but afterwards goes on to the
heavenly; in those who do not rest in the heavenly, and perish by the
inward war, we see how the small men do not know the secret of the Great
Repose; Zhâo Shang, glorying in the carriages which he had acquired, is
still farther removed from the heavenly; when Yen Ho shows that the
sage, in imparting his instructions, did not follow the example of
Heaven in diffusing its benefits, we learn that it is only the Doing
Nothing of the True Man which is in agreement with Heaven; the
difficulty of knowing the mind of man, and the various methods required
to test it, show the readiness with which, when not under the rule of
Heaven, it seems to go after what is right, and the greater readiness
with which it again revolts from it; in Khao-fû, the Correct, we have
one indifferent to the distinctions of rank, and from him we advance to
the man who understands the great condition appointed for him, and is a
follower of Heaven; then comes he who plays the thief under the chin of
the Black Dragon, running the greatest risks on a mere peradventure of
success, a resolute opponent of Heaven; and finally we have Kwang-dze
despising the ornaments of the sacrificial ox, looking in the same way
at the worms beneath and the kites overhead, and regarding himself as
quite independent

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

of them, thus giving us an example of the embodiment of the spiritual,
and of harmony with Heaven.'

So does this ingenious commentator endeavour to exhibit the one idea in
the Book, and show the unity of its different paragraphs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XXXIII. Thien Hsiâ](sbe39121.md)
