[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe39019)  [Next](sbe39021.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 13.

13\. 1. Favour and disgrace would seem equally to be feared; honour and
great calamity, to be regarded as personal conditions (of the same
kind).

2\. What is meant by speaking thus of favour and disgrace? Disgrace is
being in a low position (after the enjoyment of favour). The getting
that (favour) leads to the apprehension (of losing it), and the losing
it leads to the fear of (still greater calamity):--this is what is meant
by saying that favour and disgrace would seem equally to be feared.

And what is meant by saying that honour and great calamity are to be
(similarly) regarded as personal conditions? What makes me liable to
great calamity is my having the body (which I call myself); if I had not
the body, what great calamity could come to me?

3\. Therefore he who would administer the kingdom, honouring it as he
honours his own person, may be employed to govern it, and he who would
administer it with the love which he bears to his own person may be
entrusted with it.

<span id="img_05600"></span> ![](img/05600.jpg), 'Loathing Shame.' The
chapter is difficult to construe, and some disciples of Kû Hsî had to
ask him to explain it as in the case of ch. 10. His remarks on it are
not to my mind satisfactory. Its object seems to be to show that the
cultivation of the person according to the Tâo, is the best
qualification for the highest offices, even for the government of the
world. Par. 3 is found in Kwang-dze (XI, 18 b) in a connexion which
suggests this view of the chapter. It may be observed, however, that in
him the position of the verbal characters in the two clauses

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

of the paragraph is the reverse of that in the text of Ho-shang Kung, so
that we can hardly accept the distinction of meaning of the two
characters given in his commentary, but must take them as synonyms.
Professor Gabelentz gives the following version of Kwang-dze: 'Darum,
gebraucht er seine Person achtsam in der Verwaltung des Reiches, so mag
man ihm die Reichsgewalt anvertrauen; . . . liebend (schonend) . . .
übertragen.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](sbe39021.md)
