[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe39008)  [Next](sbe39010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2.

2\. 1. All in the world know the beauty of the beautiful, and in doing
this they have (the idea of)

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

what ugliness is; they all know the skill of the skilful, and in doing
this they have (the idea of) what the want of skill is.

2\. So it is that existence and non-existence give birth the one to (the
idea of) the other; that difficulty and ease produce the one (the idea
of) the other; that length and shortness fashion out the one the figure
of the other; that (the ideas of) height and lowness arise from the
contrast of the one with the other; that the musical notes and tones
become harmonious through the relation of one with another; and that
being before and behind give the idea of one following another.

3\. Therefore the sage manages affairs without doing anything, and
conveys his instructions without the use of speech.

4\. All things spring up, and there is not one which declines to show
itself; they grow, and there is no claim made for their ownership; they
go through their processes, and there is no expectation (of a reward for
the results). The work is accomplished, and there is no resting in it
(as an achievement).

The work is done, but how no one can see;  
'Tis this that makes the power not cease to be.

<span id="img_04900"></span> ![](img/04900.jpg), 'The Nourishment of the
Person.' But many of Ho-shang Kung's titles are more appropriate than
this.

The chapter starts with instances of the antinomies, which suggest to
the mind each of them the existence of its corresponding opposite; and
the author finds in them an analogy to the 'contraries' which
characterize the operation of the Tâo, as stated in chapter 40. He then
proceeds to describe the action of the sage in par. 3 as in accordance
with this law of contraries; and, in par. 4, that of heaven

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

and earth, or what we may call nature, in the processes of the vegetable
world.

Par. 2 should be rhymed, but I could not succeed to my satisfaction in
the endeavour to rhyme it. Every one who can read Chinese will see that
the first four members rhyme. The last two rhyme also, the concluding
<span id="img_04900"></span> ![](img/04900.jpg) being pronounced
so;--see the Khang-hsî dictionary in voc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](sbe39010)
