[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe39037)  [Next](sbe39039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 31.

31\. 1. Now arms, however beautiful, are instruments of evil omen,
hateful, it may be said, to all creatures. Therefore they who have the
Tâo do not like to employ them.

2\. The superior man ordinarily considers the left hand the most
honourable place, but in time of war the right hand. Those sharp weapons
are instruments of evil omen, and not the instruments of the

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

superior man;--he uses them only on the compulsion of necessity. Calm
and repose are what he prizes; victory (by force of arms) is to him
undesirable. To consider this desirable would be to delight in the
slaughter of men; and he who delights in the slaughter of men cannot get
his will in the kingdom.

3\. On occasions of festivity to be on the left hand is the prized
position; on occasions of mourning, the right hand. The second in
command of the army has his place on the left; the general commanding in
chief has his on the right;--his place, that is, is assigned to him as
in the rites of mourning. He who has killed multitudes of men should
weep for them with the bitterest grief; and the victor in battle has his
place (rightly) according to those rites.

<span id="img_07400"></span> ![](img/07400.jpg), 'Stilling War.' The
chapter continues the subject of the preceding. The imperially-appointed
editors of Wang Pî's Text and Commentary (1765) say that from the
beginning of par. 2 to the end, there is the appearance of text and
commentary being mixed together; but they make no alteration in the text
as it is found in Ho-shang Kung, and in all other ancient copies.

The concluding sentence will suggest to some readers the words of the
Duke of Wellington, that to gain a battle was the saddest thing next to
losing it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 32](sbe39039)
