[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe39066)  [Next](sbe39068.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 60.

60\. 1. Governing a great state is like cooking small fish.

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

2\. Let the kingdom be governed according to the Tâo, and the manes of
the departed will not manifest their spiritual energy. It is not that
those manes have not that spiritual energy, but it will not be employed
to hurt men. It is not that it could not hurt men, but neither does the
ruling sage hurt them.

3\. When these two do not injuriously affect each other, their good
influences converge in the virtue (of the Tâo).

<span id="img_10400"></span> ![](img/10400.jpg), 'Occupying the Throne;'
occupying it, that is, according to the Tâo, noiselessly and
purposelessly, so that the people enjoy their lives, free from all
molestation seen and unseen.

Par. 1. That is, in the most quiet and easy manner. The whole of the
chapter is given and commented on by Han Fei (VI, 6a-7b); but very
unsatisfactorily.

The more one thinks and reads about the rest of the chapter, the more
does he agree with the words of Julien:--'It presents the frequent
recurrence of the same characters, and appears as insignificant as it is
unintelligible, if we give to the Chinese characters their ordinary
meaning.'--The reader will observe that we have here the second mention
of spirits (the manes; Chalmers, 'the ghosts;' Julien, les démons). See
ch. 39.

Whatever Lâo-dze meant to teach in par. 2, he laid in it a foundation
for the superstition of the later and present Tâoism about the spirits
of the dead;--such as appeared few years ago in the 'tail-cutting'
scare.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 61](sbe39068.md)
