[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe39110)  [Next](sbe39112) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

### BOOK XXIII. KÄNG-SANG KHÛ.

It is not at all certain that there ever was such a personage as
Käng-sang Khû, who gives its name to the Book. In his brief memoir of
Kwang-dze, Sze-mâ Khien spells, as we should say, the first character of
the surname differently, and for the Käng (<span id="img_15300"></span>
![](img/15300.jpg)), employs Khang (<span id="img_15301"></span>
![](img/15301.jpg)), adding his own opinion, that there was nothing in
reality corresponding to the account given of the characters in this and
some other Books. They would be therefore the inventions of Kwang-dze,
devised by him to serve his purpose in setting forth the teaching of
Lâo-dze. It may have been so, but the value of the Book would hardly be
thereby affected.

Lû Shû-kih gives the following very brief account of the contents.
Borrowing the language of Mencius concerning Yen Hui and two other
disciples of Confucius as compared with the sage, he says, 'Käng-sang
Khû had all the members of Lâo-dze, but in small proportions. To outward
appearance he was above such as abjure sagehood and put knowledge away,
but still he was unable to transform Nan-yung Khû, whom therefore he
sent to Lâo-dze; and he announced to him the doctrine of the Tâo that
everything was done by doing nothing.'

The reader will see that this is a very incomplete summary of the
contents of the Book. We find in it the Tâoistic ideal of the 'Perfect
Man,' and the discipline both of body and mind through the depths of the
system by means of which it is possible for a disciple to become such.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XXIV. Hsü Wû-Kwei](sbe39112)
