[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe39079)  [Next](sbe39081.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 73.

73\. 1. He whose boldness appears in his daring (to do wrong, in
defiance of the laws) is put to death; he whose boldness appears in his
not daring (to do so) lives on. Of these two cases the one appears to be
advantageous, and the other to be injurious. But

When Heaven's anger smites a man,  
Who the cause shall truly scan?.

On this account the sage feels a difficulty (as to what to do in the
former case).

2\. It is the way of Heaven not to strive, and yet it skilfully
overcomes; not to speak, and yet it is skilful in (obtaining) a reply;
does not call, and yet men come to it of themselves. Its demonstrations
are quiet, and yet its plans are skilful and effective. The meshes of
the net of Heaven are large; far apart, but letting nothing escape.

<span id="img_11600"></span> ![](img/11600.jpg), 'Allowing Men to take
their Course.' The chapter teaches that rulers should not be hasty to
punish, especially by the infliction of death. Though they may seem to
err in leniency, yet Heaven does not allow offenders to escape.

While Heaven hates the ill-doer, yet we must not always conclude from
Its judgments that every one who suffers from them is an ill-doer; and
the two lines which rhyme, and illustrate this point, are equivalent to
the sentiment in our Old Book, 'Clouds and darkness are round about
Him.' They are ascribed to Lâo-dze by Lieh-dze (VI, 7 a); but, it has
been said, that they are quoted by him 'in an entirely different
connexion.' But the same text in two

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

different sermons may be said to be in different connexions. In Lieh-dze
and our King the lines have the same meaning, and substantially the same
application. Indeed Kang Kan, of our fourth century, the commentator of
Lieh-dze, quotes the comment of Wang Pî on this passage, condensing it
into, 'Who can know the mind of Heaven? Only the sage can do so.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 74](sbe39081.md)
