[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe39058)  [Next](sbe39060) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 52.

52\. 1. (The Tâo) which originated all under the sky is to be considered
as the mother of them all.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

2\. When the mother is found, we know what her children should be. When
one knows that he is his mother's child, and proceeds to guard (the
qualities of) the mother that belong to him, to the end of his life he
will be free from all peril.

3\. Let him keep his mouth closed, and shut up the portals (of his
nostrils), and all his life he will be exempt from laborious exertion.
Let him keep his mouth open, and (spend his breath) in the promotion of
his affairs, and all his life there will be no safety for him.

4\. The perception of what is small is (the secret of)
clear-sightedness; the guarding of what is soft and tender is (the
secret of) strength.

5\. Who uses well his light,  
Reverting to its (source so) bright,  
Will from his body ward all blight,  
And hides the unchanging from men's sight.

<span id="img_09500"></span> ![](img/09500.jpg), 'Returning to the
Source.' The meaning of the chapter is obscure, and the commentators
give little help in determining it. As in the preceding chapter, Lâo-dze
treats of the operation of the Tâo on material things, he seems in this
to go on to the operation of it in man, or how he, with his higher
nature, should ever be maintaining it in himself.

For the understanding of paragraph 1 we must refer to the first chapter
of the treatise, where the Tâo, 'having no name,' appears as 'the
Beginning' or 'First Cause' of the world, and then, 'having a name,' as
its 'Mother.' It is the same thing or concept in both of its phases, the
ideal or absolute, and the manifestation of it in its passionless
doings. The old Jesuit translators render this par. by 'Mundus
principium et causam suam habet in Divino <span id="img_09501"></span>
![](img/09501.jpg), seu actione Divinae sapientiae quae dici potest ejus
mater.' So far I may assume that they agreed with me in understanding
that the subject of the par. was the Tâo.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

Par. 2 lays down the law of life for man thus derived from the Tâo. The
last clause of it is given by the same translators as equivalent to
'Unde fit ut post mortem nihil ei timendum sit,'--a meaning which the
characters will not bear. But from that clause, and the next par., I am
obliged to conclude that even in Lâo-dze's mind there was the germ of
the sublimation of the material frame which issued in the asceticism and
life-preserving arts of the later Tâoism.

Par. 3 seems to indicate the method of 'guarding the mother in man,' by
watching over the breath, the proto-plastic 'one' of ch. 42, the
ethereal matter out of which all material things were formed. The organs
of this breath in man are the mouth and nostrils (nothing else should be
understood here by <span id="img_09600"></span> ![](img/09600.jpg) and
<span id="img_09601"></span> ![](img/09601.jpg);--see the explanations
of the former in the last par. of the fifth of the appendixes to the Yî
in vol. xvi, p. 432); and the management of the breath is the mystery of
the esoteric Buddhism and Tâoism.

In par. 4 'The guarding what is soft' is derived from the use of 'the
soft lips' in hiding and preserving the hard and strong teeth.

Par. 5 gives the gist of the chapter:--Man's always keeping before him
the ideal of the Tâo, and, without purpose, simply doing whatever he
finds to do; Tâo-like and powerful in all his sphere of action.

I have followed the reading of the last character but one, which is
given by Ziâo Hung instead of that found in Ho-shang Kung and Wang Pî.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 53](sbe39060)
