[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe39113)  [Next](sbe39115) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOOK XXVI. WÂI WÛ.

The first two characters of the first paragraph are again adopted as the
title of the Book,--Wâi Wû, 'External Things;' and the lesson supposed
to be taught in it is that expressed in the first sentence, that the
influence of external things on character and condition cannot be
determined beforehand. It may be good, it may be evil. Mr. Balfour has
translated the two characters by 'External Advantages.' Hû Wän-ying
interprets them of 'External Disadvantages.' The things may in fact be
either of these. What seems useless may be productive of the greatest
services; and what men deem most advantageous may turn out to be most
hurtful to them.

What really belongs to man is the Tâo. That is his own, sufficient for
his happiness, and cannot be taken from him, if he prize it and
cultivate it. But if he neglect it, and yield to external influences
unfavourable to it, he may become bad, and suffer all that is most
hateful to him and injurious.

Readers must judge for themselves of the way in which the subject is
illustrated in the various paragraphs. Some of the stories are pertinent
enough; others are wide of the mark. The second, third, and fourth
paragraphs are generally held to be spurious, 'poor in composition, and
not at all to the point.' If my note on the 'six faculties of
perception' in par. 9 be correct, we must admit in it a Buddhistic hand,
modifying the conceptions of Kwang-dze after he had passed away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XXVII. Yü Yen](sbe39115)
