[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shamanism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sss12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XI. MAGICIAN AND MYSTIC

ONCE more the Malay magician sat at the feet of Indian teachers, this
time as a student of Muslim pantheism.

To India have been traced the first use of the Sufi term *fana* for loss
of the individual self in God, and the Sufi's acquaintance with the
practice of "watching the breaths" as a means of worship. The Sufi
legend of Ibrahim bin Adham, the hunter prince of Balkh who gave up his
throne for the beggar's bowl, is modelled upon the story of Buddha.

The Malay has two versions of the tale of Ibrahim, prince of Balkh. Long
before he got them, India had taught him to fast and practise
austerities in order to acquire invulnerability and other magical arts.
Brahminical mantra, to which even the gods were subject, would have
prepared his mind for the audacities of popular Sufism. Like the mantra,
too, Sufi secrets and charms were fascinatingly esoteric, to be revealed
only to the initiated. The doctrines that the disciple must honour and
obey his teacher above all men and pass through several initiatory
stages were not new to a race that had been under Hindu influence for
centuries.

Teachers of Sufisrn came to the Malay Peninsula more than four hundred
years ago. Before the end of the fifteenth century a Sultan of Malacca
sent an embassy to Pasai, a small Sumatran port famous as a religious
centre, offering a present of gold and two slave girls to any theologian
who could say if those in heaven and those in hell remain in their
respective places for ever. A Pasai pundit replied openly that they did,
quoting the authority of the Quran. But the Sultan of Pasai summoned
him, hinted that an embassy could not have come for such an obvious
answer and suggested giving in private an interpretation of the problem,
communicable only to the chosen few. The pundit took this advice and won
the prize offered by Malacca. There is little doubt that his answer was
on lines suggested by a work that has left its impress on many Malay
charm books, the *Insanu'l-kamil* or "Perfect Man" of al-Jili. "You may
say, if you like," writes al-Jili, "that hell-fire remains as it was,
but that the torment of the damned is changed to pleasure," or, again,
"the power of endurance of the sufferers in hell continues to grow-God
never takes back His gifts and these powers come from God-until there
appears in them a Divine power which extinguishes the fire, because no
one is doomed to misery after the Divine attributes become manifest in
him." The author of the *Malay Annals*, writing at a learned court, was
not so indiscreet as to reveal this mystery to all and sundry. Nor does
he give the Sufi answer to another problem propounded by Malacca to
Pasai, the paradox that both the man who believes and the man who
disbelieves that God created and bestowed His gifts from all eternity is
an infidel. Theological discussions like these are above the head of the
magician. Moreover, he has left to the foreigner to practise
occasionally in Malaya that orgiastic Sufism which degrades the famous
cry of Abu Sa'id, "There is nothing inside this coat except Allah."
Village magicians that refrain from the black art are popular, while the
Arab teacher is respected, feared and disliked, and the Indian often
despised. The *Malay Annals* cynically record how when the Sultan of
Malacca took his Arab teacher into battle against the Portuguese in 1511
A.D., the theologian clung with both hands to the howdah and exclaimed,
"Let us return! This is no place to study the unity of God. "

The Shi'ah heresies and the "rash mystic pantheism" to be detected in
many Malay charms has not received the attention of English students.
"Such mysticism," remarks Snouck Hurgronje, "is found also in Arabian
lands but only in small circles of the initiated as half secret
doctrines of the Sufis, cautiously concealed on account of the hunt of
official theologians for heresy and of the suspicious fanaticism of the
vulgar. In the East Indies, however, it formed woof and warp not only of
learned speculation but of popular belief. Tracts with drawings and
tables were used in the endeavour to realise the idea of the Absolute.
The four elements, the four winds, the four righteous Caliphs, the four
founders of the schools of law, the four attributes of God in dogma, the
four grades of progress in mysticism, the four extremities of the human
body, and many other sets of four were for popular mysticism revelations
of the one indivisible self of man. Through the names of Muhammad and
Allah, each in Arabic spelt with four letters, were symbolised the One
Being."

Every Sufi who is one with God is a saint with supernatural powers, and
already it has been said that Malaya is strewn with the graves of
miracle-workers. An eighteenth century history of Perak records how when
a Sultan of that State fell ill vows were paid to "prophets and saints
and the Poles," who stand at the head of the Muslim hierarchy and are
each in his generation the axis whereon the sphere of existence
revolves. The founder of the orthodox Qadiri order was among the saints
invoked, but while the invocation of saints is allowed to Sunnis, it is
commonest in India and among the Shi'ahs. Again, the Sufi holds that the
esoteric teaching of the Quran was revealed by the Prophet to 'Ali, his
son-in-law, to whom according to the Shi'ahs was transmitted the Light
of Muhammad. The name of 'Ali, our "Lord 'Ali," occurs in innumerable
Malay charms.

It has been remarked that the conception of the tears of the Archangel
Michael creating countless cherubim in his likeness to control the rain
and guard the fruits and plants of the earth exhibits a pantheistic
tendency. The same may be said of the diagnosis of the Kelantan
medicine-man, who finds a hundred and ninety demons for smallpox, each
operating on a selected part of the body, His Lordship Buzz on the ear,
His Lordship Peg on the joints, and so on. In Patani there are elders
and midwives who believe that all evil "spirits were really one,
pervading the whole world, only called by different names according to
the environment in which the universal spirit of evil was considered for
the moment. . . . As one old man expressed it, ' It may be hot here and
at Mecca at the same time, and the spirit is the same.' He went on to
explain that the spirit could break itself into one hundred and ninety
parts, and that the great medicine-man was the person who could cause it
to do this and could keep all the different parts under his control. "

Elsewhere it has been noted how the Malay magician's idea of an
archetypal "world of the breadth of a tray and a sky of the breadth of
an umbrella" reminds one of Ibn 'Arabi's saying that all the universe
lies potential in God like the tree in the seed.

Drums and wild singing of interminable chants helped the shaman to fall
into a trance wherein he trafficked with the world of spirits, just as
Malay village mystics seek union with Allah by roaring His praises in
chorus and swaying head and body in giddy contortions. The Brahmin
ascetic attained hypnotic slumber by counting his inhalations and
exhalations and concentrating his gaze on some object. Before completely
losing consciousness and gaining deliverance from the cycle of existence
with power (like Habib Noh of Singapore) to transport himself anywhere
at will, he "hears within his body (in the heart and throat, between the
eyebrows and in other parts) various sounds, those of a drum, the
roaring sea, the thunder, a bell, a shell, a reed, a lyre and a bee."

The religious ascetic uses his trance to lose himself in God; the
Kelantan magician to discover if a warrior will win a fight or a
villager live another year. The warrior is to invoke thrice the four
Shaikhs at the corners of the world, the four first Caliphs of Islam and
the four archangels, the blessed saints, all miracle-working rulers dead
and alive, and pray them to intercede with God to reveal the issue of
the coming battle. Then he gazes at his followers. If he sees them
headless, they will perish. If he sees them armless, they will suffer
greatly in the fight. Or he may listen three times. If he hears no
sound, his men will perish; and so on. Again: the four Caliphs have
their seats in the human frame, Abu Bakar in the liver, 'Omar in the
spleen, 'Usman in the lungs, 'Ali in the gallbladder. Each of them
passes to his seat along different parts of the right or left nostril.
"If one wants to cross a river without a boat, one consults Abu Bakar
through one's breath, inhaling and then exhaling; if there is a heavy
sensation, the water is deep and a boat required; if there is a feeling
of lightness in the inhalation, the water is shallow." There are a
number of ways of divination from observing the breaths. One more charm
of which breathing forms a part must suffice:--

"To marry body and spirit draw all your breath into your heart and
recite the following:-- "I am the true Muhammad. It is not I that say
it. It is Muhammad. First spirit was created, then the body. Only if
this night be destroyed, can I be destroyed. My being is thy being. My
being is one with thy being. I vanish in the fold of the attestation,
'There is no God but Allah-He!' in the fold of my mother the Light of
Muhammad until dawn." If the charm is for protection by day, then it
commits the reciter to the fold of his "father the Light of Allah."
"Between the two eyebrows," said Hamzah of Barus, a famous heterodox
mystic of Sumatra, " that is the spot where the servant meets his God,"
and unconsciously he was quoting *yogi* ritual. Hamzah visited Pahang on
the east coast of the Peninsula about the beginnning of the seventeenth
century. So it is less surprising to find in a Kelantan charm book the
above assertion by the Malay villager of his participation in the
Islamic Logos, though it is only a mundane expedient for protecting his
skin!

Less learned but equally pantheistic is the magician who, forgetting the
terrific appearance of the archangels for the orthodox, cries:--

I attest there is no God but Allah!  
I attest that Muhammad is His Prophet!  
Ho my brethren, Gabriel, Michael, Israfil and 'Azrail!  
Ye are four but with me five!  
I sit on the Seat of Allah!  
I lean against the pillar of His Throne!

Is this a debased interpretation of al-Jili's description of the Perfect
Man? "his heart stands over against the Throne of God, his mind over
against the Pen, his soul over against the Guarded Tablet, his nature
over against the elements, his capability of receiving forms over
against matter. He stands over against the angels with his good
thoughts, over against the genies and devils with the doubts that beset
him, over against the beasts with his animality. . . . To every type of
existence he furnishes from himself an antitype." A literal
interpretation of mysteries is all that a mind utterly untrained in
metaphysics can compass. An extraordinary mixture of Hindu sentiment and
imagery and of Sufi metaphysical speculations on the Perfect Man occurs
in an old Perak charm for giving a person a dominant personality:--

I sit beneath the Throne of Allah;  
Muhammad my shelter is beside me,  
Gabriel on my right, Michael on my left,  
All the company of Angels following me.  
Vicegerent of Allah . . .  
Only if Allah suffer harm,  
Can I suffer harm:  
Only if His Prophet suffer harm,  
Can I suffer harm.  
A hooded snake is my loin-cloth,  
A musty elephant my steed:  
My ear-posy the lightning,  
My shadow is that of a fierce tiger.  
By virtue of this charm of Awang the Preeminent  
In seated assembly  
Preeminent I;  
Erect, walking or talking  
Preeminent I;  
I, lord of all mortals,  
Precious stone of the Prophet,  
Pearl of God.

The same manuscript contains a tremendous love-charm to be recited over
seven blossoms, that must then be handed to the object of one's
passion:-- "There is no God but God. *I* am God, the Divine Reality,
ruler who blesseth all the worlds. There is no God but God, the King,
the Divine Reality, the Revealed. There is no God but Allah, lord of the
heavens and the earth and of the great Throne." Thirty years ago a Perak
Malay was sentenced to gaol for teaching an obscene form of pantheism
based on the creed-"There is no God but God. I am God. God Most High is
only this self of mine."

The claim of the magician that he is God or that he is the brother of
the four archangels seems hideously blasphemous to the orthodox Malay
villager, a claim allied with the blackest magic of the spirit-raising
shaman. But to the disciple the Malay exponent of this crude popular
pantheism explains and establishes his doctrine by many far-fetched
analogies. The invocations used by the Kelantan magician are full of
them. He calls, for example, upon four winds of disease to go forth from
the patient's body by the four doors of the organs of the mystical life.
Wind in skin and pores corresponds with the first of the four steps
towards union with God, that is, with the observance of the law, which
is the outer mark of the religious and about which there is no secrecy.
Wind in sinews and bones corresponds with the second stage, that is, the
mystic path enjoined by his spiritual guide for the Sufi novice. Wind in
the flesh and blood corresponds with a third stage, the plane of truth.
Wind in the breath of life and the seed of man corresponds with the
plane of perfect gnosis. Or again, analogies are discovered between the
worlds of Sufi metaphysics and parts of the physical frame. The material
world is in the tongue; the invisible intelligible world in the
windpipe; the world of power (wherein lie hidden the processes of the
divine nature) in the first stomach of ruminants! All this is
abracadabra to civilised men, even metaphysicians. But the process of
thought is clear. The archangels are four; the first Caliphs were four;
the elements out of which the human body is composed are four; the limbs
of the body are four. Therefore man and the archangels are one! Adam,
Muhammad, and Allah can each be spelt in Arabic with four letters. Still
the ever recurring number four! Therefore God and man are identical!
Other mystic numbers are three, founded on Sufi speculations on the
trinity of the lover, the beloved and love, and seven, the number of the
stages in the Neo-Platonic theory of the emanation process of being,
exemplified also in the number of the Pleiades and the days of the week.
All this is puerile, but a charm from the Kelantan manuscript tract
already quoted so largely, a charm called "The Fortress of the Unity of
God," will show that it is wrong to suppose the Malay had no serious
intellectual interests until European protection provided him with
schools and colleges. The charm should be recited four times a night
from one Friday to the next "with a sincere vowing of the heart to unity
with Allah and the vision of Him implanted in one's heart, until His
Being permeates one and one has faith: 'I am lost in the universal and
absolute Essence of God'; and one is lost to self and one's self becomes
absolute and universal too:--

"In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. Oh God! grant
peace to our lord Muhammad and the household of Muhammad who watcheth
over my self and my friends and all my children and all the contents of
my house and my property and the possessions of my hands with a
sevenfold fortress from the fortress of God Most High; its roof--'There
is no God but God,' and my wall 'Muhammad the Apostle of God,' and my
key 'the might of God,' which may not be opened for ever save with His
permission. Muhammad is like man and unlike man; he is like a chrysolite
among stones.

"Now the meaning of the term 'fortress' is that we know we come from
not-being and to not-being shall return. For there is nothing evidently
save the Being of God. And of a surety the Being of God never parts from
His absolute essence, which carries out all His will, according to His
word: ' His desire is accomplished by Himself and goes forth to no other
than Himself save to not-being.'

"The meaning of the term self is 'spirit,' one of the attributes of God
Most High, which parts not from His essence and it becomes an
individualized idea and is called man. Now the spirit is particularized
and fettered. Always the spirit yearns towards God.

"The meaning of 'the house ' is the body. The body is the place of the
spirit and so the veritable place that reveals God according to the
saying of the Prophet, on whom be the peace of God: 'Whosoever knows
himself, knows his Lord.' The house was built of itself and though it
will pass away, yet He Whose house it is, is the Reality Who with His
absolute essence is eternal.

"The meaning of our 'property' is the liver and heart and lungs and gall
and all that God Most High has created: according to His word:--'There
is no strength in any one save the strength of Allah, lord of all the
worlds both as regards things revealed and things hidden.'

"The meaning of our 'possessions' is the ten senses, firstly the outward
and secondly the inner. The outward arc five: the sight of the eyes, the
hearing of the ears, the taste of the tongue, the smelling of the nose,
and the touch of the hand. The inner also are five: consciousness,
faith, memory, perception and judgment.

"The meaning of the sevenfold 'fortress' is the creation by God Most
High of man with seven attributes: life, knowledge, power, will,
hearing, sight and speech. And seven parts of the body must be bowed to
God in prayer: the forehead, the palms of the hands, the knees and the
soles of the feet.

"The meaning of the 'lock' is because we have utter trust and union by
surrendering ourselves to God Most High, according to His word: 'Hold
yourselves fast to the cord of God which breaks not neither is there
concealment of His will from mystical knowledge'; as said the Prophet on
whom be God's peace:--'Nothing at all moves save by permission of
Allah.' For we cannot behold aught if the cord break and it cannot break
save by the will of God Most High, and there is no substitute for that
cord.

"And the meaning of the 'key' is Muhammad Apostle of God. For God is
utterly hidden; none knoweth Him save in His own person. Therefore to
cherish His glory, God Most High was revealed in the spirit of Muhammad
our Prophet and from that spirit God Most High created all this
universe, and all the attributes of His secret wisdom were revealed. So
it is that Muhammad is called the 'key,' because he opened the
treasure-house that was hidden, according to His word:--'I opened that
which was closed.'

"And the meaning of the protection of God is according to His word: 'God
Most High is with thee wheresoever thou art,' according to His word:

God is nearer to thee than the muscles of thy neck.' "And the meaning of
'roof' is the power of God to cover any of His servants with mercy
according to His will, so that he be locked away from all enemies and
danger in this world and the next, neither shall the lock be opened by
genie or man save with the permission of God Most High."

Was it to test the efficacy of some such charm as this that that novice
on the Sufi path, Sultan Mahmud of old Malacca, took his spiritual guide
with him into battle against the "white Bengalis," descendants of
genies, the first European invaders of Malaya?
