[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shamanism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sss09)  [Next](sss11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# VIII. THE SHAMAN'S SACRIFICE

AT "the primitive annual nocturnal rite" of feasting the spirits of the
regalia and State of Perak the head of a pink buffalo was set on the
topmost tier of the altar, the royal princesses held bits of the
sacrifice on their laps, and there was a feast on the spot while drink
was being poured upon the royal drums and trumpets. The ceremony recalls
Westermarck's theory that the origin of sacrifice was the idea that
supernatural beings, having human wants and human needs, might suffer
privation and become feeble if offerings were not made to them. This
account of an annual feast to the guardian spirits of a Malay State can
be supplemented by records of parallel rituals to propitiate beneficent
spirits and expel evil influences from State, district and sick men.

One account of the ritual to feast the spirits of a district comes from
Upper Perak. When the people of the place are agreed as to the time of
the celebration, each brings a measure of rice and two coconuts. Candles
are lit and the shaman burns incense, invoking it as "born of the brain
of Muhammad, the breath of his spiritual life"! Next he calls upon "the
ancestor spirits, genies and goblins to whom the earth and water of the
district belong," and informs them that he is slaughtering a pink
buffalo, without blemish and with horns the size of a man's closed fist,
in order to invite the countryside to a feast. He prays that they may
cherish all from danger and hurt. The buffalo is slaughtered and its
blood caught in a bamboo. The shaman removes and sets aside nose, eyes,
ears, mouth, hooves, legs and shoulders, tongue, tall, heart and liver,
representative of every part of the body. From the flesh of the carcase
seven kinds of food are prepared; soused, fried, boiled, toasted, and so
on, and one portion is left raw. In ancient China, also, offerings were
"of blood, of raw flesh and of sodden flesh." A four-sided seven-tiered
altar is built of palm stems. On the topmost tier are placed the blood
of the buffalo, the pieces of the carcase set aside by the shaman, the
seven kinds of meat, seven cooked and seven raw eggs, and seven vessels
of water. On the five central tiers are spread sweetmeats; on the lowest
tier twenty-five cigarettes and twenty-five quids of betel. The food not
offered on the altar is eaten by those present. If there is a surplus,
it may not be removed: those who wish to eat it must resort to the spot
on the following day. At dusk the Muslim audience depart, all except the
shaman and one or two hardy assistants. Circumambulating the altar,
Malaya's primitive celebrant then invoked the spirits to the feast and
summoned them by burning incense and waving a white cloth. Seven times
he cried hail to the spirits and then went away. For seven days no
stranger might enter the parish, no one might throw anything into it or
take anything forth, no one might use abusive language or cause leaf or
branch to wither.

In this and the Perak regalia feast have survived the elements of one of
the world's oldest ceremonies: the victim without spot, the feast in
which all partake before the altar, the blood that is not left to fall
upon the ground, the offering that must be utterly consumed and that no
stranger may approach, the celebration by night or before dawn. Decay
has marred the ritual. The Upper Perak ceremony the Muslim villagers
regard as an occasion for junketing and, afraid or ashamed to be
present, depart before the most tremendous moment has arrived. Again, it
is not a totem but spirits who are approached, nature-spirits, spirits
of the dead, Arabian genies and the Prophet addressed as a shaman! Upon
them all the celebrant cries the peace of Allah.

In the regalia ritual there are four altars or receptacles for the
sacrifice, and their modern significance is explained. In Kelantan, too,
when a sick person recovers after the "play of the princess," it is the
custom to offer a sacrifice on four altars or receptacles. On the model
of a square five-storeyed platform are placed "fish-a bit of skate, of
shark, a crab, a prawn; flesh-pieces of chicken, duck, goat and beef,
both cooked and raw; vegetables-various, both cooked and uncooked;
boiled rice of seven different colours; two kinds of intoxicating
liquors (arrack and toddy); some bananas; various kinds of cake, the
blood of a fowl, and parched rice. . . . . One silver dollar is placed
on each storey." This money is intended for " the princess." Three tiny
collections of the same things in miniature, with a silver dollar to
each, are put, one on a square mat, another into a cradle-shaped basket
termed "the raja's hall," and the third upon a little platform half way
up a bamboo splayed into a conch. The princess descends and proceeds to
taste the offerings, beginning with those on the small mat, going next
to the model platform, and ending at the cradle-like basket. The model
platform is taken to the neighbouring jungle and left there, but the
small mat and the cradle, both designedly appropriate for the princess,
are kept in the village for a few days'. The flat platform and the
bamboo posts splayed into conches may possibly be connected with the
widespread evolution of the altar proper and the idol, developed from a
post or monolith beside the altar on which the sacred blood of the totem
was splashed to keep it off the ground. In Polynesia, also, "beside the
larger temple altars there were smaller altars some resembling a small
round table, supported by a single post fixed in the ground:
occasionally the carcase of the hog presented in sacrifice was placed on
the large altar, while the heart and some other internal parts were laid
on the smaller."

Eating together marks the tribal bond among Malays. In Negri Sembilan a
newly elected chief invites all his people, men, women and children,
"the cocks that lay not eggs, the hens that cackle and the chicks that
chirp," to a public feast called "the sprinkling of the broken grain."
He sprinkles the grain as a symbol of gathering them under his wing, and
the bond of tribal unity is acknowledged in old-world
sentences:--"Together we skin the heart of the elephant; together dip
the heart of the louse. What we drop is common loss: what we gain is
common profit." No one can slaughter a buffalo without permission of the
tribal chief. No tribal chief can refuse to be present at a feast for
which a buffalo is slaughtered: the heart, the liver, and a slice off
the rump are his perquisites. A buffalo (never an Indian bull or cow) is
slaughtered at all big Malay feasts, secular, magical or Muslim. At
certain secular festivals the animal is caparisoned with cloth and has
round its neck the three-tiered gold ornament, modelled after its horns
and worn at weddings. The Yamtuan or overlord of Negri Sembilan used to
claim all buffaloes with abnormal horns as perquisites of royalty. To
spirits a pink buffalo must be offered. The roof-trees of the Bataks, a
Proto-Malay people of Sumatra, are decorated with buffalo-horns. This
domestic animal was imported into the Malayan region ages ago from
India.

In ceremonies conducted to coax away patently maleficent spirits, the
risk of a bond between the spirits and their propitiators, if both
partook of the same sacrificial meal, seems to be consciously shunned. A
banana-leaf tray or model house or boat is often filled with offerings
for the spirits plaguing a sick Malay, and hung up in the jungle or set
adrift on the river to bear them away. Among the offerings on one such
tray was observed a faked quid, the betelnut replaced by nutmeg, the
gambier by mace, and the lime by oil. But the quid prepared along with
it to be chewed and ejected by the magician upon the patient's back was
genuine. Again, there is a notable record from Selangor of a wave
offering for a sick Malay. A hanging frame-work or tray was filled with
the usual three kinds of rice, parched, saffron and washed, an egg,
bananas from one comb, pieces of uncooked flesh making up a whole fowl.
The blood of the fowls was placed in one of five miniature palm-spathe
buckets, two of the other four containing water and two the juice of
cane. Five waxen tapers were placed on the tray and lighted to guide the
spirits to their meals, and five lighted cigarettes for them were added.
The tray was waved slowly above the patient, waved seven times before
him, held for him to spit on, and carried out and hung from a tree in
the jungle. It is significant that the cooked and uncooked flesh each
made up a whole fowl and that all the bananas were plucked from one
comb. No meal was taken by those present.

The precaution not to eat of the food presented to spirits is not
however observed in the ritual to "cleanse" a country or district.
Perhaps like the coconut, betel and cigarette offered outside a village
quarantined for smallpox, the buffaloes sacrificed at the cleansing of a
countryside are offered not to maleficent spirits but to the spirits
invoked to combat them. Until recent years Perak used to be "cleansed"
periodically by the propitiation of friendly spirits and the expulsion
of malignant influences:--"The main line of development in ritual is
from the propitiation or insulation of evil influences to the
conciliation of beneficent powers." The royal state shaman, his royal
assistant, and the chief magicians from the river parishes assembled at
a village at the foot of the rapids below which the habitations of Perak
Malays began. *Séance*s occupied seven days. A pink buffalo was killed
and a feast was held. The head and other pieces of the victim were piled
on one of the rafts, which then set out down-stream. The four leading
rafts were prepared for the four great classes of spirits and were
manned by their appropriate magicians. The foremost raft carried a
branching tree, erect and supported by stays, and was for the shaman's
familiars. The fifth raft bore Muslim elders! Next came the royal band
with its sacred drums and trumpets, and then the Raja Kechil Muda (the
title of the assistant State shaman) and his followers. As they floated
down the river, the magicians waved white cloths and invoked the spirits
of the districts passed to come aboard and consume the offerings.
Whenever they reached a mosque, they halted for one night while a
*séance* was held and the villagers slaughtered a buffalo, placing its
head on one of the spirit rafts and eating the rest of the carcase. At
the mouth of the river the rafts were abandoned and allowed to drift to
sea. The State shaman did not accompany the procession downstream,
leaving the escort of the spirit rafts with their grisly freight to his
assistant. So, too, the magicians of the different parishes of the
river-banks stayed behind in turn, each of them supplying a substitute
to go downstream with the assistant State shaman.

In Kelantan a similar ceremony took seven days and seven nights, pink
buffaloes were sacrificed, and the shaman conducted the *séance* called
"the play of the princess."

The communal sacrifices for state or district described in this chapter
all follow a shaman's *séance* and may be surmised to be part of the
most primitive ritual in Malaya. They reveal the early attitude of the
Malay mind towards sacrifice. With human wants, kind spirits may become
feeble through hunger. With human weakness and fallibility, evil spirits
will desert a person or country for offerings of food and be decoyed by
greed on to waste waters. The partaking of a sacrifice establishes
communion. It is necessary therefore to eat of the offering to friendly
spirits. Food offered to spirits of disease one should be chary of
tasting. By a gift, as in the shaman's invocations a sacrifice is so
often termed, spirits can be conciliated. Finally, when a patient
recovers there is the offering to the spirits for their beneficence,
actuated no doubt by fear of punishment for omission but containing also
the germ of the freewill sacrifice of gratitude.

Sacrifices were made to spirits either at the uncertain times of
epidemics or at periods more or less defined. The sacrifice to revive
the spirits of the Perak regalia was annual. The "cleansing" of the
States of Perak and Kelantan is said to have been triennial. One account
indeed states that Perak was cleansed once in seven years or once in a
Sultan's reign, but this is probably a native explanation of the gradual
lapse of the custom. The ritual to feast the spirits of the Upper Perak
district took place "when the grain in the rice-fields was beginning to
swell." In most places where rice is grown elaborate propitiatory
ceremonies of a communal character are celebrated in the spring of every
third or fourth year.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX. Magic and Man](sss11.md)
