[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Legends and Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tale01)  [Next](tale03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE FISHERMAN AND THE JINNI

  IT hath reached me, O auspicious King, that there was a fisherman well
stricken in years who had a wife and three children, and withal was of
poor condition. Now it was his custom to cast his net every day four
times, and no more. On a day he went forth about noontide to the
seashore, where he laid down his basket and, tucking up his shirt and
plunging into the water, made a cast with his net and waited till it
settled to the bottom. Then he gathered the cords together and haled
away at it, but found it weighty. And however much he drew it landward,
he could not pull it up, so he carried the ends ashore and drove a stake
into the ground and made the net fast to it. Then he stripped and dived
into the water all about the net, and left not off working hard until he
had brought it up.

  He rejoiced thereat and, donning his clothes, went to the net, when he
found in it a dead jackass which had torn the meshes. Now when he saw
it, he exclaimed in his grief, "There is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah the Glorious, the Great!" Then quoth he, "This is a
strange manner of daily bread," and he began reciting in extempore
verse:

   "O toiler through the glooms of night in peril and in pain,  
   Thy toiling stint for daily bread comes not by might and main!  
   Seest thou not the fisher seek afloat upon the sea  
   His bread, while glimmer stars of night as set in tangled skein?  
   Anon he plungeth in despite the buffet of the waves,  
   The while to sight the bellying net his eager glances strain,  
   Till joying at the night's success, a fish he bringeth home  
   Whose gullet by the hook of Fate was caught and cut in twain.  
   When buys that fish of him a man who spent the hours of night  
   Reckless of cold and wet and gloom in ease and comfort fain,  
   Laud to the Lord who gives to this, to that denies, his wishes  
   And dooms one toil and catch the prey and other eat the fishes."  

Then quoth he, "Up and to it. I am sure of His beneficence, Inshallah!"
So he continued:

     "When thou art seized of Evil Fate, assume  
     The noble soul's long-suffering. 'Tis thy best.  
     Complain not to the creature, this be 'plaint  
     From one most Ruthful to the ruthlessest."  

  The fisherman, when he had looked at the dead ass, got it free of the
toils and wrung out and spread his net. Then he plunged into the sea,
saying, "In Allah's name!" and made a cast and pulled at it, but it grew
heavy and settled down more firmly than the first time. Now he thought
that there were fish in it, and he made it fast and, doffing his
clothes, went into the water, and dived and haled until he drew it up
upon dry land. Then found he in it a large earthern pitcher which was
full of sand and mud, and seeing this, he was greatly troubled. So he
prayed pardon of Allah and, throwing away the jar, wrung his net and
cleansed it and returned to the sea the third time to cast his net, and
waited till it had sunk. Then he pulled at it and found therein
potsherds and broken glass. Then, raising his eyes heavenward, he said:
"O my God! Verily Thou wettest that I cast not my net each day save four
times. The third is done and as yet Thou hast vouchsafed me nothing. So
this time, O my God, deign give me my daily bread."

  Then, having called on Allah's name, he again threw his net and waited
its sinking and settling, whereupon he haled at it but could not draw it
in for that it was entangled at the bottom. He cried out in his
vexation, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah!" and
he began reciting:

     "Fie on this wretched world, an so it be  
     I must be whelmed by grief and misery.  
     Tho' gladsome be man's lot when dawns the morn,  
     He drains the cup of woe ere eve he see.  
     Yet was I one of whom the world when asked  
     'Whose lot is happiest?' would say, ''Tis he!'"  

  Thereupon he stripped and, diving down to the net, busied himself with
it till it came to land. Then he opened the meshes and found therein a
cucumber-shaped jar of yellow copper, evidently full of something, whose
mouth was made fast with a leaden cap stamped with the seal ring of our
Lord Solomon, son of David (Allah accept the twain!). Seeing this, the
fisherman rejoiced and said, "If I sell it in the brass bazaar, 'tis
worth ten golden dinars." He shook it, and finding it heavy, continued:
"Would to Heaven I knew what is herein. But I must and will open it and
look to its contents and store it in my bag and sell it in the brass
market." And taking out a knife, he worked at the lead till he had
loosened it from the jar. Then he laid the cup on the ground and shook
the vase to pour out whatever might be inside. He found nothing in it,
whereat he marveled with an exceeding marvel. But presently there came
forth from the jar a smoke which spired heavenward into ether (whereat
he again marveled with mighty marvel), and which trailed along earth's
surface till presently, having reached its full height, the thick vapor
condensed, and became an Ifrit huge of bulk, whose crest touched the
clouds while his feet were on the ground. His head was as a dome, his
hands like pitchforks, his legs long as masts, and his mough big as a
cave. His teeth were like large stones, his nostrils ewers, his eyes two
lamps, and his look was fierce and lowering.

  Now when the fisherman saw the Ifrit, his side muscles quivered, his
teeth chattered, his spittle dried up, and he became blind about what to
do. Upon this the Ifrit looked at him and cried, "there is no god but
the God, and Solomon is the prophet of God," presently adding: "O
Apostle of Allah, slay me not. Never again will I gainsay thee in word
nor sin against thee in deed." Quoth the fisherman, "O Marid, diddest
thou say Solomon the Apostle of Allah? And Solomon is dead some thousand
and eight hundred years ago, and we are now in the last days of the
world! What is thy story, and what is thy account of thyself, and what
is the cause of thy entering into this cucurbit?"

  Now when the Evil Spirit heard the words of the fisherman, quoth he:
"There is no god but the God. Be of good cheer, O Fisherman!" Quoth the
fisherman, "Why biddest thou me to be of good cheer?" And he replied,
"Because of thy having to die an ill death in this very hour." Said the
fisherman, "Thou deservest for thy good tidings the withdrawal of
Heaven's protection, O thou distant one! Wherefore shouldest thou kill
me, and what thing have I done to deserve death, I who freed thee from
the jar, and saved thee from the depths of the sea, and brought thee up
on the dry land?" Replied the Ifrit, "Ask of me only what mode of death
thou wilt die, and by what manner of slaughter shall I slay thee."
Rejoined the fisherman, "What is my crime, and wherefore such
retribution?" Quoth the Ifrit, "Hear my story, O Fisherman!" And he
answered, "Say on, and be brief in thy sayinig, for of very sooth my
life breath is in my nostrils."

  Thereupon quoth the Jinni: "Know that I am one among the heretical
Jann, and I sinned against Solomon, David-son (on the twain be peace!),
I together with the famous Sakhr al-Jinni, whereupon the Prophet sent
his Minister, Asaf son of Barkhiya, to seize me. And this Wazir brought
me against my will and led me in bonds to him (I being downcast despite
my nose), and he placed me standing before him like a suppliant. When
Solomon saw me, he took refuge with Allah and bade me embrace the True
Faith and obey his behests. But I refused, so, sending for this
cucurbit, he shut me up therein and stopped it over with lead, whereon
he impressed the Most High Name, and gave his orders to the Jann, who
carried me off and cast me into the midmost of the ocean. There I abode
a hundred years, during which I said in my heart, 'Whoso shall release
me, him will I enrich forever and ever.'

  "But the full century went by and, when no one set me free, I entered
upon the second fivescore saying, 'Whoso shall release me, for him I
will open the hoards of the earth.' Still no one set me free, and thus
four hundred years passed away. Then quoth I, 'Whoso shall release me,
for him will I fulfill three wishes.' Yet no one set me free. Thereupon
I waxed wroth with exceeding wrath and said to myself, 'Whoso shall
release me from this time forth, him will I slay, and I will give him
choice of what death he will die.' And now, as thou hast released me, I
give thee full choice of deaths."

  The fisherman, hearing the words of the Ifrit, said, "O Allah! The
wonder of it that I have not come to free thee save in these days!"
adding, "Spare my life, so Allah spare thine, and slay me not, lest
Allah set one to slay thee." Replied the Contumacious One, "There is no
help for it. Die thou must, so ask by way of boon what manner of death
thou wilt die." Albeit thus certified, the fisherman again addressed the
Ifrit, saying, "Forgive me this my death as a generous reward for having
freed thee," and the Ifrit, "Surely I would not slay thee save on
account of that same release." "O Chief of the Ifrits," said the
fisherman, "I do thee good and thou requitest me with evil! In very
sooth the old saw lieth not when it saith:

     "We wrought them weal, they met our weal with ill,  
     Such, by my life! is every bad man's labor.  
     To him who benefits unworthy wights  
     Shall hap what hapt to Ummi-Amir's neighbor."  

  Now when the Ifrit heard these words he answered: "No more of this
talk. Needs must I kill thee." Upon this the fisherman said to himself:
"This is a Jinni, and I am a man to whom Allah hath given a passably
cunning wit, so I will now cast about to compass his destruction by my
contrivance and by mine intelligence, even as he took counsel only of
his malice and his frowardness." He began by asking the Ifrit, "Hast
thou indeed resolved to kill me?" And, receiving for all answer "Even
so," he cried, "Now in the Most Great Name, graven on the seal ring of
Solomon the son of David (peace be with the holy twain!), an I question
thee on a certain matter, wilt thou give me a true answer?" The Ifrit
replied "Yea," but, hearing mention of the Most Great Name, his wits
were troubled and he said with trembling, "Ask and be brief."

  Quoth the fisherman: "How didst thou fit into this bottle which would
not hold thy hand- no, nor even thy foot- and how came it to be large
enough to contain the whole of thee?" Replied the Ifrit, "What! Dost not
believe that I was all there?" And the fisherman rejoined, "Nay! I will
never believe it until I see thee inside with my own eyes." The Evil
Spirit on the instant shook and became a vapor, which condensed and
entered the jar little and little, till all was well inside, when lo!
the fisherman in hot haste took the leaden cap with the seal and
stoppered therewith the mouth of the jar and called out to the Ifrit,
saying: "Ask me by way of boon what death thou wilt die! By Allah, I
will throw thee into the sea before us and here will I build me a lodge,
and whoso cometh hither I will warn him against fishing and will say:
'In these waters abideth an Ifrit who giveth as a last favor a choice of
deaths and fashion of slaughter to the man who saveth him!"'

  Now when the Ifrit heard this from the fisherman and saw himself in
limbo, he was minded to escape, but this was prevented by Solomon's
seal. So he knew that the fisherman had cozened and outwitted him, and
he waxed lowly and submissive and began humbly to say, "I did but jest
with thee." But the other answered, "Thou liest, O vilest of the Ifrits,
and meanest and filthiest!" And he set off with the bottle for the
seaside, the Ifrit calling out, "Nay! Nay!" and he calling out, "Aye!
Aye!" Thereupon the Evil Spirit softened his voice and smoothed his
speech and abased himself, saying, "What wouldest thou do with me. O
Fisherman?" "I will throw thee back into the sea," he answered, "Where
thou hast been housed and homed for a thousand and eight hundred years.
And now I will leave thee therein till Judgment Day. Did I not say to
thee, \`Spare me and Allah shall spare thee, and slay me not lest Allah
slay thee'? yet thou spurnedst my supplication and hadst no intention
save to deal ungraciously by me, and Allah hath now thrown thee into my
hands, and I am cunninger that thou." Quoth the Ifrit, "Open for me that
I may bring thee weal." Quoth the fisherman: "Thou liest, thou accursed!
Nothing would satisfy thee save my death, so now I will do thee die by
hurling thee into this sea." Then the Marid roared aloud and cried:
"Allah upon thee, O Fisherman, don't! Spare me, and pardon my past
doings, and as I have been tyrannous, so be thou generous, for it is
said among sayings that go current: 'O thou who doest good to him who
hath done thee evil, suffice for the ill-doer his ill deeds, and do not
deal with me as did Umamah to 'Atikah.'"

  Asked the fisherman, "And what was their case?" And the Ifrit
answered, "This is not the time for storytelling and I in this prison,
but set me free and I will tell thee the tale." Quoth the fisherman:
"Leave this language. There is no help but that thou be thrown back into
the sea, nor is there any way for thy getting out of it forever and
ever. Vainly I placed myself under thy protection, and I humbled myself
to thee with weeping, while thou soughtest only to slay me, who had done
thee no injury deserving this at thy hands. Nay, so far from injuring
thee by any evil act, I worked thee naught but weal in releasing thee
from that jail of thine. Now I knew thee to be an evil-doer when thou
diddest to me what thou didst, and know that when I have cast thee back
into this sea, I will warn whosoever may fish thee up of what hath
befallen me with thee, and I will advise him to toss thee back again. So
shalt thou abide here under these waters till The End of Time shall make
an end of thee." But the Ifrit cried aloud: "Set me free. This is a
noble occasion for generosity, and I make covenant with thee and vow
never to do thee hurt and harm- nay, I will help thee to what shall put
thee out of want."

  The fisherman accepted his promises on both conditions, not to trouble
him as before, but on the contrary to do him service, and after making
firm the plight and swearing him a solemn oath by Allah Most Highest, he
opened the cucurbit. Thereupon the pillar of smoke rose up till all of
it was fully out, then it thickened and once more became an Ifrit of
hideous presence, who forthright administered a kick to the bottle and
sent it flying into the sea. The fisherman, seeing how the cucurbit was
treated and making sure of his own death, piddled in his clothes and
said to himself, "This promiseth badly," but he fortified his heart, and
cried: "O Ifrit, Allah hath said: 'Perform your covenant, for the
performance of your covenant shall be inquired into hereafter.' Thou
hast made a vow to me and hast sworn an oath not to play me false lest
Allah play thee false, for verily He is a jealous God who respiteth the
sinner but letteth him not escape. I say to thee as said the Sage Duban
to King Yunan, 'Spare me so Allah may spare thee!'" The Ifrit burst into
laughter and stalked away, saying to the fisherman, "Follow me."

  And the man paced after him at a safe distance (for he was not assured
of escape) till they had passed round the suburbs of the city. Thence
they struck into the uncultivated grounds and, crossing them, descended
into a broad wilderness, and lo! in the midst of it stood a mountain
tarn. The Ifrit waded in to the middle and again cried, "Follow me," and
when this was done he took his stand in the center and bade the man cast
his net and catch his fish. The fisherman looked into the water and was
much astonished to see therein varicolored fishes, white and red, blue
and yellow. However, he cast his net and, hauling it in, saw that he had
netted four fishes, one of each color. Thereat he rejoiced greatly, and
more when the Ifrit said to him: "Carry these to the Sultan and set them
in his presence, then he will give thee what shall make thee a wealthy
man. And now accept my excuse, for by Allah, at this time I wot none
other way of benefiting thee, inasmuch I have lain in this sea eighteen
hundred years and have not seen the face of the world save within this
hour. But I would not have thee fish here save once a day." The Ifrit
then gave him Godspeed, saying, "Allah grant we meet again," and struck
the earth with one foot, whereupon the ground clove asunder and
swallowed him up.

  The fisherman, much marveling at what had happened to him with the
Ifrit, took the fish and made for the city, and as soon as he reached
home he filled an earthen bowl with water and therein threw the fish,
which began to struggle and wriggle about. Then he bore off the bowl
upon his head and, repairing to the King's palace (even as the Ifrit had
bidden him) laid the fish before the presence. And the King wondered
with exceeding wonder at the sight, for never in his lifetime had he
seen fishes like these in quality or in conformation. So he said, "Give
those fish to the stranger slave girl who now cooketh for us," meaning
the bondmaiden whom the King of Roum had sent to him only three days
before, so that he had not yet made trial of her talents in the dressing
of meat.

  Thereupon the Wazir carried the fish to the cook and bade her fry
them, saying: O damsel, the King sendeth this say to thee: 'I have not
treasured thee, O tear o' me! save for stress time of me.' Approve,
then, to us this day thy delicate handiwork and thy savory cooking, for
this dish of fish is a present sent to the Sultan and evidently a
rarity." The Wazir, after he had carefully charged her, returned to the
King, who commanded him to give the fisherman four hundred dinars. He
gave them accordingly, and the man took them to his bosom and ran off
home stumbling and falling and rising again and deeming the whole thing
to be a dream. However, he bought for his family all they wanted, and
lastly he went to his wife in huge joy and gladness. So far concerning
him.

  But as regards the cookmaid, she took the fish and cleansed them and
set them in the frying pan, basting them with oil till one side was
dressed. Then she turned them over and behold, the kitchen wall clave
asunder, and therefrom came a young lady, fair of form, oval of face,
perfect in grace, with eyelids which kohl lines enchase. Her dress was a
silken headkerchief fringed and tasseled with blue. A large ring hung
from either ear, a pair of bracelets adorned her wrists, rings with
bezels of priceless gems were on her fingers, and she hent in hand a
long rod of rattan cane which she thrust into the frying pan, saying, "O
fish! O fish! Be ye constant to your convenant?" When the cookmaiden saw
this apparition she swooned away. The young lady repeated her words a
second time and a third time, and at last the fishes raised their heads
from the pan, and saying in articulate speech, "Yes! Yes!" began with
one voice to recite:

     "Come back and so will I! Keep faith and so will I!  
     And if ye fain forsake, I'll requite till quits we cry!"  

  After this the young lady upset the frying pan and went forth by the
way she came in and the kitchen wall closed upon her. When the
cookmaiden recovered from her fainting fit, she saw the four fishes
charred black as charcoal, and crying out, "His staff brake in his first
bout," she again fell swooning to the ground. Whilst she was in this
case the Wazir came for the fish, and looking upon her as insensible she
lay, not knowing Sunday from Thursday, shoved her with his foot and
said, "Bring the fish for the Sultan!" Thereupon, recovering from her
fainting fit, she wept and informed him of her case and all that had
befallen her. The Wazir marveled greatly and exclaiming, "This is none
other than a right strange matter!" he sent after the fisher-man and
said to him, "Thou, O Fisherman, must needs fetch us four fishes like
those thou broughtest before."

  Thereupon the man repaired to the tarn and cast his net, and when he
landed it, lo! four fishes were therein exactly like the first. These he
at once carried to the Wazir, who went in with them to the cookmaiden
and said, "Up with thee and fry these in my presence, that I may see
this business." The damsel arose and cleansed the fish, and set them in
the frying pan over the fire. However, they remained there but a little
while ere the wall clave asunder and the young lady appeared, clad as
before and holding in hand the wand which she again thrust into the
frying pan, saying, "O fish! O fish! Be ye constant to your olden
convenant?" And behold, the fish lifted their heads and repeated "Yes!
Yes!" and recited this couplet:

     "Come back and so will I! Keep faith and so will I!  
     But if ye fain forsake, I'll requite till quits we cry!"  

  When the fishes spoke, and the young lady upset the frying pan with
her rod and went forth by the way she came and the wall closed up, the
Wazir cried out, "This is a thing not to be hidden from the King." So he
went and told him what had happened, whereupon quoth the King, "There is
no help for it but that I see this with mine own eyes Then he sent for
the fisherman and commanded him to bring four other fish like the first
and to take with him three men as witnesses. The fisherman at once
brought the fish, and the King, after ordering them to give him four
hundred gold pieces, turned to the Wazir and said, "Up, and fry me the
fishes here before me!" The Minister, replying, "To hear is to obey,"
bade bring the frying pan, threw therein the cleansed fish, and set it
over the fire, when lo! the wall clave asunder, and out burst a black
slave like a huge rock or a remnant of the tribe Ad, bearing in hand a
branch of a green tree. And he cried in loud and terrible tones, "O
fish! O fish! Be ye an constant to your antique convenant?" Whereupon
the fishes lifted their heads from the frying pan and said, "Yes! Yes!
We be true to our vow," and they again recited the couplet:

     "Come back and so will I! Keep faith and so will I!  
     But if ye fain forsake, I'll requite till quits we cry!"  

  Then the huge blackamoor approached the frying pan and upset it with
the branch and went forth by the way he came in. When he vanished from
their sight, the King inspected the fish, and finding them all charred
black as charcoal, was utterly bewildered, and said to the Wazir:
"Verily this is a matter whereanent silence cannot be kept. And as for
the fishes, assuredly some marvelous adventure connects with them." So
he bade bring the fisherman and asked him, saying: "Fie on thee, fellow!
Whence come these fishes?" And he answered, "From a tarn between four
heights lying behind this mountain which is in sight of thy city." Quoth
the King, "How many days' march?" Quoth he, "O our Lord the Sultan, a
walk of half-hour." The King wondered, and straightway ordering his men
to march and horsemen to mount, led off the fisherman, who went before
as guide, privily damning the Ifrit.

  They fared on till they had climbed the mountain and descended unto a
great desert which they had never seen during all their lives. And the
Sultan and his merry men marveled much at the wold set in the midst of
four mountains, and the tarn and its fishes of four colors, red and
white, yellow and blue. The King stood fixed to the spot in wonderment
and asked his troops and an present, "Hath anyone among you ever seen
this piece of water before now?" And all made answer, "O King of the
Age, never did we set eyes upon it during an our days." They also
questioned the oldest inhabitants they met, men well stricken in years,
but they replied, each and every, "A lakelet like this we never saw in
this place." Thereupon quoth the King, "By Allah, I will neither return
to my capital nor sit upon the throne of my forebears till I learn the
truth about this tarn and the fish therein."

  He then ordered his men to dismount and bivouac all around the
mountain, which they did, and summoning his Wazir, a Minister of much
experience, sagacious, of penetrating wit and well versed in affairs,
said to him: "'Tis in my mind to do a certain thing, whereof I will
inform thee. My heart telleth me to fare forth alone this night and root
out the mystery of this tarn and its fishes. Do thou take thy scat at my
tent door, and say to the emirs and wazirs, the nabobs and the
chamberlains, in fine, to all who ask thee, 'The Sultan is ill at ease,
and he hath ordered me to refuse all admittance.' And be careful thou
let none know my design." And the Wazir could not oppose him. Then the
King changed his dress and ornaments and, slinging his sword over his
shoulder, took a path which led up one of the mountains and marched for
the rest of the night till morning dawned, nor did he cease wayfaring
till the heat was too much for him. After his long walk he rested for a
while, and then resumed his march and fared on through the second night
till dawn, when suddenly there appeared a black point in the far
distance. Hereat he rejoiced and said to himself, "Haply someone here
shall acquaint me with the mystery of the tarn and its fishes."

  Presently, drawing near the dark object, he found it a palace built of
swart stone plated with iron, and while one leaf of the gate stood
wide-open, the other was shut. The King's spirits rose high as he stood
before the gate and rapped a light rap, but hearing no answer, he
knocked a second knock and a third, yet there came no sign. Then he
knocked his loudest, but still no answer, so he said, "Doubtless 'tis
empty." There upon he mustered up resolution and boldly walked through
the main gate into the great hall, and there cried out aloud: "Holloa,
ye people of the palace! I am a stranger and a wayfarer. Have you aught
here of victual?" He repeated his cry a second time and a third, but
still there came no reply.

  So, strengthening his heart and making up his mind, he stalked through
the vestibule into the very middle of the palace, and found no man in
it. Yet it was furnished with silken stuffs gold-starred, and the
hangings were let down over the doorways. In the midst was a spacious
court off which sat four open saloons, each with its raised dais, saloon
facing saloon. A canopy shaded the court, and in the center was a
jetting fount with four figures of lions made of red gold, spouting from
their mouths water clear as pearls and diaphanous gems. Round about the
palace birds were let loose, and over it stretched a net of golden wire,
hindering them from flying off. In brief, there was everything but human
beings. The King marveled mightily thereat, yet felt he sad at heart for
that he saw no one to give him an account of the waste and its tarn, the
fishes, the mountains, and the palace itself. Presently as he sat
between the doors in deep thought behold, there came a voice of lament,
as from a heart griefspent, and he heard the voice chanting these
verses:

   "I hid what I endured of him and yet it came to light,  
   And nightly sleep mine eyelids fled and changed to sleepless night.  
   O world! O Fate! Withhold thy hand and cease thy hurt and harm  
   Look and behold my hapless sprite in dolor and affright.  
   Wilt ne'er show ruth to highborn youth who lost him on the way  
   Of Love, and fell from wealth and fame to lowest basest wight?  
   Jealous of Zephyr's breath was I as on your form he breathed,  
   But whenas Destiny descends she blindeth human sight.  
   What shall the hapless archer do who when he fronts his foe  
   And bends his bow to shoot the shaft shall find his string undight?  
   When cark and care so heavy bear on youth of generous soul,  
   How shall he 'scape his lot and where from Fate his place of
flight?"  

  Now when the Sultan heard the mournful voice he sprang to his feet and
following the sound, found a curtain let down over a chamber door. He
raised it and saw behind it a young man sitting upon a couch about a
cubit above the ground, and he fair to the sight, a well-shaped wight,
with eloquence dight. His forehead was flower-white, his cheek rosy
bright, and a mole on his cheek breadth like an ambergris mite, even as
the poet doth indite:

     A youth slim-waisted from whose locks and brow  
     The world in blackness and in light is set.  
     Throughout Creation's round no fairer show  
     No rarer sight thine eye hath ever met.  
     A nut-brown mole sits throned upon a cheek  
     Of rosiest red beneath an eye of jet.  

  The King rejoiced and saluted him, but he remained sitting in his
caftan of silken stuff purfled with Egyptian gold and his crown studded
with gems of sorts. But his face was sad with the traces of sorrow. He
returned the royal salute in most courteous wise adding, "O my lord, thy
dignity demandeth my rising to thee, and my sole excuse is to crave thy
pardon." Quoth the King: "Thou art excused, O youth, so look upon me as
thy guest come hither on an especial object. I would thou acquaint me
with the secrets of this tarn and its fishes and of this palace and thy
loneliness therein and the cause of thy groaning and wailing." When the
young man heard these words he wept with sore weeping till his bosom was
drenched with tears. The King marveled and asked him, "What maketh thee
weep, O young man?" and he answered, "How should I not weep, when this
is my case!" Thereupon he put out his hand and raised the skirt of his
garment, when lo! the lower half of him appeared stone down to his feet
while from his navel to the hair of his head he was man. The King,
seeing this his plight, grieved with sore grief and of his compassion
cried: "Alack and wellaway! In very sooth, O youth, thou heapest sorrow
upon my sorrow. I was minded to ask thee the mystery of the fishes only,
whereas now I am concerned to learn thy story as well as theirs. But
there is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious,
the Great! Lose no time, O youth, but tell me forthright thy whole
tale." Quoth he, "Lend me thine ears, thy sight, and thine insight." And
quoth the King, "All are at thy service!"

  Thereupon the youth began, "Right wondrous and marvelous is my case
and that of these fishes, and were it graven with gravers upon the eye
corners it were a warner to whoso would be warned." "How is that?" asked
the King, and the young man began to tell

(*Next*) [THE TALE OF THE ENSORCELED PRINCE](tale03.md)  
