[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Legends and Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tale27)  [Next](tale29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE SLEEPER AND THE WAKER

  IT hath reached me, O auspicious King, that there was once at Baghdad,
in the caliphate of Harun al-Rashid, a man and a merchant who had a son
Abu al-Hasan al-Khali'a by name. The merchant died leaving great store
of wealth to his heir, who divided it into two equal parts, whereof he
laid up one and spent of the other half. And he fell to companying with
Persians and with the sons of the merchants, and he gave himself up to
good drinking and good eating till all the wealth he had with him was
wasted and wantoned. Whereupon he betook himself to his friends and
comrades and cup companions and expounded to them his case, discovering
to them the failure of that which was in his hand of wealth. But not one
of them took heed of him or even deigned answer him.

  So he returned to his mother (and indeed his spirit was broken) and
related to her that which had happened to him and what had befallen him
from his friends, how they had neither shared with him nor requited him
with speech. Quoth she: "O Abu al-Hasan, on this wise are the sons of
this time: And thou have aught, they draw thee near to them, and if thou
have naught, they put thee away from them." And she went on to condole
with him, what while he bewailed himself and his tears flowed and he
repeated these lines:

     "An wane my wealth, no man will succor me,  
     When my wealth waxeth all men friendly show.  
     How many a friend for wealth showed friendliness  
     Who, when my wealth departed, turned to foe!"  

  Then he sprang up, and going to the place wherein was the other half
of his goods, took it and lived with it well. And he sware that he would
never again consort with a single one of those he had known, but would
company only with the stranger, nor entertain even him but one night,
and that when it morrowed, he would never know him more. Accordingly he
fell to sitting every eventide on the bridge over Tigris and looking at
each one who passed by him. And if he saw him to be a stranger, he made
friends with him and carried him to his house, where he conversed and
caroused with him all night till morning. Then he dismissed him, and
would never more salute him with the salaam nor ever more drew near unto
him, neither invited him again.

  Thus he continued to do for the space of a full year, till one day
while he sat on the bridge, as was his wont, expecting who should come
to him so he might take him and pass the night with him, behold, up came
the Caliph and Masrur, the Sworder of his vengeance, disguised in
merchants' dress, according to their custom. So Abu al-Hasan looked at
them, and rising, because he knew them not, asked them: "What say ye?
Will ye go with me to my dwelling place, so ye may eat what is ready and
drink what is at hand; to wit, platter bread and meat cooked and wine
strained?" The Caliph refused this, but he conjured him and said to him:
"Allah upon thee, O my lord. Go with me, for thou art my guest this
night, and balk not my hopes of thee!" And he ceased not to press him
till he consented, whereat Abu al-Hasan rejoiced, and walking on before
him, gave not over talking with him till they came to his house and he
carried the Caliph into the saloon.

  Al-Rashid entered a hall such as an thou sawest it and gazedst upon
its walls, thou hadst beheld marvels, and hadst thou looked narrowly at
its water conduits, thou wouldst have seen a fountain cased with gold.
The Caliph made his man abide at the door, and as soon as he was seated,
the host brought him somewhat to eat. So he ate, and Abu al-Hasan ate
with him, that eating might be grateful to him. Then he removed the tray
and they washed their hands and the Commander of the Faithful sat down
again. Whereupon Abu al-Hasan set on the drinking vessels, and seating
himself by his side, fell to filling and giving him to drink and
entertaining him with discourse. And when they had drunk their
sufficiency the host called for a slave girl like a branch of ban, who
took a lute and sang to it these two couplets:

      "O thou aye dwelling in my heart,  
      Whileas thy form is far from sight,  
      Thou art my sprite by me unseen,  
      Yet nearest near art thou, my sprite."  

  His hospitality pleased the Caliph, and the goodliness of his manners,
and he said to him: "O youth, who art thou? Make me acquainted with
thyself, so I may requite thee thy kindness." But Abu al-Hasan smiled
and said: 'O my lord, far be it, alas! that what is past should again
come to pass and that I company with thee at other time than this time!"
The Prince of True Believers asked: "Why so? And why wilt thou not
acquaint me with thy case?" and Abu al-Hasan answered, "Know, O my lord,
that my story is strange and that there is a cause for this affair."
Quoth Al-Rashid, "And what is the cause?" and quoth he, "The cause hath
a tail." The Caliph laughed at his words and Abu al-Hasan said, "I will
explain to thee this saying by the tale of the larrikin and the cook. So
hear thou, O my lord, the

(*Next*) [STORY OF THE LARRIKIN AND THE COOK](tale29)  
