[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Legends and Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tale19)  [Next](tale21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE THIRD VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SEAMAN

  AS I told you yesterday, I returned from my second voyage overjoyed at
my safety and with great increase of wealth, Allah having requited me
all that I had wasted and lost, and I abode awhile in Baghdad city
savoring the utmost ease and prosperity and comfort and happiness, till
the carnal man was once more seized with longing for travel and
diversion and adventure, and yearned after traffic and lucre and
emolument, for that the human heart is naturally prone to evil. So,
making up my mind, I laid in great plenty of goods suitable for a sea
voyage and repairing to Bassorah, went down to the shore and found there
a fine ship ready to sail, with a full crew and a numerous company of
merchants, men of worth and substance, faith, piety, and consideration.
I embarked with them and we set sail on the blessing of Allah Almighty
and on His aidance and His favor to bring our voyage to a safe and
prosperous issue, and already we congratulated one another on our good
fortune and boon voyage.

  We fared on from sea to sea and from island to island and city to
city, in all delight and contentment, buying and selling wherever we
touched, and taking our solace and our pleasure, till one day when as we
sailed athwart the dashing sea swollen with clashing billows, behold,
the master (who stood on the gunwale examining the ocean in all
directions) cried out with a great cry, and buffeted his face and pluckt
out his beard and rent his raiment, and bade furl the sail and cast the
anchors. So we said to him, "O Rais, what is the matter?" "Know, O my
brethren (Allah preserve you!) that the wind hath gotten the better of
us and hath driven us out of our course into midocean, and Destiny, for
our ill luck, hath brought us to the Mountain of the Zughb, a hairy folk
like apes, among whom no man ever fell and came forth alive. And my
heart presageth that we all be dead men."

  Hardly had the master made an end of his speech when the apes were
upon us. They surrounded the ship on all sides, swarming like locusts
and crowding the shore. They were the most frightful of wild creatures,
covered with black hair like felt, foul of favor and small of stature,
being but four spans high, yellow-eyed and black-faced. None knoweth
their language nor what they are, and they shun the company of men. We
feared to slay them or strike them or drive them away, because of their
inconceivable multitude, lest if we hurt one, the rest fall on us and
slay us, for numbers prevail over courage. So we let them do their will,
albeit we feared they would plunder our goods and gear. They swarmed up
the cables and gnawed them asunder, and on like wise they did with all
the ropes of the ship, so that if fell off from the wind and stranded
upon their mountainous coast. Then they laid hands on all the merchants
and crew, and landing us on the island, made off with the ship and its
cargo and went their ways, we wot not whither.

  We were thus left on the island, eating of its fruits and potherbs and
drinking of its streams till one day we espied in its midst what seemed
an inhabited house. So we made for it as fast as our feet could carry us
and, behold, it was a castle strong and tall, compassed about with a
lofty wall, and having a two-leaved gate of ebony wood, both of which
leaves open stood. We entered and found within a space wide and bare
like a great square, round which stood many high doors open thrown, and
at the farther end a long bench of stone and braziers, with cooking gear
hanging thereon and about it great Plenty of bones. But we saw no one
and marveled thereat with exceeding wonder. Then we sat down in the
courtyard a little while, and presently falling asleep, slept from the
forenoon till sundown, when lo! the earth trembled under our feet and
the air rumbled with a terrible tone.

  Then there came down upon us, from the top of the castle, a huge
creature in the likeness of a man, black of color, tall and big of bulk,
as he were a great date tree, with eyes like coals of fire and eyeteeth
like boar's tusks and a vast big gape like the mouth of a well.
Moreover, he had long loose lips like camel's hanging down upon his
breast, and ears like two jarms falling over his shoulder blades, and
the nails of his hands were like the claws of a lion. When we saw this
frightful giant, we were like to faint and every moment increased our
fear and terror, and we became as dead men for excess of horror and
affright. And after trampling upon the earth, he sat awhile on the
bench. Then he arose and coming to us, seized me by the arm, choosing me
out from among my comrades the merchants. He took me up in his hand and
turning me over, felt me as a butcher feeleth a sheep he is about to
slaughter, and I but a little mouthful in his hands. But finding me lean
and fleshless for stress of toil and trouble and weariness, let me go
and took up another, whom in like manner he turned over and felt and let
go. Nor did he cease to feel and turn over the rest of us, one after
another, till he came to the master of the ship.

  Now he was a sturdy, stout, broad-shouldered wight, fat and in full
vigor, so he pleased the giant, who seized him as a butcher seizeth a
beast, and throwing him down, set his foot on his neck and brake it,
after which he fetched a long spit and thrusting it up his backside,
brought it forth of the crown of his head. Then, lighting a fierce fire,
he set over it the spit with the rais thereon, and turned it over the
coals till the flesh was roasted, when he took the spit off the fire and
set it like a kobab stick before him. Then he tare the body, limb from
limb, as one jointeth a chicken and, rending the fresh with his nails,
fell to eating of it and gnawing the bones, till there was nothing left
but some of these, which he threw on one side of the wall. This done, he
sat for a while, then he lay down on the stone bench and fell asleep,
snarking and snoring like the gurgling of a lamb or a cow with its
throat cut, nor did he awake till morning, when he rose and fared forth
and went his ways.

  As soon as we were certified that he was gone, we began to talk with
one another, weeping and bemoaning ourselves for the risk we ran, and
saying: "Would Heaven we had been drowned in the sea or that the apes
had eaten us! That were better than to be roasted over the coals. By
Allah, this is a vile, foul death! But whatso the Lord willeth must
come-to pass, and there is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Him,
the Glorious, the Great! We shall assuredly perish miserably and none
will know of us, as there is no escape for us from this place." Then we
arose and roamed about the island, hoping that haply we might find a
place to hide us in or a means of flight, for indeed death was a light
matter to us, provided we were not roasted over the fire and eaten.
However, we could find no hiding place, and the evening overtook us, so,
of the excess of our terror, we returned to the castle and sat down
awhile.

  Presently, the earth trembled under our feet and the black ogre came
up to us and turning us over, felt one after other till he found a man
to his liking, whom he took and served as he had done the captain,
killing and roasting and eating him. After which he lay down on the
bench and slept and night, snarling and snoring like a beast with its
throat cut, till daybreak, when he arose and went out as before. Then we
drew together and conversed and add one to other, "By Allah, we had
better throw ourselves into the sea and be drowned than die roasted for
this is an abominable death!" Quoth one of us: "Hear ye my words! Let us
cast about to kill him, and be at peace from the grief of him and rid
the Moslems of his barbarity and tyranny." Then said I: "Hear me, O my
brothers. If there is nothing for it but to slay him, let us carry some
of this firewood and planks down to the seashore and make us a boat
wherein, if we succeed in slaughtering him, we may either embark and let
the waters carry us whither Allah willeth, or else abide here till some
ship pass, when we will take passage in it. If we fail to kill him, we
will embark in the boat and put out to sea. And if we be drowned, we
shall at least escape being roasted over a kitchen fire with sliced
weasands, whilst if we escape, we escape, and if we be drowned, we die
martyrs." "By Allah," said they all, "this rede is a right," and we
agreed upon this, and set about carrying it out. So we haled down to the
beach the pieces of wood which lay about the bench, and making a boat,
moored it to the strand, after which we stowed therein somewhat of
victual and returned to the castle.

  As soon as evening fell the earth trembled under our feet and in came
the blackamoor upon us, snarling like a dog about to bite. He came up to
us, and feeling us and turning us over one by one, took one of us and
did with him as he had done before and ate him, after which he lay down
on the bench and snored and snorted like thunder. As soon as we were
assured that he slept, we arose and taking two iron spits of those
standing there, heated them in the fiercest of the fire till they were
red-hot, like burning coals, when we gripped fast hold of them, and
going up to the giant as he lay snoring on the bench, thrust them into
his eyes and pressed upon them, all of us, with our united might, so
that his eyeballs burst and he became stone-blind. Thereupon he cried
with a great cry, whereat our hearts trembled, and springing up from the
bench, he fell a-groping after us, blindfold. We fled from him right and
left and he saw us not, for his sight was altogether blent, but we were
in terrible fear of him and made sure we were dead men despairing of
escape. Then he found the door, feeling for it with his hands, and went
out roaring aloud, and behold, the earth shook under us for the noise of
his roaring, and we quaked for fear. As he quitted the castle we
followed him and betook ourselves to the place where we had moored our
boat, saying to one another: "If this accursed abide absent till the
going down of the sun and come not to the castle, we shall know that he
is dead; and if he come back, we will embark in the boat and paddle till
we escape, committing our affair to Allah."

  But as we spoke, behold, up came the blackamoor with other two as they
were Ghuls, fouler and more frightful than he, with eyes like red-hot
coals, which when we saw, we hurried into the boat and casting off the
moorings, paddled away, and pushed out to sea. As soon as the ogres
caught sight of us, they cried out at us, and running down to the
seashore, fell a-pelting us with rocks, whereof some fell amongst us and
others fell into the sea. We paddled with all our might till we were
beyond their reach, but the most part of us were slain by the
rock-throwing, and the winds and waves sported with us and carried us
into the midst of the dashing sea, swollen with billows clashing. We
knew not whither we went, and my fellows died one after another till
there remained but three, myself and two others, for as often as one
died, we threw him into the sea. We were sore exhausted for stress of
hunger, but we took courage and heartened one another and worked for
dear life, and paddled with main and might till the winds cast us upon
an island, as we were dead men for fatigue and fear and famine.

  We landed on the island and walked about it for a while, finding that
it abounded in trees and streams and birds, and we ate of the fruits and
rejoiced in our escape from the black and our deliverance from the
perils of the sea. And thus we did till nightfall, when we lay down and
fell asleep for excess of fatigue. But we had hardly closed our eyes
before we were aroused by a hissing sound, like the sough of wind, and
awakening, saw a serpent like a dragon, a seldseen sight, of monstrous
make and belly of enormous bulk, which lay in a circle around us.
Presently it reared its head, and seizing one of my companions,
swallowed him up to his shoulders. Then it gulped down the rest of him,
and we heard his ribs crack in its belly. Presently it went its way, and
we abode in sore amazement and grief for our comrade and mortal fear for
ourselves, saying: "By Allah, this is a marvelous thing! Each kind of
death that threateneth us is more terrible than the last We were
rejoicing in our escape from the black ogre and our deliverance from the
perils of the sea, but now we have fallen into that which is worse.
There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah! By the
Almighty, we have escaped from the blackamoor and from drowning, but how
shall we escape from this abominable and viperish monster?" Then we
walked about the island, eating of its fruits and drinking of its
streams till dusk, when we climbed up into a high tree and went to sleep
there, I being on the topmost bough.

  As soon as it was dark night, up came the serpent, looking right and
left, and making for the tree whereon we were, climbed up to my comrade
and swallowed him down to his shoulders. Then it coiled about the bole
with him, whilst I, who could not take my eyes off the sight, heard his
bones crack in its belly, and it swallowed him whole, after which it
slid down from the tree. When the day broke and the light showed me that
the serpent was gone, I came down, as I were a dead man for stress of
fear and anguish, and thought to cast myself into the sea and be at rest
from the woes of the world, but could not bring myself to this, for
verily life is dear. So I took five pieces of wood, broad and long, and
bound one crosswise to the soles of my feet and others in like fashion
on my right and left sides and over my breast, and the broadest and
largest I bound across my head and made them fast with ropes. Then I lay
down on the ground on my back, so that I was completely fenced in by the
pieces of wood, which enclosed me like a bier.

  So as soon as it was dark, up came the serpent as usual, and made
toward me, but could not get at me to swallow me for the wood that
fenced me in. So it wriggled round me on every side whilst I looked on
like one dead by reason of my terror, and every now and then it would
glide away, and come back. But as often as it tried to come at me, it
was hindered by the pieces of wood wherewith I had bound myself on every
side. It ceased not to beset me thus from sundown till dawn, but when
the light of day shone upon the beast it made off, in the utmost fury
and extreme disappointment. Then I put out my hand and unbound myself,
well-nigh down among the dead men for fear and suffering, and went down
to the island shore, whence a ship afar off in the midst of the waves
suddenly struck my sight. So I tore off a great branch of a tree and
made signs with it to the crew, shouting out the while, which when the
ship's company saw they said to one another: "We must stand in and see
what this is. Peradventure 'tis a man." So they made for the island and
presently heard my cries, whereupon they took me on board and questioned
me of my case. I told them all my adventures from first to last, whereat
they marveled mightily and covered my shame with some of their clothes.
Moreover, they set before me somewhat of food and I ate my fill and I
drank cold sweet water and was mightily refreshed, and Allah Almighty
quickened me after I was virtually dead. So I praised the Most Highest
and thanked Him for His favors and exceeding mercies, and my heart
revived in me after utter despair, till meseemed as if all I had
suffered were but a dream I had dreamed.

  We sailed on with a fair wind the Almighty sent us till we came to an
island called Al-Salahitah, which aboundeth in sandalwood, when the
captain cast anchor. And when we had cast anchor, the merchants and the
sailors landed with their goods to sell and to buy. Then the captain
turned to me and said: "Hark'ee, thou art a stranger and a pauper and
tellest us that thou hast undergone frightful hardships, wherefore I
have a mind to benefit thee with somewhat that may further thee to thy
native land, so thou wilt ever bless me and pray for me." "So be it,"
answered I. "Thou shalt have my prayers." Quoth he: "Know then that
there was with us a man, a traveler, whom we lost, and we know not if he
be alive or dead, for we had no news of him. So I purpose to commit his
bales of goods to thy charge, that thou mayst sell them in this island.
A part of the proceeds we will give thee as an equivalent for thy pains
and service, and the rest we will keep till we return to Baghdad, where
we will inquire for his family and deliver it to them, together with the
unsold goods. Say me then, wilt thou undertake the charge and land and
sell them as other merchants do?" I replied, "Hearkening and obedience
to thee, O my lord, and great is thy kindness to me," and thanked him.
Whereupon he bade the sailors and porters bear the bales in question
ashore, and commit them to my charge.

  The ship's scribe asked him, "O master, what bales are these, and what
merchant's name shall I write upon them?" and he answered: "Write on
them the name of Sindbad the Seaman, him who was with us in the ship and
whom we lost at the roc's island, and of whom we have no tidings. For we
mean this stranger to sell them, and we will give him a part of the
price for his pains and keep the rest till we return to Baghdad, where
if we find the owner we will make it over to him, and if not, to his
family." And the clerk said, "Thy words are apposite and thy rede is
right." Now when I heard the captain give orders for the bales to be
inscribed with my name, I said to myself, "By Allah, I am Sindbad the
Seaman!" So I armed myself with courage and patience and waited till all
the merchants had landed and were gathered together, talking and
chattering about buying and selling. Then I went up to the captain and
asked him, "O my lord, knowest thou what manner of man was this Sindbad
whose goods thou hast committed to me for sale?" and he answered, "I
know of him naught save that he was a man from Baghdad city, Sindbad
hight the Seaman, who was drowned with many others when we lay anchored
at such an island, and I have heard nothing of him since then."

  At this I cried out with a great cry and said: "O Captain, whom Allah
keep! know that I am that Sindbad the Seaman and that I was not drowned,
but when thou castest anchor at the island, I landed with the rest of
the merchants and crew. And I sat down in a pleasant place by myself and
ate somewhat of food I had with me and enjoyed myself till I became
drowsy and was drowned in sleep. And when I awoke, I found no ship, and
none near me. These goods are my goods and these bales are my bales, and
all the merchants who fetch jewels from the Valley of Diamonds saw me
there and will bear me witness that I am the very Sindbad the Seaman;
for I related to them everything that had befallen me and told them how
you forgot me and left me sleeping on the island, and that betided me
which betided me." When the passengers and crew heard my words, they
gathered about me and some of them believed me and others disbelieved,
but presently, behold, one of the merchants, hearing me mention the
Valley of Diamonds, came up to me and said to them: "Hear what I say,
good people! When I related to you the most wonderful things in my
travels, and I told you that at the time we cast down our slaughtered
animals into the Valley of Serpents (I casting with the rest as was my
wont), there came up a man hanging to mine, ye believed me not and live
me the lie." "Yes," quoth they, "thou didst tell us some such tale, but
we had no call to credit thee." He resumed: "Now this is the very man,
by token that he gave me diamonds of great value and high price whose
like are not to be found, requiting me more than would have come up
sticking to my quarter of meat. And I companied with him to Bassorah
city, where he took leave of us and went on to his native stead whilst
we returned to our own land. This is he, and he told us his name,
Sindbad the Seaman, and how the ship left him on the desert island. And
know ye that Allah hath sent him hither, so might the truth of my story
be made manifest to you. Moreover, these are his goods, for when he
first forgathered with us, he told us of them; and the truth of his
words is patent."

  Hearing the merchant's speech, the captain came up to me and
considered me straitly awhile, after which he said, "What was the mark
on thy bales?" "Thus and thus," answered I, and reminded him of somewhat
that had passed between him and me when I shipped with him from
Bassorah. Thereupon he was convinced that I was indeed Sindbad the
Seaman and took me round the neck and gave me joy of my safety, saying:
"By Allah, O my lord, thy case is indeed wondrous and thy tale
marvelous. But lauded be Allah Who hath brought thee and me together
again, and Who hath restored to thee thy goods and gear!" Then I
disposed of my merchandise to the best of my skill, and profited largely
on them, whereat I rejoiced with exceeding joy and congratulated myself
on my safety and the recovery of my goods. We ceased not to buy and sell
at the several islands till we came to the land of Hind, where we bought
cloves and ginger and all manner spices. And thence we fared on to the
land of Sind, where also we bought and sold.

  In these Indian seas I saw wonders without number or count, amongst
others a fish like a cow which bringeth forth its young and suckleth
them like human beings, and of its skin bucklers are made. There were
eke fishes like asses and camels and tortoises twenty cubits wide. And I
saw also a bird that cometh out of a sea shell and layeth eggs and
hatcheth her chicks on the surface of the water, never coming up from
the sea to the land. Then we set sail again with a fair wind and the
blessing of Almighty Allah, and after a prosperous voyage, arrived safe
and sound at Bassorah. Here I abode a few days, and presently returned
to Baghdad, where I went at once to my quarter and my house and saluted
my family and familiars and friends. I had gained on this voyage what
was beyond count and reckoning, so I gave alms and largess and clad the
widow and orphan, by way of thanksgiving for my happy return, and fell
to feasting and making merry with my companions and intimates and forgot
while eating well and drinking well and dressing well everything that
had befallen me and all the perils and hardships I had suffered.

  These, then, are the most admirable things I sighted on my third
voyage, and tomorrow, an it be the will of Allah, you shall come to me
and I will relate the adventures of my fourth voyage, which is still
more wonderful than those you have already heard. (Saith he who telleth
the tale): Then Sindbad the Seaman bade give Sindbad the Landsman a
hundred golden dinars as of wont, and called for food. So they spread
the tables and the company ate the night meal and went their ways,
marveling at the tale they had heard. The porter after taking his gold
passed the night in his own house, also wondering at what his namesake
the seaman had told him, and as soon as day broke and the morning showed
with its sheen and shone, he rose and praying the dawn prayer, betook
himself to Sindbad the Seaman, who returned his salute and received him
with an open breast and cheerful favor and made him sit with him till
the rest of the company arrived, when he caused set on food and they ate
and drank and made merry. Then Sindbad the Seaman bespake them and
related to them the narrative of

(*Next*) [THE FOURTH VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SEAMAN](tale21)  
