[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pme05)  [Next](pme07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

### III.

### LITERATURE--DESCRIPTIVE.

SEXUAL inversion can boast a voluminous modern literature, little known
to general readers. A considerable part of this is pornographic, and
need not arrest our attention. <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6) A good
deal is descriptive, scientific,

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

historical, anthropological, apologetical and, polemical. With a few
books in each of these kinds I propose to deal now.

The first which falls under my hand is written by a French official, who
was formerly Chief of the Police Department for Morals in Paris. <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) M. Carlier, during ten years, had excellent
opportunities for studying the habits of professional male prostitutes
and their frequenters. He had condensed the results of his experience in
seven very disagreeable chapters, which offer a revolting picture of
vice and systematised extortion. in the great metropolis.

"In the numerous books," says M. Carlier, "which treat of prostitution,
the antiphysical passions have hitherto been always deliberately
omitted. Officially, public opinion does not recognise them, the
legislature will take no notice of them. The police are left alone to
react against them; and the unequal combat may some day cease, since it
is supported by no text of the code and no regulation of the state. When
that happens, pæderasty will become a calamity far more dangerous, more
scandalous, than female prostitution, the organisation of which it
shares in full. A magistrate once declared that in Paris it is the
school where the cleverest and boldest criminals are formed; and as a
matter of fact, it produces associations of special scoundrels, who use
it as the means of theft and *chantage*, not stopping short of murder in
the execution of their plots."

It will be seen from this exordium that M. Carlier

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

regards the subject wholly from the point of view of prostitution. He
has proved abundantly that male prostitution is organised in Paris upon
the same system as its female counterpart, and he has demonstrated that
this system is attended with the same dangers to society.

A violent animus against antiphysical passions makes him exaggerate
these dangers, for it is clear that normal vice is no less free from
sordid demoralisation and crimes of violence than its abnormal
twin-brother. Both are fornication; and everywhere, in Corinth as in
Sodom, the prostitute goes hand in hand with the bully, the robber, and
the cut-throat.

With reference to the legal position of these passions in France, he
says: "Pæderasty is not punished by our laws. It can only come within
the reach of the code by virtue of circumstances under which it may be
practised. If the facts take place in the presence of witnesses, or in a
place open to public observation, there will be an outrage to decency.
If minors are seduced, there may he proof of the habitual incitement of
minors to debauch, corruption, or even rape. But the passion itself is
not subject to penalty; it is only a vice arising from one of the seven
deadly sins. We have no intention of analysing this perverted instinct.
Since the law does not regard it, we will do like the law. We will pass
in silence all its private details, occupying ourselves only with what
meets the eye, with what may be called a veritable prostitution."

M. Carlier proceeds to describe the two main classes, which in France
are known as *tantes* and *amateurs*. The former are subdivided into
minor branches, under the

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

names of *jésus*, *petits jésus*, *corvettes* (naval), soldiers. The
latter, called also *rivettes*, are distinguished by their tastes for
different sorts of *tantes*.

Those who are interested in such matters may turn to M. Carlier's pages
for minute information regarding the habits, coteries, houses of
debauch, bullies, earnings, methods of extortion, dwellings, balls,
banquets, and even wedding-parties of these people. A peculiar world of
clandestine vice in a great city is revealed; and the authentic
documents, abundantly presented, render the picture vivid in its
details. From the official papers which passed through M. Carlier's
bureau during ten years (1860-70), he compiles a list of 6,342 pæderasts
who came within the cognisance of the police: 2,049 Parisians, 3,709
provincials, 484 foreigners. Of these 3,532, or more than the half,
could not be convicted of illegal acts.

While devoting most of his attention to professionals who dress like
women, and have become exactly similar to the efferninated youth
described in *Monsieur Vénus*, <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8) Carlier
gives some curious details about the French army. Soldiers are no less
sought after in France than in England or in Germany, and special houses
exist for military prostitution both in Paris and the garrison
towns. <span id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_9) Upon this point it should be
remarked that

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Carlier expresses a very strong opinion
regarding the contagiousness of antiphysical passion. And certainly many
facts known about the French army go to prove that these habits have
been contracted in Algeria, and have spread to a formidable extent
through whole regiments. <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10)

In conclusion, M. Carlier, though he so strongly deplores the impunity
extended by French law to sexual inversion, admits that this has not
augmented the evil. Speaking about England, where legal penalties are
heavy enough, he says: "Though they call it the *nameless crime* there,
it has in England at least as many votaries as in France, and they are
quite as depraved." <span id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[16:1](pme06.htm#fr_6) Ancient literature abounds
in prose and poetry which are both of them concerned with homosexual
love. Only a portion of this can be called pornographic: among the
Greeks, the Μοῦσα Παιδική, parts of Lucian, and occasional hints in
Athenæus and Aristophanes perhaps deserve the name; among the Romans,
the Priapeia, the Satyricon of Petronius, some elegies and satires,
certainly do so. Italian literature can show the Rime Burlesche,
Beccadelli's Hermaphroditus, the Canti Carnascialeschi, the maccaronic
poems of Fidentius, and the remarkably outspoken romance entitled
"Alcibiade fanciullo a scolla." Balzac has treated the theme, but with
reserve and delicacy. Mirabeau's "Erotika Biblion" is a kind of classic
on the subject. In English literature, if we except Shakespeare's
Sonnets. George Barnfield's Poems, parts of Marlowe, "Roderick Random,"
Churchill's Satire "The Times," homosexual passions have been rarely
handled, and none of these works are pornographic. In Germany, Count von
Platen, Heine's victim, was certainly an Urning; but his homosexual
imitations of Persian poetry are pure, though passionate. I am not
acquainted with more than the titles of some distinctly pornographic
German books. The following appears to be of this sort: Mannesliebe,
oder drei Jahre aus dem Leben eines jungen Mannes."

<span id="fn_7"></span>[17:1](pme06.htm#fr_7) Les Deux Prostitutions,
par F. Carlier, Ancien Chef du Service actif des Mœurs à la Préfecture
de Police. Paris, Dentu, 1889.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[19:1](pme06.htm#fr_8) Paris, Brossier, 1889.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[19:2](pme06.htm#fr_9) In the recently published
military novel "Sous Offs." (by Lucien Descaves, Paris, Tresse et Stock,
1890) some details are given regarding establishments of this nature.
See pp. 322, 412, 417, for a description of the drinking-shop called
"Aux Amis dc l'Armée," where a few maids were kept for show, and also of
its frequenters, including in particular the adjutant Laprévotte (cp.
44).

<span id="fn_10"></span>[20:1](pme06.htm#fr_10) On the morals of the
Foreign Legions, see Ulrichs, Ara Spei, p. 20; Memnon, p. 27. Also
General Brossier's report, quoted by Burton, Arabian Nights, vol. X. p.
251.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[20:2](pme06.htm#fr_11) p. 459.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Literature--Medico-Forensic](pme07)
