[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pme12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

### SUGGESTIONS ON THE SUBJECT OF SEXUAL INVERSION IN RELATION TO LAW AND EDUCATION.

#### I.

THE laws in force against what are called unnatural offences derive from
an edict of Justinian, A.D. 538. The Emperor treated these offences as
criminal, on the ground that they brought plagues, famines, earthquakes,
and the destruction of whole cities, together with their inhabitants,
upon the nations who tolerated them.

#### II.

A belief that sexual inversion is a crime against God, nature, and the
State pervades all subsequent legislation on the subject. This belief
rests on (1) theological conceptions derived from the Scriptures; (2) a
dread of decreasing the population; (3) the antipathy of the majority
for the tastes of the minority; (4) the vulgar error that antiphysical
desires are invariably voluntary, and the result either of inordinate
lust or of satiated appetites.

#### III.

Scientific investigation has proved in recent years that a very large
proportion of persons in whom abnormal

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

sexual inclinations are manifested possess them from their earliest
childhood, that they cannot divert them into normal channels, and that
they are powerless to get rid of them. In these cases, then, legislation
is interfering with the liberty of individuals, under a certain
misconception regarding the nature of their offense.

#### IV.

Those who support the present laws are therefore bound to prove that the
coercion, punishment, and defamation of such persons are justified
either (1) by any injury which these persons suffer in health of body or
mind, or (2) by any serious danger arising from them to the social
organism.

#### V.

Experience, confirmed by scientific observation, proves that the
temperate indulgence of abnormal sexuality is no more injurious to the
individual than a similar indulgence of normal sexuality.

#### VI.

In the present state of over-population, it is not to be apprehended
that a small minority of men exercising sterile and abnormal sexual
inclinations should seriously injure society by limiting the increase of
the human race.

#### VII.

Legislation does not interfere with various forms of sterile intercourse
between men and women: (1) prostitution, (2) cohabitation in marriage
during the period of pregnancy, (3) artificial precautions against
impregnation,

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

and (4) some abnormal modes of congress with the consent of the female.
It is therefore in an illogical position, when it interferes with the
action of those who are naturally sterile, on the ground of maintaining
the numerical standard of the population.

#### VIII.

The danger that unnatural vices, if tolerated by the law, would increase
until whole nations acquired them, does not seem to be formidable. The
position of women in our civilisation renders sexual relations among us
occidentals different from those of any country--ancient Greece and
Rome, modern Turkey and Persia--where antiphysical habits have hitherto
become endemic.

#### IX.

In modern France, since the promulgation of the Code Napoleon, sexual
inversion has been tolerated under the same restrictions as normal
sexuality. That is to say, violence and outrages to public decency are
punished, and minors are protected, but adults are allowed to dispose as
they like of their own persons. The experience of nearly a century shows
that in France, where sexual inversion is not criminal Per se, there has
been no extension of it through society. Competent observers, like
agents of police, declare that London, in spite of our penal
legislation, is no less notorious for abnormal vice than Paris.

#### X.

Italy, by the Penal Code of 1889, adopted the principles of the Code
Napoleon on this point. It would be interesting to know what led to this
alteration of the

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Italian law. But it cannot be supposed that the
results of the Code Napoleon in France were not fully considered.

#### XI.

The severity of the English statutes render them almost incapable of
being put in force. In consequence of this the law is not unfrequently
evaded, and crimes are winked at.

#### XII.

At the same time our laws encourage blackmailing upon false accusation;
and the presumed evasion of their execution places from time to time a
vile weapon in the hands of unscrupulous politicians, to attack the
Government in office. Examples: the Dublin Castle Scandals of 1884, the
Cleveland Street Scandals of 1889.

#### XIII.

Those who hold that our penal laws are required by the interests of
society must turn their attention to the higher education. This still
rests on the study of the Greek and Latin classics, a literature
impregnated with pæderastia. It is carried on at public schools, where
young men are kept apart from females, and where homo-sexual vices are
frequent. The best minds of our youth are therefore exposed to the
influences of a pæderastic literature at the same time that they acquire
the knowledge and experience of unnatural practices. Nor is any trouble
taken to correct these adverse influences by physiological instruction
in the laws of sex.

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

#### XIV.

The points suggested for consideration are whether England is still
justified in restricting the freedom of adult persons, and rendering
certain abnormal forms of sexuality criminal, by any real dangers to
society: after it has been shown (1) that abnormal inclinations are
congenital, natural, and ineradicable in a large percentage of
individuals; (2) that we tolerate sterile intercourse of various types
between the two sexes; (3) that our legislation has not suppressed the
immorality in question; (4) that the operation of the Code Napoleon for
nearly a century has not increased this immorality in France; (5) that
Italy, with the experience of the Code Napoleon to guide her, adopted
its principles in 1889; (6) that the English penalties are rarely
inflicted to their full extent; (7) that their existence encourages
blackmailing, and their non-enforcement gives occasion for base
political agitation; (8) that our higher education is in open
contradiction to the spirit of our laws. <span
id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79.md)

FINIS.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_79"></span>[135:1](pme13.htm#fr_79.md) It may not he
superfluous to recapitulate the main points of English legislation on
this topic. (1) Sodomy is a felony, defined as the carnal knowledge (per
anum) of any man or of any woman by a male person; punishable with penal
servitude for life as a maximum, for ten years as a minimum. (2) The
attempt to commit sodomy is punishable with ten years' penal servitude
as a maximum. (3) The commission, in public or private, by any male
person with another male person, of "any act of gross indecency," is
punishable with two years' imprisonment and hard labour."
