[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mba15)  [Next](mba17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002GYVU7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths of Babylonia and Assyria*, by Donald A. MacKenzie, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span> <span id="an_ch-10"></span>

### CHAPTER X

### Buildings and Laws and Customs of Babylon

<span class="small">Decline and Fall of Sumerian Kingdoms--Elamites and
Semites strive for Supremacy--Babylon's Walls, Gates, Streets, and
Canals--The Hanging Gardens--Merodach's Great Temple--The Legal Code of
Hammurabi--The Marriage Market--Position of Women--Marriage brought
Freedom--Vestal Virgins--Breach of Promise and Divorce--Rights of
Children--Female Publicans--The Land Laws--Doctors legislated out of
Existence--Folk Cures--Spirits of Disease expelled by Magical
Charms--The Legend of the Worm--"Touch Iron"--Curative Water--Magical
Origin of Poetry and Music.</span>

THE rise of Babylon inaugurated a new era in the history of Western
Asia. Coincidentally the political power of the Sumerians came to an
end. It had been paralysed by the Elamites, who, towards the close of
the Dynasty of Isin, successfully overran the southern district and
endeavoured to extend their sway over the whole valley. Two Elamite
kings, Warad-Sin and his brother Rim-Sin, struggled with the rulers of
Babylon for supremacy, and for a time it appeared as if the intruders
from the East were to establish themselves permanently as a military
aristocracy over Sumer and Akkad. But the Semites were strongly
reinforced by new settlers of the same blended stock who swarmed from
the land of the Arno-rites. Once again Arabia was pouring into Syria
vast hordes of its surplus population, with the result that ethnic
disturbances were constant and widespread. This migration is termed the
Canaanitic or Amorite: it flowed into Mesopotamia and across Assyria,
while it supplied

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

the "driving power" which secured the ascendancy of the Hammurabi
Dynasty at Babylon. Indeed, the ruling family which came into prominence
there is believed to have been of Canaanitic origin.

Once Babylon became the metropolis it retained its pre-eminence until
the end. Many political changes took place during its long and chequered
history, but no rival city in the south ever attained to its splendour
and greatness. Whether its throne was occupied by Amorite or Kassite,
Assyrian or Chaldean, it was invariably found to be the most effective
centre of administration for the lower Tigro-Euphrates valley. Some of
the Kassite monarchs, however, showed a preference for Nippur.

Of its early history little is known. It was over-shadowed in turn by
Kish and Umma, Lagash and Erech, and may have been little better than a
great village when Akkad rose into prominence. Sargon I, the royal
gardener, appears to have interested himself in its development, for it
was recorded that he cleared its trenches and strengthened its
fortifications. The city occupied a strategic position, and probably
assumed importance on that account as well as a trading and industrial
centre. Considerable wealth had accumulated at Babylon when the Dynasty
of Ur reached the zenith of its power. It is recorded that King Dungi
plundered its famous "Temple of the High Head", E-sagila, which some
identify with the Tower of Babel, so as to secure treasure for Ea's
temple at Eridu, which he specially favoured. His vandalistic raid, like
that of the Gutium, or men of Kutu, was remembered for long centuries
afterwards, and the city god was invoked at the time to cut short his
days.

No doubt, Hammurabi's Babylon closely resembled the later city so
vividly described by Greek writers, although it was probably not of such
great dimensions.

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> According to
Herodotus, it occupied an exact square on the broad plain, and had a
circumference of sixty of our miles. "While such is its size," the
historian wrote, "in magnificence there is no other city that approaches
to it." Its walls were eighty-seven feet thick and three hundred and
fifty feet high, and each side of the square was fifteen miles in
length. The whole city was surrounded by a deep, broad canal or moat,
and the river Euphrates ran through it.

"Here", continued Herodotus, "I may not omit to tell the use to which
the mould dug out of the great moat was turned, nor the manner in which
the wall was wrought. As fast as they dug the moat the soil which they
got from the cutting was made into bricks, and when a sufficient number
were completed they baked the bricks in kilns. Then they set to
building, and began with bricking the borders of the moat, after which
they proceeded to construct the wall itself; using throughout for their
cement hot bitumen, and interposing a layer of wattled reeds at every
thirtieth course of the bricks. On the top, along the edges of the wall,
they constructed buildings of a single chamber facing one another,
leaving between them room for a four-horse chariot to turn. In the
circuit of the wall are a hundred gates, all of brass, with brazen
lintels and side posts." <span id="fr_264"></span>[1](#fn_263) These
were the gates referred to by Isaiah when God called Cyrus:

<span class="small">I will loose the loins of kings, to open before him
the two leaved gates; and the gates shall not be shut: I will go before
thee, and make the crooked places straight; I will break in pieces the
gates of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron. <span
id="fr_265"></span>[2](#fn_264)</span>

The outer wall was the main defence of the city, but there was also an
inner wall less thick but not much

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

inferior in strength. In addition, a fortress stood in each division of
the city. The king's palace and the temple of Bel Merodach were
surrounded by walls.

All the main streets were perfectly straight, and each crossed the city
from gate to gate, a distance of fifteen miles, half of them being
interrupted by the river, which had to be ferried. As there were
twenty-five gates on each side of the outer wall, the great
thoroughfares numbered fifty in all, and there were six hundred and
seventy-six squares, each over two miles in circumference. From
Herodotus we gather that the houses were three or four stories high,
suggesting that the tenement system was not unknown, and according to Q.
Curtius, nearly half of the area occupied by the city was taken up by
gardens within the squares.

In Greek times Babylon was famous for the hanging or terraced gardens of
the "new palace", which had been erected by Nebuchadnezzar II. These
occupied a square which was more than a quarter of a mile in
circumference. Great stone terraces, resting on arches, rose up like a
giant stairway to a height of about three hundred and fifty feet, and
the whole structure was strengthened by a surrounding wall over twenty
feet in thickness. So deep were the layers of mould on each terrace that
fruit trees were grown amidst the plants of luxuriant foliage and the
brilliant Asian flowers. Water for irrigating the gardens was raised
from the river by a mechanical contrivance to a great cistern situated
on the highest terrace, and it was prevented from leaking out of the
soil by layers of reeds and bitumen and sheets of lead. Spacious
apartments, luxuriously furnished and decorated, were constructed in the
spaces between the arches and were festooned by flowering creepers. A
broad stairway ascended from terrace to terrace.

 

<span id="img_22000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![NEBUCHADNEZZAR IN
THE HANGING GARDENS&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From the Painting by E.
Wallcousins&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/22000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/22000.jpg)  
NEBUCHADNEZZAR IN THE HANGING GARDENS  
*From the Painting by E. Wallcousins*.  
</span>

 

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

The old palace stood in a square nearly four miles in circumference, and
was strongly protected by three walls, which were decorated by
sculptures in low relief, representing battle scenes and scenes of the
chase and royal ceremonies. Winged bulls with human heads guarded the
main entrance.

Another architectural feature of the city was E-sagila, the temple of
Bel Merodach, known to the Greeks as "Jupiter-Belus". The high wall
which enclosed it had gates of solid brass. "In the middle of the
precinct", wrote Herodotus, "there was a tower of solid masonry, a
furlong in length and breadth, upon which was raised a second tower, and
on that a third, and so on up to eight. The ascent to the top is on the
outside, by a path which winds round all the towers. When one is about
halfway up, one finds a resting-place and seats, where persons are wont
to sit some time on their way to the summit. On the topmost tower there
is a spacious temple, and inside the temple stands a couch of unusual
size, richly adorned, with a golden table by its side. There is no
statue of any kind set up in the place, nor is the chamber occupied of
nights by anyone but a single native woman, who, as the Chaldæans, the
priests of this god, affirm, is chosen for himself by the deity out of
all the women of the land."

A woman who was the "wife of Amon" also slept in that god's temple at
Thebes in Egypt. A similar custom was observed in Lycia.

"Below, in the same precinct," continued Herodotus, "there is a second
temple, in which is a sitting figure of Jupiter, all of gold. Before the
figure stands a large golden table, and the throne whereon it sits, and
the base on which the throne is placed, are likewise of pure gold. . . .
Outside the temple are two altars, one of solid gold, on which it is
only lawful to offer sucklings;

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

the other, a common altar, but of great size, on which the full-grown
animals are sacrificed. It is also on the great altar that the Chaldæans
burn the frankincense, which is offered to the amount of a thousand
talents' weight, every year, at the festival of the god. In the time of
Cyrus there was likewise in this temple a figure of a man, twelve cubits
high, entirely of solid gold. . . . Besides the ornaments which I have
mentioned, there are a large number of private offerings in this holy
precinct." <span id="fr_266"></span>[1](#fn_265)

The city wall and river gates were closed every night, and when Babylon
was besieged the people were able to feed themselves. The gardens and
small farms were irrigated by canals, and canals also controlled the
flow of the river Euphrates. A great dam had been formed above the town
to store the surplus water during inundation and increase the supply
when the river sank to its lowest.

In Hammurabi's time the river was crossed by ferry boats, but long ere
the Greeks visited the city a great bridge had been constructed. So
completely did the fierce Sennacherib destroy the city, that most of the
existing ruins date from the period of Nebuchadnezzar II. <span
id="fr_267"></span>[2](#fn_266)

Our knowledge of the social life of Babylon and the territory under its
control is derived chiefly from the Hammurabi Code of laws, of which an
almost complete copy was discovered at Susa, towards the end of 1901, by
the De Morgan expedition. The laws were inscribed on a stele of black
diorite 7 ft. 3 in. high, with a circumference at the base of 6 ft. 2
in. and at the top of 5 ft. 4 in. This important relic of an ancient
law-abiding people had been broken in three pieces, but when these

 

<span id="img_22200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![STELE OF
HAMMURABI, WITH ''CODE OF LAWS''&lt;br&gt; (&lt;i&gt;Louvre,
Paris&lt;/i&gt;)&lt;br&gt; Photo. Giraudon](tn/22200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/22200.jpg)  
STELE OF HAMMURABI, WITH ''CODE OF LAWS''  
(*Louvre, Paris*)  
Photo. Giraudon  
</span>

 

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

were joined together it was found that the text was not much impaired.
On one side are twenty-eight columns and on the other sixteen.
Originally there were in all nearly 4000 lines of inscriptions, but five
columns, comprising about 300 lines, had been erased to give space, it
is conjectured, for the name of the invader who carried the stele away,
but unfortunately the record was never made.

On the upper part of the stele, which is now one of the treasures of the
Louvre, Paris, King Hammurabi salutes, with his right hand reverently
upraised, the sun god Shamash, seated on his throne, at the summit of
E-sagila, by whom he is being presented with the stylus with which to
inscribe the legal code. Both figures are heavily bearded, but have
shaven lips and chins. The god wears a conical headdress and a flounced
robe suspended from his left shoulder, while the king has assumed a
round dome-shaped hat and a flowing garment which almost sweeps the
ground.

It is gathered from the Code that there were three chief social
grades--the aristocracy, which included land-owners, high officials and
administrators; the freemen, who might be wealthy merchants or small
landholders; and the slaves. The fines imposed for a given offence upon
wealthy men were much heavier than those imposed upon the poor. Lawsuits
were heard in courts. Witnesses were required to tell the truth,
"affirming before the god what they knew", and perjurers were severely
dealt with; a man who gave false evidence in connection with a capital
charge was put to death. A strict watch was also kept over the judges,
and if one was found to have willingly convicted a prisoner on
insufficient evidence he was fined and degraded.

Theft was regarded as a heinous crime, and was invariably

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

punished by death. Thieves included those who made purchases from minors
or slaves without the sanction of elders or trustees. Sometimes the
accused was given the alternative of paying a fine, which might exceed
by ten or even thirty fold the value of the article or animal he had
appropriated. It was imperative that lost property should be restored.
If the owner of an article of which he had been wrongfully deprived
found it in possession of a man who declared that he had purchased it
from another, evidence was taken in court. When it happened that the
seller was proved to have been the thief, the capital penalty was
imposed. On the other hand, the alleged purchaser was dealt with in like
manner if he failed to prove his case. Compensation for property stolen
by a brigand was paid by the temple, and the heirs of a man slain by a
brigand within the city had to be compensated by the local authority.

Of special interest are the laws which relate to the position of women.
In this connection reference may first he made to the
marriage-by-auction custom, which Herodotus described as follows: "Once
a year in each village the maidens of age to marry were collected all
together into one place, while the men stood round them in a circle.
Then a herald called up the damsels one by one, and offered them for
sale. He began with the most beautiful. When she was sold for no small
sum of money, he offered for sale the one who came next to her in
beauty. All of them were sold to be wives. The richest of the
Babylonians who wished to wed bid against each other for the loveliest
maidens, while the humbler wife-seekers, who were indifferent about
beauty, took the more homely damsels with marriage portions. For the
custom was that when the herald had gone through the whole number of the
beautiful

 

<span id="img_22400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE BABYLONIAN
MARRIAGE MARKET&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From The Painting by Edwin Long,
R.A., in the Royal Holloway College&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/22400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/22400.jpg)  
THE BABYLONIAN MARRIAGE MARKET  
*From The Painting by Edwin Long, R.A., in the Royal Holloway
College*.  
</span>

 

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

damsels, he should then call up the ugliest--a cripple, if there chanced
to be one--and offer her to the men, asking who would agree to take her
with the smallest marriage portion. And the man who offered to take the
smallest sum had her assigned to him. The marriage portions were
furnished by the money paid for, the beautiful damsels, and thus the
fairer maidens portioned out the uglier. No one was allowed to give his
daughter in marriage to the man of his choice, nor might anyone carry
away the damsel whom he had purchased without finding bail really and
truly to make her his wife; if, however, it turned out that they did not
agree, the money might be paid back. All who liked might come, even from
distant villages, and bid for the women." <span
id="fr_268"></span>[1](#fn_267)

This custom is mentioned by other writers, but it is impossible to
ascertain at what period it became prevalent in Babylonia and by whom it
was introduced. Herodotus understood that it obtained also in "the
Illyrian tribe of the Eneti", which was reputed to have entered Italy
with Antenor after the fall of Troy, and has been identified with the
Venetians of later times. But the ethnic clue thus afforded is
exceedingly vague. There is no direct reference to the custom in the
Hammurabi Code, which reveals a curious blending of the principles of
"Father right" and "Mother right". A girl was subject to her father's
will; he could dispose of her as he thought best, and she always
remained a member of his family; after marriage she was known as the
daughter of so and so rather than the wife of so and so. But marriage
brought her freedom and the rights of citizenship. The power vested in
her father was never transferred to her husband.

A father had the right to select a suitable spouse for

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

his daughter, and she could not marry without his consent. That this law
did not prevent "love matches" is made evident by the fact that
provision was made in the Code for the marriage of a free woman with a
male slave, part of whose estate in the event of his wife's death could
be claimed by his master.

When a betrothal was arranged, the father fixed the "bride price", which
was paid over before the contract could be concluded, and he also
provided a dowry. The amount of the "bride price" might, however, be
refunded to the young couple to give them a start in life. If, during
the interval between betrothal and marriage, the man "looked upon
another woman", and said to his father-in-law, "I will not marry your
daughter", he forfeited the "bride price" for breach of promise of
marriage.

A girl might also obtain a limited degree of freedom by taking vows of
celibacy and becoming one of the vestal virgins, or nuns, who were
attached to the temple of the sun god. She did not, however, live a life
of entire seclusion. If she received her due proportion of her father's
estate, she could make business investments within certain limits. She
was not, for instance, allowed to own a wineshop, and if she even
entered one she was burned at the stake. Once she took these vows she
had to observe them until the end of her days. If she married, as she
might do to obtain the legal status of a married woman and enjoy the
privileges of that position, she denied her husband conjugal rites, but
provided him with a concubine who might bear him children, as Sarah did
to Abraham. These nuns must not be confused with the unmoral women who
were associated with the temples of Ishtar and other love goddesses of
shady repute.

The freedom secured by a married woman had its

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

legal limitations. If she became a widow, for instance, she could not
remarry without the consent of a judge, to whom she was expected to show
good cause for the step she proposed to take. Punishments for breaches
of the marriage law were severe. Adultery was a capital crime; the
guilty parties were bound together and thrown into the river. If it
happened, however, that the wife of a prisoner went to reside with
another man on account of poverty, she was acquitted and allowed to
return to her husband after his release. In cases where no plea of
poverty could be urged the erring women were drowned. The wife of a
soldier who had been taken prisoner by an enemy was entitled to a third
part of her husband's estate if her son was a minor, the remainder was
held in trust. The husband could enter into possession of all his
property again if he happened to return home.

Divorce was easily obtained. A husband might send his wife away either
because she was childless or because he fell in love with another woman.
Incompatibility of temperament was also recognized as sufficient reason
for separation. A woman might hate her husband and wish to leave him.
"If", the Code sets forth, "she is careful and is without blame, and is
neglected by her husband who has deserted her", she can claim release
from the marriage contract. But if she is found to have another lover,
and is guilty of neglecting her duties, she is liable to be put to
death.

A married woman possessed her own property. Indeed, the value of her
marriage dowry was always vested in her. When, therefore, she divorced
her husband, or was divorced by him, she was entitled to have her dowry
refunded and to return to her father's house. Apparently she could claim
maintenance from her father.

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

A woman could have only one husband, but a man could have more than one
wife. He might marry a secondary wife, or concubine, because he was
without offspring, but "the concubine", the Code lays down, "shall not
rank with the wife". Another reason for second marriage recognized by
law was a wife's state of health. In such circumstances a man could not
divorce his sickly wife. He had to support her in his house as long as
she lived.

Children were the heirs of their parents, but if a man during his
lifetime gifted his property to his wife, and confirmed it on "a sealed
tablet", the children could have no claim, and the widow was entitled to
leave her estate to those of her children she preferred; but she could
not will any portion of it to her brothers. In ordinary cases the
children of a first marriage shared equally the estate of a father with
those of a second marriage. If a slave bore children to her employer,
their right to inheritance depended on whether or not the father had
recognized them as his offspring during his lifetime. A father might
legally disown his son if the young man was guilty of criminal
practices.

The legal rights of a vestal virgin were set forth in detail. If she had
received no dowry from her father when she took vows of celibacy, she
could claim after his death one-third of the portion of a son. She could
will her estate to anyone she favoured, but if she died intestate her
brothers were her heirs. When, however, her estate consisted of fields
or gardens allotted to her by her father, she could not disinherit her
legal heirs. The fields or gardens might be worked during her lifetime
by her brothers if they paid rent, or she might employ a manager on the
"share system".

Vestal virgins and married women were protected

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

against the slanderer. Any man who "pointed the finger" against them
unjustifiably was charged with the offence before a judge, who could
sentence him to have his forehead branded. It was not difficult,
therefore, in ancient Babylonia to discover the men who made malicious
and unfounded statements regarding an innocent woman. Assaults on women
were punished according to the victim's rank; even slaves were
protected.

Women appear to have monopolized the drink traffic. At any rate, there
is no reference to male wine sellers. A female publican had to conduct
her business honestly, and was bound to accept a legal tender. If she
refused corn and demanded silver, when the value of the silver by "grand
weight" was below the price of corn, she was prosecuted and punished by
being thrown into the water. Perhaps she was simply ducked. As much may
be inferred from the fact that when she was found guilty of allowing
rebels to meet in her house, she was put to death.

The land laws were strict and exacting. A tenant could be penalized for
not cultivating his holding properly. The rent paid was a proportion of
the crop, but the proportion could be fixed according to the average
yield of a district, so that a careless or inefficient tenant had to
bear the brunt of his neglect or want of skill. The punishment for
allowing a field to lie fallow was to make a man hoe and sow it and then
hand it over to his landlord, and this applied even to a man who leased
unreclaimed land which he had contracted to cultivate. Damage done to
fields by floods after the rent was paid was borne by the cultivator;
but if it occurred before the corn was reaped the landlord's share was
calculated in proportion to the amount of the yield which was recovered.
Allowance was also made for poor harvests, when the

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

shortage was not due to the neglect of the tenant, but to other causes,
and no interest was paid for borrowed money even if the farm suffered
from the depredations of the tempest god; the moneylender had to share
risks with borrowers. Tenants who neglected their dykes, however, were
not exempted from their legal liabilities, and their whole estates could
be sold to reimburse their creditors.

The industrious were protected against the careless. Men who were
negligent about controlling the water supply, and caused floods by
opening irrigation ditches which damaged the crops of their neighbours,
had to pay for the losses sustained, the damages being estimated
according to the average yield of a district. A tenant who allowed his
sheep to stray on to a neighbour's pasture had to pay a heavy fine in
corn at the harvest season, much in excess of the value of the grass
cropped by his sheep. Gardeners were similarly subject to strict laws.
All business contracts had to be conducted according to the provisions
of the Code, and in every case it was necessary that a proper record
should be made on clay tablets. As a rule a dishonest tenant or trader
had to pay sixfold the value of the sum under dispute if the judge
decided in court against his claim.

The law of an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth was strictly
observed in Babylonia. A freeman who destroyed an eye of a freeman had
one of his own destroyed; if he broke a bone, he had a bone broken.
Fines were imposed, however, when a slave was injured. For striking a
gentleman, a commoner received sixty lashes, and the son who smote his
father had his hands cut off. A slave might have his ears cut off for
assaulting his master's son.

Doctors must have found their profession an extremely

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

risky one. No allowance was made for what is nowadays known as a
"professional error". A doctor's hands were cut off if he opened a wound
with a metal knife and his patient afterwards died, or if a man lost his
eye as the result of an operation. A slave who died under a doctor's
hands had to be replaced by a slave, and if a slave lost his eye, the
doctor had to pay half the man's market value to the owner. Professional
fees were fixed according to a patient's rank. Gentlemen had to pay five
shekels of silver to a doctor who set a bone or restored diseased flesh,
commoners three shekels, and masters for their slaves two shekels. There
was also a scale of fees for treating domesticated animals, and it was
not overgenerous. An unfortunate surgeon who undertook to treat an ox or
ass suffering from a severe wound had to pay a quarter of its price to
its owner if it happened to die. A shrewd farmer who was threatened with
the loss of an animal must have been extremely anxious to engage the
services of a surgeon.

It is not surprising, after reviewing this part of the Hammurabi Code,
to find Herodotus stating bluntly that the Babylonians had no
physicians. "When a man is ill", he wrote, "they lay him in the public
square, and the passers-by come up to him, and if they have ever had his
disease themselves, or have known anyone who has suffered from it, they
give him advice, recommending him to do whatever they found good in
their own case, or in the case known to them; and no one is allowed to
pass the sick man in silence without asking him what his ailment is."
One might imagine that Hammurabi had legislated the medical profession
out of existence, were it not that letters have been found in the
Assyrian library of Ashur-banipal which indicate that skilled physicians
were held in high repute. It is improbable, however,

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

that they were numerous. The risks they ran in Babylonia may account for
their ultimate disappearance in that country.

No doubt patients received some benefit from exposure in the streets in
the sunlight and fresh air, and perhaps, too, from some of the old
wives' remedies which were gratuitously prescribed by passers-by. In
Egypt, where certain of the folk cures were recorded on papyri, quite
effective treatment was occasionally given, although the "medicines"
were exceedingly repugnant as a rule; ammonia, for instance, was taken
with the organic substances found in farmyards. Elsewhere some wonderful
instances of excellent folk cures have come to light, especially among
isolated peoples, who have received them interwoven in their immemorial
traditions. A medical man who has investigated this interesting subject
in the Scottish Highlands has shown that "the simple observation of the
people was the starting-point of our fuller knowledge, however complete
we may esteem it to be". For dropsy and heart troubles, foxglove, broom
tops, and juniper berries, which have reputations "as old as the hills",
are "the most reliable medicines in our scientific armoury at the
present time". These discoveries of the ancient folks have been "merely
elaborated in later days". Ancient cures for indigestion are still in
use. "Tar water, which was a remedy for chest troubles, especially for
those of a consumptive nature, has endless imitations in our day"; it
was also "the favourite remedy for skin diseases". No doubt the present
inhabitants of Babylonia, who utilize bitumen as a germicide, are
perpetuating an ancient folk custom.

This medical man who is being quoted adds: "The whole matter may be
summed up, that we owe infinitely more to the simple nature study of our
people in the

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

great affair of health than we owe to all the later science." <span
id="fr_269"></span>[1](#fn_268)

Herodotus, commenting on the custom of patients taking a census of folk
cures in the streets, said it was one of the wisest institutions of the
Babylonian people. It is to be regretted that he did not enter into
details regarding the remedies which were in greatest favour in his day.
His data would have been useful for comparative purposes.

So far as can be gathered from the clay tablets, faith cures were not
unknown, and there was a good deal of quackery. If surgery declined, as
a result of the severe restrictions which hampered progress in an
honourable profession, magic flourished like tropical fungi. Indeed, the
worker of spells was held in high repute, and his operations were in
most cases allowed free play. There are only two paragraphs in the
Hammurabi Code which deal with magical practices. It is set forth that
if one man cursed another and the curse could not be justified, the
perpetrator of it must suffer the death penalty. Provision was also made
for discovering whether a spell had been legally imposed or not. The
victim was expected to plunge himself in a holy river. If the river
carried him away it was held as proved that he deserved his punishment,
and "the layer of the spell" was given possession of the victim's house.
A man who could swim was deemed to be innocent; he claimed the residence
of "the layer of the spell", who was promptly put to death. With this
interesting glimpse of ancient superstition the famous Code opens, and
then strikes a modern note by detailing the punishments for perjury and
the unjust administration of law in the courts.

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

The poor sufferers who gathered at street corners in Babylon to make
mute appeal for cures believed that they were possessed by evil spirits.
Germs of disease were depicted by lively imaginations as invisible
demons, who derived nourishment from the human body. When a patient was
wasted with disease, growing thinner and weaker and more bloodless day
by day, it was believed that a merciless vampire was sucking his veins
and devouring his flesh. It had therefore to be expelled by performing a
magical ceremony and repeating a magical formula. The demon was either
driven or enticed away.

A magician had to decide in the first place what particular demon was
working evil. He then compelled its attention and obedience by detailing
its attributes and methods of attack, and perhaps by naming it.
Thereafter he suggested how it should next act by releasing a raven, so
that it might soar towards the clouds like that bird, or by offering up
a sacrifice which it received for nourishment and as compensation.
Another popular method was to fashion a waxen figure of the patient and
prevail upon the disease demon to enter it. The figure was then carried
away to be thrown in the river or burned in a fire.

Occasionally a quite effective cure was included in the ceremony. As
much is suggested by the magical treatment of toothache. First of all
the magician identified the toothache demon as "the worm". Then he
recited its history, which is as follows: After Anu created the heavens,
the heavens created the earth, the earth created the rivers, the rivers
created the canals, the canals created the marshes, and last of all the
marshes created "the worm".

This display of knowledge compelled the worm to listen, and no doubt the
patient was able to indicate to

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

what degree it gave evidence of its agitated mind. The magician
continued:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Came the worm and wept before Shamash,  
Before Ea came her tears:  
"What wilt thou give me for my food,  
What wilt thou give me to devour?"</span>

</div>

One of the deities answered: "I will give thee dried bones and scented .
. . wood"; but the hungry worm protested:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Nay, what are these dried bones of thine to me?  
Let me drink among the teeth;  
And set me on the gums  
That I may devour the blood of the teeth,  
And of their gums destroy their strength--  
Then shall I hold the bolt of the door."</span>

</div>

The magician provided food for "the worm", and the following is his
recipe: "Mix beer, the plant sa-kil-bir, and oil together; put it on the
tooth and repeat Incantation." No doubt this mixture soothed the pain,
and the sufferer must have smiled gladly when the magician finished his
incantation by exclaiming:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"So must thou say this, O Worm!  
May Ea smite thee with the might of his fist." <span
id="fr_270"></span>[1](#fn_269)</span>

</div>

Headaches were no doubt much relieved when damp cloths were wrapped
round a patient's head and scented wood was burned beside him, while the
magician, in whom so much faith was reposed, droned out a mystical
incantation. The curative water was drawn from the confluence of two
streams and was sprinkled with much ceremony. In like manner the
evil-eye curers, who still

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

operate in isolated districts in these islands, draw water from under
bridges "over which the dead and the living pass", <span
id="fr_271"></span>[1](#fn_270) and mutter charms and lustrate victims.

Headaches were much dreaded by the Babylonians. They were usually the
first symptoms of fevers, and the demons who caused them were supposed
to be blood-thirsty and exceedingly awesome. According to the charms,
these invisible enemies of man were of the brood of Nergal. No house
could be protected against them. They entered through keyholes and
chinks of doors and windows; they crept like serpents and stank like
mice; they had lolling tongues like hungry dogs.

Magicians baffled the demons by providing a charm. If a patient "touched
iron"--meteoric iron, which was the "metal of heaven"--relief could be
obtained. Or, perhaps, the sacred water would dispel the evil one; as
the drops trickled from the patient's face, so would the fever spirit
trickle away. When a pig was offered up in sacrifice as a substitute for
a patient, the wicked spirit was commanded to depart and allow a kindly
spirit to take its place--an indication that the Babylonians, like the
Germanic peoples, believed that they were guarded by spirits who brought
good luck.

The numerous incantations which were inscribed on clay tablets and
treasured in libraries, do not throw much light on the progress of
medical knowledge, for the genuine folk cures were regarded as of
secondary importance, and were not as a rule recorded. But these
metrical compositions are of special interest, in so far as they
indicate how poetry originated and achieved wide-spread popularity among
ancient peoples. Like the religious dance, the earliest poems were used
for magical purposes. They were composed in the first place by men

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

and women who were supposed to be inspired in the literal sense; that
is, possessed by spirits. Primitive man associated "spirit" with
"breath", which was the "air of life", and identical with wind. The
poetical magician drew in a "spirit", and thus received inspiration, as
he stood on some sacred spot on the mountain summit, amidst forest
solitudes, beside a whispering stream, or on the sounding shore. As
Burns has sung:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">The muse, nae poet ever fand her,  
Till by himsel’ he learn’d to wander,  
Adown some trottin’ burn's meander,  
             An’ no think lang:  
O sweet to stray, an' pensive ponder  
             A heart-felt sang!</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Or, perhaps, the
bard received inspiration by drinking magic water from the fountain
called Hippocrene, or the skaldic mead which dripped from the moon.

The ancient poet did not sing for the mere love of singing: he knew
nothing about "Art for Art's sake". His object in singing appears to
have been intensely practical. The world was inhabited by countless
hordes of spirits, which were believed to be ever exercising themselves
to influence mankind. The spirits caused suffering; they slew victims;
they brought misfortune; they were also the source of good or "luck".
Man regarded spirits emotionally; he conjured them with emotion; he
warded off their attacks with emotion; and his emotions were given
rhythmical expression by means of metrical magical charms.

Poetic imagery had originally a magical significance; if the ocean was
compared to a dragon, it was because it was supposed to be inhabited by
a storm-causing dragon; the wind whispered because a spirit whispered in
it.

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Love lyrics were
charms to compel the love god to wound or possess a maiden's heart--to
fill it, as an Indian charm sets forth, with "the yearning of the
Apsaras (fairies)"; satires conjured up evil spirits to injure a victim;
and heroic narratives chanted at graves were statements made to the god
of battle, so that he might award the mighty dead by transporting him to
the Valhal of Odin or Swarga of Indra.

Similarly, music had magical origin as an imitation of the voices of
spirits--of the piping birds who were "Fates", of the wind high and low,
of the thunder roll, of the bellowing sea. So the god Pan piped on his
reed bird-like notes, Indra blew his thunder horn, Thor used his hammer
like a drumstick, Neptune imitated on his "wreathed horn" the voice of
the deep, the Celtic oak god Dagda twanged his windy wooden harp, and
Angus, the Celtic god of spring and love, came through budding forest
ways with a silvern harp which had strings of gold, echoing the tuneful
birds, the purling streams, the whispering winds, and the rustling of
scented fir and blossoming thorn.

Modern-day poets and singers, who voice their moods and cast the spell
of their moods over readers and audiences, are the representatives of
ancient magicians who believed that moods were caused by the spirits
which possessed them--the rhythmical wind spirits, those harpers of the
forest and songsters of ocean.

The following quotations from Mr. R. C. Thompson's translations of
Babylonian charms will serve to illustrate their poetic qualities:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

     Fever like frost hath come upon the land.

Fever hath blown upon the man as the wind blast,  
It hath smitten the man and humbled his pride. <span id="page_239">p.
239</span>  
Headache lieth like the stars of heaven in the desert and hath no
praise;  
Pain in the head and shivering like a scudding cloud turn unto the form
of man.

     Headache whose course like the dread windstorm none knoweth.  
     Headache roareth over the desert, blowing like the wind,  
     Flashing like lightning, it is loosed above and below,  
     It cutteth off him, who feareth not his god, like a reed . . .  
     From amid mountains it hath descended upon the land.

          Headache . . . a rushing hag-demon,  
          Granting no rest, nor giving kindly sleep . . .  
          Whose shape is as the whirlwind.  
          Its appearance is as the darkening heavens,  
          And its face as the deep shadow of the forest.

     Sickness . . . breaking the fingers as a rope of wind . . .  
     Flashing like a heavenly star, it cometh like the dew.

</div>

These early poets had no canons of Art, and there were no critics to
disturb their meditations. Many singers had to sing and die ere a critic
could find much to say. In ancient times, therefore, poets had their
Golden Age--they were a law unto themselves. Even the "minors" were
influential members of society.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_263"></span>[219:1](mba16.htm#fr_264) *Herodotus*, book i,
179 (Rawlinson's translation).

<span id="fn_264"></span>[219:2](mba16.htm#fr_265) *Isaiah*, xlv, I, 2.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[222:1](mba16.htm#fr_266) *Herodotus*, book i,
181-3 (Rawlinson's translation).

<span id="fn_266"></span>[222:2](mba16.htm#fr_267) *History of Sumer and
Akkad*, L. W. King, p. 37.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[225:1](mba16.htm#fr_268) *Herodotus*, book i,
196 (Rawlinson's translation).

<span id="fn_268"></span>[233:1](mba16.htm#fr_269) *Home Life of the
Highlanders* (Dr. Cameron Gillies on *Medical Knowledge*), pp. 85 *et
seq*. Glasgow, 1911.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[235:1](mba16.htm#fr_270) Translations by R. C.
Thompson in *The Devils and Spirits of Babylon*, vol. i, pp. lxiii *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[236:1](mba16.htm#fr_271) Bridges which lead to
graveyards.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. The Golden Age of Babylonia](mba17)
