[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mba10)  [Next](mba12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002GYVU7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths of Babylonia and Assyria*, by Donald A. MacKenzie, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

### CHAPTER V

### Myths of Tammuz and Ishtar

<span class="small">Forms of Tammuz--The Weeping Ceremony--Tammuz the
Patriarch and the Dying God--Common Origin of Tammuz and other Deities
from an Archaic God--The Mediterranean Racial Myth--Animal Forms of Gods
of Fertility--Two Legends of the Death of Tammuz--Attis, Adonis, and
Diarmid Slain by a Boar--Laments for Tammuz--His Soul in Underworld and
the Deep--Myth of the Child God of Ocean--Sargon Myth Version--The
Germanic Scyld of the Sheaf--Tammuz Links with Frey, Heimdal, Agni,
&c.--Assyrian Legend of "Descent of Ishtar"--Sumerian Version--The
Sister Belit-sheri and the Mother Ishtar--The Egyptian Isis and
Nepthys--Goddesses as Mothers, Sisters, and Wives--Great Mothers of
Babylonia--Immortal Goddesses and Dying Gods--The Various Indras--Celtic
Goddess with Seven Periods of Youth--Lovers of Germanic and Classic
Goddesses--The Lovers of Ishtar--Racial Significance of Goddess
Cult--The Great Fathers and their Worshippers--Process of Racial and
Religious Fusion--Ishtar and Tiamat--Mother Worship in Palestine--Women
among Goddess Worshippers.</span>

AMONG the gods of Babylonia none achieved wider and more enduring fame
than Tammuz, who was loved by Ishtar, the amorous Queen of Heaven--the
beautiful youth who died and was mourned for and came to life again. He
does not figure by his popular name in any of the city pantheons, but
from the earliest times of which we have knowledge until the passing of
Babylonian civilization, he played a prominent part in the religious
life of the people

Tammuz, like Osiris of Egypt, was an agricultural deity, and as the
Babylonian harvest was the gift of the rivers, it is probable that one
of his several forms was Dumu-zi-abzu, "Tammuz of the Abyss". He was
also

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "the child", "the
heroic lord", "the sentinel", "the healer", and the patriarch who
reigned over the early Babylonians for a considerable period. "Tammuz of
the Abyss" was one of the members of the family of Ea, god of the Deep,
whose other sons, in addition to Merodach, were Nira, an obscure deity;
Ki-gulla, "world destroyer", Burnunta-sa, "broad ear", and Bara and
Baragulla, probably "revealers" or "oracles". In addition there was a
daughter, Khi-dimme-azaga, "child of the renowned spirit". She may have
been identical with Belit-sheri, who is referred to in the Sumerian
hymns as the sister of Tammuz. This family group was probably formed by
symbolizing the attributes of Ea and his spouse Damkina. Tammuz, in his
character as a patriarch, may have been regarded as a hostage from the
gods: the human form of Ea, who instructed mankind, like King Osiris,
how to grow corn and cultivate fruit trees. As the youth who perished
annually, he was the corn spirit. He is referred to in the Bible by his
Babylonian name.

When Ezekiel detailed the various idolatrous practices of the
Israelites, which included the worship of the sun and "every form of
creeping things and abominable beasts"--a suggestion of the composite
monsters of Babylonia--he was brought "to the door of the gate of the
Lord's house, which was towards the north; and, behold, there sat women
weeping for Tammuz". <span id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_104)

The weeping ceremony was connected with agricultural rites. Corn deities
were weeping deities, they shed fertilizing tears; and the sowers
simulated the sorrow of divine mourners when they cast seed in the soil
"to die", so that it might spring up as corn. This ancient custom, like
many others, contributed to the poetic

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

imagery of the Bible. "They that sow in tears", David sang, "shall reap
in joy. He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall
doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with
him." <span id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_105) In Egypt the priestesses who
acted the parts of Isis and Nepthys, mourned for the slain corn god
Osiris.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Gods and men before the face of the gods are weeping
for thee at the same time, when they behold me! . . .  
All thy sister goddesses are at thy side and behind thy couch,  
Calling upon thee with weeping--yet thou are prostrate upon thy bed! . .
.  
Live before us, desiring to behold thee. <span
id="fr_107"></span>[2](#fn_106)</span>

</div>

It was believed to be essential that human beings should share the
universal sorrow caused by the death of a god. If they remained
unsympathetic, the deities would punish them as enemies. Worshippers of
nature gods, therefore, based their ceremonial practices on natural
phenomena. "The dread of the worshippers that the neglect of the usual
ritual would be followed by disaster, is particularly intelligible",
writes Professor Robertson Smith, "if they regarded the necessary
operations of agriculture as involving the violent extinction of a
particle of divine life." <span id="fr_108"></span>[3](#fn_107) By
observing their ritual, the worshippers won the sympathy and
co-operation of deities, or exercised a magical control over nature.

The Babylonian myth of Tammuz, the dying god, bears a close resemblance
to the Greek myth of Adonis. It also links with the myth of Osiris.
According to Professor Sayce, Tammuz is identical with "Daonus or Daos,
the shepherd of Pantibibla", referred to by Berosus as the ruler of one
of the mythical ages of Babylonia. We

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

have therefore to deal with Tammuz in his twofold character as a
patriarch and a god of fertility.

The Adonis version of the myth may be summarized briefly. Ere the god
was born, his mother, who was pursued by her angry sire, as the river
goddesses of the folk tales are pursued by the well demons, transformed
herself into a tree. Adonis sprang from the trunk of this tree, and
Aphrodite, having placed the child in a chest, committed him to the care
of Persephone, queen of Hades, who resembles the Babylonian
Eresh-ki-gal. Persephone desired to retain the young god, and Aphrodite
(Ishtar) appealed to Zeus (Anu), who decreed that Adonis should spend
part of the year with one goddess and part of the year with the other.

It is suggested that the myth of Adonis was derived in post-Homeric
times by the Greeks indirectly from Babylonia through the Western
Semites, the Semitic title "Adon", meaning "lord", having been mistaken
for a proper name. This theory, however, cannot be accepted without
qualifications. It does not explain the existence of either the Phrygian
myth of Attis, which was developed differently from the Tammuz myth, or
the Celtic story of "Diarmid and the boar", which belongs to the
archæological "Hunting Period". There are traces in Greek mythology of
pre-Hellenic myths about dying harvest deities, like Hyakinthos and
Erigone, for instance, who appear to have been mourned for. There is
every possibility, therefore, that the Tammuz ritual may have been
attached to a harvest god of the pre-Hellenic Greeks, who received at
the same time the new name of Adonis. Osiris of Egypt resembles Tammuz,
but his Mesopotamian origin has not been proved. It would appear
probable that Tammuz, Attis, Osiris, and the deities represented by
Adonis and Diarmid were all developed

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

from an archaic god of fertility and vegetation, the central figure of a
myth which was not only as ancient as the knowledge and practice of
agriculture, but had existence even in the "Hunting Period". Traces of
the Tammuz-Osiris story in various forms are found all over the area
occupied by the Mediterranean or Brown race from Sumeria to the British
Isles. Apparently the original myth was connected with tree and water
worship and the worship of animals. Adonis sprang from a tree; the body
of Osiris was concealed in a tree which grew round the sea-drifted chest
in which he was concealed. Diarmid concealed himself in a tree when
pursued by Finn. The blood of Tammuz, Osiris, and Adonis reddened the
swollen rivers which fertilized the soil. Various animals were
associated with the harvest god, who appears to have been manifested
from time to time in different forms, for his spirit pervaded all
nature. In Egypt the soul of Osiris entered the Apis bull or the ram of
Mendes.

Tammuz in the hymns is called "the pre-eminent steer of heaven", and a
popular sacrifice was "a white kid of the god Tammuz", which, however,
might be substituted by a sucking pig. Osiris had also associations with
swine, and the Egyptians, according to Herodotus, sacrificed a pig to
him annually. When Set at full moon hunted the boar in the Delta
marshes, he probably hunted the boar form of Osiris, whose human body
had been recovered from the sacred tree by Isis. As the soul of Bata,
the hero of the Egyptian folk tale, <span
id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_108) migrated from the blossom to the bull,
and the bull to the tree, so apparently did the soul of Osiris pass from
incarnation to incarnation. Set, the demon slayer of the harvest god,
had also a boar form; he was the black pig who devoured the waning moon
and blinded the Eye of Ra.

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

In his character as a long-lived patriarch, Tammuz the King Daonus or
Daos of Berosus, reigned in Babylonia for 36,000 years. When he died, he
departed to Hades or the Abyss. Osiris, after reigning over the
Egyptians, became Judge of the Dead.

Tammuz of the Sumerian hymns, however, is the Adonis-like god who lived
on earth for a part of the year as the shepherd and agriculturist so
dearly beloved by the goddess Ishtar. Then he died so that he might
depart to the realm of Eresh-ki-gal (Persephone), queen of Hades.
According to one account, his death was caused by the fickle Ishtar.
When that goddess wooed Gilgamesh, the Babylonian Hercules, he upbraided
her, saying:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">On Tammuz, the spouse of thy youth,  
Thou didst lay affliction every year.  
                               *King's Translation*.</span>

</div>

References in the Sumerian hymns suggest that there also existed a form
of the legend which gave an account of the slaying of the young god by
someone else than Ishtar. The slayer may have been a Set-like
demon--perhaps Nin-shach, who appears to have symbolized the destroying
influence of the sun. He was a war deity, and his name, Professor
Pinches says, "is conjectured to mean 'lord of the wild boar'". There is
no direct evidence, however, to connect Tammuz's slayer with the boar
which killed Adonis. Ishtar's innocence is emphasized by the fact that
she mourned for her youthful lover, crying:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Oh hero, my lord, ah me! I will say;  
Food I eat not . . . water I drink not . . .  
Because of the exalted one of the nether world, him of the radiant face,
yea radiant,  
Of the exalted one of the nether world, him of the dove-like voice, yea
dove-like. <span id="fr_110"></span>[1](#fn_109)</span>

</div>

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

The Phrygian Attis met his death, according to one legend, by
self-mutilation under a sacred tree. Another account sets forth,
however, that he was slain by a boar. The Greek Adonis was similarly
killed by a boar. This animal was a form of Ares (Mars), god of war and
tempest, who also loved Aphrodite (Ishtar). The Celtic Diarmid, in his
character as a love god, with lunar attributes, was slain by "the green
boar", which appears to have been one of the animals of a ferocious Hag,
an earth and air "mother" with various names. In one of the many
Fingalian stories the animal is

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">. . . That venomous boar, and he so fierce,  
That Grey Eyebrows had with her herd of swine. <span
id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_110)</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Diarmid had eloped
with the wife of Finn-mac-Coul (Fingal), who, like Ares, plotted to
bring about his rival's death, and accordingly set the young hero to
hunt the boar. As a thunder god Finn carried a hammer with which he
smote his shield; the blows were heard in Lochlann (Scandinavia).
Diarmid, like Tammuz, the "god of the tender voice and shining eyes",
had much beauty. When he expired, Finn cried:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">No maiden will raise her eye  
Since the mould has gone over thy visage fair . . .  
Blue without rashness in thine eye!  
Passion and beauty behind thy curls! . . .  
Oh, yesternight it was green the hillock,  
Red is it this day with Diarmid's blood. <span
id="fr_112"></span>[2](#fn_111)</span>

</div>

Tammuz died with the dying vegetation, and Diarmid expired when the
hills apparently were assuming their purple tints. <span
id="fr_113"></span>[3](#fn_112) The month of Tammuz wailings was from

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 20th June till
20th July, when the heat and dryness brought forth the demons of
pestilence. The mourners chanted:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">He has gone, he has gone to the bosom of the
earth,  
And the dead are numerous in the land . . .  
Men are filled with sorrow: they stagger by day in gloom .  
In the month of thy year which brings not peace hast thou gone.  
Thou hast gone on a journey that makes an end of thy people.</span>

</div>

The following extract contains a reference to the slaying of the god:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">The holy one of Ishtar, in the middle of the year
the fields languish . . .  
The shepherd, the wise one, the man of sorrows, why have they slain? . .
.  
In his temple, in his inhabited domain,  
The child, lord of knowledge, abides no more . . .  
In the meadows, verily, verily, the soul of life perishes.</span>

</div>

There is wailing for Tammuz "at the sacred cedar, where the mother bore
thee", a reference which connects the god, like Adonis and Osiris, with
tree worship:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">The wailing is for the herbs: the first lament is,
"they are not produced".  
The wailing is for the grain, ears are not produced.  
The wailing is for the habitations, for the flocks which bring forth no
more.  
The wailing is for the perishing wedded ones; for the perishing
children; the dark-headed people create no more.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The wailing is
also for the shrunken river, the parched meadows, the fishpools, the
cane brakes, the forests, the

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

plains, the gardens, and the palace, which all suffer because the god of
fertility has departed. The mourner cries:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">How long shall the springing of verdure be
restrained?  
How long shall the putting forth of leaves be held back?</span>

</div>

Whither went Tammuz? His destination has already been referred to as
"the bosom of the earth", and in the Assyrian version of the "Descent of
Ishtar" he dwells in "the house of darkness" among the dead, "where dust
is their nourishment and their food mud", and "the light is never
seen"--the gloomy Babylonian Hades. In one of the Sumerian hymns,
however, it is stated that Tammuz "upon the flood was cast out". The
reference may be to the submarine "house of Ea", or the Blessed Island
to which the Babylonian Noah was carried. In this Hades bloomed the
nether "garden of Adonis".

The following extract refers to the garden of Damu (Tammuz) <span
id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_113):--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Damu his youth therein slumbers .  
Among the garden flowers he slumbers; among the garden flowers he is
cast away .  
Among the tamarisks he slumbers, with woe he causes us to be
satiated.</span>

</div>

Although Tammuz of the hymns was slain, he returned again from Hades.
Apparently he came back as a child. He is wailed for as "child, Lord
Gishzida", as well as "my hero Damu". In his lunar character the
Egyptian Osiris appeared each month as "the child surpassingly
beautiful"; the Osiris bull was also a child of the moon; "it was
begotten", says Plutarch, "by a ray of generative light falling from the
moon". When the bull of Attis was sacrificed his worshippers were
drenched

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

with its blood, and were afterwards ceremonially fed with milk, as they
were supposed to have "renewed their youth" and become children. The
ancient Greek god Eros (Cupid) was represented as a wanton boy or
handsome youth. Another god of fertility, the Irish Angus, who resembles
Eros, is called "the ever young"; he slumbers like Tammuz and awakes in
the Spring.

Apparently it was believed that the child god, Tammuz, returned from the
earlier Sumerian Paradise of the Deep, and grew into full manhood in a
comparatively brief period, like Vyasa and other super-men of Indian
mythology. A couplet from a Tammuz hymn says tersely:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">In his infancy in a sunken boat he lay.  
In his manhood in the submerged grain he lay. <span
id="fr_115"></span>[1](#fn_114)</span>

</div>

The "boat" may be the "chest" in which Adonis was concealed by Aphrodite
when she confided him to the care of Persephone, queen of Hades, who
desired to retain the young god, but was compelled by Zeus to send him
back to the goddess of love and vegetation. The fact that Ishtar
descended to Hades in quest of Tammuz may perhaps explain the symbolic
references in hymns to mother goddesses being in sunken boats also when
their powers were in abeyance, as were those of the god for part of each
year. It is possible, too, that the boat had a lunar and a solar
significance. Khonsu, the Egyptian moon god, for instance, was
associated with the Spring sun, being a deity of fertility and therefore
a corn spirit; he was a form of Osiris, the Patriarch, who sojourned on
earth to teach mankind how to grow corn and cultivate fruit trees. In
the Egyptian legend Osiris received the corn seeds from Isis, which
suggests that among Great-Mother-worshipping

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

peoples, it was believed that agricultural civilization had a female
origin. The same myths may have been attached to corn gods and corn
goddesses, associated with water, sun, moon, and stars.

That there existed in Babylonia at an extremely remote period an
agricultural myth regarding a Patriarch of divine origin who was rescued
from a boat in his childhood, is suggested by the legend which was
attached to the memory, of the usurper King Sargon of Akkad. It runs as
follows:

<span class="small">"I am Sargon, the mighty King of Akkad. My mother
was a vestal (priestess), my father an alien, whose brother inhabited
the mountain. . . . When my mother had conceived me, she bare me in a
hidden place. She laid me in a vessel of rushes, stopped the door
thereof with pitch, and cast me adrift on the river. . . . The river
floated me to Akki, the water drawer, who, in drawing water, drew me
forth. Akki, the water drawer, educated me as his son, and made me his
gardener. As a gardener, I was beloved by the goddess Ishtar."</span>

It is unlikely that this story was invented by Sargon. Like the many
variants of it found in other countries, it was probably founded on a
form of the Tammuz-Adonis myth. Indeed, a new myth would not have suited
Sargon's purpose so well as the adaptation of an old one, which was more
likely to make popular appeal when connected with his name. The
references to the goddess Ishtar, and Sargon's early life as a gardener,
suggest that the king desired to be remembered as an agricultural
Patriarch, if not of divine, at any rate of semi-divine origin.

What appears to be an early form of the widespread Tammuz myth is the
Teutonic legend regarding the mysterious child who came over the sea to
inaugurate a new era of civilization and instruct the people how to

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

grow corn and become great warriors. The Northern peoples, as
archæological evidence suggests, derived their knowledge of agriculture,
and therefore their agricultural myths, from the Neolithic
representatives of the Mediterranean race with whom they came into
contact. There can be no doubt but that the Teutonic legend refers to
the introduction of agriculture. The child is called "Scef" or "Sceaf",
which signifies "Sheaf", or "Scyld, the son of Sceaf". Scyld is the
patriarch of the Scyldings, the Danes, a people of mixed origin. In the
Anglo-Saxon *Beowulf* poem, the reference is to "Scyld", but Ethelweard,
William of Malmesbury, and others adhered to "Sceaf" as the name of the
Patriarch of the Western Saxons.

The legend runs that one day a boat was seen approaching the shore; it
was not propelled by oars or sail. In it lay a child fast asleep, his
head pillowed upon a sheaf of grain. He was surrounded by armour,
treasure, and various implements, including the fire-borer. The child
was reared by the people who found him, and he became a great instructor
and warrior and ruled over the tribe as king. In *Beowulf* Scyld is the
father of the elder Beowulf, whose grandson Hrothgar built the famous
Hall. The poem opens with a reference to the patriarch "Scyld of the
Sheaf". When he died, his body, according to the request he had made,
was laid in a ship which was set adrift:

<span class="small">Upon his breast lay many treasures which were to
travel with him into the power of the flood. Certainly they (the
mourners) furnished him with no less of gifts, of tribal treasures, than
those had done who, in his early days, started him over the sea alone,
child as he was. Moreover, they set besides a gold-embroidered standard
high above his head, and let the flood bear him--gave him to the sea.
Their soul was sad, their spirit sorrowful. Who</span>

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

<span class="small">received that load, men, chiefs of council, heroes
under heaven, cannot for certain tell. <span
id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_115)</span>

Sceaf or Scyld is identical with Yngve, the patriarch of the Ynglings;
with Frey, the harvest and boar god, son of Njord, <span
id="fr_117"></span>[2](#fn_116) the sea god; and with Hermod, referred
to as follows in the Eddic "Lay of Hyndla":

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">To some grants he wealth, to his children war
fame,  
Word skill to many and wisdom to men,  
Fair winds to sea-farers, song craft to skalds,  
And might of manhood to many a warrior.</span>

</div>

Tammuz is similarly "the heroic lord of the land", the "wise one", the
"lord of knowledge", and "the sovereign, lord of invocation".

Heimdal, watchman of the Teutonic gods, also dwelt for a time among men
as "Rig", and had human offspring, his son Thrall being the ancestor of
the Thralls, his son Churl of churls, and Jarl of noblemen.

Tammuz, like Heimdal, is also a guardian. He watches the flocks and
herds, whom he apparently guards against the Gallu demons as Heimdal
guards the world and the heavens against attacks by giants and monsters.
The flocks of Tammuz, Professor Pinches suggests, "recall the flocks of
the Greek sun god Helios. These were the clouds illuminated by the sun,
which were likened to sheep--indeed, one of the early Sumerian
expressions for 'fleece' was 'sheep of the sky'. The name of Tammuz in
Sumerian is Dumu-zi, or in its rare fullest form, Dumu-zida, meaning
'true or faithful son'. There is probably some legend attached to this
which is at present unknown." <span id="fr_118"></span>[3](#fn_117)

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

So the Sumerian hymn-chanters lamented:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Like an herdsman the sentinel place of sheep and
cattle he (Tammuz) has forsaken . . .  
From his home, from his inhabited domain, the son, he of wisdom,
pre-eminent steer of heaven,  
The hero unto the nether herding place has taken his way. <span
id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_118)</span>

</div>

Agni, the Aryo-Indian god, who, as the sky sentinel, has points of
resemblance to Heimdal, also links with Tammuz, especially in his Mitra
character:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Agni has been established among the tribes of men, the son of the
waters, Mitra acting in the right way. *Rigveda*, iii, 5, 3.

Agni, who has been looked and longed for in Heaven, who has been looked
for on earth--he who has been looked for has entered all herbs.
*Rigveda*, i, 98. <span id="fr_120"></span>[2](#fn_119)

</div>

Tammuz, like the Egyptian lunar and solar god Khonsu, is "the healer",
and Agni "drives away all disease". Tammuz is the god "of sonorous
voice"; Agni "roars like a bull"; and Heimdal blows a horn when the
giants and demons threaten to attack the citadel of the gods. As the
spring sun god, Tammuz is "a youthful warrior", says Jastrow,
"triumphing over the storms of winter". <span
id="fr_121"></span>[3](#fn_120) The storms, of course, were symbolized
as demons. Tammuz, "the heroic lord", was therefore a demon slayer like
Heimdal and Agni. Each of these gods appear to have been developed in
isolation from an archaic spring god of fertility and corn whose
attributes were symbolized. In Teutonic mythology, for instance, Heimdal
was the warrior form of the patriarch Scef, while Frey was the deified
agriculturist who came over the deep as a child. In Saxo's mythical
history of Denmark,

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Frey as Frode is
taken prisoner by a storm giant, Beli, "the howler", and is loved by his
hag sister in the Teutonic Hades, as Tammuz is loved by Eresh-ki-gal,
spouse of the storm god Nergal, in the Babylonian Hades. Frode returns
to earth, like Tammuz, in due season.

It is evident that there were various versions of the Tammuz myth in
Ancient Babylonia. In one the goddess Ishtar visited Hades to search for
the lover of her youth. A part of this form of the legend survives in
the famous Assyrian hymn known as "The Descent of Ishtar". It was first
translated by the late Mr. George Smith, of the British Museum. A box
containing inscribed tablets had been sent from Assyria to London, and
Mr. Smith, with characteristic patience and skill, arranged and
deciphered them, giving to the world a fragment of ancient literature
infused with much sublimity and imaginative power. Ishtar is depicted
descending to dismal Hades, where the souls of the dead exist in bird
forms:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">I spread like a bird my hands.  
I descend, I descend to the house of darkness, the dwelling of the god
Irkalla:  
To the house out of which there is no exit,  
To the road from which there is no return:  
To the house from whose entrance the light is taken,  
The place where dust is their nourishment and their food mud.  
Its chiefs also are like birds covered with feathers;  
The light is never seen, in darkness they dwell. . . .</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When the goddess
reaches the gate of Hades she cries to the porter:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Keeper of the waters, open thy gate,  
Open thy gate that I may enter.  
If thou openest not the gate that I may enter  
I will strike the door, the bolts I will shatter, <span id="page_96">p.
96</span>  
I will strike the threshold and will pass through the doors;  
I will raise up the dead to devour the living,  
Above the living the dead shall exceed in numbers.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The porter answers
that he must first consult the Queen of Hades, here called Allatu, to
whom he accordingly announces the arrival of the Queen of Heaven.
Allatu's heart is filled with anger, and makes reference to those whom
Ishtar caused to perish:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Let me weep over the strong who have left their
wives,  
Let me weep over the handmaidens who have lost the embraces of their
husbands,  
Over the only son let me mourn, who ere his days are come is taken
away.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Then she issues
abruptly the stern decree:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Go, keeper, open the gate to her,  
Bewitch her according to the ancient rules;</span>

</div>

that is, "Deal with her as you deal with others who come here".

As Ishtar enters through the various gates she is stripped of her
ornaments and clothing. At the first gate her crown was taken off, at
the second her ear-rings, at the third her necklace of precious stones,
at the fourth the ornaments of her breast, at the fifth her gemmed
waist-girdle, <span id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_121) at the sixth the
bracelets of her hands and feet, and at the seventh the covering robe of
her body. Ishtar asks at each gate why she is thus dealt with, and the
porter answers, "Such is the command of Allatu."

After descending for a prolonged period the Queen of Heaven at length
stands naked before the Queen of Hades. Ishtar is proud and arrogant,
and Allatu, desiring to punish her rival whom she cannot humble,

 

<span id="img_09600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![ISHTAR IN
HADES&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From the Painting by E.
Wallcousins&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/09600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/09600.jpg)  
ISHTAR IN HADES  
*From the Painting by E. Wallcousins*.  
</span>

 

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

commands the plague demon, Namtar, to strike her with disease in all
parts of her body. The effect of Ishtar's fate was disastrous upon
earth: growth and fertility came to an end.

Meanwhile Pap-sukal, messenger of the gods, hastened to Shamash, the sun
deity, to relate what had occurred. The sun god immediately consulted
his lunar father, Sin, and Ea, god of the deep. Ea then created a man
lion, named Nadushu-namir, to rescue Ishtar, giving him power to pass
through the seven gates of Hades. When this being delivered his message

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Allatu . . . struck her breast; she bit her thumb,  
She turned again: a request she asked not.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In her anger she
cursed the rescuer of the Queen of Heaven.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">May I imprison thee in the great prison,  
May the garbage of the foundations of the city be thy food,  
May the drains of the city be thy drink,  
May the darkness of the dungeon be thy dwelling,  
May the stake be thy seat,  
May hunger and thirst strike thy offspring.</span>

</div>

She was compelled, however, to obey the high gods, and addressed Namtar,
saying:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Unto Ishtar give the waters of life and bring her
before me.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thereafter the
Queen of Heaven was conducted through the various gates, and at each she
received her robe and the ornaments which were taken from her on
entering. Namtar says:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Since thou hast not paid a ransom for thy
deliverance to her (Allatu), so to her again turn back,  
For Tammuz the husband of thy youth.  
The glistening waters (of life) pour over him .  
In splendid clothing dress him, with a ring of crystal adorn him.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

Ishtar mourns for "the wound of Tammuz", smiting her breast, and she did
not ask for "the precious eye-stones, her amulets", which were
apparently to ransom Tammuz. The poem concludes with Ishtar's wail:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">O my only brother (Tammuz) thou dost not lament for
me.  
In the day that Tammuz adorned me, with a ring of crystal,  
With a bracelet of emeralds, together with himself, he adorned me, <span
id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_122)  
With himself he adorned me; may men mourners and women mourners  
On a bier place him, and assemble the wake. <span
id="fr_124"></span>[2](#fn_123)</span>

</div>

A Sumerian hymn to Tammuz throws light on this narrative. It sets forth
that Ishtar descended to Hades to entreat him to be glad and to resume
care of his flocks, but Tammuz refused or was unable to return.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">His spouse unto her abode he sent back.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> She then
instituted the wailing ceremony:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">The amorous Queen of Heaven sits as one in
darkness. <span id="fr_125"></span>[3](#fn_124)</span>

</div>

Mr. Langdon also translates a hymn (Tammuz III) which appears to contain
the narrative on which the Assyrian version was founded. The goddess who
descends to Hades, however, is not Ishtar, but the "sister",
Belit-sheri. She is accompanied by various demons--the "gallu-demon",
the "slayer", &c.--and holds a conversation with Tammuz which, however,
is "unintelligible and badly broken". Apparently, however, he promises
to return to earth.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">. . . I will go up, as for me I will depart with
thee . . .  
. . . I will return, unto my mother let us go back.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

Probably two goddesses originally lamented for Tammuz, as the Egyptian
sisters, Isis and Nepthys, lamented for Osiris, their brother. Ishtar is
referred to as "my mother". Isis figures alternately in the Egyptian
chants as mother, wife, sister, and daughter of Osiris. She cries, "Come
thou to thy wife in peace; her heart fluttereth for thy love", . . . "I
am thy wife, made as thou art, the elder sister, soul of her brother". .
. . "Come thou to us as a babe". . . . "Lo, thou art as the Bull of the
two goddesses--come thou, child growing in peace, our lord!" . . "Lo!
the Bull, begotten of the two cows, Isis and Nepthys". . . . "Come thou
to the two widowed goddesses". . . . "Oh child, lord, first maker of the
body". . . . "Father Osiris." <span id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_125)

As Ishtar and Belit-sheri weep for Tammuz, so do

Isis and Nepthys weep for Osiris.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Calling upon thee with weeping--yet thou art
prostrate upon thy bed!  
Gods and men . . . are weeping for thee at the same time, when they
behold me (Isis).  
Lo! I invoke thee with wailing that reacheth high as heaven.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Isis is also
identified with Hathor (Ishtar) the Cow. . . . "The cow weepeth for thee
with her voice." <span id="fr_127"></span>[2](#fn_126)

There is another phase, however, to the character of the mother goddess
which explains the references to the desertion and slaying of Tammuz by
Ishtar. "She is", says Jastrow, "the goddess of the human instinct, or
passion which accompanies human love. Gilgamesh . . . reproaches her
with abandoning the objects of her passion after a brief period of
union." At Ishtar's temple "public maidens accepted temporary partners,
assigned to them by

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ishtar". <span
id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_127) The worship of all mother goddesses in
ancient times was accompanied by revolting unmoral rites which are
referred to in condemnatory terms in various passages in the Old
Testament, especially in connection with the worship of Ashtoreth, who
was identical with Ishtar and the Egyptian Hathor.

Ishtar in the process of time overshadowed all the other female deities
of Babylonia, as did Isis in Egypt. Her name, indeed, which is Semitic,
became in the plural, Ishtaráte, a designation for goddesses in general.
But although she was referred to as the daughter of the sky, Anu, or the
daughter of the moon, Sin or Nannar, she still retained traces of her
ancient character. Originally she was a great mother goddess, who was
worshipped by those who believed that life and the universe had a female
origin in contrast to those who believed in the theory of male origin.
Ishtar is identical with Nina, the fish goddess, a creature who gave her
name to the Sumerian city of Nina and the Assyrian city of Nineveh.
Other forms of the Creatrix included Mama, or Mami, or Ama, "mother",
Aruru, Bau, Gula, and Zer-panitu<sup>m</sup>. These were all
"Preservers" and healers. At the same time they were "Destroyers", like
Nin-sun and the Queen of Hades, Eresh-ki-gal or Allatu. They were
accompanied by shadowy male forms ere they became wives of strongly
individualized gods, or by child gods, their sons, who might be regarded
as "brothers" or "husbands of their mothers", to use the paradoxical
Egyptian term. Similarly Great Father deities had vaguely defined wives.
The "Semitic" Baal, "the lord", was accompanied by a female reflection
of himself--Beltu, "the lady". Shamash, the sun god, had for wife the
shadowy Aa.

 

<span id="img_10000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![WINGED
HUMAN-HEADED COW (?)&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From Kouyunjik (Nineveh): now in
the British Museum&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; Photo. Mansell.](tn/10000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10000.jpg)  
WINGED HUMAN-HEADED COW (?)  
*From Kouyunjik (Nineveh): now in the British Museum*.  
Photo. Mansell.  
</span>

 

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

As has been shown, Ishtar is referred to in a Tammuz hymn as the mother
of the child god of fertility. In an Egyptian hymn the sky goddess Nut,
"the mother" of Osiris, is stated to have "built up life from her own
body." <span id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_128) Sri or Lakshmi, the Indian
goddess, who became the wife of Vishnu, as the mother goddess Saraswati,
a tribal deity, became the wife of Brahma, was, according to a Purana
commentator, "the mother of the world . . . eternal and
undecaying". <span id="fr_130"></span>[2](#fn_129)

The gods, on the other hand, might die annually: the goddesses alone
were immortal. Indra was supposed to perish of old age, but his wife,
Indrani, remained ever young. There were fourteen Indras in every "day
of Brahma", a reference apparently to the ancient conception of Indra
among the Great-Mother-worshipping sections of the Aryo-Indians. <span
id="fr_131"></span>[3](#fn_130) In the *Mahàbhàrata* the god Shiva, as
Mahadeva, commands Indra on "one of the peaks of Himavat", where they
met, to lift up a stone and join the Indras who had been before him.
"And Indra on removing that stone beheld a cave on the breast of that
king of mountains in which were four others resembling himself." Indra
exclaimed in his grief, "Shall I be even like these?" These five Indras,
like the "Seven Sleepers", awaited the time when they would be called
forth. They were ultimately reborn as the five Pandava warriors. <span
id="fr_132"></span>[4](#fn_131)

The ferocious, black-faced Scottish mother goddess, Cailleach Bheur, who
appears to be identical with Mala Lith, "Grey Eyebrows" of Fingalian
story, and the English "Black Annis", figures in Irish song and legend
as "The Old Woman of Beare". This "old woman" (Cailleach) "had", says
Professor Kuno Meyer, "seven

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

periods of youth one after another, so that every man who had lived with
her came to die of old age, and her grandsons and great-grandsons were
tribes and races". When old age at length came upon her she sang her
"swan song", from which the following lines are extracted:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Ebb tide to me as of the sea!  
Old age causes me reproach . . .  
It is riches  
Ye love, it is not men:  
In the time when we lived  
It was men we loved . . .  
My arms when they are seen  
Are bony and thin:  
Once they would fondle,  
They would be round glorious kings . . .  
I must take my garment even in the sun:  
The time is at hand that shall renew me. <span
id="fr_133"></span>[1](#fn_132)</span>

</div>

Freyja, the Germanic mother goddess, whose car was drawn by cats, had
similarly many lovers. In the Icelandic poem "Lokasenna", Loki taunts
her, saying:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Silence, Freyja! Full well I know thee,  
  And faultless art thou not found;  
Of the gods and elves who here are gathered  
  Each one hast thou made thy mate.</span>

</div>

Idun, the keeper of the apples of immortal youth, which prevent the gods
growing old, is similarly addressed:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Silence, Idun! I swear, of all women  
  Thou the most wanton art;  
Who couldst fling those fair-washed arms of thine  
  About thy brother's slayer.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

Frigg, wife of Odin, is satirized as well:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Silence, Frigg! Earth's spouse for a husband,  
    And hast ever yearned after men! <span
id="fr_134"></span>[1](#fn_133)</span>

</div>

The goddesses of classic mythology had similar reputations. Aphrodite
(Venus) had many divine and mortal lovers. She links closely with
Astarte and Ashtoreth (Ishtar), and reference has already been made to
her relations with Adonis (Tammuz). These love deities were all as cruel
as they were wayward. When Ishtar wooed the Babylonian hero, Gilgamesh,
he spurned her advances, as has been indicated, saying:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">On Tammuz, the spouse of thy youth,  
Thou didst lay affliction every year.  
Thou didst love the brilliant Allalu bird  
But thou didst smite him and break his wing;  
He stands in the woods and cries "O my wing".</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He likewise
charged her with deceiving the lion and the horse, making reference to
obscure myths:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Thou didst also love a shepherd of the flock,  
Who continually poured out for thee the libation,  
And daily slaughtered kids for thee;  
But thou didst smite him and didst change him into a leopard,  
So that his own sheep boy hunted him,  
And his own hounds tore him to pieces. <span
id="fr_135"></span>[2](#fn_134)</span>

</div>

These goddesses were ever prone to afflict human beings who might offend
them or of whom they wearied. Demeter (Ceres) changed Ascalaphus into an
owl and Stellio into a lizard. Rhea (Ops) resembled

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">     The tow’red Cybele,  
Mother of a hundred gods,</span>

</div>

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

the wanton who loved Attis (Adonis). Artemis (Diana) slew her lover
Orion, changed Actæon into a stag, which was torn to pieces by his own
dogs, and caused numerous deaths by sending a boar to ravage the fields
of Œneus, king of Calydon. Human sacrifices were frequently offered to
the bloodthirsty "mothers". The most famous victim of Artemis was the
daughter of Agamemnon, "divinely tall and most divinely fair". <span
id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_135) Agamemnon had slain a sacred stag, and
the goddess punished him by sending a calm when the war fleet was about
to sail for Troy, with the result that his daughter had to be
sacrificed. Artemis thus sold breezes like the northern wind hags and
witches.

It used to be customary to account for the similarities manifested by
the various mother goddesses by assuming that there was constant
cultural contact between separate nationalities, and, as a result, a not
inconsiderable amount of "religious borrowing". Greece was supposed to
have received its great goddesses from the western Semites, who had come
under the spell of Babylonian religion. Archæological evidence, however,
tends to disprove this theory. "The most recent researches into
Mesopotamian history", writes Dr. Farnell, "establish with certainty the
conclusion that there was no direct political contact possible between
the powers in the valley of the Euphrates and the western shores of the
Ægean in the second millennium B.C. In fact, between the nascent Hellas
and the great world of Mesopotamia there were powerful and possibly
independent strata of cultures interposing." <span
id="fr_137"></span>[2](#fn_136)

The real connection appears to be the racial one. Among the
Mediterranean Neolithic tribes of Sumeria, Arabia, and Europe, the
goddess cult appears to have

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

been influential. Mother worship was the predominant characteristic of
their religious systems, so that the Greek goddesses were probably of
pre-Hellenic origin, the Celtic of Iberian, the Egyptian of
proto-Egyptian, and the Babylonian of Sumerian. The northern hillmen, on
the other hand, who may be identified with the "Aryans" of the
philologists, were father worshippers. The Vedic Aryo-Indians worshipped
father gods, <span id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_137) as did also the
Germanic peoples and certain tribes in the "Hittite confederacy". Earth
spirits were males, like the Teutonic elves, the Aryo-Indian Ribhus, and
the Burkans, "masters", of the present-day Buriats, a Mongolian people.
When the father-worshipping peoples invaded the dominions of the
mother-worshipping peoples, they introduced their strongly
individualized gods, but they did not displace the mother goddesses.
"The Aryan Hellenes", says Dr. Farnell, "were able to plant their Zeus
and Poseidon on the high hill of Athens, but not to overthrow the
supremacy of Athena in the central shrine and in the aboriginal soul of
the Athenian people." <span id="fr_139"></span>[2](#fn_138) As in Egypt,
the beliefs of the father worshippers, represented by the self-created
Ptah, were fused with the beliefs of the mother worshippers, who adored
Isis, Mut, Neith, and others. In Babylonia this process of racial and
religious fusion was well advanced before the dawn of history. Ea, who
had already assumed manifold forms, may have originally been the son or
child lover of Damkina, "Lady of the Deep", as was Tammuz of Ishtar. As
the fish, Ea was the offspring of the mother river.

The mother worshippers recognized male as well as female deities, but
regarded the great goddess as the First Cause. Although the primeval
spirits were grouped in

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

four pairs in Egypt, and apparently in Babylonia also, the female in the
first pair was more strongly individualized than the male. The Egyptian
Nu is vaguer than his consort Nut, and the Babylonian Apsu than his
consort Tiamat. Indeed, in the narrative of the Creation Tablets of
Babylon, which will receive full treatment in a later chapter, Tiamat,
the great mother, is the controlling spirit. She is more powerful and
ferocious than Apsu, and lives longer. After Apsu's death she elevates
one of her brood, named Kingu, to be her consort, a fact which suggests
that in the Ishtar-Tammuz myth survives the influence of exceedingly
ancient modes of thought. Like Tiamat, Ishtar is also a great battle
heroine, and in this capacity she was addressed as "the lady of majestic
rank exalted over all gods". This was no idle flattery on the part of
worshippers, but a memory of her ancient supremacy.

Reference has been made to the introduction of Tammuz worship into
Jerusalem. Ishtar, as Queen of Heaven, was also adored by the
backsliding Israelites as a deity of battle and harvest. When Jeremiah
censured the people for burning incense and serving gods "whom they knew
not", he said, "neither they, ye, nor your fathers", they made answer:
"Since we left off to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour
out drink offerings unto her, we have wanted all things, and have been
consumed by the sword and the famine". The women took a leading part in
these practices, but refused to accept all the blame, saying, "When we
burned incense to the queen of heaven, and poured out drink offerings
unto her, did we make our cakes and pour out drink offerings unto her
without our men?" <span id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_139) That the
husbands, and the children even, assisted at the ceremony is made
evident in another reference to goddess worship:

 

<span id="img_10600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Female figure in
adoration before a goddess](tn/10600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10600.jpg)  
Female figure in adoration before a goddess  
</span>

<span id="img_10601"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![The winged Ishtar
above the rising sun god, the river god, and other
deities](tn/10601.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10601.jpg)  
The winged Ishtar above the rising sun god, the river god, and other
deities  
</span>

<span id="img_10602"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Gilgamesh in
conflict with bulls](tn/10602.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10602.jpg)  
Gilgamesh in conflict with bulls  
</span>

(see page [176](mba14.htm#page_176))

CYLINDER-SEAL IMPRESSIONS  
(*British Museum)*

 

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "The children
gather wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead the
dough, to make cakes to the queen of heaven". <span
id="fr_141"></span>[1](#fn_140)

Jastrow suggests that the women of Israel wept for Tammuz, offered cakes
to the mother goddess, &c., because "in all religious bodies . . . women
represent the conservative element; among them religious customs
continue in practice after they have been abandoned by men". <span
id="fr_142"></span>[2](#fn_141) The evidence of Jeremiah, however, shows
that the men certainly co-operated at the archaic ceremonials. In
lighting the fires with the "vital spark", they apparently acted in
imitation of the god of fertility. The women, on the other hand,
represented the reproductive harvest goddess in providing the food
supply. In recognition of her gift, they rewarded the goddess by
offering her the cakes prepared from the newly ground wheat and
barley--the "first fruits of the harvest". As the corn god came as a
child, the children began the ceremony by gathering the wood for the
sacred fire. When the women mourned for Tammuz, they did so evidently
because the death of the god was lamented by the goddess Ishtar. It
would appear, therefore, that the suggestion regarding the "conservative
element" should really apply to the immemorial practices of folk
religion. These differed from the refined ceremonies of the official
cult in Babylonia, where there were suitable temples and organized bands
of priests and priestesses. But the official cult received no
recognition in Palestine; the cakes intended for a goddess were not
offered up in the temple of Abraham's God, but "in the streets of
Jerusalem" and those of other cities. <span
id="fr_143"></span>[3](#fn_142)

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

The obvious deduction seems to be that in ancient times women everywhere
played a prominent part in the ceremonial folk worship of the Great
Mother goddess, while the men took the lesser part of the god whom she
had brought into being and afterwards received as "husband of his
mother". This may account for the high social status of women among
goddess worshippers, like the representatives of the Mediterranean race,
whose early religion was not confined to temples, but closely associated
with the acts of everyday life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_104"></span>[82:1](mba11.htm#fr_105) *Ezekiel*, viii.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[83:1](mba11.htm#fr_106) *Psalms*, cxxvi.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[83:2](mba11.htm#fr_107) *The Burden of Isis*,
J. T. Dennis (*Wisdom of the East* series), pp. 21, 22.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[83:3](mba11.htm#fr_108) *Religion of the
Semites*, pp. 412, 414.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[85:1](mba11.htm#fr_109) *Egyptian Myth and
Legend*, pp. 45 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[86:1](mba11.htm#fr_110) Langdon's *Sumerian
and Babylonian Psalms*, pp. 319-321.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[87:1](mba11.htm#fr_111) Campbell's *West
Highland Tales*, vol. iii, p. 74..

<span id="fn_111"></span>[87:2](mba11.htm#fr_112) *West Highland Tales*,
vol. iii, pp. 85, 86.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[87:3](mba11.htm#fr_113) If Finn and his band
were really militiamen--the original Fenians--as is believed in Ireland,
they may have had attached to their memories the legends of archaic
Iberian <span id="page_88">p. 88</span> deities who differed from the
Celtic Danann deities. Theodoric the Goth, as Dietrich von Bern, was
identified, for instance, with Donar or Thunor (Thor), the thunder god,
In Scotland Finn and his followers are all giants. Diarmid is the
patriarch of the Campbell clan, the MacDiarmids being "sons of Diarmid".

<span id="fn_113"></span>[89:1](mba11.htm#fr_114) Isaiah condemns a
magical custom connected with the worship of Tammuz in the garden,
Isaiah, xvii, g, II. This "Garden of Adonis" is dealt with in the [next
chapter](mba12.htm#an_ch-06).

<span id="fn_114"></span>[90:1](mba11.htm#fr_115) Quotations are from
*Sumerian and Babylonian Psalms*, translated by Stephen Langdon, Ph.D.
(Paris and London, 1909), pp. 299-341.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[93:1](mba11.htm#fr_116) *Beowulf*, translated
by J. R. Clark Hall (London, 1911), pp. 9-11.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[93:2](mba11.htm#fr_117) For Frey's connection
with the Ynglings see Morris and Magnusson's *Heimskringla* (*Saga
Library*, vol. iii), pp. 23-71.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[93:3](mba11.htm#fr_118) *The Religion of
Babylonia and Assyria*, p. 72.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[94:1](mba11.htm#fr_119) Langdon's *Sumerian
and Babylonian Psalms*, pp. 325, 339.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[94:2](mba11.htm#fr_120) Professor Oldenberg's
translation.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[94:3](mba11.htm#fr_121) Osiris is also invoked
to "remove storms and rain and give fecundity in the night-time". As a
spring sun god he slays demons; as a lunar god he brings fertility.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[96:1](mba11.htm#fr_122) Like the
love-compelling girdle of Aphrodite.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[98:1](mba11.htm#fr_123) A wedding bracelet of
crystal is worn by Hindu women; they break it when the husband dies.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[98:2](mba11.htm#fr_124) Quotations from the
translation in *The Chaldean Account of Genesis*, by George Smith.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[98:3](mba11.htm#fr_125) Langdon's *Sumerian
and Babylonian Psalms*, p. 32q *et seq*.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[99:1](mba11.htm#fr_126) *The Burden of Isis*,
translated by J. T. Dennis (*Wisdom of the East* series), pp. 24, 31,
32, 39, 45, 46, 49.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[99:2](mba11.htm#fr_127) *The Burden of Isis*,
pp. 22, 46.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[100:1](mba11.htm#fr_128) *Aspects of Religious
Belief and Practice in Babylonia and Assyria*, p. 137, and *Herodotus*,
book i, 199.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[101:1](mba11.htm#fr_129) *The Burden of Isis*,
p. 47.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[101:2](mba11.htm#fr_130) *Original Sanskrit
Texts*, J. Muir, London, 1890, vol. i, p. 67.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[101:3](mba11.htm#fr_131) *Original Sanskrit
Texts*, vol. i, p. 44.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[101:4](mba11.htm#fr_132) *Adi Parva* section
of *Mahàbhàrata* (Roy's translation), pp. 553, 555.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[102:1](mba11.htm#fr_133) *Ancient Irish
Poetry*, Kuno Meyer (London, 1911), pp. 88-90.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[103:1](mba11.htm#fr_134) Translations from
*The Elder Edda*, by O. Bray (part i), London, 1908.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[103:2](mba11.htm#fr_135) *Babylonian
Religion*, L. W. King, pp. 160, 161.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[104:1](mba11.htm#fr_136) Tennyson's *A Dream
of Fair Women*.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[104:2](mba11.htm#fr_137) *Greece and Babylon*,
L. R. Farnell (Edinburgh, 1911), p. 35.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[105:1](mba11.htm#fr_138) The goddesses did not
become prominent until the "late invasion" of the post-Vedic Aryans.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[105:2](mba11.htm#fr_139) *Greece and Babylon*,
p. 96.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[106:1](mba11.htm#fr_140) *Jeremiah*, xliv.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[107:1](mba11.htm#fr_141) *Jeremiah*, vii, 18.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[107:2](mba11.htm#fr_142) *Aspects of Religious
Belief and Practice in Babylonia and Assyria*, pp. 348, 349.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[107:3](mba11.htm#fr_143) *Jeremiah*, vii, 17.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Wars of the City States of Sumer and Akkad](mba12)
