[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mba14)  [Next](mba16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002GYVU7A/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths of Babylonia and Assyria*, by Donald A. MacKenzie, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span> <span id="an_ch-09"></span>

#### CHAPTER IX

#### Deluge Legend, the Island of the Blessed, and Hades

<span class="small">Babylonian Story of the Flood--The Two Immortals on
the Island of the Blessed--Deluge Legends in the Old and New Worlds--How
Babylonian Culture reached India--Theory of Cosmic Periods--Gilgamesh
resembles the Indian Yama and Persian Yimeh--Links with Varuna and
Mitra--The Great Winter in Persian and Teutonic Mythologies--Babylonian
Hades compared with the Egyptian, Greek, Indian, Teutonic, and Celtic
Otherworlds--Legend of Nergal and the Queen of Death--Underworld
originally the Grave--Why Weapons, &c., were Buried with the
Dead--Japanese and Roman Beliefs--Palæolithic Burial Customs--"Our
Graves are our Houses"--Importance of Babylonian Funerary
Ceremonies--Doctrine of Eternal Bliss in Egypt and India--Why Suppressed
in Babylonia--Heavy Burial Fees--Various Burial Customs.</span>

THE story of the Deluge which was related to Gilgamesh by Pir-napishtim
runs as follows:

"Hear me, O Gilgamesh, and I will make revelation regarding the hidden
doings of the high gods. As thou knowest, the city of Shurippak is
situated upon the bank of the Euphrates. The gods were within it: there
they assembled together in council. Anu, the father, was there, and Bel
the counsellor and warrior, Ninip the messenger, and Ennugi the
governor. Ea, the wise lord, sat also with them. In their hearts the
gods agreed together to send a great deluge.

"Thereafter Ea made known the purpose of the divine rulers in the hut of
reeds, saying: <span id="fr_224"></span>[1](#fn_223.md) 'O hut of

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

reeds, hear; O wall, understand . . . O man of Shurippak, son of Umbara
Tutu, tear down thy house and build a ship; leave all thou dost possess
and save thy life, and preserve in the ship the living seed of every
kind. The ship that thou wilt build must be of goodly proportions in
length and height. It must be floated on the great deep.'

"I heard the command of Ea and understood, and I made answer, saying, 'O
wise lord, as thou hast said so will I do, for thy counsel is most
excellent. But how shall I give reason for my doings to the young men
and the elders?'

"Ea opened his mouth and said unto me, his servant: 'What thou shalt say
unto them is this . . *It hath been revealed unto me that Bel doth hate
me, therefore I cannot remain any longer in his domain, this city of
Shurippak, so I must depart unto the domain of Ea and dwell with him . .
. Unto you will Bel send abundance of rain, so that you may obtain birds
and fishes in plenty and have a rich harvest. But Shamash hath appointed
a time for Ramman to pour down destruction from the heavens*.'" <span
id="fr_225"></span>[1](#fn_224.md)

Ea then gave instructions to Pir-napishtim how to build the ship in
which he should find refuge. So far as can be gathered from the
fragmentary text, it appears that this vessel was to have a deck house
six stories high, with nine apartments in each story. According to
another account, Ea drew a plan of the great ship upon the sand.

Pir-napishtim set to work and made a flat-bottomed vessel, which was 120
cubits wide and 120 cubits in height. He smeared it with bitumen inside
and pitch outside; and on the seventh day it was ready. Then

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

he carried out Ea's further instructions. Continuing his narrative to
Gilgamesh, he said:

"I gathered together all that I possessed, my silver and gold and seeds
of every kind, and my goods also. These I placed in the ship. Then I
caused to go aboard all my family and house servants, the animals of the
field and the beasts of the field and the workers--every one of them I
sent up.

"The god Shamash appointed the time, saying: 'I will cause the Night
Lord to send much rain and bring destruction. Then enter thou the ship
and shut thy door.'

"At the appointed time the Night Lord sent at eventime much rain. I saw
the beginning of the deluge and I was afraid to look up. I entered the
ship and shut the door. I appointed Buzur-Kurgala, the sailor, to be
captain, and put under his command the great vessel and all that it
contained.

"At the dawn of day I saw rising athwart the heavens a dark cloud, and
in the midst of it Ramman thundered. Nebo and Merodach went in front,
speeding like emissaries over hills and plains. The cables of the ship
were let loose.

"Then Ninip, the tempest god, came nigh, and the storm broke in fury
before him. All the earth spirits leapt up with flaming torches and the
whole land was aflare. The thunder god swept over the heavens, blotting
out the sunlight and bringing thick darkness. Rain poured down the whole
day long, and the earth was covered with water; the rivers were swollen;
the land was in confusion; men stumbled about in the darkness, battling
with the elements. Brothers were unable to see brothers; no man could
recognize his friends. . . . The spirits above looked down and beheld
the rising

 

<span id="img_19200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE BABYLONIAN
DELUGE&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From the Painting by E.
Wallcousins&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/19200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/19200.jpg.md)  
THE BABYLONIAN DELUGE  
*From the Painting by E. Wallcousins*.  
</span>

 

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

flood and were afraid: they fled away, and in the heaven of Anu they
crouched like to hounds in the protecting enclosures.

"In time Ishtar, the lady of the gods, cried out distressfully, saying:
'The elder race hath perished and turned to clay because that I have
consented to evil counsel in the assembly of the gods. Alas! I have
allowed my people to be destroyed. I gave being to man, but where is he?
Like the offspring of fish he cumbers the deep.'

"The earth spirits were weeping with Ishtar: they sat down cowering with
tightened lips and spake not; they mourned in silence.

"Six days and six nights went past, and the tempest raged over the
waters which gradually covered the land. But when the seventh day came,
the wind fell, the whirling waters grew peaceful, and the sea retreated.
The storm was over and the rain of destruction had ceased. I looked
forth. I called aloud over the waters. But all mankind had perished and
turned to clay. Where fields had been I saw marshes only.

"Then I opened wide the window of the ship, and the sunlight suffused my
countenance. I was dazzled and sank down weeping and the tears streamed
over my face. Everywhere I looked I saw water.

"At length, land began to appear. The ship drifted towards the country
of Nitsir, and then it was held fast by the mountain of Nitsir. Six days
went past and the ship remained stedfast. On the seventh day I sent
forth a dove, and she flew away and searched this way and that, but
found no resting place, so she returned. I then sent forth a swallow,
and she returned likewise. Next I sent forth a raven, and she flew away.
She saw that the waters were shrinking, and gorged and croaked and
waded, but

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

did not come back. Then I brought forth all the animals into the air of
heaven.

"An offering I made on the mountain. I poured out a libation. I set up
incense vessels seven by seven on heaped-up reeds and used cedar wood
with incense. The gods smelt the sweet savour, and they clustered like
flies about the sacrificer.

"Thereafter Ishtar (Sirtu) drew nigh. Lifting up the jewels, which the
god Anu had fashioned for her according to her desire, she spake,
saying: 'Oh! these gods! I vow by the lapis lazuli gems upon my neck
that I will never forget! I will remember these days for ever and ever.
Let all the gods come hither to the offering, save Bel (Enlil) alone,
because that he ignored my counsel, and sent a great deluge which
destroyed my people.'

"But Bel Enlil came also, and when he beheld the ship he paused. His
heart was filled with wrath against the gods and the spirits of heaven.
Angrily he spake and said: 'Hath one escaped? It was decreed that no
human being should survive the deluge.'

"Ninip, son of Bel, spoke, saying: 'Who hath done this save Ea alone? He
knoweth all things.'

"Ea, god of the deep, opened his mouth and said unto the warrior Bel:
'Thou art the lord of the gods, O warrior. But thou wouldst not hearken
to my counsel and caused the deluge to be. Now punish the sinner for his
sins and the evil doer for his evil deed, but be merciful and do not
destroy all mankind. May there never again be a flood. Let the lion come
and men will decrease. May there never again be a flood. Let the leopard
come and men will decrease. May there never again be a flood. Let famine
come upon the land; let Ura, god of pestilence, come and snatch off
mankind. . . . I did not reveal the secret purpose of the mighty gods,

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

but I caused Atra-chasis (Pir-napishtim) to dream a dream in which he
had knowledge of what the gods had decreed.'

"Having pondered a time over these words, Bel entered the ship alone. He
grasped my hand land led me forth, even me, and he led forth my wife
also, and caused her to kneel down beside me. Then he stood between us
and gave his blessing. He spoke, saying: 'In time past Pir-napishtim was
a man. Henceforth Pir-napishtim and his wife will be like unto deities,
even us. Let them dwell apart beyond the river mouths.'

"Thereafter Bel carried me hither beyond the mouths of rivers."

.        .        .        .        .        .

Flood myths are found in many mythologies both in the Old World and the
New.

The violent and deceitful men of the mythical Bronze Age of Greece were
destroyed by a flood. It is related that Zeus said on one occasion to
Hermes: "I will send a great rain, such as hath not been since the
making of the world, and the whole race of men shall perish. I am weary
of their iniquity."

For receiving with hospitable warmth these two gods in human guise,
Deucalion, an old man, and his wife Pyrrha were spared, however. Zeus
instructed his host to build an ark of oak, and store it well with food.
When this was done, the couple entered the vessel and shut the door.
Then Zeus "broke up all the fountains of the deep, and opened the well
springs of heaven, and it rained for forty days and forty nights
continually". The Bronze folk perished: not even those who fled to the
hilltops could escape. The ark rested on Parnassus, and when the waters
ebbed the old couple descended the mountain and took up their abode in a
cave. <span id="fr_226"></span>[1](#fn_225.md)

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

In Indian mythology the world is destroyed by a flood at the end of each
Age of the Universe. There are four ages: the Krita or Perfect Age, the
Treta Age, the Dwapara Age, and the Kali or Wicked Age. These correspond
closely to the Greek and Celtic ages. <span
id="fr_227"></span>[1](#fn_226.md) There are also references in Sanskrit
literature to the destruction of the world because too many human beings
lived upon it. "When the increase of population had been so frightful,"
a sage related, "the Earth, oppressed with the excessive burden, sank
down for a hundred Yojanas. Suffering pain in all her limbs, and being
deprived of her senses by excessive pressure, the Earth in distress
sought the protection of Narayana, the foremost of the gods." <span
id="fr_228"></span>[2](#fn_227.md)

Manu's account of the flood has been already referred to ([Chapter
II](mba08.htm#an_ch-02).md). The god in fish shape informed him: "The time
is ripe for purging the world. . . . Build a strong and massive ark, and
furnish it with a long rope. . . ." When the waters rose the horned fish
towed the ark over the roaring sea, until it grounded on the highest
peak of the Himavat, which is still called Naubandha (the harbour). Manu
was accompanied by seven rishis. <span id="fr_229"></span>[3](#fn_228.md)

In the Celtic (Irish) account of the flood, Cessair, granddaughter of
Noah, was refused a chamber for herself in the ark, and fled to the
western borders of the world as advised by her idol. <span
id="fr_230"></span>[4](#fn_229.md) Her fleet consisted of three ships, but
two foundered before Ireland was reached. The survivors in addition to
Cessair were, her father Bith, two other men, Fintan and Ladru, and
fifty women. All of these perished on the hills except Fintan, who slept
on the crest of a great billow, and lived to see Partholon, the giant,
arriving from Greece.

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

There is a deluge also in Egyptian mythology. When Ra, the sun god, grew
old as an earthly king, men began to mutter words against him. He called
the gods together and said: "I will not slay them (his subjects) until I
have heard what ye say concerning them." Nu, his father, who was the god
of primeval waters, advised the wholesale destruction of mankind.

Said Ra: "Behold men flee unto the hills; their heart is full of fear
because of that which they said."

The goddess Hathor-Sekhet, the Eye of Ra, then went forth and slew
mankind on the hills. Thereafter Ra, desiring to protect the remnant of
humanity, caused a great offering to be made to the goddess, consisting
of corn beer mixed with herbs and human blood. This drink was poured out
during the night. "And the goddess came in the morning; she found the
fields inundated, she rejoiced thereat, she drank thereof; her heart was
rejoiced, she went about drunken and took no more cognizance of
men." <span id="fr_231"></span>[1](#fn_230.md)

It is obvious that the Egyptian myth refers to the annual inundation of
the Nile, the "human blood" in the "beer" being the blood of the slain
corn god, or of his earthly representative. It is probable that the
flood legends of North and South America similarly reflected local
phenomena, although the possibility that they were of Asiatic origin,
like the American Mongoloid tribes, cannot be overlooked. Whether or not
Mexican civilization, which was flourishing about the time of the battle
of Hastings, received any cultural stimulus from Asia is a question
regarding which it would be unsafe to dogmatize, owing to the meagre
character of the available data.

The Mexican deluge was caused by the "water sun", which suddenly
discharged the moisture it had been

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

drawing from the earth in the form of vapour through long ages. All life
was destroyed.

A flood legend among the Nahua tribes resembles closely the Babylonian
story as told by Pir-napishtim. The god Titlacahuan instructed a man
named Nata to make a boat by hollowing out a cypress tree, so as to
escape the coming deluge with his wife Nena. This pair escaped
destruction. They offered up a fish sacrifice in the boat and enraged
the deity who visited them, displaying as much indignation as did Bel
when he discovered that Pir-napishtim had survived the great disaster.
Nata and Nena had been instructed to take with them one ear of maize
only, which suggests that they were harvest spirits.

In Brazil, Monan, the chief god, sent a great fire to burn up the world
and its wicked inhabitants. To extinguish the flames a magician caused
so much rain to fall that the earth was flooded.

The Californian Indians had a flood legend, and believed that the early
race was diminutive; and the Athapascan Indians of the north-west
professed to be descendants of a family who escaped the deluge. Indeed,
deluge myths were widespread in the "New World".

The American belief that the first beings who were created were unable
to live on earth was shared by the Babylonians. According to Berosus the
first creation was a failure, because the animals could not bear the
light and they all died. <span id="fr_232"></span>[1](#fn_231.md) Here we
meet with the germs of the Doctrine of the World's Ages, which reached
its highest development in Indian, Greek, and Celtic (Irish)
mythologies.

The Biblical account of the flood is familiar to readers. "It forms",
says Professor Pinches, "a good subject for

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

comparison with the Babylonian account, with which it agrees so closely
in all the main points, and from which it differs so much in many
essential details." <span id="fr_233"></span>[1](#fn_232.md)

The drift of Babylonian culture was not only directed westward towards
the coast of Palestine, and from thence to Greece during the Phœnician
period, but also eastward through Elam to the Iranian plateau and India.
Reference has already been made to the resemblances between early Vedic
and Sumerian mythologies. When the "new songs" of the Aryan invaders of
India were being composed, the sky and ocean god, Varuna, who resembles
Ea-Oannes, and Mitra, who links with Shamash, were already declining in
splendour. Other cultural influences were at work. Certain of the Aryan
tribes, for instance, buried their dead in Varuna's "house of clay",
while a growing proportion cremated their dead and worshipped Agni, the
fire god. At the close of the Vedic period there were fresh invasions
into middle India, and the "late comers" introduced new beliefs,
including the doctrines of the Transmigration of Souls and of the Ages
of the Universe. Goddesses also rose into prominence, and the Vedic gods
became minor deities, and subject to Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva. These
"late comers" had undoubtedly been influenced by Babylonian ideas before
they entered India. In their Doctrine of the World's Ages or Yugas, for
instance, we are forcibly reminded of the Euphratean ideas regarding
space and time. Mr. Robert Brown, junr., who is an authority in this
connection, shows that the system by which the "Day of Brahma" was
calculated in India resembles closely an

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

astronomical system which obtained in Babylonia, where apparently the
theory of cosmic periods had origin. <span
id="fr_234"></span>[1](#fn_233.md)

The various alien peoples, however, who came under the spell of
Babylonian modes of thought did not remain in a state of intellectual
bondage. Thought was stimulated rather than arrested by religious
borrowing, and the development of ideas regarding the mysteries of life
and death proceeded apace in areas over which the ritualistic and
restraining priesthood of Babylonia exercised no sway. As much may be
inferred from the contrasting conceptions of the Patriarchs of Vedic and
Sumerian mythologies. Pir-napishtim, the Babylonian Noah, and the
semi-divine Gilgamesh appear to be represented in Vedic mythology by
Yama, god of the dead. Yama was "the first man", and, like Gilgamesh, he
set out on a journey over mountains and across water to discover
Paradise. He is lauded in the Vedic hymns as the explorer of "the path"
or "way" to the "Land of the Pitris" (Fathers), the Paradise to which
the Indian uncremated dead walked on foot. Yama never lost his original
character. He is a traveller in the Epics as in the Vedas. <span
id="fr_235"></span>[2](#fn_234.md)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Him who along the mighty heights departed,  
Him who searched and spied the path for many,  
Son of Vivasvat, gatherer of the people,  
Yama, the King, with sacrifices worship.  
                                         *Rigveda*, x, 14, 1. <span
id="fr_236"></span>[3](#fn_235.md)

To Yama, mighty King, be gifts and homage paid,  
He was the first of men that died, the first to brave  
Death's rapid rushing stream, the first to point the road  
To heaven, and welcome others to that bright abode.  
                            *Sir M. Monier Williams' Translation*. <span
id="fr_237"></span>[4](#fn_236.md)

</div>

Yama and his sister Yamí were the first human pair.

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They are identical
with the Persian Celestial twins, Yima and Yimeh. Yima resembles Mitra
(Mithra); Varuna, the twin brother of Mitra, in fact, carries the noose
associated with the god of death. <span id="fr_238"></span>[1](#fn_237.md)

The Indian Yama, who was also called Pitripati, "lord of the fathers",
takes Mitra's place in the Paradise of Ancestors beside Varuna, god of
the sky and the deep. He sits below a tree, playing on a flute and
drinking the Soma drink which gives immortality. When the descendants of
Yama reached Paradise they assumed shining forms "refined and from all
taint set free". <span id="fr_239"></span>[2](#fn_238.md)

In Persian mythology "Yima", says Professor Moulton, "reigns over a
community which may well have been composed of his own descendants, for
he lived yet longer than Adam. To render them immortal, he gives them to
eat forbidden food, being deceived by the Daevas (demons). What was this
forbidden food? May we connect it with another legend whereby, at the
Regeneration, Mithra is to make men immortal by giving them to eat the
fat of the *Ur-Kuh*, the primeval cow from whose slain body, according
to the Aryan legends adopted by Mithraism, mankind was first created?"

Yima is punished for "presumptuously grasping at immortality for himself
and mankind, on the suggestion of an evil power, instead of waiting
Ahura's good time". Professor Moulton wonders if this story, which he
endeavours to reconstruct, "owed anything to Babylon?"

Yima, like the Babylonian Pir-napishtim, is also a revealer of the
secrets of creation. He was appointed to be "Guardian, Overseer, Watcher
over my Creation" by Ahura, the supreme god. Three hundred years went
past

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Then the earth became abounding,  
Full of flocks and full of cattle,  
Full of men, of birds, dogs likewise,  
Full of fires all bright and blazing,  
Nor did men, flocks, herds of cattle,  
Longer find them places in it.  
                              *Jackson's Translation*.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The earth was
thereafter cloven with a golden arrow. Yima then built a refuge in which
mankind and the domesticated animals might find shelter during a
terrible winter. "The picture", says Professor Moulton, "strongly tempts
us to recognize the influence of the Babylonian Flood Legend." <span
id="fr_240"></span>[1](#fn_239.md) The "Fimbul winter" of Germanic
mythology is also recalled. Odin asks in one of the Icelandic Eddic
poems:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">What beings shall live when the long dread winter  
   Comes o’er the people of earth? <span
id="fr_241"></span>[2](#fn_240.md)</span>

</div>

In another Eddic poem, the Voluspa, the Vala tells of a Sword Age, an
Axe Age, a Wind Age, and a Wolf Age which is to come "ere the world
sinks". After the battle of the gods and demons,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">The sun is darkened, earth sinks in the sea.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In time, however,
a new world appears.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">I see uprising a second time  
Earth from the Ocean, green anew;  
The waters fall, on high the eagle  
Flies o'er the fell and catches fish.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When the surviving
gods return, they will talk, according to the Vala (prophetess), of "the
great world serpent" (Tiamat). The fields will be sown and "Balder will

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

come" <span id="fr_242"></span>[1](#fn_241.md)--apparently as Tammuz came.
The association of Balder with corn suggests that, like Nata of the
Nahua tribes, he was a harvest spirit, among other things.

Leaving, meantime, the many problems which arise from consideration of
the Deluge legends and their connection with primitive agricultural
myths, the attention of readers may be directed to the Babylonian
conception of the Otherworld.

Pir-napishtim, who escaped destruction at the Flood, resides in an
Island Paradise, which resembles the Greek "Islands of the Blessed", and
the Irish "Tir nan og" or "Land of the Young", situated in the western
ocean, and identical with the British <span
id="fr_243"></span>[2](#fn_242.md)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">                            island-valley of
Avilion,  
Where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow,  
Nor ever wind blows loudly, but it lies  
Deep meadow’d, happy, fair with orchard lawns  
And bowery hollows crowned with summer sea. <span
id="fr_244"></span>[3](#fn_243.md)</span>

</div>

Only two human beings were permitted to reside on the Babylonian island
paradise, however. These were Pir-napishtim and his wife. Apparently
Gilgamesh could not join them there. His gods did not transport heroes
and other favoured individuals to a happy isle or isles like those of
the Greeks and Celts and Aryo-Indians. There was no Heaven for the
Babylonian dead. All mankind were doomed to enter the gloomy Hades of
the Underworld, "the land of darkness and the shadow of death; a land of
darkness, as darkness itself; and of the shadow of death, without any
order, and where the light is darkness", as Job exclaimed in the hour of
despair, lamenting his fate. <span id="fr_245"></span>[4](#fn_244.md)

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

This gloomy habitation of the dead resembles the Greek Hades, the
Teutonic Nifelhel, and the Indian "Put". No detailed description of it
has been found. The references, however, in the "Descent of Ishtar" and
the Gilgamesh epic suggest that it resembled the hidden regions of the
Egyptians, in which souls were tortured by demons who stabbed them,
plunged them in pools of fire, and thrust them into cold outer darkness
where they gnashed their teeth, or into places of horror swarming with
poisonous reptiles.

Ishtar was similarly tortured by the plague demon, Namtar, when she
boldly entered the Babylonian Underworld to search for Tammuz. Other
sufferings were, no doubt, in store for her, resembling those, perhaps,
with which the giant maid in the Eddic poem "Skirnismal" was threatened
when she refused to marry Frey, the god of fertility and harvest:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Trolls shall torment thee from morn till eve  
  In the realms of the Jotun race,  
Each day to the dwellings of Frost giants must thou  
  Creep helpless, creep hopeless of love;  
Thou shalt weeping have in the stead of joy,  
  And sore burden bear with tears. . . .  
May madness and shrieking, bondage and yearning  
  Burden thee with bondage and tears. <span
id="fr_246"></span>[1](#fn_245.md)</span>

</div>

In like manner, too, the inhabitants of the Indian Hell suffered endless
and complicated tortures. <span id="fr_247"></span>[2](#fn_246.md)

The Persephone of the Babylonian Underworld was Eresh-ki-gal, who was
also called Allatu. A myth, which was found among the Egyptian
Tel-el-Amarna "Letters", sets forth that on one occasion the Babylonian
gods held a feast. All the deities attended it, except Eresh-ki-gal.

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> She was unable to
leave her gloomy Underworld, and sent her messenger, the plague demon
Namtar, to obtain her share. The various deities honoured Namtar, except
Nergal, by standing up to receive him. When Eresh-ki-gal was informed of
this slight she became very angry, and demanded that Nergal should be
delivered up to her so that he might be put to death. The storm god at
once hastened to the Underworld, accompanied by his own group of fierce
demons, whom he placed as guardians at the various doors so as to
prevent the escape of Eresh-ki-gal. Then he went boldly towards the
goddess, clutched her by the hair, and dragged her from her throne.
After a brief struggle, she found herself over-powered. Nergal made
ready to cut off her head, but she cried for mercy and said: "Do not
kill me, my brother! Let me speak to thee."

This appeal indicated that she desired to ransom her life--like the hags
in the European folk tales--so Nergal unloosed his hold.

Then Eresh-ki-gal continued: "Be thou my husband and I will be thy wife.
On thee I confer sovereignty over the wide earth, giving thee the tablet
of wisdom. Thou shalt be my lord and I will be thy lady."

Nergal accepted these terms by kissing the goddess. Affectionately
drying her tears, he spoke, saying: "Thou shalt now have from me what
thou hast demanded during these past months."

In other words, Nergal promises to honour her as she desired, after
becoming her husband and equal.

In the "Descent of Ishtar" the Babylonian Underworld is called Cuthah.
This city had a famous cemetery, like Abydos in Egypt, where many pious
and orthodox worshippers sought sepulture. The local god was Nergal, who
symbolized the destructive power of the sun and the

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

sand storm; he was a gloomy, vengeful deity, attended by the spirits of
tempest, weariness, pestilence, and disease, and was propitiated because
he was dreaded.

In Nether Cuthah, as Ea-bani informed Gilgamesh, the worm devoured the
dead amidst the dust and thick darkness.

It is evident that this Underworld was modelled on the grave. In early
times men believed that the spirits of the dead hovered in or about the
place of sepulture. They were therefore provided with "houses" to
protect them, in the same manner as the living were protected in their
houses above the ground.

The enemies of the human ghosts were the earth spirits. Weapons were
laid beside the dead in their graves so that they might wage war against
demons when necessary. The corpse was also charmed, against attack, by
the magical and protecting ornaments which were worn by the
living--necklaces, armlets, ear-rings, &c. Even face paint was provided,
probably as a charm against the evil eye and other subtle influences.

So long as corpses were left in their graves, the spirits of the dead
were, it would appear, believed to be safe. But they required food and
refreshment. Food vessels and drinking urns were therefore included in
the funerary furniture, and the dead were given food offerings at
regular intervals. Once a year the living held feasts in the burial
ground, and invited the ghosts to share in the repast. This custom was
observed in Babylonia, and is not yet obsolete in Egypt; Moslems and
Coptic Christians alike hold annual all-night feasts in their
cemeteries.

The Japanese "Land of Yomi" is similarly an underworld, or great grave,
where ghosts mingle with the demons of disease and destruction. Souls
reach it by "the pass of Yomi". The Mikado, however, may be

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

privileged to ascend to heaven and join the gods in the "Eternal Land".

Among the ancient Romans the primitive belief survived that the spirit
of the dead "just sank into the earth where it rested, and returned from
time to time to the upper world through certain openings in the ground
(mundi), whose solemn uncovering was one of the regular observances of
the festal calendar". <span id="fr_248"></span>[1](#fn_247.md)

According to Babylonian belief, the dead who were not properly buried
roamed through the streets searching for food, eating refuse and
drinking impure water.

Prior to the period of ceremonial burials, the dead were interred in the
houses in which they had lived--a custom which has made it possible for
present-day scientists to accumulate much valuable data regarding
primitive races and their habits of life. The Palæolithic cave-dwellers
of Europe were buried in their caves. These were then deserted and
became the haunts of wild animals. After a long interval a deserted cave
was occupied by strangers. In certain characteristic caves the various
layers containing human remains represent distinct periods of the vast
Pleistocene Age.

When Mediterranean man moved northward through Europe, he utilized some
of these caves, and constructed in them well-built graves for his dead,
digging down through older layers. In thus making a "house" within a
"house", he has provided us with a link between an old custom and a new.
Apparently he was influenced by local practices and beliefs, for he met
and mingled in certain localities with the men of the Late Palæolithic
Age.

The primitive house-burial rite is referred to in the Ethiopic version
of the life of Alexander the Great. The

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Two-horned", as
the hero was called, conversed with Brahmans when he reached India. He
spoke to one of them, "saying: 'Have ye no tombs wherein to bury any man
among ye who may die?' And an interpreter made answer to him, saying:
'Man and woman and child grow up, and arrive at maturity, and become
old, and when any one of them dieth we bury him in the place wherein he
lived; thus our graves are our houses. And our God knoweth that we
desire this more than the lust for food and meat which all men have:
this is our life and manner of living in the darkness of our tombs.'"
When Alexander desired to make a gift to these Brahmans, and asked them
what they desired most, their answer was, "Give us immortality". <span
id="fr_249"></span>[1](#fn_248.md)

In the Gilgamesh epic the only ray of hope which relieves the gloomy
closing passages is Ea-bani's suggestion that the sufferings endured by
the dead may be alleviated by the performance of strict burial rites.
Commenting on this point Professor Jastrow says: "A proper burial with
an affectionate care of the corpse ensures at least a quiet repose.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Such a one rests on a couch and drinks pure water;  
But he whose shade has no rest in the earth, as I have seen and you will
see,  
His shade has no rest in the earth  
Whose shade no one cares for . . .  
What is left over in the pot, remains of rood  
That are thrown in the street, he eats." <span
id="fr_250"></span>[2](#fn_249.md)  
                                                *Gilgamesh Epic*.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

By disseminating the belief that the dead must be buried with much
ceremony, the priests secured great power over the people, and extracted
large fees.

In Egypt, on the other hand, the teachers of the sun cult sold charms
and received rewards to perform ceremonies so that chosen worshippers
might enter the sun-barque of Ra; while the Osirian priests promised the
just and righteous that they would reach an agricultural Paradise where
they could live and work as on earth, but receive a greater return for
their labour, the harvests of the Otherworld being of unequalled
abundance.

In the sacred books of India a number of Paradises are referred to. No
human beings, however, entered the Paradise of Varuna, who resembles the
Sumerian Ea-Oannes. The souls of the dead found rest and enjoyment in
the Paradise of Yama, while "those kings that yield up their lives,
without turning their backs on the field of battle, attain", as the sage
told a hero, "to the mansion of Indra", which recalls the Valhal of
Odin. It will thus be seen that belief in immortality was a tenet of the
Indian cults of Indra and Yama.

It is possible that the Gilgamesh epic in one of its forms concluded
when the hero reached the island of Pir-napishtim, like the Indian Yama
who "searched and spied the path for many". The Indian "Land of the
Pitris" (Ancestors), over which Yama presided, may be compared to the
Egyptian heaven of Osiris. It contains, we are told, "all kinds of
enjoyable articles", and also "sweet, juicy, agreeable and delicious
edibles . . . floral wreaths of the most delicious fragrance, and trees
that yield fruits that are desired of them". Thither go "all sinners
among human beings, as also (those) that have died during the winter
solstice" <span id="fr_251"></span>[1](#fn_250.md)--a suggestion that this

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Paradise was not
unconnected with the Tammuz-like deity who took up his abode in the
spirit land during the barren season.

The view may be urged that in the Gilgamesh epic we have a development
of the Tammuz legend in its heroic form. Like Ishtar, when she descended
to Hades, the King of Erech could not return to earth until he had been
sprinkled by the water of life. No doubt, an incident of this character
occurred also in the original Tammuz legend. The life of the god had to
be renewed before he could return. Did he slumber, like one of the Seven
Sleepers, in Ea's house, and not awake again until he arrived as a child
in his crescent moon boat--"the sunken boat" of the hymns--like Scef,
who came over the waves to the land of the Scyldings?

It seems remarkable that the doctrine of Eternal Bliss, which obtained
in Egypt on the one hand and in India on the other, should never have
been developed among the Babylonians. Of course, our knowledge in this
connection is derived from the orthodox religious texts. Perhaps the
great thinkers, whose influence can be traced in the tendencies towards
monotheism which became marked at various periods, believed in a Heaven
for the just and good. If they did, their teachings must have been
suppressed by the mercenary priests. It was extremely profitable for
these priests to perpetuate the belief that the spirits of the dead were
consigned to a gloomy Hades, where the degree of suffering which they
endured depended on the manner in which their bodies were disposed or
upon earth. An orthodox funeral ceremony was costly at all times. This
is made evident by the inscriptions which record the social reforms of
Urukagina, the ill-fated patesi of Lagash. When he came to the throne he
cut down the burial fees by more than a half. "In

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

the case of an ordinary burial," writes Mr. King, "when a corpse was
laid in a grave, it had been the custom for the presiding priest to
demand as a fee for himself seven urns of wine or strong drink, four
hundred and twenty loaves of bread, one hundred and twenty measures of
corn, a garment, a kid, a bed, and a seat." The reformer reduced the
perquisites to "three urns of wine, eighty loaves of bread, a bed, and a
kid, while the fee of his (the priest's) assistant was cut down from
sixty to thirty measures of corn". <span id="fr_252"></span>[1](#fn_251.md)

The conservative element in Babylonian religion is reflected by the
burial customs. These did not change greatly after the Neolithic period.
Prehistoric Sumerian graves resemble closely those of pre-Dynastic
Egypt. The bodies of the dead were laid on their sides in crouching
posture, with a "beaker", or "drinking cup" urn, beside the right hand.
Other vessels were placed near the head. In this connection it may be
noted that the magic food prepared for Gilgamesh by Pir-napishtim's
wife, when he lay asleep, was also placed near his head.

The corpse was always decked with various ornaments, including rings,
necklaces, and armlets. As has been indicated, these were worn by the
living as charms, and, no doubt, they served the same purpose for the
dead. This charm-wearing custom was condemned by the Hebrew teachers. On
one occasion Jacob commanded his household to "put away the strange gods
which were in their hand, and all the ear-rings which were in their
ears; and Jacob buried them under the oak which was by Shechem". <span
id="fr_253"></span>[2](#fn_252.md) To Jacob, personal ornaments had quite
evidently an idolatrous significance.

"A very typical class of grave furniture", writes Mr.

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> King, "consisted
of palettes, or colour dishes, made of alabaster, often of graceful
shape, and sometimes standing on four feet. . . . There is no doubt as
to their use, for colour still remains in many of them, generally black
and yellow, but sometimes a light rose and light green." Palettes for
face paint have also been found in many early Egyptian graves.

The gods had their faces painted like the living and the dead and were
similarly adorned with charms. In the course of the daily service in the
Egyptian temples an important ceremony was "dressing the god with white,
green, bright-red, and dark-red sashes, and supplying two kinds of
ointment and black and green eye paint". <span
id="fr_254"></span>[1](#fn_253.md) In the word-picture of the Aryo-Indian
Varuna's heaven in the *Mahàbhàrata* the deity is depicted "attired in
celestial robes and decked with celestial ornaments and jewels". His
attendants, the Adityas, appear "adorned with celestial garlands and
perfumed with celestial scents and besmeared with paste of celestial
fragrance". <span id="fr_255"></span>[2](#fn_254.md) Apparently the
"paste", like the face paint of the Babylonians and Egyptians, had
protective qualities. The Picts of Scotland may have similarly painted
themselves to charm their bodies against magical influences and the
weapons of their enemies. A painted man was probably regarded as one who
was likely to have good luck, being guarded against bad luck.

Weapons and implements were also laid in the Sumerian graves, indicating
a belief that the spirits of the dead could not only protect themselves
against their enemies but also provide themselves with food. The
funerary gifts of fish-hooks suggests that spirits were expected to
catch fish and thus obtain clean food, instead

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

of returning to disturb the living as they searched for the remnants of
the feast, like the Scottish Gunna,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">            perched alone  
On a chilly old grey stone,  
Nibbling, nibbling at a bone  
   That we'll maybe throw away.</span>

</div>

Some bodies which were laid in Sumerian graves were wrapped up in reed
matting, a custom which suggests that the reeds afforded protection or
imparted magical powers. Magical ceremonies were performed in Babylonian
reed huts. As we have seen, Ea revealed the "purpose" of the gods, when
they resolved to send a flood, by addressing the reed hut in which
Pir-napishtim lay asleep. Possibly it was believed that the dead might
also have visions in their dreams which would reveal the "purpose" of
demons who were preparing to attack them. In Syria it was customary to
wrap the dead in a sheep skin. <span id="fr_256"></span>[1](#fn_255.md) As
priests and gods were clad in the skins of animals from which their
powers were derived, it is probable that the dead were similarly
supposed to receive inspiration in their skin coverings. The Highland
seer was wrapped in a bull's skin and left all night beside a stream so
as to obtain knowledge of the future. This was a form of the Taghairm
ceremony, which is referred to by Scott in his "Lady of the Lake". <span
id="fr_257"></span>[2](#fn_256.md) The belief in the magical influence of
sacred clothing gave origin to the priestly robes. When David desired to
ascertain what Saul intended to do he said, "Bring hither the ephod".

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

Then he came to know that his enemy had resolved to attack Keilah. <span
id="fr_258"></span>[1](#fn_257.md) Elisha became a prophet when he received
Elijah's mantle. <span id="fr_259"></span>[2](#fn_258.md)

Sometimes the bodies of the Sumerians were placed in sarcophagi of clay.
The earlier type was of "bath-tub" shape, round and flat-bottomed, with
a rounded lid, while the later was the "slipper-shaped coffin", which
was ornamented with charms. There is a close resemblance between the
"bath-tub" coffins of Sumeria and the Egyptian pottery coffins of oval
shape found in Third and Fourth Dynasty tombs in rock chambers near
Nuerat. Certain designs on wooden coffins, and tombs as early as the
First Dynasty, have direct analogies in Babylonia. <span
id="fr_260"></span>[3](#fn_259.md)

No great tombs were erected in Sumeria. The coffins were usually laid in
brick vaults below dwellings, or below temples, or in trenches outside
the city walls. On the "stele of victory", which belongs to the period
of Eannatum, patesi of Lagash, the dead bodies on the battlefield are
piled up in pairs quite naked, and earth is being heaped over them; this
is a specimen of mound burial.

According to Herodotus the Babylonians "buried their dead in honey, and
had funeral lamentations like the Egyptians". <span
id="fr_261"></span>[4](#fn_260.md) The custom of preserving the body in
this manner does not appear to have been an ancient one, and may have
resulted from cultural contact with the Nile valley during the late
Assyrian period. So long as the bones were undisturbed, the spirit was
supposed to be assured of rest in the Underworld. This archaic belief
was widespread, and finds an echo in the quaint lines over Shakespeare's
grave in Stratford church:

 

<span id="img_21400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![SLIPPER-SHAPED
COFFIN MADE OF GLAZED EARTHENWARE&lt;br&gt; (&lt;i&gt;British
Museum&lt;/i&gt;)&lt;br&gt; Photo. Mansell](tn/21400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/21400.jpg.md)  
SLIPPER-SHAPED COFFIN MADE OF GLAZED EARTHENWARE  
(*British Museum*)  
Photo. Mansell  
</span>

 

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Good friend, for Jesus' sake forbeare  
To dig the dust enclosed heare;  
Blest be the man that spares these stones,  
And curst be he that moves my bones.</span>

</div>

In Babylonia the return of the spirits of the dead was greatly dreaded.
Ishtar once uttered the terrible threat: "I will cause the dead to rise;
they will then eat and live. The dead will be more numerous than the
living." When a foreign country was invaded, it was a common custom to
break open the tombs and scatter the bones they contained. Probably it
was believed, when such acts of vandalism were committed, that the
offended spirits would plague their kinsfolk. Ghosts always haunted the
homes they once lived in, and were as malignant as demons. It is
significant to find in this connection that the bodies of enemies who
were slain in battle were not given decent burial, but mutilated and
left for birds and beasts of prey to devour.

The demons that plagued the dead might also attack the living. A
fragmentary narrative, which used to be referred to as the "Cuthean
Legend of Creation", <span id="fr_262"></span>[1](#fn_261.md) and has been
shown by Mr. L. W. King to have no connection with the struggle between
Merodach and the dragon, <span id="fr_263"></span>[2](#fn_262.md) deals
with a war waged by an ancient king against a horde of evil spirits, led
by "the lord of heights, lord of the Anunaki (earth spirits)". Some of
the supernatural warriors had bodies like birds; others had "raven
faces", and all had been "suckled by Tiamat".

For three years the king sent out great armies to attack the demons, but
"none returned alive". Then he decided to go forth himself to save his
country from destruction. So he prepared for the conflict, and took

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

the precaution of performing elaborate and therefore costly religious
rites so as to secure the co-operation of the gods. His expedition was
successful, for he routed the supernatural army. On his return home, he
recorded his great victory on tablets which were placed in the shrine of
Nergal at Cuthah.

This myth may be an echo of Nergal's raid against Eresh-ki-gal. Or,
being associated with Cuthah, it may have been composed to encourage
burial in that city's sacred cemetery, which had been cleared by the
famous old king of the evil demons which tormented the dead and made
seasonal attacks against the living.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_223"></span>[190:1](mba15.htm#fr_224.md) Ea addresses the hut
in which his human favourite, Pir-napishtim, slept. His message was
conveyed to this man in a dream.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[191:1](mba15.htm#fr_225.md) The second sentence
of Ea's speech is conjectural, as the lines are mutilated.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[195:1](mba15.htm#fr_226.md) *The Muses' Pageant*,
W. M. L. Hutchinson, pp. 5 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[196:1](mba15.htm#fr_227.md) Indian Myth and
Legend, pp. 107 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[196:2](mba15.htm#fr_228.md) *Vana Parva* section
of the *Mahàbhàrata* (Roy's trans.), p. 425.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[196:3](mba15.htm#fr_229.md) *Indian Myth and
Legend*, p. 141.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[196:4](mba15.htm#fr_230.md) *Book of Leinster*,
and Keating's *History of Ireland*, p. 150 (1811 ed.).

<span id="fn_230"></span>[197:1](mba15.htm#fr_231.md) *Religion of the
Ancient Egyptians*, H. Wiedemann, pp. 58 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[198:1](mba15.htm#fr_232.md) Pinches' *The
Religion of Babylonia and Assyria*, p. 42.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[199:1](mba15.htm#fr_233.md) The problems involved
are discussed from different points of view by Mr. L. W. King in
*Babylonian Religion* (Books on Egypt and Chaldæa, vol. iv), Professor
Pinches in *The Old Testament in the Light of the Historical Records and
Legends of Assyria and Babylonia*, and other vols.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[200:1](mba15.htm#fr_234.md) *Primitive
Constellations*, vol. i, pp. 334-5.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[200:2](mba15.htm#fr_235.md) *Indian Myth and
Legend*, chap. iii.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[200:3](mba15.htm#fr_236.md) Professor Macdonell's
translation.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[200:4](mba15.htm#fr_237.md) *Indian Wisdom*.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[201:1](mba15.htm#fr_238.md) "Varuna, the deity
bearing the noose as his weapon", *Sabha Parva* section of the
*Mahàbhàrata* (Roy's trans.), p. 29.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[201:2](mba15.htm#fr_239.md) Indian Myth and
Legend, pp. 38-42.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[202:1](mba15.htm#fr_240.md) *Early Religious
Poetry of Persia*, J. H. Moulton, pp. 41 *et seq*. and 154 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[202:2](mba15.htm#fr_241.md) *The Elder Edd*a, O.
Bray, p. 55.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[203:1](mba15.htm#fr_242.md) *The Elder Edda*, O.
Bray, pp. 291 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[203:2](mba15.htm#fr_243.md) *Celtic Myth and
Legend*, pp. 133 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[203:3](mba15.htm#fr_244.md) Tennyson's *The
Passing of Arthur*.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[203:4](mba15.htm#fr_245.md) *Job*, x, 1-22.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[204:1](mba15.htm#fr_246.md) *The Elder Edda*, O.
Bray, pp. 150-1.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[204:2](mba15.htm#fr_247.md) *Indian Myth and
Legend*, p. 326.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[207:1](mba15.htm#fr_248.md) *The Religion of
Ancient Rome*, Cyril Bailey, p. 50.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[208:1](mba15.htm#fr_249.md) *The Life and
Exploits of Alexander the Great* (Ethiopic version of the Pseudo
Callisthenes), pp. 133-4. The conversation possibly never took place,
but it is of interest in so far as it reflects beliefs which were
familiar to the author of this ancient work. His Brahmans evidently
believed that immortality was denied to ordinary men, and reserved only
for the king, who was the representative of the deity, of course.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[208:2](mba15.htm#fr_250.md) *Aspects of Religious
Belief and Practice in Babylonia and Assyria*, Morris Jastrow, pp.
358-9.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[209:1](mba15.htm#fr_251.md) The *Mahàbhàrata*
(*Sabha Parva* section), Roy 's translation, pp. 25-7.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[211:1](mba15.htm#fr_252.md) *A History of Sumer
and Akkad*, L. W. King, pp. 181-2.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[211:2](mba15.htm#fr_253.md) *Genesis*, xxxv, 2-4.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[212:1](mba15.htm#fr_254.md) *The Religion of
Ancient Egypt*, W. M. Flinders Petrie, p. 72.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[212:2](mba15.htm#fr_255.md) *Sabha Parva* section
of the *Mahàbhàrata* (Roy's trans.), p. 29.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[213:1](mba15.htm#fr_256.md) *Egyptian Myth and
Legend*, p. 214.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[213:2](mba15.htm#fr_257.md) Canto iv:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">              Last eventide  
Brian an augury hath tried. . . .  
The Taghairm called; by which afar  
Our sires foresaw the events of war.  
Duncraggan's milk-white bull they slew. . .</span>

</div>

<span id="fn_257"></span>[214:1](mba15.htm#fr_258.md) *1 Samuel*, xxiii,
9-11.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[214:2](mba15.htm#fr_259.md) *1 Kings*, xix, 19
and *2 Kings*, ii, 13-15.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[214:3](mba15.htm#fr_260.md) *The Burial Customs
of Ancient Egypt*, John Garstang, pp. 28, 29 (London, 1907).

<span id="fn_260"></span>[214:4](mba15.htm#fr_261.md) *Herod*., book i,
198.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[215:1](mba15.htm#fr_262.md) *Records of the Past*
(old series), xi, pp. 109 *et seq*., and (new series), vol. i, pp. 149
*et seq*.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[215:2](mba15.htm#fr_263.md) L. W. King's *The
Seven Tablets of Creation*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Buildings and Laws and Customs of Babylon](mba16.md)
