[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mba17)  [Next](mba19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002GYVU7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths of Babylonia and Assyria*, by Donald A. MacKenzie, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span> <span id="an_ch-12"></span>

### CHAPTER XII

### Rise of the Hittites, Mitannians, Kassites, Hyksos, and Assyrians

<span class="small">The War God of Mountaineers--Antiquity of Hittite
Civilization--Prehistoric Movements of "Broad Heads"--Evidence of
Babylon and Egypt--Hittites and Mongolians--Biblical References to
Hittites in Canaan--Jacob's Mother and her Daughters-in-law--Great
Father and Great Mother Cults--History in Mythology--The Kingdom of
Mitanni--Its Aryan Aristocracy--The Hyksos Problem--The Horse in
Warfare--Hittites and Mitannians--Kassites and Mitannians--Hyksos Empire
in Asia--Kassites overthrow Sealand Dynasty--Egyptian Campaigns in
Syria--Assyria in the Making--Ethnics of Genesis--Nimrod as
Merodach--Early Conquerors of Assyria--Mitannian
Overlords--Tell-el-Amarna Letters--Fall of Mitanni--Rise of Hittite and
Assyrian Empires--Egypt in Eclipse--Assyrian and Babylonian
Rivalries.</span>

WHEN the Hammurabi Dynasty, like the Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt, is found
to be suffering languid decline, the gaps in the dulled historical
records are filled with the echoes of the thunder god, whose hammer
beating resounds among the northern mountains. As this deity comes each
year in Western Asia when vegetation has withered and after fruits have
dropped from trees, bringing tempests and black rainclouds to issue in a
new season of growth and fresh activity, so he descended from the hills
in the second millennium before the Christian era as the battle lord of
invaders and the stormy herald of a new age which was to dawn upon the
ancient world.

He was the war god of the Hittites as well as of the

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

northern Amorites, the Mitannians, and the Kassites; and he led the
Aryans from the Iranian steppes towards the verdurous valley of the
Punjab. His worshippers engraved his image with grateful hands on the
beetling cliffs of Cappadocian chasms in Asia Minor, where his sway was
steadfast and pre-eminent for long centuries. In one locality he appears
mounted on a bull wearing a fringed and belted tunic with short sleeves,
a conical helmet, and upturned shoes, while he grasps in one hand the
lightning symbol, and in the other a triangular bow resting on his right
shoulder. In another locality he is the bringer of grapes and barley
sheaves. But his most familiar form is the bearded and thick-set
mountaineer, armed with a ponderous thunder hammer, a flashing trident,
and a long two-edged sword with a hemispherical knob on the hilt, which
dangles from his belt, while an antelope or goat wearing a pointed tiara
prances beside him. This deity is identical with bluff, impetuous Thor
of northern Europe, Indra of the Himalayas, Tarku of Phrygia, and Teshup
or Teshub of Armenia and northern Mesopotamia, Sandan, the Hercules of
Cilicia, Adad or Hadad of Amurru and Assyria, and Ramman, who at an
early period penetrated Akkad and Sumer in various forms. His Hittite
name is uncertain, but in the time of Rameses II he was identified with
Sutekh (Set). He passed into southern Europe as Zeus, and became "the
lord" of the deities of the Ægean and Crete.

The Hittites who entered Babylon about 1800 B.C., and overthrew the last
king of the Hammurabi Dynasty, may have been plundering raiders, like
the European Gauls of a later age, or a well-organized force of a
strong, consolidated power, which endured for a period of uncertain
duration. They were probably the latter, for although they carried off
Merodach and Zerpanitu<sup>m</sup>, these

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

idols were not thrust into the melting pot, but retained apparently for
political reasons.

These early Hittites are "a people of the mist". More than once in
ancient history casual reference is made to them; but on most of these
occasions they soon vanish suddenly behind their northern mountains. The
explanation appears to be that at various periods great leaders arose
who were able to weld together the various tribes, and make their
presence felt in Western Asia. But when once the organization broke
down, either on account of internal rivalries or the influence of an
outside power, they lapsed back again into a state of political
insignificance in the affairs of the ancient world. It is possible that
about 1800 B.C. the Hittite confederacy was controlled by an ambitious
king who had dreams of a great empire, and was accordingly pursuing a
career of conquest.

Judging from what we know of the northern worshippers of the hammer god
in later times, it would appear that when they were referred to as the
Hatti or Khatti, the tribe of that name was the dominating power in Asia
Minor and north Syria. The Hatti are usually identified with the
broad-headed mountaineers of Alpine or Armenoid type--the ancestors of
the modern Armenians. Their ancient capital was at Boghaz-Kai, the site
of Pteria, which was destroyed, according to the Greeks, by Crœsus, the
last King of Lydia, in the sixth century B.C. It was strongly situated
in an excellent pastoral district on the high, breezy plateau of
Cappadocia, surrounded by high mountains, and approached through narrow
river gorges, which in winter were blocked with snow.

Hittite civilization was of great antiquity. Excavations which have been
conducted at an undisturbed artificial

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

mound at Sakje-Geuzi have revealed evidences of a continuous culture
which began to flourish before 3000 B.C. <span
id="fr_282"></span>[1](#fn_281) In one of the lower layers occurred that
particular type of Neolithic yellow-painted pottery, with black
geometric designs, which resembles other specimens of painted fabrics
found in Turkestan by the Pumpelly expedition; in Susa, the capital of
Elam, and its vicinity, by De Morgan; in the Balkan peninsula by
Schliemann; in a First Dynasty tomb at Abydos in Egypt by Petrie; and in
the late Neolithic and early Bronze Age (Minoan) strata of Crete by
Evans. It may be that these interesting relics were connected with the
prehistoric drift westward of the broad-headed pastoral peoples who
ultimately formed the Hittite military aristocracy.

According to Professor Elliot Smith, broad-headed aliens from Asia Minor
first reached Egypt at the dawn of history. There they blended with the
indigenous tribes of the Mediterranean or Brown Race. A mesocephalic
skull then became common. It is referred to as the Giza type, and has
been traced by Professor Elliot Smith from Egypt to the Punjab, but not
farther into India. <span id="fr_283"></span>[2](#fn_282)

During the early dynasties this skull with alien traits was confined
chiefly to the Delta region and the vicinity of Memphis, the city of the
pyramid builders. It is not improbable that the Memphite god Ptah may
have been introduced into Egypt by the invading broad heads. This deity
is a world artisan like Indra, and is similarly associated with dwarfish
artisans; he hammers out the copper sky, and therefore links with the
various thunder gods--Tarku, Teshup, Adad, Ramman, &c., of the Asian
mountaineers. Thunderstorms were of too rare occurrence in Egypt to be
connected with the food supply,

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

which has always depended on the river Nile. Ptah's purely Egyptian
characteristics appear to have been acquired after fusion with
Osiris-Seb, the Nilotic gods of inundation, earth, and vegetation. The
ancient god Set (Sutekh), who became a demon, and was ultimately
re-exalted as a great deity during the Nineteenth Dynasty, may also have
had some connection with the prehistoric Hatti.

Professor Elliot Smith, who has found alien traits in the mummies of the
Rameses kings, is convinced that the broad-headed folks who entered
Europe by way of Asia Minor, and Egypt through the Delta, at the close
of the Neolithic Age, represent "two streams of the same Asiatic
folk". <span id="fr_284"></span>[1](#fn_283) The opinion of such an
authority cannot be lightly set aside.

The earliest Egyptian reference to the Kheta, as the Hittites were
called, was made in the reign of the first Amenemhet of the Twelfth
Dynasty, who began to reign about 2000 B.C. Some authorities, including
Maspero, <span id="fr_285"></span>[2](#fn_284) are of opinion that the
allusion to the Hatti which is found in the Babylonian *Book of Omens*
belongs to the earlier age of Sargon of Akkad and Naram-Sin, but Sayce
favours the age of Hammurabi. Others would connect the Gutium, or men of
Kutu, with the Kheta or Hatti. Sayce has expressed the opinion that the
Biblical Tidal, identified with Tudkhul or Tudhula, "king of nations",
the ally of Arioch, Amraphel, and Chedor-laomer, was a Hittite king, the
"nations" being the confederacy of Asia Minor tribes controlled by the
Hatti. "In the fragments of the Babylonian story of Chedor-laomer
published by Dr. Pinches", says Professor Sayce, "the name of
Tid<sup>c</sup>al is written Tudkhul, and he is described as King of the
*Umman Manda*, or Nations of the North,

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

of which the Hebrew *Goyyim* is a literal translation. Now the name is
Hittite. In the account of the campaign of Rameses II against the
Hittites it appears as Tidcal, and one of the Hittite kings of
Boghaz-Köi bears the same name, which is written as Dud-khaliya in
cuneiform. <span id="fr_286"></span>[1](#fn_285)

One of the racial types among the Hittites wore pigtails. These head
adornments appear on figures in certain Cappadocian sculptures and on
Hittite warriors in the pictorial records of a north Syrian campaign of
Rameses II at Thebes. It is suggestive, therefore, to find that on the
stele of Naram-Sin of Akkad, the mountaineers who are conquered by that
battle lord wear pig-tails also. Their split robes are unlike the short
fringed tunics of the Hittite gods, but resemble the long split mantles
worn over their tunics by high dignitaries like King Tarku-dimme, who
figures on a famous silver boss of an ancient Hittite dagger. Naram-Sin
inherited the Empire of Sargon of Akkad, which extended to the
Mediterranean Sea. If his enemies were not natives of Cappadocia, they
may have been the congeners of the Hittite pigtailed type in another
wooded and mountainous country.

It has been suggested that these wearers of pigtails were Mongolians.
But although high cheek bones and oblique eyes occurred in ancient
times, and still occur, in parts of Asia Minor, suggesting occasional
Mongolian admixture with Ural-Altaic broad heads, the Hittite pig-tailed
warriors must not be confused with the true small-nosed Mongols of
north-eastern Asia. The Egyptian sculptors depicted them with long and
prominent noses, which emphasize their strong Armenoid affinities.

Other tribes in the Hittite confederacy included the

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

representatives of the earliest settlers from North Africa of
Mediterranean racial stock. These have been identified with the
Canaanites, and especially the agriculturists among them, for the
Palestinian Hittites are also referred to as Canaanites in the Bible,
and in one particular connection under circumstances which afford an
interesting glimpse of domestic life in those far-off times. When Esau,
Isaac's eldest son, was forty years of age, "he took to wife Judith the
daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Bashemath the daughter of Elon the
Hittite" <span id="fr_287"></span>[1](#fn_286). Apparently the Hittite
ladies considered themselves to be of higher caste than the indigenous
peoples and the settlers from other countries, for when Ezekiel declared
that the mother of Jerusalem was a Hittite he said: "Thou art thy
mother's daughter, that lotheth her husband and her children." <span
id="fr_288"></span>[2](#fn_287) Esau's marriage was "a grief of mind
unto Isaac and to Rebekah". <span id="fr_289"></span>[1](#fn_286) The
Hebrew mother seems to have entertained fears that her favourite son
Jacob would fall a victim to the allurements of other representatives of
the same stock as her superior and troublesome daughters-in-law, for she
said to Isaac: "I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth;
if Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, such as these which are
of the daughters of the land, what good shall my life do me?" <span
id="fr_290"></span>[3](#fn_288) Isaac sent for Jacob, "and charged him,
and said unto him, Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of
Canaan. Arise, go to Padan-aram, to the house of Bethuel, thy mother's
father; and take thee a wife from thence of the daughters of Laban, thy
mother's brother." <span id="fr_291"></span>[4](#fn_289) From these
quotations two obvious deductions may be drawn: the Hebrews regarded the
Hittites "of the land" as one with the Canaanites, the stocks having
probably

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

been so well fused, and the worried Rebekah had the choosing of Jacob's
wife or wives from among her own relations in Mesopotamia who were of
Sumerian stock and kindred of Abraham. <span
id="fr_292"></span>[1](#fn_290) It is not surprising to find traces of
Sumerian pride among the descendants of the evicted citizens of ancient
Ur, especially when brought into association with the pretentious
Hittites.

Evidence of racial blending in Asia Minor is also afforded by Hittite
mythology. In the fertile agricultural valleys and round the shores of
that great Eur-Asian "land bridge" the indigenous stock was also of the
Mediterranean race, as Sergi and other ethnologists have demonstrated.
The Great Mother goddess was worshipped from the earliest times, and she
bore various local names. At Comana in Pontus she was known to the
Greeks as Ma, a name which may have been as old as that of the Sumerian
Mama (the creatrix), or Mamitu<sup>m</sup> (goddess of destiny); in
Armenia she was Anaitis; in Cilicia she was Ate (’Atheh of Tarsus);
while in Phrygia she was best known as Cybele, mother of Attis, who
links with Ishtar as mother and wife of Tammuz, Aphrodite as mother and
wife of Adonis, and Isis as mother and wife of Osiris. The Great Mother
was in Phoenicia called Astarte; she was a form of Ishtar, and identical
with the Biblical Ashtoreth. In the Syrian city of Hierapolis she bore
the name of Atargatis, which Meyer, with whom Frazer agrees, considers
to be the Greek rendering of the Aramaic ’Athar-’Atheh--the god ’Athar
and the goddess ’Atheh. Like the "bearded Aphrodite", Atargatis may have
been regarded as a bisexual deity. Some of the specialized mother
goddesses, whose outstanding attributes reflected the history and
politics of the states they represented, were imported into Egypt--the
land of

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

ancient mother deities--during the Empire period, by the half-foreign
Rameses kings; these included the voluptuous Kadesh and the warlike
Anthat. In every district colonized by the early representatives of the
Mediterranean race, the goddess cult came into prominence, and the gods
and the people were reputed to be descendants of the great Creatrix.
This rule obtained as far distant as Ireland, where the Danann folk and
the Danann gods were the children of the goddess Danu.

Among the Hatti proper--that is, the broad-headed military
aristocracy--the chief deity of the pantheon was the Great Father, the
creator, "the lord of Heaven", the Baal. As Sutekh, Tarku, Adad, or
Ramman, he was the god of thunder, rain, fertility, and war, and he
ultimately acquired solar attributes. A famous rock sculpture at
Boghaz-Köi depicts a mythological scene which is believed to represent
the Spring marriage of the Great Father and the Great Mother, suggesting
a local fusion of beliefs which resulted from the union of tribes of the
god cult with tribes of the goddess cult. So long as the Hatti tribe
remained the predominant partner in the Hittite confederacy, the
supremacy was assured of the Great Father who symbolized their sway. But
when, in the process of time, the power of the Hatti declined, their
chief god "fell . . . from his predominant place in the religion of the
interior", writes Dr. Garstang. "But the Great Mother lived on, being
the goddess of the land." <span id="fr_293"></span>[1](#fn_291)

In addition to the Hittite confederacy of Asia Minor and North Syria,
another great power arose in northern Mesopotamia. This was the Mitanni
Kingdom. Little is known regarding it, except what is derived from
indirect sources. Winckler believes that it was first established

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

by early "waves" of Hatti people who migrated from the east.

The Hittite connection is based chiefly on the following evidence. One
of the gods of the Mitanni rulers was Teshup, who is identical with
Tarku, the Thor of Asia Minor. The raiders who in 1800 B.C. entered
Babylon, set fire to E-sagila, and carried off Merodach and his consort
Zerpanitu<sup>m</sup>, were called the Hatti. The images of these
deities were afterwards obtained from Khani (Mitanni).

At a later period, when we come to know more about Mitanni from the
letters of one of its kings to two Egyptian Pharaohs, and the Winckler
tablets from Boghaz-Köi, it is found that its military aristocracy spoke
an Indo-European language, as is shown by the names of their
kings--Saushatar, Artatama, Sutarna, Artashshumara, Tushratta, and
Mattiuza. They worshipped the following deities:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Mi-it-ra, Uru-w-na, In-da-ra, and
Na-sa-at-ti-ia--</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mitra, Varuna,
Indra, and Nasatyau (the "Twin Aswins" = Castor and Pollux)--whose names
have been deciphered by Winckler. These gods were also imported into
India by the Vedic Aryans. The Mitanni tribe (the military aristocracy
probably) was called "Kharri", and some philologists are of opinion that
it is identical with "Arya", which was "the normal designation in Vedic
literature from the Rigveda onwards of an Aryan of the three upper
classes". <span id="fr_294"></span>[1](#fn_292) Mitanni signifies "the
river lands", and the descendants of its inhabitants, who lived in
Cappadocia, were called by the Greeks "Mattienoi". "They are possibly",
says Dr. Haddon, "the ancestors

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

of the modern Kurds", <span id="fr_295"></span>[1](#fn_293) a
conspicuously long-headed people, proverbial, like the ancient
Aryo-Indians and the Gauls, for their hospitality and their raiding
propensities.

It would appear that the Mitannian invasion of northern Mesopotamia and
the Aryan invasion of India represented two streams of diverging
migrations from a common cultural centre, and that the separate groups
of wanderers mingled with other stocks with whom they came into contact.
Tribes of Aryan speech were associated with the Kassite invaders of
Babylon, who took possession of northern Babylonia soon after the
disastrous Hittite raid. It is believed that they came from the east
through the highlands of Elam.

For a period, the dating of which is uncertain, the Mitannians were
overlords of part of Assyria, including Nineveh and even Asshur, as well
as the district called "Musri" by the Assyrians, and part of Cappadocia.
They also occupied the cities of Harran and Kadesh. Probably they owed
their great military successes to their cavalry. The horse became common
in Babylon during the Kassite Dynasty, which followed the Hammurabi, and
was there called "the ass of the east", a name which suggests whence the
Kassites and Mitannians came.

The westward movement of the Mitannians in the second millennium B.C.
may have been in progress prior to the Kassite conquest of Babylon and
the Hyksos invasion of Egypt. Their relations in Mesopotamia and Syria
with the Hittites and the Amorites are obscure. Perhaps they were for a
time the overlords of the Hittites. At any rate it is of interest to
note that when Thothmes III struck at the last Hyksos stronghold during
his long Syrian campaign of about twenty years' duration, his

 

<span id="img_27000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE HORSE IN
WARFARE&lt;br&gt; Marble slab showing Ashur-natsir-pal and army
advancing against a besieged tow. A battering ram is being drawn on a
six-wheeled carriage.&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From N.W. Palace of Nimroud:
now in the British Museum&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; Photo.
Mansell](tn/27000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/27000.jpg)  
THE HORSE IN WARFARE  
Marble slab showing Ashur-natsir-pal and army advancing against a
besieged tow. A battering ram is being drawn on a six-wheeled
carriage.  
*From N.W. Palace of Nimroud: now in the British Museum*.  
Photo. Mansell  
</span>

 

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

operations were directly against Kadesh on the Orontes, which was then
held by his fierce enemies the Mitannians of Naharina. <span
id="fr_296"></span>[1](#fn_294)

During the Hyksos Age the horse was introduced into Egypt. Indeed the
Hyksos conquest was probably due to the use of the horse, which was
domesticated, as the Pumpelly expedition has ascertained, at a remote
period in Turkestan, whence it may have been obtained by the
horse-sacrificing Aryo-Indians and the horse-sacrificing ancestors of
the Siberian Buriats.

If the Mitanni rulers were not overlords of the Hittites about 1800
B.C., the two peoples may have been military allies of the Kassites.
Some writers suggest, indeed, that the Kassites came from Mitanni.
Another view is that the Mitannians were the Aryan allies of the
Kassites who entered Babylon from the Elamite highlands, and that they
afterwards conquered Mesopotamia and part of Cappadocia prior to the
Hyksos conquest of Egypt. A third solution of the problem is that the
Aryan rulers of the Mitannian Hittites were the overlords of northern
Babylonia, which they included in their Mesopotamian empire for a
century before the Kassites achieved political supremacy in the
Tigro-Euphrates valley, and that they were also the leaders of the
Hyksos invasion of Egypt, which they accomplished with the assistance of
their Hittite and Amoritic allies.

The first Kassite king of Babylonia of whom we have knowledge was
Gandash. He adopted the old Akkadian title, "king of the four quarters",
as well as the title "king of Sumer and Akkad", first used by the rulers
of the Dynasty of Ur. Nippur appears to have been selected by Gandash as
his capital, which suggests that his war and storm god, Shuqamuna, was
identified with Bel Enlil, who

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

as a "world giant" has much in common with the northern hammer gods.
After reigning for sixteen years, Gandash was succeeded by his son, Agum
the Great, who sat on the throne for twenty-two years. The
great-grandson of Agum the Great was Agum II, and not until his reign
were the statues of Merodach and his consort Zerpanitu<sup>m</sup>
brought back to the city of Babylon. This monarch recorded that, in
response to the oracle of Shamash, the sun god, he sent to the distant
land of Khani (Mitanni) for the great deity and his consort. Babylon
would therefore appear to have been deprived of Merodach for about two
centuries. The Hittite-Mitanni raid is dated about 1800 B.C., and the
rise of Gandash, the Kassite, about 1700 B.C. At least a century elapsed
between the reigns of Gandash and Agum II. These calculations do not
coincide, it will be noted, with the statement in a Babylonian hymn,
that Merodach remained in the land of the Hatti for twenty-four years,
which, however, may be either a priestly fiction or a reference to a
later conquest. The period which followed the fall of the Hammurabi
Dynasty of Babylonia is as obscure as the Hyksos Age of Egypt.

Agum II, the Kassite king, does not state whether or not he waged war
against Mitanni to recover Babylon's god Merodach. If, however, he was
an ally of the Mitanni ruler, the transference of the deity may have
been an ordinary diplomatic transaction. The possibility may also be
suggested that the Hittites of Mitanni were not displaced by the Aryan
military aristocracy until after the Kassites were firmly established in
northern Babylonia between 1700 B.C. and i 600 B.C. This may account for
the statements that Merodach was carried off by the Hatti and returned
from the land of Khani.

The evidence afforded by Egypt is suggestive in this

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

connection. There was a second Hyksos Dynasty in that country. The later
rulers became "Egyptianized" as the Kassites became "Babylonianized",
but they were all referred to by the exclusive and sullen Egyptians as
"barbarians" and "Asiatics". They recognized the sun god of Heliopolis,
but were also concerned in promoting the worship of Sutekh, a deity of
sky and thunder, with solar attributes, whom Rameses II identified with
the "Baal" of the Hittites. The Mitannians, as has been stated,
recognized a Baal called Teshup, who was identical with Tarku of the
Western Hittites and with their own tribal Indra also. One of the Hyksos
kings, named Ian or Khian, the Ianias of Manetho, was either an overlord
or the ally of an overlord, who swayed a great empire in Asia. His name
has been deciphered on relics found as far apart as Knossos in Crete and
Baghdad on the Tigris, which at the time was situated within the area of
Kassite control. Apparently peaceful conditions prevailed during his
reign over a wide extent of Asia and trade was brisk between far-distant
centres of civilization. The very term Hyksos is suggestive in this
connection. According to Breasted it signifies "rulers of countries",
which compares with the Biblical "Tidal king of nations", whom Sayce, as
has been indicated, regards as a Hittite monarch. When the Hittite
hieroglyphics have been read and Mesopotamia thoroughly explored, light
may be thrown on the relations of the Mitannians, the Hittites, the
Hyksos, and the Kassites between 1800 B.C. and 1500 B.C. It is evident
that a fascinating volume of ancient history has yet to be written.

The Kassites formed the military aristocracy of Babylonia, which was
called Karduniash, for nearly six centuries. Agum II was the first of
their kings who became thoroughly Babylonianized, and although he still
gave

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

recognition to Shuqamuna, the Kassite god of battle, he re-exalted
Merodach, whose statue he had taken back from "Khani", and decorated
E-sagila with gifts of gold, jewels, rare woods, frescoes, and pictorial
tiles; he also re-endowed the priesthood. During the reign of his
successor, Burnaburiash I, the Dynasty of Sealand came to an end.

Little is known regarding the relations between Elam and Babylonia
during the Kassite period. If the Kassite invaders crossed the Tigris
soon after the raid of the Mitannian Hittites they must have previously
overrun a great part of Elam, but strongly situated Susa may have for a
time withstood their attacks. At first the Kassites held northern
Babylonia only, while the ancient Sumerian area was dominated by the
Sealand power, which had gradually regained strength during the closing
years of the Hammurabi Dynasty. No doubt many northern Babylonian
refugees reinforced its army.

The Elamites, or perhaps the Kassites of Elam, appear to have made
frequent attacks on southern Babylonia. At length Ea-gamil, king of
Sealand, invaded Elam with purpose, no doubt, to shatter the power of
his restless enemies. He was either met there, however, by an army from
Babylon, or his country was invaded during his absence. Prince
Ulamburiash, son of Burnaburiash I, defeated Ea-gamil and brought to an
end the Sealand Dynasty which had been founded by Ilu-ma-ilu, the
contemporary and enemy of Samsu-la-ilu, son of Hammurabi. Ulamburiash is
referred to on a mace-head which was discovered at Babylon as "king of
Sealand", and he probably succeeded his father at the capital. The whole
of Babylonia thus came under Kassite sway.

Agum III, a grandson of Ulamburiash, found it necessary, however, to
invade Sealand, which must

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

therefore have revolted. It was probably a centre of discontent during
the whole period of Kassite ascendancy.

After a long obscure interval we reach the period when the Hyksos power
was broken in Egypt, that is, after 1580 B.C. The great Western Asiatic
kingdoms at the time were the Hittite, the Mitannian, the Assyrian, and
the Babylonian (Kassite). Between 1557 B.C. and 1501 B.C. Thothmes I of
Egypt was asserting his sway over part of Syria. Many years elapsed,
however, before Thothmes III, who died in 1447 B.C., established firmly,
after waging a long war of conquest, the supremacy of Egypt between the
Euphrates and the Mediterranean coast as far north as the borders of
Asia Minor.

"At this period", as Professor Flinders Petrie emphasizes, "the
civilization of Syria was equal or superior to that of Egypt." Not only
was there in the cities "luxury beyond that of the Egyptians", but also
"technical work which could teach them". The Syrian soldiers had suits
of scale armour, which afterwards were manufactured in Egypt, and they
had chariots adorned with gold and silver and highly decorated, which
were greatly prized by the Egyptians when they captured them, and
reserved for royalty. "In the rich wealth of gold and silver vases",
obtained from captured cities by the Nilotic warriors, "we see also",
adds Petrie, "the sign of a people who were their (the Egyptians’)
equals, if not their superiors in taste and skill." <span
id="fr_297"></span>[1](#fn_295) It is not to be wondered at, therefore,
when the Pharaohs received tribute from Syria that they preferred it to
be carried into Egypt by skilled workmen. "The keenness with which the
Egyptians record all the beautiful and luxurious products of the Syrians
shows that the workmen would

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

probably be more in demand than other kinds of slave tribute." <span
id="fr_298"></span>[1](#fn_296)

One of the monarchs with whom Thothmes III corresponded was the king of
Assyria. The enemies of Egypt in northern Mesopotamia were the Hittites
and Mitannians, and their allies, and these were also the enemies of
Assyria. But to enable us to deal with the new situation which was
created by Egypt in Mesopotamia, it is necessary in the first place to
trace the rise of Assyria, which was destined to become for a period the
dominating power in Western Asia, and ultimately in the Nile valley
also.

The Assyrian group of cities grew up on the banks of the Tigris to the
north of Babylonia, the mother country. The following Biblical
references regarding the origins of the two states are of special
interest:--

Now these are the generations of the sons of Noah: Shem, Ham, and
Japheth. . . . The sons of Ham: Cush, and Mizraim, and Phut, and Canaan.
. . . And Cush begat Nimrod; he began to be a mighty one in the earth.
He was a mighty hunter before the Lord; wherefore it is said, Even as
Nimrod the mighty hunter before the Lord. And the beginning of his
kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of
Shinar. Out of that land went forth Asshur and builded Nineveh, and the
city Rehoboth, and Calah, and Resen between Nineveh and Calah: the same
is a great city.

The children of Shem: Elam and Asshur . . . (*Genesis*, x, 1-22).

The land of Assyria . . . and the land of Nimrod in the entrances
thereof (*Micah*, v, 6).

It will be observed that the Sumero-Babylonians are Cushites or Hamites,
and therefore regarded as racially akin to the proto-Egyptians of the
Mediterranean race--an interesting confirmation of recent ethnological
conclusions.

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

Nimrod, the king of Babel (Babylon), in Shinar (Sumer), was, it would
appear, a deified monarch who became ultimately identified with the
national god of Babylonia. Professor Pinches has shown <span
id="fr_299"></span>[1](#fn_297) that his name is a rendering of that of
Merodach. In Sumerian Merodach was called Amaruduk or Amarudu, and in
the Assyro-Babylonian language Marduk. By a process familiar to
philologists the suffix "uk" was dropped and the rendering became Marad.
The Hebrews added "ni" ="ni-marad", assimilating the name "to a certain
extent to the 'niphal forms' of the Hebrew verbs and making a change",
says Pinches, "in conformity with the genius of the Hebrew language".

Asshur, who went out of Nimrod's country to build Nineveh, was a son of
Shem--a Semite, and so far as is known it was after the Semites achieved
political supremacy in Akkad that the Assyrian colonies were formed.
Asshur may have been a subject ruler who was deified and became the god
of the city of Asshur, which probably gave its name to Assyria.

According to Herodotus, Nineveh was founded by King Ninus and Queen
Semiramis. This lady was reputed to be the daughter of Derceto, the fish
goddess, whom Pliny identified with Atargatis. Semiramis was actually an
Assyrian queen of revered memory. She was deified and took the place of
a goddess, apparently Nina, the prototype of Derceto. This Nina, perhaps
a form of Damkina, wife of Ea, was the great mother of the Sumerian city
of Nina, and there, and also at Lagash, received offerings of fish. She
was one of the many goddesses of maternity absorbed by Ishtar. The Greek
Ninus is regarded as a male form of her name; like

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Atargatis, she may
have become a bisexual deity, if she was not always accompanied by a
shadowy male form. Nineveh (Ninua) was probably founded or conquered by
colonists from Nina or Lagash, and called after the fish goddess.

All the deities of Assyria were imported from Babylonia except, as some
hold, Ashur, the national god. <span id="fr_300"></span>[1](#fn_298) The
theory that Ashur was identical with the Aryo-Indian Asura and the
Persian Ahura is not generally accepted. One theory is that he was an
eponymous hero who became the city god of Asshur, although the early
form of his name, Ashir, presents a difficulty in this connection.
Asshur was the first capital of Assyria. Its city god may have become
the national god on that account.

At an early period, perhaps a thousand years before Thothmes III battled
with the Mitannians in northern Syria, an early wave of one of the
peoples of Aryan speech may have occupied the Assyrian cities. Mr. Johns
points out in this connection that the names of Ushpia, Kikia, and
Adasi, who, according to Assyrian records, were early rulers in Asshur,
"are neither Semitic nor Sumerian". An ancient name of the goddess of
Nineveh was Shaushka, which compares with Shaushkash, the consort of
Teshup, the Hittite-Mitanni hammer god. As many of the Mitannian names
"are", according to Mr. Johns, "really Elamitic", he suggests an ethnic
connection between the early conquerors of Assyria and the people of
Elam. <span id="fr_301"></span>[2](#fn_299) Were the pre-Semitic
Elamites originally speakers of an agglutinative language, like the
Sumerians and present-day Basques, who were conquered in prehistoric
times by a people of Aryan speech?

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

The possibility is urged by Mr. Johns's suggestion that Assyria may have
been dominated in pre-Semitic times by the congeners of the Aryan
military aristocracy of Mitanni. As has been shown, it was Semitized by
the Amoritic migration which, about 2000 B.C., brought into prominence
the Hammurabi Dynasty of Babylon.

A long list of kings with Semitic names held sway in the Assyrian cities
during and after the Hammurabi Age. But not until well on in the Kassite
period did any of them attain prominence in Western Asia. Then
Ashur-bel-nish-eshu, King of Asshur, was strong enough to deal on equal
terms with the Kassite ruler Kara-indash I, with whom he arranged a
boundary treaty. He was a contemporary of Thothmes III of Egypt.

After Thothmes III had secured the predominance of Egypt in Syria and
Palestine he recognized Assyria as an independent power, and supplied
its king with Egyptian gold to assist him, no doubt, in strengthening
his territory against their common enemy. Gifts were also sent from
Assyria to Egypt to fan the flame of cordial relations.

The situation was full of peril for Saushatar, king of Mitanni. Deprived
by Egypt of tribute-paying cities in Syria, his exchequer must have been
sadly depleted. A standing army had to be maintained, for although Egypt
made no attempt to encroach further on his territory, the Hittites were
ever hovering on his north-western frontier, ready when opportunity
offered to win back Cappadocia. Eastward, Assyria was threatening to
become a dangerous rival. He had himself to pay tribute to Egypt, and
Egypt was subsidizing his enemy. It was imperative on his part,
therefore, to take action without delay. The power of Assyria had to be
crippled; its revenues were required for the Mitannian exchequer. So

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Saushatar raided
Assyria during the closing years of the reign of Thothmes III, or soon
after his successor, Amenhotep II, ascended the Egyptian throne.

Nothing is known from contemporary records regarding this campaign; but
it can be gathered from the references

of a later period that the city of Asshur was captured and plundered;
its king, Ashur-nadin-akhe, ceased corresponding and exchanging gifts
with Egypt. That Nineveh also fell is made clear by the fact that a
descendant of Saushatar (Tushratta) was able to send to a descendant of
Thothmes III at Thebes (Amenhotep III) the image of Ishtar (Shaushka) of
Nineveh. Apparently five successive Mitannian kings were overlords of
Assyria during a period which cannot be estimated at much less than a
hundred years.

Our knowledge regarding these events is derived chiefly from the
Tell-el-Amarna letters, and the tablets found by Professor Hugo Winckler
at Boghaz-Köi in Cappadocia, Asia Minor.

The Tell-el-Amarna letters were discovered among the ruins of the palace
of the famous Egyptian Pharaoh, Akhenaton, of the Eighteenth Dynasty,
who died about 1358 B.C. During the winter of 1887-8 an Egyptian woman
was excavating soil for her garden, when she happened upon the cellar of
Akhenaton's foreign office in which the official correspondence had been
stored. The "letters" were baked clay tablets inscribed with cuneiform
alphabetical signs in the Babylonian-Assyrian language, which, like
French in modern times, was the language of international diplomacy for
many centuries in Western Asia after the Hyksos period.

The Egyptian natives, ever so eager to sell antiquities so as to make a
fortune and retire for life, offered some specimens of the tablets for
sale. One or two were sent

 

<span id="img_28000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![LETTER FROM
TUSHRATTA, KING OF MITANNI, TO AMENHOTEP III, KING OF
EGYPT](tn/28000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/28000.jpg)  
LETTER FROM TUSHRATTA, KING OF MITANNI, TO AMENHOTEP III, KING OF
EGYPT  
</span>

*One of the Tell-el-Amarna tablets, now in the British Museum*. (See
pages [280](#page_280)-282)

Photo. Mansell

 

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

to Paris, where they were promptly declared to be forgeries, with the
result that for a time the inscribed bricks were not a marketable
commodity. Ere their value was discovered, the natives had packed them
into sacks, with the result that many were damaged and some completely
destroyed. At length, however, the majority of them reached the British
Museum and the Berlin Museum, while others drifted into the museums at
Cairo, St. Petersburg, and Paris. When they were deciphered, Mitanni was
discovered, and a flood of light thrown on the internal affairs of Egypt
and its relations with various kingdoms in Asia, while glimpses were
also afforded of the life and manners of the times.

The letters covered the reigns of Amenhotep III, the great-grandson of
Thothmes III, and of his son Akhenaton, "the dreamer king", and included
communications from the kings of Babylonia, Assyria, Mitanni, Cyprus,
the Hittites, and the princes of Phoenicia and Canaan. The copies of two
letters from Amenhotep III to Kallima-Sin, King of Babylonia, had also
been preserved. One deals with statements made by Babylonian
ambassadors, whom the Pharaoh stigmatizes as liars. Kallima-Sin had sent
his daughter to the royal harem of Egypt, and desired to know if she was
alive and well. He also asked for "much gold" to enable him to carry on
the work of extending his temple. When twenty minas of gold was sent to
him, he complained in due course that the quantity received was not only
short but that the gold was not pure; it had been melted in the furnace,
and less than five minas came out. In return he sent to Akhenaton two
minas of enamel, and some jewels for his daughter, who was in the
Egyptian royal harem.

Ashur-uballit, king of Ashur, once wrote intimating to Akhenaton that he
was gifting him horses and chariots

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

and a jewel seal. He asked for gold to assist in building his palace.
"In your country", he added, "gold is as plentiful as dust." He also
made an illuminating statement to the effect that no ambassador had gone
from Assyria to Egypt since the days of his ancestor Ashur-nadin-akhe.
It would therefore appear that Ashur-uballit had freed part of Assyria
from the yoke of Mitanni.

The contemporary king of Mitanni was Tushratta. He corresponded both
with his cousin Amenhotep III and his son-in-law Akhenaton. In his
correspondence with Amenhotep III Tushratta tells that his kingdom had
been invaded by the Hittites, but his god Teshup had delivered them into
his hand, and he destroyed them; "not one of them", he declared,
"returned to his own country". Out of the booty captured he sent
Amenhotep several chariots and horses, and a boy and a girl. To his
sister Gilu-khipa, who was one of the Egyptian Pharaoh's wives, he
gifted golden ornaments and a jar of oil. In another letter Tushratta
asked for a large quantity of gold "without measure". He complained that
he did not receive enough on previous occasions, and hinted that some of
the Egyptian gold looked as if it were alloyed with copper. Like the
Assyrian king, he hinted that gold was as plentiful as dust in Egypt.
His own presents to the Pharaoh included precious stones, gold
ornaments, chariots and horses, and women (probably slaves). This may
have been tribute. It was during the third Amenhotep's illness that
Tushratta forwarded the Nineveh image of Ishtar to Egypt, and he made
reference to its having been previously sent thither by his father,
Sutarna.

When Akhenaton came to the throne Tushratta wrote to him, desiring to
continue the friendship which had existed for two or three generations
between the kings of Mitanni and Egypt, and made complimentary
references

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

to "the distinguished Queen Tiy", Akhenaton's mother, who evidently
exercised considerable influence in shaping Egypt's foreign policy. In
the course of his long correspondence with the Pharaohs, Tushratta made
those statements regarding his ancestors which have provided so much
important data for modern historians of his kingdom.

During the early part of the Tell-el-Amarna period, Mitanni was the most
powerful kingdom in Western Asia. It was chiefly on that account that
the daughters of its rulers were selected to be the wives and mothers of
great Egyptian Pharaohs. But its numerous enemies were ever plotting to
accomplish its downfall. Among these the foremost and most dangerous
were the Hittites and the Assyrians.

The ascendancy of the Hittites was achieved in northern Syria with
dramatic suddenness. There arose in Asia Minor a great conqueror, named
Subbi-luliuma, the successor of Hattusil I, who established a strong
Hittite empire which endured for about two centuries. His capital was at
Boghaz-Köi. Sweeping through Cappadocia, at the head of a finely
organized army, remarkable for its mobility, he attacked the buffer
states which owed allegiance to Mitanni and Egypt. City after city fell
before him, until at length he invaded Mitanni; but it is uncertain
whether or not Tushratta met him in battle. Large numbers of the
Mitannians were, however, evicted and transferred to the land of the
Hittites, where the Greeks subsequently found them, and where they are
believed to be represented by the modern Kurds, the hereditary enemies
of the Armenians.

In the confusion which ensued, Tushratta was murdered by Sutarna II, who
was recognized by Subbi-luliuma. The crown prince, Mattiuza, fled to
Babylon,

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

where he found protection, but was unable to receive any assistance.
Ultimately, when the Hittite emperor had secured his sway over northern
Syria, he deposed Sutarna II and set Mattiuza as his vassal on the
throne of the shrunken Mitanni kingdom.

Meanwhile the Egyptian empire in Asia had gone to pieces. When
Akhenaton, the dreamer king, died in his palace at Tell-el-Amarna, the
Khabiri were conquering the Canaanite cities which had paid him tribute,
and the Hittite ruler was the acknowledged overlord of the Amorites.

The star of Assyria was also in the ascendant. Its king, Ashur-uballit,
who had corresponded with Akhenaton, was, like the Hittite king,
Subbi-luliuma, a distinguished statesman and general, and similarly laid
the foundations of a great empire. Before or after Subbi-luliuma invaded
Tushratta's domains, he drove the Mitannians out of Nineveh, and
afterwards overcame the Shubari tribes of Mitanni on the north-west,
with the result that he added a wide extent of territory to his growing
empire.

He had previously thrust southward the Assyro-Babylonian frontier. In
fact, he had become so formidable an opponent of Babylonia that his
daughter had been accepted as the wife of Karakhardash, the Kassite king
of that country. In time his grandson, Kadashman-Kharbe, ascended the
Babylonian throne. This young monarch co-operated with his grandfather
in suppressing the Suti, who infested the trade routes towards the west,
and plundered the caravans of merchants and the messengers of great
monarchs with persistent impunity.

A reference to these bandits appears in one of the Tell-el-Amarna
letters. Writing to Akhenaton, Ashur-uballit said: "The lands (of
Assyria and Egypt) are

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

remote, therefore let our messengers come and go. That your messengers
were late in reaching you, (the reason is that) if the Suti had waylaid
them, they would have been dead men. For if I had sent them, the Suti
would have sent bands to waylay them; therefore I have retained them. My
messengers (however), may they not (for this reason) be delayed." <span
id="fr_302"></span>[1](#fn_300)

Ashur-uballit's grandson extended his Babylonian frontier into Amurru,
where he dug wells and erected forts to protect traders. The Kassite
aristocracy, however, appear to have entertained towards him a strong
dislike, perhaps because he was so closely associated with their
hereditary enemies the Assyrians. He had not reigned for long when the
embers of rebellion burst into flame and he was murdered in his palace.
The Kassites then selected as their king a man of humble origin, named
Nazibugash, who was afterwards referred to as "the son of nobody".
Ashur-uballit deemed the occasion a fitting one to interfere in the
affairs of Babylonia. He suddenly appeared at the capital with a strong
army, overawed the Kassites, and seized and slew Nazibugash. Then he set
on the throne his great grandson the infant Kurigalzu II, who lived to
reign for fifty-five years.

Ashur-uballit appears to have died soon after this event. He was
succeeded by his son Bel-nirari, who carried on the policy of
strengthening and extending the Assyrian empire. For many years he
maintained excellent relations with his kinsman Kurigalzu II, but
ultimately they came into conflict apparently over disputed territory. A
sanguinary battle was fought, in which the Babylonians suffered heavily
and were put to rout. A treaty of peace was afterwards arranged, which
secured for the Assyrians a further extension of their frontier "from

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

the borders of Mitanni as far as Babylonia". The struggle of the future
was to be for the possession of Mesopotamia, so as to secure control
over the trade routes.

Thus Assyria rose from a petty state in a comparatively brief period to
become the rival of Babylonia, at a time when Egypt at the beginning of
its Nineteenth Dynasty was endeavouring to win back its lost empire in
Syria, and the Hittite empire was being consolidated in the north.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_281"></span>[263:1](mba18.htm#fr_282) *The Land of the
Hittites*, John Garstang, pp. 312 *et seq*. and 315 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[263:2](mba18.htm#fr_283) *The Ancient
Egyptians*, pp. 106 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[264:1](mba18.htm#fr_284) *The Ancient
Egyptians*, p. 130.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[264:2](mba18.htm#fr_285) *Struggle of the
Nations* (1896), p. 19.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[265:1](mba18.htm#fr_286) Note contributed to
*The Land of the Hittites*, J. Garstang, p. 324.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[266:1](mba18.htm#fr_289) *Genesis*, xxvi, 34,
35.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[266:2](mba18.htm#fr_288) *Ezekiel*, xvi, 45.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[266:3](mba18.htm#fr_290) *Genesis*, xxvii, 46.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[266:4](mba18.htm#fr_291) *Genesis*, xxviii, 1,
2.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[267:1](mba18.htm#fr_292) *Genesis*, xxiv.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[268:1](mba18.htm#fr_293) *The Syrian Goddess*,
John Garstang (London, 1913), pp. 17-8.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[269:1](mba18.htm#fr_294) *Vedic Index of Names
and Subjects*, Macdonald & Keith, vol. i, pp. 64-5 (London, 1912).

<span id="fn_293"></span>[270:1](mba18.htm#fr_295) *The Wanderings of
Peoples*, p. 21.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[271:1](mba18.htm#fr_296) *Breasted's History
of Egypt*, pp. 219-20.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[275:1](mba18.htm#fr_297) *A History of Egypt*,
W. M. Flinders Petrie, vol. ii, p. 146 *et seq*. (1904 ed.).

<span id="fn_296"></span>[276:1](mba18.htm#fr_298) *A History of Egypt*,
W. M. Flinders Petrie, vol. ii, p. 147 (1904 ed.).

<span id="fn_297"></span>[277:1](mba18.htm#fr_299) *The Old Testament in
the Light of the Historical Records and Legends of Assyria and
Babylonia*, pp. 126 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[278:1](mba18.htm#fr_300) His connection with
Anu is discussed in [chapter xiv](mba20.htm#an_ch-14).

<span id="fn_299"></span>[278:2](mba18.htm#fr_301) *Ancient Assyria*, C.
H. W. Johns, p. 11 (London, 1912).

<span id="fn_300"></span>[285:1](mba18.htm#fr_302) *The Tell-el-Amarna
Letters*, Hugo Winckler, p. 31.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. Astrology and Astronomy](mba19)
