[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mba23)  [Next](mba25.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002GYVU7A/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths of Babylonia and Assyria*, by Donald A. MacKenzie, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

### CHAPTER XVIII

### The Age of Semiramis

<span class="small">Queen Sammu-rammat the original of
Semiramis--"Mother-right" among "Mother Worshippers"--Sammu-rammat
compared to Queen Tiy--Popularity of Goddess Cults--Temple Worship and
Domestic Worship--Babylonian Cultural Influence in Assyria--Ethical
Tendency in Shamash Worship--The Nebo Religious Revolt--Aton Revolt in
Egypt--The Royal Assyrian Library--Fish Goddess of Babylonia in
Assyria--The Semiramis and Shakuntala Stories--The Mock King and
Queen--Dove Goddesses of Assyria, Phoenicia, and Cyprus--Ishtar's Dove
Form--St. Valentine's Day beliefs--Sacred Doves of Cretans, Hittites,
and Egyptians--Pigeon Lore in Great Britain and Ireland--Deities
associated with various Animals--The Totemic Theory--Common Element in
Ancient Goddess Cults--Influence of Agricultural Beliefs--Nebo a form of
Ea--His Spouse Tashmit a Love Goddess and Interceder--Traditions of
Famous Mother Deities--Adad-nirari IV the "Saviour" of Israel--Expansion
of the Urartian Empire--Its Famous Kings--Decline and Fall of Assyria's
Middle Empire Dynasty.</span>

ONE of the most interesting figures in Mesopotamian history came into
prominence during the Assyrian Middle Empire period. This was the famous
Sammu-rammat, the Babylonian wife of an Assyrian ruler. Like Sargon of
Akkad, Alexander the Great, and Dietrich von Bern, she made, by reason
of her achievements and influence, a deep impression on the popular
imagination, and as these monarchs became identified in tradition with
gods of war and fertility, she had attached to her memory the myths
associated with the mother goddess of love and battle who presided over
the destinies of mankind. In her character as the legendary Semiramis of
Greek literature, the Assyrian queen was reputed to have been the

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

daughter of Derceto, the dove and fish goddess of Askalon, and to have
departed from earth in bird form.

It is not quite certain whether Sammu-rammat was the wife of
Shamshi-Adad VII or of his son, Adad-nirari IV. Before the former
monarch reduced Babylonia to the status of an Assyrian province, he had
signed a treaty of peace with its king, and it is suggested that it was
confirmed by a matrimonial alliance. This treaty was repudiated by King
Bau-akh-iddina, who was transported with his palace treasures to
Assyria.

As Sammu-rammat was evidently a royal princess of Babylonia, it seems
probable that her marriage was arranged with purpose to legitimatize the
succession of the Assyrian overlords to the Babylonian throne. The
principle of "mother right" was ever popular in those countries where
the worship of the Great Mother was perpetuated if not in official at
any rate in domestic religion. Not a few Egyptian Pharaohs reigned as
husbands or as sons of royal ladies. Succession by the female line was
also observed among the Hittites. When Hattusil II gave his daughter in
marriage to Putakhi, king of the Amorites, he inserted a clause in the
treaty of alliance "to the effect that the sovereignty over the Amorite
should belong to the son and descendants of his daughter for
evermore". <span id="fr_465"></span>[1](#fn_463.md)

As queen or queen-mother, Sammu-rammat occupied as prominent a position
in Assyria as did Queen Tiy of Egypt during the lifetime of her husband,
Amenhotep III, and the early part of the reign of her son, Amenhotep IV
(Akhenaton). The Tell-el-Amarna letters testify to Tiy's influence in
the Egyptian "Foreign Office", and we know that at home she was joint
ruler with her husband and took part with him in public ceremonials.
During their reign a temple was erected to the mother goddess Mut,

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

and beside it was formed a great lake on which sailed the "barque of
Aton" in connection with mysterious religious ceremonials. After
Akhenaton's religious revolt was inaugurated, the worship of Mut was
discontinued and Tiy went into retirement. In Akhenaton's time the
vulture symbol of the goddess Mut did not appear above the sculptured
figures of royalty.

What connection the god Aton had with Mut during the period of the Tiy
regime remains obscure. There is no evidence that Aton was first exalted
as the son of the Great Mother goddess, although this is not improbable.

Queen Sammu-rammat of Assyria, like Tiy of Egypt, is associated with
social and religious innovations. She was the first, and, indeed, the
only Assyrian royal lady, to be referred to on equal terms with her
royal husband in official inscriptions. In a dedication to the god Nebo,
that deity is reputed to be the protector of "the life of Adad-nirari,
king of the land of Ashur, his lord, and the life of Sammu-rammat, she
of the palace, his lady". <span id="fr_466"></span>[1](#fn_464.md)

During the reign of Adad-nirari IV the Assyrian Court radiated
Babylonian culture and traditions. The king not only recorded his
descent from the first Shalmaneser, but also claimed to be a descendant
of Bel-kap-kapu, an earlier, but, to us, unknown, Babylonian monarch
than "Sulili", i.e. Sumu-la-ilu, the great-great-grandfather of
Hammurabi. Bel-kap-kapu was reputed to have been an over-lord of
Assyria.

Apparently Adad-nirari desired to be regarded as the legitimate heir to
the thrones of Assyria and Babylonia. His claim upon the latter country
must have had a substantial basis. It is not too much to assume that he
was a son of a princess of its ancient royal family. Sammu-rammat

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

may therefore have been his mother. She could have been called his
"wife" in the mythological sense, the king having become "husband of his
mother". If such was the case, the royal pair probably posed as the high
priest and high priestess of the ancient goddess cult--the incarnations
of the Great Mother and the son who displaced his sire.

The worship of the Great Mother was the popular religion of the
indigenous peoples of western Asia, including parts of Asia Minor,
Egypt, and southern and western Europe. It appears to have been closely
associated with agricultural rites practised among representative
communities of the Mediterranean race. In Babylonia and Assyria the
peoples of the goddess cult fused with the peoples of the god cult, but
the prominence maintained by Ishtar, who absorbed many of the old mother
deities, testifies to the persistence of immemorial habits of thought
and antique religious ceremonials among the descendants of the earliest
settlers in the Tigro-Euphrates valley. Merodach's spouse
Zerpanitu<sup>m</sup> was not a shadowy deity but a goddess who
exercised as much influence as her divine husband. As Aruru she took
part with him in the creation of mankind. In Asia Minor the mother
goddess was overshadowed by the father god during the period of Hatti
predominance, but her worship was revived after the early people along
the coast and in the agricultural valleys were freed from the yoke of
the father-god worshippers.

It must be recognized, in this connection, that an official religion was
not always a full reflection of popular beliefs. In all the great
civilizations of antiquity it was invariably a compromise between the
beliefs of the military aristocracy and the masses of mingled peoples
over whom they held sway. Temple worship had therefore a political

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

aspect; it was intended, among other things, to strengthen the position
of the ruling classes. But ancient deities could still be worshipped,
and were worshipped, in homes and fields, in groves and on mountain
tops, as the case might be. Jeremiah has testified to the persistence of
the folk practices in connection with the worship of the mother goddess
among the inhabitants of Palestine. Sacrificial fires were lit and cakes
were baked and offered to the "Queen of Heaven" in the streets of
Jerusalem and other cities. In Babylonia and Egypt domestic religious
practices were never completely supplanted by temple ceremonies in which
rulers took a prominent part. It was always possible, therefore, for
usurpers to make popular appeal by reviving ancient and persistent forms
of worship. As we have seen, Jehu of Israel, after stamping out
Phœnician Baal worship, secured a strong following by giving official
recognition to the cult of the golden calf.

It is not possible to set forth in detail, or with intimate knowledge,
the various innovations which Sammu-rammat introduced, or with which she
was credited, during the reigns of Adad-nirari IV (810-782 B.C.) and his
father. No discovery has been made of documents like the Tell-el-Amarna
"letters", which would shed light on the social and political life of
this interesting period. But evidence is not awanting that Assyria was
being suffused with Babylonian culture. Royal inscriptions record the
triumphs of the army, but suppress the details of barbarities such as
those which sully the annals of Ashur-natsir-pal, who had boys and girls
burned on pyres and the heroes of small nations flayed alive. An ethical
tendency becomes apparent in the exaltation of the Babylonian Shamash as
an abstract deity who loved law and order, inspired the king with wisdom
and ordained the

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

destinies of mankind. He is invoked on equal terms with Ashur.

The prominence given to Nebo, the god of Borsippa, during the reign of
Adad-nirari IV is highly significant. He appears in his later character
as a god of culture and wisdom, the patron of scribes and artists, and
the wise counsellor of the deities. He symbolized the intellectual life
of the southern kingdom, which was more closely associated with
religious ethics than that of war-loving Assyria.

A great temple was erected to Nebo at Kalkhi, and four statues of him
were placed within it, two of which are now in the British Museum. On
one of these was cut the inscription, from which we have quoted, lauding
the exalted and wise deity and invoking him to protect Adad-nirari and
the lady of the palace, Sammu-rammat, and closing with the exhortation,
"Whoso cometh in after time, let him trust in Nebo and trust in no other
god".

The priests of Ashur in the city of Asshur must have been as deeply
stirred by this religious revolt at Kalkhi as were the priests of Amon
when Akhenaton turned his back on Thebes and the national god to worship
Aton in his new capital at Tell-el-Amarna.

It would appear that this sudden stream of Babylonian culture had begun
to flow into Assyria as early as the reign of Shalmaneser III, and it
may be that it was on account of that monarch's pro-Babylonian
tendencies that his nobles and priests revolted against him. Shalmaneser
established at Kalkhi a royal library which was stocked with the
literature of the southern kingdom. During the reign of Adad-nirari IV
this collection was greatly increased, and subsequent additions were
made to it by his successors, and especially Ashur-nirari IV, the last
monarch of the Middle Empire. The inscriptions of

 

<span id="img_42200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![STATUE OF
NEBO&lt;br&gt; Dedicated by Adad-nirari IV, and the Queen,
Sammu-rammat&lt;br&gt; (&lt;i&gt;British Museum&lt;/i&gt;)&lt;br&gt;
Photo. Mansell](tn/42200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/42200.jpg.md)  
STATUE OF NEBO  
Dedicated by Adad-nirari IV, and the Queen, Sammu-rammat  
(*British Museum*)  
Photo. Mansell  
</span>

 

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

Shamshi-Adad, son of Shalmaneser III, have literary qualities which
distinguish them from those of his predecessors, and may be accounted
for by the influence exercised by Babylonian scholars who migrated
northward.

To the reign of Adad-nirari belongs also that important compilation the
"Synchronistic History of Assyria and Babylonia", which deals with the
relations of the two kingdoms and refers to contemporary events and
rulers.

The legends of Semiramis indicate that Sammu-rammat was associated like
Queen Tiy with the revival of mother worship. As we have said, she went
down to tradition as the daughter of the fish goddess, Derceto. Pliny
identified that deity with Atargatis of Hierapolis. <span
id="fr_467"></span>[1](#fn_465.md)

In Babylonia the fish goddess was Nina, a developed form of Damkina,
spouse of Ea of Eridu. In the inscription on the Nebo statue, that god
is referred to as the "son of Nudimmud" (Ea). Nina was the goddess who
gave her name to Nineveh, and it is possible that Nebo may have been
regarded as her son during the Semiramis period.

The story of Semiramis's birth is evidently of great antiquity. It seems
to survive throughout Europe in the nursery tale of the "Babes in the
Wood". A striking Indian parallel is afforded by the legend of
Shakuntala, which may be first referred to for the purpose of
comparative study. Shakuntala was the daughter of the rishi, Viswamitra,
and Menaka, the Apsara (celestial fairy). Menaka gave birth to her child
beside the sacred river Malini. "And she cast the new-born infant on the
bank of that river and went away. And beholding the new-born infant
lying in that forest destitute of human beings but abounding with lions
and tigers, a number of vultures sat around to protect it from harm." A
sage discovered

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

the child and adopted her. "Because", he said, "she was surrounded by
*Shakuntas* (birds), therefore hath she been named by me *Shakuntala*
(bird protected)." <span id="fr_468"></span>[1](#fn_466.md)

Semiramis was similarly deserted at birth by her Celestial mother. She
was protected by doves, and her Assyrian name, Sammu-rammat, is believed
to be derived from "Summat"--"dove", and to signify "the dove goddess
loveth her". Simmas, the chief of royal shepherds, found the child and
adopted her. She was of great beauty like Shakuntala, the maiden of
"perfect symmetry", "sweet smiles", and "faultless features", with whom
King Dushyanta fell in love and married in Gandharva fashion. <span
id="fr_469"></span>[2](#fn_467.md)

Semiramis became the wife of Onnes, governor of Nineveh, and one of the
generals of its alleged founder, King Ninus. She accompanied her husband
to Bactria on a military campaign, and is said to have instructed the
king how that city should be taken. Ninus fell in love with Semiramis,
and Onnes, who refused to give her up, went and hanged himself. The fair
courtesan then became the wife of the king.

The story proceeds that Semiramis exercised so great an influence over
the impressionable King Ninus, that she persuaded him to proclaim her
Queen of Assyria for five days. She then ascended the throne decked in
royal robes. On the first day she gave a great banquet, and on the
second thrust Ninus into prison, or had him put to death. In this manner
she secured the empire for herself. She reigned for over forty years.

Professor Frazer inclines to the view that the legend is a reminiscence
of the custom of appointing a mock king and queen to whom the kingdom
was yielded up for five

 

<span id="img_42400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE SHEPHERD FINDS
THE BABE SEMIRAMIS&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From the Painting by E.
Wallcousins&lt;/i&gt;](tn/42400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/42400.jpg.md)  
THE SHEPHERD FINDS THE BABE SEMIRAMIS  
*From the Painting by E. Wallcousins*  
</span>

 

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

days. Semiramis played the part of the mother goddess, and the priestly
king died a violent death in the character of her divine lover. "The
mounds of Semiramis which were pointed out all over Western Asia were
said to have been the graves of her lovers whom she buried alive. . . .
This tradition is one of the surest indications of the identity of the
mythical Semiramis with the Babylonian goddess Ishtar or Astarte." <span
id="fr_470"></span>[1](#fn_468.md) As we have seen, Ishtar and other mother
goddesses had many lovers whom they deserted like La Belle Dame sans
Merci (pp. [174](mba14.htm#page_174)-5.md).

As Queen of Assyria, Semiramis was said to have cut roads through
mountainous districts and erected many buildings. According to one
version of the legend she founded the city of Babylon. Herodotus,
however, says in this connection: "Semiramis held the throne for five
generations before the later princess (Nitocris). . . . She raised
certain embankments, well worthy of inspection, in the plain near
Babylon, to control the river (Euphrates), which, till then, used to
overflow and flood the whole country round about." <span
id="fr_471"></span>[2](#fn_469.md) Lucian, who associates the famous queen
with "mighty works in Asia", states that she was reputed by some to be
the builder of the ancient temple of Aphrodite in the Libanus, although
others credited it to Cinyras, or Deukalion. <span
id="fr_472"></span>[3](#fn_470.md) Several Median places bear her name, and
according to ancient Armenian tradition she was the founder of Van,
which was formerly called "Shamiramagerd". Strabo tells that
unidentified mountains in Western Asia were named after Semiramis. <span
id="fr_473"></span>[4](#fn_471.md) Indeed, many of the great works in the
Tigro-Euphrates valley, not excepting the famous inscription of Darius,
were credited to the legendary queen of Babylonia and

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Assyria. <span
id="fr_474"></span>[1](#fn_472.md) She was the rival in tradition of the
famous Sesostris of Egypt as a ruler, builder, and conqueror.

All the military expeditions of Semiramis were attended with success,
except her invasion of India. She was supposed to have been defeated in
the Punjab. After suffering this disaster she died, or abdicated the
throne in favour of her son Ninyas. The most archaic form of the legend
appears to be that she was turned into a dove and took flight to heaven
in that form. After her death she was worshipped as a dove goddess like
"Our Lady of Trees and Doves" in Cyprus, whose shrine at old Paphos was
founded, Herodotus says, by Phœnician colonists from Askalon. <span
id="fr_475"></span>[2](#fn_473.md) Fish and doves were sacred to Derceto
(Attar), <span id="fr_476"></span>[3](#fn_474.md) who had a mermaid form.
"I have beheld", says Lucian, "the image of Derceto in Phoenicia. A
marvellous spectacle it is. One half is a woman, but the part which
extends from thighs to feet terminates with the tail of a fish." <span
id="fr_477"></span>[4](#fn_475.md)

Derceto was supposed to have been a woman who threw herself in despair
into a lake. After death she was adored as a goddess and her worshippers
abstained from eating fish, except sacrificially. A golden image of a
fish was suspended in her temple. Atargatis, who was identical with
Derceto, was reputed in another form of the legend to have been born of
an egg which the sacred fishes found in the Euphrates and thrust ashore
([p. 28](mba08.htm#page_28).md). The Greek Aphrodite was born of the froth
of the sea and floated in a sea-shell. According to Hesiod,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">                     The wafting waves  
First bore her to Cythera the divine:  
To wave-encircled Cyprus came she then,  
And forth emerged, a goddess, in the charms <span id="page_427">p.
427</span>  
Of awful beauty. Where her delicate feet  
Had pressed the sands, green herbage flowering sprang.  
Her Aphrodite gods and mortals name,  
The foam-born goddess; and her name is known  
As Cytherea with the blooming wreath,  
For that she touched Cythera's flowery coast;  
And Cypris, for that on the Cyprian shore  
She rose, amid the multitude of waves. *Elton's translation*.</span>

</div>

The animals sacred to Aphrodite included the sparrow, the dove, the
swan, the swallow, and the wryneck. <span
id="fr_478"></span>[1](#fn_476.md) She presided over the month of April,
and the myrtle, rose, poppy, and apple were sacred to her.

Some writers connect Semiramis, in her character as a dove goddess, with
Media and the old Persian mother goddess Anaitis, and regard as
arbitrary her identification with the fish goddess Derceto or Atargatis.
The dove was certainly not a popular bird in the religious art of
Babylonia and Assyria, but in one of the hymns translated by Professor
Pinches Ishtar says, "Like a lonely dove I rest". In another the
worshipper tries to touch Ishtar's heart by crying, "Like the dove I
moan". A Sumerian psalmist makes a goddess (Gula, who presided over
Larak, a part of Isin) lament over the city after it was captured by the
enemy:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">My temple E-aste, temple of Larak,  
Larak the city which Bel Enlil gave, <span id="page_428">p. 428</span>  
Beneath are turned to strangeness, above are turned to strangeness,  
With wailings on the lyre my dwelling-place is surrendered to the
stranger,  
*The dove cots they wickedly seized, the doves they entrapped* . . .  
The ravens he (Enlil) caused to fly. <span
id="fr_479"></span>[1](#fn_477.md)</span>

</div>

Apparently there were temple and household doves in Babylonia. The
Egyptians had their household dove-cots in ancient as in modern times.
Lane makes reference to the large pigeon houses in many villages. They
are of archaic pattern, "with the walls slightly inclining inwards (like
many of the ancient Egyptian buildings)", and are "constructed upon the
roofs of the huts with crude brick, pottery, and mud. . . . Each pair of
pigeons occupies a separate (earthen) pot." <span
id="fr_480"></span>[2](#fn_478.md) It may be that the dove bulked more
prominently in domestic than in official religion, and had a special
seasonal significance. Ishtar appears to have had a dove form. In the
Gilgamesh epic she is said to have loved the "brilliant Allalu bird"
(the "bright-coloured wood pigeon", according to Sayce), and to have
afterwards wounded it by breaking its wings. <span
id="fr_481"></span>[3](#fn_479.md) She also loved the lion and the horse,
and must therefore have assumed the forms of these animals. The goddess
Bau, "she whose city is destroyed", laments in a Sumerian psalm:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Like a dove to its dwelling-place, how long to my
dwelling-place will they pursue me,  
To my sanctuary . . . the sacred place they pursue me . . .  
My resting place, the brick walls of my city Isin, thou art destroyed;  
My sanctuary, shrine of my temple Galmah, thou art destroyed.  
                                            *Langdon's
translation*.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Here the goddess
appears to be identified with the doves which rest on the walls and make
their nests in the shrine. The Sumerian poets did not adorn their poems
with meaningless picturesque imagery; their images were stern facts;
they had a magical or religious significance like the imagery of magical
incantations; the worshipper invoked the deity by naming his or her
various attributes, forms, &c.

Of special interest are the references in Sumerian psalms to the ravens
as well as the doves of goddesses. Throughout Asia and Europe ravens are
birds of ill omen. In Scotland there still linger curious folk beliefs
regarding the appearance of ravens and doves after death. Michael Scott,
the great magician, when on his deathbed told his friends to place his
body on a hillock. "Three ravens and three doves would be seen flying
towards it. If the ravens were first the body was to be burned, but if
the doves were first it was to receive Christian burial. The ravens were
foremost, but in their hurry flew beyond their mark. So the devil, who
had long been preparing a bed for Michael, was disappointed." <span
id="fr_482"></span>[1](#fn_480.md)

In Indian mythology Purusha, the chaos giant, first divided himself.
"Hence were husband and wife produced." This couple then assumed various
animal forms and thus "created every living pair whatsoever down to the
ants". <span id="fr_483"></span>[2](#fn_481.md) Goddesses and fairies in
the folk tales of many countries sometimes assume bird forms. The
"Fates" appear to Damayanti in the Nala story as swans which carry love
messages. <span id="fr_484"></span>[3](#fn_482.md)

According to Aryo-Indian belief, birds were "blessed with fecundity".
The Babylonian Etana eagle and the Egyptian vulture, as has been
indicated, were deities of

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

fertility. Throughout Europe birds, which were "Fates", mated, according
to popular belief, on St. Valentine's Day in February, when lots were
drawn for wives by rural folks. Another form of the old custom is
referred to by the poet Gay:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Last Valentine, the day when birds of kind  
Their paramours with mutual chirpings find,  
I early rose . . .  
Thee first I spied, and the first swain we see,  
In spite of fortune, shall our true love be.</span>

</div>

The dove appears to have been a sacred bird in various areas occupied by
tribes of the Mediterranean race. Models of a shrine found in two royal
graves at Mycenæ are surmounted by a pair of doves, suggesting twin
goddesses like Isis and Nepthys of Egypt and Ishtar and Belitsheri of
Babylonia. Doves and snakes were associated with the mother goddess of
Crete, "typifying", according to one view, "her connection with air and
earth. Although her character was distinctly beneficent and pacific, yet
as Lady of the Wild Creatures she had a more fearful aspect, one that
was often depicted on carved gems, where lions are her
companions." <span id="fr_485"></span>[1](#fn_483.md) Discussing the
attributes and symbols of this mother goddess, Professor Burrows says:
"As the serpent, coming from the crevices of the earth, shows the
possession of the tree or pillar from the underworld, so the dove, with
which this goddess is also associated, shows its possession from the
world of the sky". <span id="fr_486"></span>[2](#fn_484.md) Professor
Robertson Smith has demonstrated that the dove was of great sanctity
among the Semites. <span id="fr_487"></span>[3](#fn_485.md) It figures in
Hittite sculptures and was probably connected with the goddess cult in
Asia

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Minor. Although
Egypt had no dove goddess, the bird was addressed by lovers--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">I hear thy voice, O turtle dove--  
  he dawn is all aglow  
Weary am I with love, with love,  
  Oh, whither shall I go? <span id="fr_488"></span>[1](#fn_486.md)</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pigeons, as
indicated, are in Egypt still regarded as sacred birds, and a few years
ago British soldiers created a riot by shooting them. Doves were
connected with the ancient Greek oracle at Dodona. In many countries the
dove is closely associated with love, and also symbolizes innocence,
gentleness, and holiness.

The pigeon was anciently, it would appear, a sacred bird in these
islands, and Brand has recorded curious folk beliefs connected with it.
In some districts the idea prevailed that no person could die on a bed
which contained pigeon feathers: "If anybody be sick and lye a dying, if
they lye upon pigeon feathers they will be languishing and never die,
but be in pain and torment," wrote a correspondent. A similar
superstition about the feathers of different varieties of wild
fowl <span id="fr_489"></span>[2](#fn_487.md) obtained in other districts.
Brand traced this interesting traditional belief in Yorkshire,
Lancashire, Derbyshire, and some of the Welsh and Irish counties. <span
id="fr_490"></span>[3](#fn_488.md) It still lingers in parts of the
Scottish Highlands. In the old ballad of "The Bloody Gardener" the white
dove appears to a young man as the soul of his lady love who was
murdered by his mother. He first saw the bird perched on his breast and
then "sitting on a myrtle tree". <span id="fr_491"></span>[4](#fn_489.md)

The dove was not only a symbol of Semiramis, but

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

also of her mother Derceto, the Phœnician fish goddess. The connection
between bird and fish may have been given an astral significance. In
"Poor Robin's Almanack" for 1757 a St. Valentine rhyme begins:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">This month bright Phoebus enters Pisces,  
The maids will have good store of kisses,  
For always when the sun comes there,  
Valentine's day is drawing near,  
And both the men and maids incline  
To choose them each a Valentine.</span>

</div>

As we have seen, the example was set by the mating birds. The "Almanack"
poet no doubt versified an old astrological belief: when the spring sun
entered the sign of the Fishes, the love goddess in bird form returned
to earth.

Advocates of the Totemic theory, on the other hand, may hold that the
association of doves with snake goddesses and fish goddesses of
fertility was due to the fusion of tribes who had various animal totems.
"The Pelew Islanders believed", says Professor Frazer, "that the souls
of their forefathers lived in certain species of animals, which
accordingly they held sacred and would not injure. For this reason one
man would not kill snakes, another would not harm pigeons, and so on;
but everyone was quite ready to kill and eat the sacred animals of his
neighbours." <span id="fr_492"></span>[1](#fn_490.md) That the Egyptians
had similar customs is suggested by what Herodotus tells us regarding
their sacred animals: "Those who live near Thebes and the lake Mœris
hold the crocodile in religious veneration. . . . Those who live in or
near Elephantine, so far from considering these beasts as sacred, make
them an article of food. . . . The hippopotamus is esteemed sacred in
the

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

district of Papremis, but in no other part of Egypt. . . . They roast
and boil . . . birds and fishes . . . excepting those which are
preserved for sacred purposes." <span id="fr_493"></span>[1](#fn_491.md)
Totemic animals controlled the destinies of tribes and families. "Grose
tells us", says Brand, "that, besides general notices of death, many
families have particular warnings or notices: some by the appearance of
a bird, and others by the figure of a tall woman, dressed all in white.
. . . Pennant says that many of the great families in Scotland had their
demon or genius, who gave them monitions of future events." <span
id="fr_494"></span>[2](#fn_492.md) Members of tribes which venerated the
pigeon therefore invoked it like the Egyptian love poet and drew omens
from its notes, or saw one appearing as the soul of the dead like the
lover in the ballad of "The Bloody Gardener". They refrained also from
killing the pigeon except sacrificially, and suffered agonies on a
death-bed which contained pigeon feathers, the "taboo" having been
broken.

Some such explanation is necessary to account for the specialization of
certain goddesses as fish, snake, cat, or bird deities. Aphrodite, who
like Ishtar absorbed the attributes of several goddesses of fertility
and fate, had attached to her the various animal symbols which were
prominent in districts or among tribes brought into close contact, while
the poppy, rose, myrtle, &c., which were used as love charms, or for
making love potions, were also consecrated to her. Anthropomorphic
deities were decorated with the symbols and flowers of folk religion.

From the comparative evidence accumulated here, it will be seen that the
theory of the mythical Semiramis's Median or Persian origin is somewhat
narrow. It is possible that the dove was venerated in Cyprus, as it
certainly was in Crete, long centuries before Assyrian and

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Babylonian
influence filtered westward through Phœnician and Hittite channels. In
another connection Sir Arthur Evans shows that the resemblance between
Cretan and early Semitic beliefs "points rather to some remote common
element, the nature of which is at present obscure, than to any definite
borrowing by one side or another". <span id="fr_495"></span>[1](#fn_493.md)

From the evidence afforded by the Semiramis legends and the inscriptions
of the latter half of the Assyrian Middle Empire period, it may be
inferred that a renascence of "mother worship" was favoured by the
social and political changes which were taking place. In the first place
the influence of Babylon must have been strongly felt in this
connection. The fact that Adad-nirari found it necessary to win the
support of the Babylonians by proclaiming his descent from one of their
ancient royal families, suggests that he was not only concerned about
the attitude assumed by the scholars of the southern kingdom, but also
that of the masses of old Sumerian and Akkadian stocks who continued to
bake cakes to the Queen of Heaven so as to ensure good harvests. In the
second place it is not improbable that even in Assyria the introduction
of Nebo and his spouse made widespread appeal. That country had become
largely peopled by an alien population; many of these aliens came from
districts where "mother worship" prevailed, and had no traditional
respect for Ashur, while they regarded with hostility the military
aristocracy who conquered and ruled in the name of that dreaded deity.
Perhaps, too, the influence of the Aramæans, who in Babylonia wrecked
the temples of the sun god, tended to revive the ancient religion of the
Mediterranean race. Jehu's religious revolt in Israel, which established
once again the cult of Ashtoreth, occurred after he came under

<span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

the sway of Damascus, and may have not been unconnected with the
political ascendancy elsewhere of the goddess cult.

Nebo, whom Adad-nirari exalted at Kalkhi, was more than a local god of
Borsippa. "The most satisfactory view", says Jastrow, "is to regard him
as a counterpart of Ea. Like Ea, he is the embodiment and source of
wisdom. . . . The study of the heavens formed part of the wisdom which
is traced back to Nebo, and the temple school at Borsippa became one of
the chief centres for the astrological, and, subsequently, for the
astronomical lore of Babylonia. . . . Like Nebo, Ea is also associated
with the irrigation of the fields and with their consequent fertility. A
hymn praises him as the one who fills the canals and the dikes, who
protects the fields and brings the crops to maturity." Nebo links with
Merodach (Marduk), who is sometimes referred to as his father. Jastrow
assumes that the close partnership between Nebo and Merodach "had as a
consequence a transfer of some of the father Marduk's attributes as a
solar deity to Nebo, <span id="fr_496"></span>[1](#fn_494.md) his son, just
as Ea passed his traits on to his son, Marduk". <span
id="fr_497"></span>[2](#fn_495.md)

As the "recorder" or "scribe" among the gods, Nebo resembles the
Egyptian god Thoth, who links with Khonsu, the lunar and spring sun god
of love and fertility, and with Osiris. In Borsippa he had, like
Merodach in Babylon, pronounced Tammuz traits. Nebo, in fact, appears to
be the Tammuz of the new age, the son of the ancient goddess, who became
"Husband of his Mother". If Nebo had no connection with Great Mother
worship, it is unlikely that his statue would have

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>

borne an inscription referring to King Adad-nirari and Queen
Sammu-rammat on equal terms. The Assyrian spouse of Nebo was called
Tashmit. This "goddess of supplication and love" had a lunar
significance. A prayer addressed to her in association with Nannar (Sin)
and Ishtar, proceeds:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">In the evil of the eclipse of the moon which ... has
taken place,  
In the evil of the powers, of the portents, evil and not good, which are
in my palace and my land,  
(I) have turned towards thee! . . .  
Before Nabu (Nebo) thy spouse, thy lord, the prince, the first-born of
E-sagila, intercede for me!  
May he hearken to my cry at the word of thy mouth; may he remove my
sighing, may he learn my supplication!</span>

</div>

Damkina is similarly addressed in another prayer:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">O Damkina, mighty queen of all the gods,  
O wife of Ea, valiant art thou,  
O Ir-nina, mighty queen of all the gods . . .  
Thou that dwellest in the Abyss, O lady of heaven and earth! . . .  
In the evil of the eclipse of the moon, etc.</span>

</div>

Bau is also prayed in a similar connection as "mighty lady that dwellest
in the bright heavens", i.e. "Queen of heaven". <span
id="fr_498"></span>[1](#fn_496.md)

Tashmit, whose name signifies "Obedience", according to Jastrow, or
"Hearing", according to Sayce, carried the prayers of worshippers to
Nebo, her spouse. As Isis interceded with Osiris, she interceded with
Nebo, on behalf of mankind. But this did not signify that she was the
least influential of the divine pair. A goddess played many parts: she
was at once mother, daughter, and wife of the god; the servant of one
god or the "mighty queen of all the gods". The Great Mother

<span id="page_437">p. 437</span>

was, as has been indicated, regarded as the eternal and undecaying one;
the gods passed away, son succeeding father; she alone remained. Thus,
too, did Semiramis survive in the popular memory, as the queen-goddess
of widespread legends, after kings and gods had been forgotten. To her
was ascribed all the mighty works of other days in the lands where the
indigenous peoples first worshipped the Great Mother as Damkina, Nina,
Bau, Ishtar, or Tashmit, because the goddess was anciently believed to
be the First Cause, the creatrix, the mighty one who invested the ruling
god with the powers he possessed--the god who held sway because he was
her husband, as did Nergal as the husband of Eresh-ki-gal, queen of
Hades.

The multiplication of well-defined goddesses was partly due to the
tendency to symbolize the attributes of the Great Mother, and partly due
to the development of the great "Lady" in a particular district where
she reflected local phenomena and where the political influence achieved
by her worshippers emphasized her greatness. Legends regarding a famous
goddess were in time attached to other goddesses, and in Aphrodite and
Derceto we appear to have mother deities who absorbed the traditions of
more than one local "lady" of river and plain, forest and mountain.
Semiramis, on the other hand, survived as a link between the old world
and the new, between the country from which emanated the stream of
ancient culture and the regions which received it. As the high priestess
of the cult, she became identified with the goddess whose bird name she
bore, as Gilgamesh and Etana became identified with the primitive
culture-hero or patriarch of the ancient Sumerians, and Sargon became
identified with Tammuz. No doubt the fame of Semiramis was specially
emphasized because of her close association, as Queen

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sammu-rammat, with
the religious innovations which disturbed the land of the god Ashur
during the Middle Empire period.

Adad-nirari IV, the son or husband of Sammu-rammat, was a vigorous and
successful campaigner. He was the Assyrian king who became the "saviour"
of Israel. Although it is not possible to give a detailed account of his
various expeditions, we find from the list of these which survives in
the Eponym Chronicle that he included in the Assyrian Empire a larger
extent of territory than any of his predecessors. In the north-east he
overcame the Median and other tribes, and acquired a large portion of
the Iranian plateau; he compelled Edom to pay tribute, and established
his hold in Babylonia by restricting the power of the Chaldæans in
Sealand. In the north he swayed--at least, so he claimed--the wide
domains of the Nairi people. He also confirmed his supremacy over the
Hittites.

The Aramæan state of Damascus, which had with-stood the attack of the
great Shalmaneser and afterwards oppressed, as we have seen, the
kingdoms of Israel and Judah, was completely overpowered by Adad-nirari.
The old king, Hazael, died when Assyria's power was being strengthened
and increased along his frontiers. He was succeeded by his son Mari, who
is believed to be identical with the Biblical Ben-Hadad III. <span
id="fr_499"></span>[1](#fn_497.md)

Shortly after this new monarch came to the throne, Adad-nirari IV led a
great army against him. The Syrian ruler appears to have been taken by
surprise; probably his kingdom was suffering from the three defeats
which had been previously administered by the revolting
Israelites. <span id="fr_500"></span>[2](#fn_498.md) At any rate Mari was
unable to gather together an army of allies to resist the Assyrian
advance, and took

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

refuge behind the walls of Damascus. This strongly fortified city was
closely invested, and Mari had at length to submit and acknowledge
Adad-nirari as his overlord. The price of peace included 23,000 talents
of silver, 20 of gold, 3000 of copper, and 5000 of iron, as well as
ivory ornaments and furniture, embroidered materials, and other goods
"to a countless amount." Thus "the Lord gave Israel a saviour, so that
they went out from under the hand of the Syrians: and the children of
Israel dwelt in their tents, as beforetime". This significant reference
to the conquest of Damascus by the Assyrian king is followed by another
which throws light on the religious phenomena of the period:
"Nevertheless they departed not from the sins of the house of Jeroboam,
who made Israel sin, but walked therein: and there remained the grove
also in Samaria". <span id="fr_501"></span>[1](#fn_499.md) Ashtoreth and
her golden calf continued to be venerated, and doves were sacrificed to
the local Adonis.

It is not certain whether Adad-nirari penetrated farther than Damascus.
Possibly all the states which owed allegiance to the king of that city
became at once the willing vassals of Assyria, their protector. The
tribute received by Adad-nirari from Tyre, Sidon, the land of Omri
(Israel), Edom, and Palastu (Philistia) may have been gifted as a formal
acknowledgment of his suzerainty and with purpose to bring them directly
under Assyrian control, so that Damascus might be prevented from taking
vengeance against them.

Meagre details survive regarding the reign of the next king, Shalmaneser
IV (781-772 B.C.). These are, however, supplemented by the Urartian
inscriptions. Although Adad-nirari boasted that he had subdued the
kingdom of Urartu in the north, he appears to have

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

done no more than limit its southern expansion for a time.

The Urarti were, like the Mitanni, a military aristocracy <span
id="fr_502"></span>[1](#fn_500.md) who welded together by conquest the
tribes of the eastern and northern Highlands which several Assyrian
monarchs included in their Empire. They acquired the elements of
Assyrian culture, and used the Assyrian script for their own language.
Their god was named Khaldis, and they called their nation Khaldia.
During the reign of Ashur-natsir-pal their area of control was confined
to the banks of the river Araxes, but it was gradually extended under a
succession of vigorous kings towards the south-west until they became
supreme round the shores of Lake Van. Three of their early kings were
Lutipris, Sharduris I, and Arame.

During the reign of Shamshi-Adad the Assyrians came into conflict with
the Urarti, who were governed at the time by "Ushpina of Nairi"
(Ishpuinis, son of Sharduris II). The Urartian kingdom had extended
rapidly and bordered on Assyrian territory. To the west were the tribes
known as the Mannai, the northern enemies of the Medes, a people of
Indo-European speech.

When Adad-nirari IV waged war against the Urarti, their king was Menuas,
the son of Ishpuinis. Menuas was a great war-lord, and was able to
measure his strength against Assyria on equal terms. He had nearly
doubled by conquest the area controlled by his predecessors. Adad-nirari
endeavoured to drive his rival northward, but all along the Assyrian
frontier from the Euphrates to the Lower Zab, Menuas forced the outposts
of Adad-nirari to retreat southward. The Assyrians, in short, were
unable to hold their own.

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

Having extended his kingdom towards the south, Menuas invaded Hittite
territory, subdued Malatia and compelled its king to pay tribute. He
also conquered the Mannai and other tribes. Towards the north and
north-west he added a considerable area to his kingdom, which became as
large as Assyria.

Menuas's capital was the city of Turushpa or Dhuspas (Van), which was
called Khaldinas <span id="fr_503"></span>[1](#fn_501.md) after the
national god. For a century it was the seat of Urartian administration.
The buildings erected there by Menuas and his successors became
associated in after-time with the traditions of Semiramis, who, as Queen
Sammu-rammat of Assyria, was a contemporary of the great Urartian
conqueror. Similarly a sculptured representation of the Hittite god was
referred to by Herodotus as a memorial of the Egyptian king Sesostris.

The strongest fortification at Dhuspas was the citadel, which was
erected on a rocky promontory jutting into Lake Van. A small garrison
could there resist a prolonged siege. The water supply of the city was
assured by the construction of subterranean aqueducts. Menuas erected a
magnificent palace, which rivalled that of the Assyrian monarch at
Kalkhi, and furnished it with the rich booty brought back from
victorious campaigns. He was a lover of trees and planted many, and he
laid out gardens which bloomed with brilliant Asian flowers. The palace
commanded a noble prospect of hill and valley scenery on the
south-western shore of beautiful Lake Van.

Menuas was succeeded by his son Argistis, who ascended the throne during
the lifetime of Adad-nirari of Assyria. During the early part of his
reign he conducted military expeditions to the north beyond the river

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Araxes. He
afterwards came into conflict with Assyria, and acquired more territory
on its northern frontier. He also subdued the Mannai, who had risen in
revolt.

For three years (781-778 B.C.) the general of Shalmaneser IV waged war
constantly with Urartu, and again in 776 B.C. and 774 B.C. attempts were
made to prevent the southern expansion of that Power. On more than one
occasion the Assyrians were defeated and compelled to retreat.

Assyria suffered serious loss of prestige on account of its inability to
hold in check its northern rival. Damascus rose in revolt and had to be
subdued, and northern Syria was greatly disturbed. Hadrach was visited
in the last year of the king's reign.

Ashur-dan III (771-763 B.C.) occupied the Assyrian throne during a
period of great unrest. He was unable to attack Urartu. His army had to
operate instead on his eastern and southern frontiers. A great plague
broke out in 765 B.C., the year in which Hadrach had again to be dealt
with. On June 15, 763 B.C., there was a total eclipse of the sun, and
that dread event was followed by a revolt at Asshur which was no doubt
of priestly origin. The king's son Adad-nirari was involved in it, but
it is not certain whether or not he displaced his father for a time. In
758 B.C. Ashur-dan again showed signs of activity by endeavouring to
suppress the revolts which during the period of civil war had broken out
in Syria.

Adad-nirari V came to the throne in 763 B.C. He had to deal with revolts
in Asshur in other cities. Indeed for the greater part of his reign he
seems to have been kept fully engaged endeavouring to establish his
authority within the Assyrian borders. The Syrian provinces regained
their independence.

During the first four years of his successor Ashur-nirari IV (753-746
B.C.)

<span id="page_443">p. 443</span>

the army never left Assyria. Namri was visited in 749-748 B.C., but it
is not certain whether he fought against the Urartians, or the Aramæans
who had become active during this period of Assyrian decline. In 746
B.C. a revolt broke out in the city of Kalkhi and the king had to leave
it. Soon afterwards he died--perhaps he was assassinated--and none of
his sons came to the throne. A year previously Nabu-natsir, known to the
Greeks as Nabonassar, was crowned king of Babylonia.

Ashur-nirari IV appears to have been a monarch of somewhat like
character to the famous Akhenaton of Egypt--an idealist for whom war had
no attractions. He kept his army at home while his foreign possessions
rose in revolt one after another. Apparently he had dreams of guarding
Assyria against attack by means of treaties of peace. He arranged one
with a Mesopotamian king, Mati-ilu of Agusi, who pledged himself not to
go to war without the consent of his Assyrian overlord, and it is
possible that there were other documents of like character which have
not survived to us. During his leisure hours the king engaged himself in
studious pursuits and made additions to the royal library. In the end
his disappointed soldiers found a worthy leader in one of its generals
who seized the throne and assumed the royal name of Tiglath-pileser.

Ashur-nirari IV was the last king of the Middle Empire of Assyria. He
may have been a man of high character and refinement and worthy of our
esteem, although an unsuitable ruler for a predatory State.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_463"></span>[418:1](mba24.htm#fr_465.md) *The Land of the
Hittites*, J. Garstang, p. 354.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[419:1](mba24.htm#fr_466.md) *The Old Testament in
the Light of the Historical Records and Legends of Assyria and
Babylonia*, T. G. Pinches, p. 343.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[423:1](mba24.htm#fr_467.md) *Nat. Hist.*, v, 19
and *Strabo*, xvi, 1-27.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[424:1](mba24.htm#fr_468.md) The *Mahàbhàrata*:
*Adi Parva*, sections lxxi and lxxii (Roy's translation, pp. 213-216),
and *Indian Myth and Legend*, pp. 157 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[424:2](mba24.htm#fr_469.md) That is, without
ceremony but with consent.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[425:1](mba24.htm#fr_470.md) *The Golden Bough*
(*The Scapegoat*), pp. 369 *et seq*. (3rd edition). Perhaps the mythic
Semiramis and legends connected were in existence long before the
historic Sammu-rammat, though the two got mixed up.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[425:2](mba24.htm#fr_471.md) *Herodotus*, i, 184.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[425:3](mba24.htm#fr_472.md) *De dea Syria*, 9-14.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[425:4](mba24.htm#fr_473.md) *Strabo*, xvi, 1, 2.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[426:1](mba24.htm#fr_474.md) *Diodorus Siculus*,
ii, 3.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[426:2](mba24.htm#fr_475.md) *Herodotus*, 105.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[426:3](mba24.htm#fr_476.md) *Diodorus Siculus*,
ii, 4.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[426:4](mba24.htm#fr_477.md) *De dea Syria*, 14.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[427:1](mba24.htm#fr_478.md) This little bird
allied to the woodpecker twists its neck strangely when alarmed. It may
have symbolized the coquettishness of fair maidens. As love goddesses
were "Fates", however, the wryneck may have been connected with the
belief that the perpetrator of a murder, or a death spell, could be
detected when he approached his victim's corpse. If there was no wound
to "bleed afresh", the "death thraw" (the contortions of death) might
indicate who the criminal was. In a Scottish ballad regarding a lady,
who was murdered by her lover, the verse occurs:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">’T was in the middle o’ the night  
The cock began to craw;  
And at the middle o’ the night  
The corpse began to thraw.</span>

</div>

<span id="fn_477"></span>[428:1](mba24.htm#fr_479.md) Langdon's *Sumerian
and Babylonian Psalms*, pp. 133, 135.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[428:2](mba24.htm#fr_480.md) Introduction to
Lane's *Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians*.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[428:3](mba24.htm#fr_481.md) Tammuz is referred to
in a Sumerian psalm as "him of the dovelike voice, yea, dovelike". He
may have had a dove form. Angus, the Celtic god of spring, love, and
fertility, had a swan form; he also had his seasonal period of sleep
like Tammuz.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[429:1](mba24.htm#fr_482.md) Campbell's
*Superstitions of the Scottish Highlands*, p. 288.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[429:2](mba24.htm#fr_483.md) *Indian Myth and
Legend*, p. 95.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[429:3](mba24.htm#fr_484.md) *Ibid*., pp. 329-30.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[430:1](mba24.htm#fr_485.md) *Crete, the
Forerunner of Greece*, C. H. and H. B. Hawes, p. 139.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[430:2](mba24.htm#fr_486.md) *The Discoveries in
Crete*, pp. 137-8.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[430:3](mba24.htm#fr_487.md) *Religion of the
Semites*, p. 294.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[431:1](mba24.htm#fr_488.md) *Egyptian Myth and
Legend*, p. 59.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[431:2](mba24.htm#fr_489.md) Including the goose,
one of the forms of the harvest goddess.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[431:3](mba24.htm#fr_490.md) *Brand's Popular
Antiquities*, vol. ii, 230-1 and vol. iii, 232 (1899 ed.).

<span id="fn_489"></span>[431:4](mba24.htm#fr_491.md) *Ibid*., vol. iii,
217. The myrtle was used for love charms.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[432:1](mba24.htm#fr_492.md) *The Golden Bough*
(*Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild*), vol. ii, p. 293 (3rd ed.).

<span id="fn_491"></span>[433:1](mba24.htm#fr_493.md) *Herodotus*, ii, 69,
71, and 77.

<span id="fn_492"></span>[433:2](mba24.htm#fr_494.md) *Brand's Popular
Antiquities*, vol. iii, p. 227.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[434:1](mba24.htm#fr_495.md) Cited by Professor
Burrows in *The Discoveries in Crete*, p. 134.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[435:1](mba24.htm#fr_496.md) Like the Egyptian
Horus, Nebo had many phases: he was connected with the sun and moon, the
planet Mercury, water and crops; he was young and yet old--a mystical
god.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[435:2](mba24.htm#fr_497.md) *Aspects of Religious
Belief and Practice in Babylonia and Assyria*, pp. 94 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[436:1](mba24.htm#fr_498.md) *Babylonian Magic and
Sorcery*, L. W. King, pp. 6-7 and 26-7.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[438:1](mba24.htm#fr_499.md) *2 Kings*, xiii, 3.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[438:2](mba24.htm#fr_500.md) *2 Kings*, xiii,
14-25.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[439:1](mba24.htm#fr_501.md) *2 Kings*, xiii, 5,
6.

<span id="fn_500"></span>[440:1](mba24.htm#fr_502.md) The masses of the
Urartian folk appear to have been of Hatti stock--"broad heads", like
their descendants, the modern Armenians.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[441:1](mba24.htm#fr_503.md) It is uncertain
whether this city or Kullani in north Syria is the Biblical Calno.
*Isaiah*, x, 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. Assyria's Age of Splendour](mba25.md)
