[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mba25)  [Next](mba27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002GYVU7A/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths of Babylonia and Assyria*, by Donald A. MacKenzie, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_477">p. 477</span> <span id="an_ch-20"></span>

### CHAPTER XX

### The Last Days of Assyria and Babylonia

<span class="small">Doom of Nineveh and Babylon--Babylonian
Monotheism--Ashur-banipal and his Brother, King of Babylon--Ceremony of
"Taking the Hands of Bel"--Merodach restored to E-sagila--Assyrian
Invasion of Egypt and Sack of Thebes--Lydia's Appeal to Assyria--Elam
subdued--Revolt of Babylon--Death of Babylonian King--Sack of
Susa--Psamtik of Egypt--Cimmerians crushed--Ashur-bani-pal's Literary
Activities--The Sardanapalus Legend--Last Kings of Assyria--Fall of
Nineveh--The New Babylonian Empire--Necho of Egypt expelled from
Syria--King Jehoaikin of Judah deposed--Zedekiah's Revolt and
Punishment--Fall of Jerusalem and Hebrew Captivity--Jeremiah laments
over Jerusalem--Babylonia's Last Independent King--Rise of Cyrus the
Conqueror--The Persian Patriarch and Eagle Legend--Cyrus conquers
Lydia--Fall of Babylon--Jews return to Judah--Babylon from Cyrus to
Alexander the Great.</span>

 

<span class="small">THE burden of Nineveh . . . The Lord is slow to
anger, and great in power, and will not at all acquit the wicked: the
Lord hath his way in the whirlwind and in the storm, and the clouds are
the dust of his feet. He rebuketh the sea, and maketh it dry, and drieth
up all the rivers: Bashan languisheth, and Carmel, and the flower of
Lebanon languisheth. . . . He that dasheth in pieces is come up before
thy face. . . . The gates of the rivers shall be opened, and the palace
shall be dissolved. And Huzzab shall be led away captive, she shall be
brought up, and her maids shall lead her as with the voice of doves,
tabering upon their breasts. . . . Draw thee waters for the siege,
fortify thy strong holds: go into clay, and tread the morter, make
strong the brick-kiln. There shall the fire devour thee; the sword shall
cut thee off. . . . Thy shepherds slumber, O king of Assyria: thy nobles
shall dwell in the dust: thy people is scattered upon the mountains, and
no man gathereth them. There is no healing of thy bruise; thy wound is
grievous: all that hear the bruit of thee shall clap the hands</span>

<span id="page_478">p. 478</span>

<span class="small">over thee: for upon whom hath not thy wickedness
passed continually? <span id="fr_545"></span>[1](#fn_543.md)</span>

The doom of Babylon was also foretold:

<span class="small">Bel boweth down, Nebo stoopeth. . . . Come down, and
sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on the ground: there
is no throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans. . . . Stand now with thine
enchantments, and with the multitude of thy sorceries, wherein thou hast
laboured from thy youth; if so be thou shalt be able to profit, if so be
thou mayest prevail. Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels.
Let now the astrologers, the star-gazers, the monthly prognosticators,
stand up, and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee.
Behold, they shall be as stubble; the fire shall burn them. . . . Thus
shall they be unto thee with whom thou hast laboured, even thy
merchants, from thy youth: they shall wander every one to his quarter;
none shall save thee. <span id="fr_546"></span>[2](#fn_544.md)</span>

Against a gloomy background, dark and ominous as a thundercloud, we have
revealed in the last century of Mesopotamian glory the splendour of
Assyria and the beauty of Babylon. The ancient civilizations ripened
quickly before the end came. Kings still revelled in pomp and luxury.
Cities resounded with "the noise of a whip, and the noise of the
rattling of the wheels, and of the pransing horses, and of the jumping
chariots. The horseman lifteth up both the bright sword and the
glittering spear. . . . The valiant men are in scarlet." <span
id="fr_547"></span>[3](#fn_545.md) But the minds of cultured men were more
deeply occupied than ever with the mysteries of life and creation. In
the libraries, the temples, and observatories, philosophers and
scientists were shattering the unsubstantial fabric of immemorial
superstition; they attained to higher conceptions of the duties and
responsibilities of mankind; they

<span id="page_479">p. 479</span>

conceived of divine love and divine guidance; they discovered, like
Wordsworth, that the soul has--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">               An obscure sense  
Of possible sublimity, whereto  
With growing faculties she doth aspire.</span>

</div>

One of the last kings of Babylon, Nebuchadrezzar, recorded a prayer
which reveals the loftiness of religious thought and feeling attained by
men to whom graven images were no longer worthy of adoration and
reverence--men whose god was not made by human hands--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">O eternal prince! Lord of all being!  
As for the king whom thou lovest, and  
Whose name thou hast proclaimed  
As was pleasing to thee,  
Do thou lead aright his life,  
Guide him in a straight path.  
I am the prince, obedient to thee,  
The creature of thy hand;  
Thou hast created me, and  
With dominion over all people  
Thou hast entrusted me.  
According to thy grace, O Lord,  
Which thou dost bestow on  
All people,  
Cause me to love thy supreme dominion,  
And create in my heart  
The worship of thy godhead  
And grant whatever is pleasing to thee,  
Because thou hast fashioned my life. <span
id="fr_548"></span>[1](#fn_546.md)</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The "star-gazers"
had become scientists, and foretold eclipses: in every sphere of
intellectual activity great men were sifting out truth from the debris
of superstition. It seemed as if Babylon and Assyria were about to cross

<span id="page_480">p. 480</span>

the threshold of a new age, when their doom was sounded and their power
was shattered for ever. Nineveh perished with dramatic suddenness:
Babylon died of "senile decay".

When, in 668 B.C., intelligence reached Nineveh that Esarhaddon had
passed away, on the march through Egypt, the arrangements which he had
made for the succession were carried out smoothly and quickly. Naki´a,
the queen mother, was acting as regent, and completed her lifework by
issuing a proclamation exhorting all loyal subjects and vassals to obey
the new rulers, her grandsons, Ashur-bani-pal, Emperor of Assyria, and
Shamash-shum-ukin, King of Babylon. Peace prevailed in the capital, and
there was little or no friction throughout the provinces: new rulers
were appointed to administer the States of Arvad and Ammon, but there
were no changes elsewhere.

Babylon welcomed its new king--a Babylonian by birth and the son of a
Babylonian princess. The ancient kingdom rejoiced that it was no longer
to be ruled as a province; its ancient dignities and privileges were
being partially restored. But one great and deep-seated grievance
remained. The god Merodach was still a captive in the temple of Ashur.
No king could reign aright if Merodach were not restored to E-sagila.
Indeed he could not be regarded as the lord of the land until he had
"taken the hands of Bel".

The ceremony of taking the god's hands was an act of homage. When it was
consummated the king became the steward or vassal of Merodach, and every
day he appeared before the divine one to receive instructions and
worship him. The welfare of the whole kingdom depended on the manner in
which the king acted towards the god. If Merodach was satisfied with the
king he sent blessings to the land; if he was angry he sent calamities.

<span id="page_481">p. 481</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> A pious and
faithful monarch was therefore the protector of the people.

This close association of the king with the god gave the priests great
influence in Babylon. They were the power behind the throne. The
destinies of the royal house were placed in their hands; they could
strengthen the position of a royal monarch, or cause him to be deposed
if he did not satisfy their demands. A king who reigned over Babylon
without the priestly party on his side occupied an insecure position.
Nor could he secure the co-operation of the priests unless the image of
the god was placed in the temple. Where king was, there Merodach had to
he also.

Shamash-shum-ukin pleaded with his royal brother and overlord to restore
Bel Merodach to Babylon. Ashur-bani-pal hesitated for a time; he was
unwilling to occupy a less dignified position, as the representative of
Ashur, than his distinguished predecessor, in his relation to the
southern kingdom. At length, however, he was prevailed upon to consult
the oracle of Shamash, the solar lawgiver, the revealer of destiny. The
god was accordingly asked if Shamash-shum-ukin could "take the hands of
Bel" in Ashur's temple, and then proceed to Babylon as his
representative. In response, the priests of Shamash informed the emperor
that Bel Merodach could not exercise sway as sovereign lord so long as
he remained a prisoner in a city which was not his own.

Ashur-bani-pal accepted the verdict, and then visited Ashur's temple to
plead with Bel Merodach to return to Babylon. "Let thy thoughts", he
cried, "dwell in Babylon, which in thy wrath thou didst bring to naught.
Let thy face be turned towards E-sagila, thy lofty and divine temple.
Return to the city thou hast deserted for a house unworthy of thee. O
Merodach! lord of the

<span id="page_482">p. 482</span>

gods, issue thou the command to return again to Babylon."

Thus did Ashur-bani-pal make pious and dignified submission to the will
of the priests. A favourable response was, of course, received from
Merodach when addressed by the emperor, and the god's image was carried
back to E-sagila, accompanied by a strong force. Ashur-bani-pal and
Shamash-shum-ukin led the procession of priests and soldiers, and
elaborate ceremonials were ob-served at each city they passed, the local
gods being carried forth to do homage to Merodach.

Babylon welcomed the deity who was thus restored to his temple after the
lapse of about a quarter of a century, and the priests celebrated with
unconcealed satisfaction and pride the ceremony at which
Shamash-shum-ukin "took the hands of Bel". The public rejoicings were
conducted on an elaborate scale. Babylon believed that a new era of
prosperity had been inaugurated, and the priests and nobles looked
forward to the day when the kingdom would once again become free and
independent and powerful.

Ashur-bani-pal (668-626 B.C.) made arrangements to complete his father's
designs regarding Egypt. His Tartan continued the campaign, and Taharka,
as has been stated, was driven from Memphis. The beaten Pharaoh returned
to Ethiopia and did not again attempt to expel the Assyrians. He died in
666 B.C. It was found that some of the petty kings of Lower Egypt had
been intriguing with Taharka, and their cities were severely dealt with.
Necho of Sais had to be arrested, among others, but was pardoned after
he appeared before Ashur-bani-pal, and sent back to Egypt as the
Assyrian governor.

Tanutamon, a son of Pharaoh Shabaka, succeeded Taharka, and in 663 B.C.
marched northward from Thebes

<span id="page_483">p. 483</span>

with a strong army. He captured Memphis. It is believed Necho was slain,
and Herodotus relates that his son Psamtik took refuge in Syria. In 661
B.C. Ashur-bani-pal's army swept through Lower Egypt and expelled the
Ethiopians. Tanutamon fled southward, but on this occasion the Assyrians
followed up their success, and besieged and captured Thebes, which they
sacked. Its nobles were slain or taken captive. According to the prophet
Nahum, who refers to Thebes as No (Nu-Amon = city of Amon), "her young
children also were dashed in pieces at the top of all the streets: and
they (the Assyrians) cast lots for her honourable men, and all her great
men were bound in chains". <span id="fr_549"></span>[1](#fn_547.md) Thebes
never again recovered its prestige. Its treasures were transported to
Nineveh. The Ethiopian supremacy in Egypt was finally extinguished, and
Psamtik, son of Necho, who was appointed the Pharaoh, began to reign as
the vassal of Assyria.

When the kings on the seacoasts of Palestine and Asia Minor found that
they could no longer look to Egypt for help, they resigned themselves to
the inevitable, and ceased to intrigue against Assyria. Gifts were sent
to Ashur-bani-pal by the kings of Arvad, Tyre, Tarsus, and Tabal. The
Arvad ruler, however, was displaced, and his son set on his throne. But
the most extraordinary development was the visit to Nineveh of
emissaries from Gyges, king of Lydia, who figures in the legends of
Greece. This monarch had been harassed by the Cimmerians after they
accomplished the fall of Midas of Phrygia in 676 B.C., and he sought the
help of Ashur-bani-pal. It is not known whether the Assyrians operated
against the Cimmerians in Tabal, but, as Gyges did not send tribute, it
would appear that he held his own with

<span id="page_484">p. 484</span>

the aid of mercenaries from the State of Caria in south-western Asia
Minor. The Greeks of Cilicia, and the Achæans and Phœnicians of Cyprus
remained faithful to Assyria.

Elam gave trouble in 665 B.C. by raiding Akkad, but the Assyrian army
repulsed the invaders at Dur-ilu and pushed on to Susa. The Elamites
received a crushing defeat in a battle on the banks of the River Ula.
King Teumman was slain, and a son of the King of Urtagu was placed on
his throne. Elam thus came under Assyrian sway.

The most surprising and sensational conspiracy against Ashur-bani-pal
was fomented by his brother Shamash-shum-ukin of Babylon, after the two
had co-operated peacefully for fifteen years. No doubt the priestly
party at E-sagila were deeply concerned in the movement, and the king
may have been strongly influenced by the fact that Babylonia was at the
time suffering from severe depression caused by a series of poor
harvests. Merodach, according to the priests, was angry; it was probably
argued that he was punishing the people because they had not thrown off
the yoke of Assyria.

The temple treasures of Babylon were freely drawn upon to purchase the
allegiance of allies. Ere Ashur-bani-pal had any knowledge of the
conspiracy his brother had won over several governors in Babylonia, the
Chaldæans, Aramæans and Elamites, and many petty kings in Palestine and
Syria: even Egypt and Libya were prepared to help him. When, however,
the faithful governor of Ur was approached, he communicated with his
superior at Erech, who promptly informed Ashur-bani-pal of the great
conspiracy. The intelligence reached Nineveh like a bolt from the blue.
The emperor's heart was filled with sorrow and anguish. In after-time he
lamented in

<span id="page_485">p. 485</span>

an inscription that his "faithless brother" forgot the favours he had
shown him. "Outwardly with his lips he spoke friendly things, while
inwardly his heart plotted murder."

In 652 B.C. Shamash-shum-ukin precipitated the crisis by forbidding
Ashur-bani-pal to make offerings to the gods in the cities of Babylonia.
He thus declared his independence.

War broke out simultaneously. Ur and Erech were besieged and captured by
the Chaldæans, and an Elamite army marched to the aid of the King of
Babylon, but it was withdrawn before long on account of the unsettled
political conditions at home. The Assyrian armies swept through
Babylonia, and the Chaldæans in the south were completely subjugated
before Babylon was captured. That great commercial metropolis was
closely besieged for three years, and was starved into submission. When
the Assyrians were entering the city gates a sensational happening
occurred. Shamash-shum-ukin, the rebel king, shut himself up in his
palace and set fire to it, and perished there amidst the flames with his
wife and children, his slaves and all his treasures. Ashur-bani-pal was
in 647 B.C. proclaimed King Kandalanu <span
id="fr_550"></span>[1](#fn_548.md) of Babylon, and reigned over it until
his death in 626 B.C.

Elam was severely dealt with. That unhappy country was terribly
devastated by Assyrian troops, who besieged and captured Susa, which was
pillaged and wrecked. It was recorded afterwards as a great triumph of
this campaign that the statue of Nana of Erech, which had been carried
off by Elamites 1635 years previously, was recovered and restored to the
ancient Sumerian city. Elam's power of resistance was finally
extinguished, and the country fell a ready prey to the Medes and
Persians, who

<span id="page_486">p. 486</span>

soon entered into possession of it. Thus, by destroying a buffer State,
Ashur-bani-pal strengthened the hands of the people who were destined
twenty years after his death to destroy the Empire of Assyria.

The western allies of Babylon were also dealt with, and it may be that
at this time Manasseh of Judah was taken to Babylon (*2 Chronicles*,
xxxiii, 11), where, however, he was forgiven. The Medes and the Mannai
in the north-west were visited and subdued, and a new alliance was
formed with the dying State of Urartu.

Psamtik of Egypt had thrown off the yoke of Assyria, and with the
assistance of Carian mercenaries received from his ally, Gyges, king of
Lydia, extended his sway southward. He made peace with Ethiopia by
marrying a princess of its royal line. Gyges must have weakened his army
by thus assisting Psamtik, for he was severely defeated and slain by the
Cimmerians. His son, Ardys, appealed to Assyria for help. Ashur-bani-pal
dispatched an army to Cilicia. The joint operations of Assyria and Lydia
resulted in the extinction of the kingdom of the Cimmerians about 645
B.C.

The records of Ashur-bani-pal cease after 640 B.C., so that we are
unable to follow the events of his reign during its last fourteen years.
Apparently peace prevailed everywhere. The great monarch, who was a
pronounced adherent of the goddess cults, appears to have given himself
up to a life of indulgence and inactivity. Under the name Sardanapalus
he went down to tradition as a sensual Oriental monarch who lived in
great pomp and luxury, and perished in his burning palace when the Medes
revolted against him. It is evident, however, that the memory of more
than one monarch contributed to the Sardanapalus legend, for
Ashur-bani-pal had lain nearly twenty years in his grave before the
siege of Nineveh took place.

 

<span id="img_48600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![ASHUR-BANI-PAL
RECLINING IN A BOWER&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;Marble Slab from Kouyunjik
(Nineveh); now in British Museum&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; Photo.
Mansell](tn/48600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/48600.jpg.md)  
ASHUR-BANI-PAL RECLINING IN A BOWER  
*Marble Slab from Kouyunjik (Nineveh); now in British Museum*.  
Photo. Mansell  
</span>

 

<span id="page_487">p. 487</span>

In the Bible he is referred to as "the great and noble Asnapper", and he
appears to have been the emperor who settled the Babylonian, Elamite,
and other colonists "in the cities of Samaria". <span
id="fr_551"></span>[1](#fn_549.md)

He erected at Nineveh a magnificent palace, which was decorated on a
lavish scale. The sculptures are the finest productions of Assyrian art,
and embrace a wide variety of subjects--battle scenes, hunting scenes,
and elaborate Court and temple ceremonies. Realism is combined with a
delicacy of touch and a degree of originality which raises the artistic
productions of the period to the front rank among the artistic triumphs
of antiquity.

Ashur-bani-pal boasted of the thorough education which he had received
from the tutors of his illustrious father, Esarhaddon. In his palace he
kept a magnificent library. It contained thousands of clay tablets on
which were inscribed and translated the classics of Babylonia. To the
scholarly zeal of this cultured monarch is due the preservation of the
Babylonian story of creation, the Gilgamesh and Etana legends, and other
literary and religious products of remote antiquity. Most of the
literary tablets in the British Museum were taken from Ashur-bani-pal's
library.

There are no Assyrian records of the reigns of Ashur-bani-pal's two
sons, Ashur-etil-ilani--who erected a small palace and reconstructed the
temple to Nebo at Kalkhi--and Sin-shar-ishkun, who is supposed to have
perished in Nineveh. Apparently Ashur-etil-ilani reigned for at least
six years, and was succeeded by his brother.

A year after Ashur-bani-pal died, Nabopolassar, who was probably a
Chaldæan, was proclaimed king at Babylon. According to Babylonian legend
he was an Assyrian general

<span id="page_488">p. 488</span>

who had been sent southward with an army to oppose the advance of
invaders from the sea. Nabopolassar's sway at first was confined to
Babylon and Borsippa, but he strengthened himself by forming an
offensive and defensive alliance with the Median king, whose daughter he
had married to his son Nebuchadrezzar. He strengthened the
fortifications of Babylon, rebuilt the temple of Merodach, which had
been destroyed by Ashur-bani-pal, and waged war successfully against the
Assyrians and their allies in Mesopotamia.

About 606 B.C. Nineveh fell, and Sin-shar-ishkun may have burned himself
there in his palace, like his uncle, Shamash-shum-ukin of Babylon, and
the legendary Sardanapalus. It is not certain, however, whether the
Scythians or the Medes were the successful besiegers of the great
Assyrian capital. "Woe to the bloody city! it is all full of lies and
robbery", Nahum had cried. ". . . The gates of the rivers shall be
opened, and the palace shall be dissolved. . . . Take ye the spoil of
silver, take the spoil of gold. . . . Behold, I am against thee, saith
the Lord of hosts." <span id="fr_552"></span>[1](#fn_550.md)

According to Herodotus, an army of Medes under Cyaxares had defeated the
Assyrians and were besieging Nineveh when the Scythians overran Media.
Cyaxares raised the siege and went against them, but was defeated. Then
the Scythians swept across Assyria and Mesopotamia, and penetrated to
the Delta frontier of Egypt. Psamtik ransomed his kingdom with handsome
gifts. At length, however, Cyaxares had the Scythian leaders slain at a
banquet, and then besieged and captured Nineveh.

Assyria was completely overthrown. Those of its nobles and priests who
escaped the sword no doubt

<span id="page_489">p. 489</span>

escaped to Babylonia. Some may have found refuge also in Palestine and
Egypt.

Necho, the second Pharaoh of the Twenty-sixth Egyptian Dynasty, did not
hesitate to take advantage of Assyria's fall. In 609 B.C. he proceeded
to recover the long-lost Asiatic possessions of Egypt, and operated with
an army and fleet. Gaza and Askalon were captured. Josiah, the grandson
of Manasseh, was King of Judah. "In his days Pharaoh-nechoh king of
Egypt went up against the king of Assyria to the river Euphrates: and
king Josiah went against him; and he (Necho) slew him at Megiddo." <span
id="fr_553"></span>[1](#fn_551.md) His son, Jehoahaz, succeeded him, but
was deposed three months later by Necho, who placed another son of
Josiah, named Eliakim, on the throne, "and turned his name to
Jehoiakim". <span id="fr_554"></span>[2](#fn_552.md) The people were
heavily taxed to pay tribute to the Pharaoh.

When Necho pushed northward towards the Euphrates he was met by a
Babylonian army under command of Prince Nebuchadrezzar. <span
id="fr_555"></span>[3](#fn_553.md) The Egyptians were routed at Carchemish
in 60s B.C. (*Jeremiah*, xvi, 2).

In 604 B.C. Nabopolassar died, and the famous Nebuchadrezzar II ascended
the throne of Babylon. He lived to be one of its greatest kings, and
reigned for over forty years. It was he who built the city described by
Herodotus (pp. [219](mba16.htm#page_219) *et seq*..md), and constructed its
outer wall, which enclosed so large an area that no army could invest
it. Merodach's temple was decorated with greater magnificence than ever
before. The great palace and hanging gardens were erected by this mighty
monarch, who no doubt attracted to the city large numbers of the skilled
artisans who had fled from Nineveh. He also restored temples at other
cities, and made generous gifts to the

<span id="page_490">p. 490</span>

priests. Captives were drafted into Babylonia from various lands, and
employed cleaning out the canals and as farm labourers.

The trade and industries of Babylon flourished greatly, and
Nebuchadrezzar's soldiers took speedy vengeance on roving bands which
infested the caravan roads. "The king of Egypt", after his crushing
defeat at Carchemish, "came not again any more out of his land: for the
king of Babylon had taken from the river of Egypt unto the river
Euphrates all that pertained to the king of Egypt." <span
id="fr_556"></span>[1](#fn_554.md) Jehoiakim of Judah remained faithful to
Necho until he was made a prisoner by Nebuchadrezzar, who "bound him in
fetters to carry him to Babylon". <span id="fr_557"></span>[2](#fn_555.md)
He was afterwards sent back to Jerusalem. "And Jehoiakim became his
(Nebuchadrezzar's) servant three years: then he turned and rebelled
against him." <span id="fr_558"></span>[3](#fn_556.md)

Bands of Chaldæans, Syrians, Moabites, and Ammonites were harassing the
frontiers of Judah, and it seemed to the king as if the Babylonian power
had collapsed. Nebuchadrezzar hastened westward and scattered the
raiders before him. Jehoiakim died, and his son Jehoiachan, a youth of
eighteen years, succeeded him. Nebuchadrezzar laid siege to Jerusalem,
and the young king submitted to him and was carried off to Babylon, with
"all the princes, and all the mighty men of valour, even ten thousand
captives, and all the craftsmen and smiths: none remained save the
poorest sort of the people of the land". <span
id="fr_559"></span>[4](#fn_557.md) Nebuchadrezzar had need of warriors and
work-men.

Zedekiah was placed on the throne of Judah as an Assyrian vassal. He
remained faithful for a few years, but at length began to conspire with
Tyre and Sidon,

<span id="page_491">p. 491</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Moab, Edom, and
Ammon in favour of Egyptian suzerainty. Pharaoh Hophra (Apries), the
fourth king of the Twenty-sixth Dynasty, took active steps to assist the
conspirators, and "Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon". <span
id="fr_560"></span>[1](#fn_558.md)

Nebuchadrezzar led a strong army through Mesopotamia, and divided it at
Riblah, on the Orontes River. One part of it descended upon Judah and
captured Lachish and Azekah. Jerusalem was able to hold out for about
eighteen months. Then "the famine was sore in the city, so that there
was no bread for the people of the land. Then the city was broken up,
and all the men of war fled, and went forth out of the city by night by
way of the gate between the two walls, which was by the king's garden."
Zedekiah attempted to escape, but was captured and carried before
Nebuchadrezzar, who was at Riblah, in the land of Hamath.

<span class="small">And the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah
before his eyes. . . . Then he put out the eyes of Zedekiah; and the
king of Babylon bound him in chains and carried him to Babylon and put
him in prison till the day of his death. <span
id="fr_561"></span>[2](#fn_559.md)</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The majority of
the Jews were deported to Babylonia, where they were employed as farm
labourers. Some rose to occupy important official positions. A remnant
escaped to Egypt with Jeremiah.

Jerusalem was plundered and desolated. The Assyrians "burned the house
of the Lord and the king's house, and all the houses of Jerusalem", and
"brake down all the walls of Jerusalem round about". Jeremiah lamented:

<span class="small">How doth the city sit solitary, that was full of
people! how is she become as a widow! she that was great among the
nations, and</span>

<span id="page_492">p. 492</span>

princess among the provinces, how is she become tributary! She weepeth
sore in the night, and her tears are on her cheeks: among all her lovers
she hath none to comfort her: all her friends have dealt treacherously
with her, they are become her enemies.

Judah is gone into captivity because of affliction, and because of great
servitude: she dwelleth among the heathen, she findeth no rest: all her
persecutors overtook her between the straits. . . .

Jerusalem remembered in the days of her affliction and of her miseries
all her pleasant things that she had in the days of old. . . . <span
id="fr_562"></span>[1](#fn_560.md)

Tyre was besieged, but was not captured. Its king, however, arranged
terms of peace with Nebuchadrezzar.

Amel-Marduk, the "Evil Merodach" of the Bible, the next king of Babylon,
reigned for a little over two years. He released Jehoiachin from prison,
and allowed him to live in the royal palace. <span
id="fr_563"></span>[2](#fn_561.md) Berosus relates that Amel-Marduk lived a
dissipated life, and was slain by his brother-in-law, Nergal-shar-utsur,
who reigned two years (559-6 B.C.). Labashi-Marduk, son of
Nergal-shar-utsur, followed with a reign of nine months. He was deposed
by the priests. Then a Babylonian prince named Nabuna´id (Nabonidus) was
set on the throne. He was the last independent king of Babylonia. His
son Belshazzar appears to have acted as regent during the latter part of
the reign.

Nabonidus engaged himself actively during his reign (556-540 B.C.) in
restoring temples. He entirely reconstructed the house of Shamash, the
sun god, at Sippar, and, towards the end of his reign, the house of Sin,
the moon god, at Haran. The latter building had been destroyed by the
Medes.

The religious innovations of Nabonidus made him exceedingly unpopular
throughout Babylonia, for he carried away the gods of Ur, Erech, Larsa,
and Eridu,

<span id="page_493">p. 493</span>

and had them placed in E-sagila. Merodach and his priests were
displeased: the prestige of the great god was threatened by the policy
adopted by Nabonidus. As an inscription composed after the fall of
Babylon sets forth, Merodach "gazed over the surrounding lands . . .
looking for a righteous prince, one after his own heart, who should take
his hands. . . . He called by name Cyrus."

Cyrus was a petty king of the shrunken Elamite province of Anshan, which
had been conquered by the Persians. He claimed to be an Achæmenian--that
is a descendant of the semi-mythical Akhamanish (the Achæmenes of the
Greeks), a Persian patriarch who resembled the Aryo-Indian Manu and the
Germanic Mannus. Akhamanish was reputed to have been fed and protected
in childhood by an eagle--the sacred eagle which cast its shadow on born
rulers. Probably this eagle was remotely Totemic, and the Achæmenians
were descendants of an ancient eagle tribe. Gilgamesh was protected by
an eagle, as we have seen, as the Aryo-Indian Shakuntala was by vultures
and Semiramis by doves. The legends regarding the birth and boyhood of
Cyrus resemble those related regarding Sargon of Akkad and the Indian
Karna and Krishna.

Cyrus acknowledged as his overlord Astyages, king of the Medes. He
revolted against Astyages, whom he defeated and took prisoner.
Thereafter he was proclaimed King of the Medes and Persians, who were
kindred peoples of Indo-European speech. The father of Astyages was
Cyaxares, the ally of Nabopolassar of Babylon. When this powerful king
captured Nineveh he entered into possession of the northern part of the
Assyrian Empire, which extended westward into Asia Minor to the frontier
of the Lydian kingdom; he also possessed himself of Urartu

<span id="page_494">p. 494</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (Armenia). Lydia
had, after the collapse of the Cimmerian power, absorbed Phrygia, and
its ambitious king, Alyattes, waged war against the Medes. At length,
owing to the good offices of Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon and Syennesis of
Cilicia, the Medes and Lydians made peace in 585 B.C. Astyages then
married a daughter of the Lydian ruler.

When Cyrus overthrew Cyaxares, king of the Medes, Crœsus, king of Lydia,
formed an alliance against him with Amasis, king of Egypt, and
Nabonidus, king of Babylon. The latter was at first friendly to Cyrus,
who had attacked Cyaxares when he was advancing on Babylon to dispute
Nabonidus's claim to the throne, and perhaps to win it for a descendant
of Nebuchadrezzar, his father's ally. It was after the fall of the
Median Dynasty that Nabonidus undertook the restoration of the moon
god's temple at Haran.

Cyrus advanced westward against Crœsus of Lydia before that monarch
could receive assistance from the intriguing but pleasure-loving Amasis
of Egypt; he defeated and overthrew him, and seized his kingdom
(547--546 B.C.). Then, having established himself as supreme ruler in
Asia Minor, he began to operate against Babylonia. In 539 B.C.
Belshazzar was defeated near Opis. Sippar fell soon afterwards. Cyrus's
general, Gobryas, then advanced upon Babylon, where Belshazzar deemed
himself safe. One night, in the month of Tammuz--

<span class="small">Belshazzar the king made a great feast to a thousand
of his lords, and drank wine before the thousand. Belshazzar, whiles he
tasted the wine, commanded to bring the golden and silver vessels which
his father Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the temple which was in
Jerusalem; that the king, and his princes, his wives, and his
concubines, might drink therein. . . . They drank wine, and praised the
gods of gold, and of silver, of brass, of iron, of</span>

 

<span id="img_49400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PERSIANS BRINGING
CHARIOTS, RINGS, AND WREATHS&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;Bas-relief from
Persepolis: now in the British Museum&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; Photo.
Mansell](tn/49400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/49400.jpg.md)  
PERSIANS BRINGING CHARIOTS, RINGS, AND WREATHS  
*Bas-relief from Persepolis: now in the British Museum*.  
Photo. Mansell  
</span>

 

<span id="page_495">p. 495</span>

<span class="small">wood, and of stone. . . . In that night was
Belshazzar the king of the Chaldeans slain. <span
id="fr_564"></span>[1](#fn_562.md)</span>

On the 16th of Tammuz the investing army under Gobryas entered Babylon,
the gates having been opened by friends within the city. Some think that
the Jews favoured the cause of Cyrus. It is quite as possible, however,
that the priests of Merodach had a secret understanding with the great
Achæmenian, the "King of kings".

A few days afterwards Cyrus arrived at Babylon. Belshazzar had been
slain, but Nabonidus still lived, and he was deported to Carmania.
Perfect order prevailed throughout the city, which was firmly policed by
the Persian soldiers, and there was no looting. Cyrus was welcomed as a
deliverer by the priesthood. He "took the hands" of Bel Merodach at
E-sagila, and was proclaimed "King of the world, King of Babylon, King
of Sumer and Akkad, and King of the Four Quarters".

Cyrus appointed his son Cambyses as governor of Babylon. Although a
worshipper of Ahura-Mazda and Mithra, Cambyses appears to have
conciliated the priesthood. When he became king, and swept through
Egypt, he was remembered as the madman who in a fit of passion slew a
sacred Apis bull. It is possible, however, that he performed what he
considered to be a pious act: he may have sacrificed the bull to Mithra.

The Jews also welcomed Cyrus. They yearned for their native land.

<span class="small">By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea, we
wept, when we remembered Zion. We hanged our harps upon the willows in
the midst thereof. For there they that carried us away captive required
of us a song; and they that wasted us required of us mirth, saying, Sing
us one of the songs of Zion. How shall we sing the Lord's song in a
strange land? If I forget thee, O</span>

<span id="page_496">p. 496</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jerusalem, let my
right hand forget her cunning. If I do not remember thee, let my tongue
cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief
joy. <span id="fr_565"></span>[1](#fn_563.md)

Cyrus heard with compassion the cry of the captives.

<span class="small">Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that
the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled, the
Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a
proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing,
saying, Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, The Lord God of heaven hath
given me all kingdoms of the earth; and he hath charged me to build him
an house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Who is there among you of all
his people? his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, which
is in Judah, and build the house of the Lord God of Israel (he is the
God) which is in Jerusalem. <span id="fr_566"></span>[2](#fn_564.md)</span>

In 538 B.C. the first party of Jews who were set free saw through tears
the hills of home, and hastened their steps to reach Mount Zion. Fifty
years later Ezra led back another party of the faithful. The work of
restoring Jerusalem was undertaken by Nehemiah in 445 B.C.

The trade of Babylon flourished under the Persians, and the influence of
its culture spread far and wide. Persian religion was infused with new
doctrines, and their deities were given stellar attributes. Ahura-Mazda
became identified with Bel Merodach, as, perhaps, he had previously been
with Ashur, and the goddess Anahita absorbed the attributes of Nina,
Ishtar, Zerpanitu<sup>m</sup>, and other Babylonian "mother deities".

Another "Semiramis" came into prominence. This was the wife and sister
of Cambyses. After Cambyses died she married Darius I, who, like Cyrus,
claimed to be an Achæmenian. He had to overthrow a pretender, but
submitted to the demands of the orthodox Persian

<span id="page_497">p. 497</span>

party to purify the Ahura-Mazda religion of its Babylonian innovations.
Frequent revolts in Babylon had afterwards to be suppressed. The
Merodach priesthood apparently suffered loss of prestige at Court.
According to Herodotus, Darius plotted to carry away from E-sagila a
great statue of Bel "twelve cubits high and entirely of solid gold". He,
however, was afraid "to lay his hands upon it". Xerxes, son of Darius
(485-465 B.C.), punished Babylon for revolting, when intelligence
reached them of his disasters in Greece, by pillaging and partly
destroying the temple. "He killed the priest who forbade him to move the
statue, and took it away." <span id="fr_567"></span>[1](#fn_565.md) The
city lost its vassal king, and was put under the control of a governor.
It, however, regained some of its ancient glory after the burning of
Susa palace, for the later Persian monarchs resided in it. Darius II
died at Babylon, and Artaxerxes II promoted in the city the worship of
Anaitis.

When Darius III, the last Persian emperor, was overthrown by Alexander
the Great in 331 B.C., Babylon welcomed the Macedonian conqueror as it
had welcomed Cyrus. Alexander was impressed by the wisdom and
accomplishments of the astrologers and priests, who had become known as
"Chaldæans", and added Bel Merodach to his extraordinary pantheon, which
already included Amon of Egypt, Melkarth, and Jehovah. Impressed by the
antiquity and magnificence of Babylon, he resolved to make it the
capital of his world-wide empire, and there he received ambassadors from
countries as far east as India and as far west as Gaul.

The canals of Babylonia were surveyed, and building operations on a vast
scale planned out. No fewer than ten thousand men were engaged working
for two months reconstructing and decorating the temple of Merodach,

<span id="page_498">p. 498</span>

which towered to a height of 607 feet. It looked as if Babylon were
about to rise to a position of splendour unequalled in its history, when
Alexander fell sick, after attending a banquet, and died on an evening
of golden splendour sometime in June of 323 B.C.

One can imagine the feelings of the Babylonian priests and astrologers
as they spent the last few nights of the emperor's life reading "the
omens of the air"--taking note of wind and shadow, moon and stars and
planets, seeking for a sign, but unable to discover one favourable.
Their hopes of Babylonian glory were suspended in the balance, and they
perished completely when the young emperor passed away in the
thirty-third year of his life. For four days and four nights the
citizens mourned in silence for Alexander and for Babylon.

The ancient city fell into decay under the empire of the Seleucidæ.
Seleucus I had been governor of Babylon, and after the break-up of
Alexander's empire he returned to the ancient metropolis as a conqueror.
"None of the persons who succeeded Alexander", Strabo wrote, "attended
to the undertaking at Babylon"--the reconstruction of Merodach's temple.
"Other works were neglected, and the city was dilapidated partly by the
Persians and partly by time and through the indifference of the Greeks,
particularly after Seleucus Nicator fortified Seleukeia on the
Tigris." <span id="fr_568"></span>[1](#fn_566.md)

Seleucus drafted to the city which bore his name the great bulk of the
inhabitants of Babylon. The remnant which was left behind continued to
worship Merodach and other gods after the walls had crumbled and the
great temple began to tumble down. Babylon died slowly, but at length
the words of the Hebrew prophet were fulfilled:

<span id="page_499">p. 499</span>

<span class="small">The cormorant and the bittern shall possess it; the
owl also and the raven shall dwell in it. . . . They shall call the
nobles thereof to the kingdom, but none shall be there, and all her
princes shall be nothing. And thorns shall come up in her palaces,
nettles and brambles in the fortresses thereof: and it shall be an
habitation of dragons, and a court for owls. The wild beasts of the
desert shall also meet with the wild beasts of the island, and the satyr
shall cry to his fellow: the screech owl also shall rest there, and find
for herself a place of rest. <span
id="fr_569"></span>[1](#fn_567.md)</span>

 

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_543"></span>[478:1](mba26.htm#fr_545.md) *Nahum*, i, ii, and
iii.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[478:2](mba26.htm#fr_546.md) *Isaiah*, xivi, 1;
xlvii, 1-15.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[478:3](mba26.htm#fr_547.md) *Nahum*, iii, 2, 3;
ii, 3.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[479:1](mba26.htm#fr_548.md) Goodspeed's *A
History of the Babylonians and Assyrians*, p. 348.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[483:1](mba26.htm#fr_549.md) *Nahum*, iii, 8-11.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[485:1](mba26.htm#fr_550.md) Ptolemy's
Kineladanus.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[487:1](mba26.htm#fr_551.md) *Ezra*, iv, 10.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[488:1](mba26.htm#fr_552.md) *Nahum*, iii and ii.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[489:1](mba26.htm#fr_553.md) *2 Kings*, xxiii, 29.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[489:2](mba26.htm#fr_554.md) *Ibid*., 33-5.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[489:3](mba26.htm#fr_555.md) Nebuchadrezzar is
more correct than Nebuchadnezzar.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[490:1](mba26.htm#fr_556.md) *2 Kings*, xxiv, 7.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[490:2](mba26.htm#fr_557.md) *2 Chronicles*,
xxxvi, 6.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[490:3](mba26.htm#fr_558.md) *2 Kings*, xxiv, 1.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[490:4](mba26.htm#fr_559.md) *2 Kings*, xxiv,
8-15.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[491:1](mba26.htm#fr_560.md) *Jeremiah*, lii, 3.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[491:2](mba26.htm#fr_561.md) *Jeremiah*, lii,
4-11.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[492:1](mba26.htm#fr_562.md) *The Lamentations of
Jeremiah*, i, 1-7.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[492:2](mba26.htm#fr_563.md) *Jeremiah*, lii,
31-4.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[495:1](mba26.htm#fr_564.md) *Daniel*, v, 1 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[496:1](mba26.htm#fr_565.md) *Psalms*, cxxxvii,
1-6.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[496:2](mba26.htm#fr_566.md) *Ezra*, i, 1-3.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[497:1](mba26.htm#fr_567.md) *Herodotus*, i, 183;
*Strabo*, xvi, 1, 5; and *Arrian*, vii, 17.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[498:1](mba26.htm#fr_568.md) *Strabo*, xvi, 1-5.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[499:1](mba26.htm#fr_569.md) *Isaiah*, xxxiv,
11-4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A-C](mba27.md)
