<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Lang Fairy Books](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](olfb01)  [Next](olfb03) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Olive Fairy Book*, by Andrew Lang, \[1907\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f00"></span>

PREFACE

Many years ago my friend and publisher, Mr. Charles Longman, presented
me with *Le Cabinet des Fées* ('The Fairy Cabinet'). This work almost
requires a swinging bookcase for its accommodation, like the
*Encyclopædia Britannica*, and in a revolving bookcase I bestowed the
volumes. Circumstances of an intimately domestic character, 'not wholly
unconnected,' as Mr. Micawber might have said, with the narrowness of my
study (in which it is impossible to 'swing a cat'), prevent the
revolving bookcase from revolving at this moment. I can see, however,
that the Fairy Cabinet contains at least forty volumes, and I think
there are about sixty in all. This great plenitude of fairy tales from
all quarters presents legends of fairies, witches, genii or Djinn,
monsters, dragons, wicked step-mothers, princesses, pretty or plain,
princes lucky or unlucky, giants, dwarfs, and enchantments. The stories
begin with those which children like best—the old *Blue Beard*, *Puss in
Boots*, *Hop o' my Thumb*, *Little Red Riding Hood*, *The Sleeping
Beauty*, and *Toads and Pearls*. These were first collected, written,
and printed at Paris in 1697. The author was Monsieur Charles Perrault,
a famous personage in a great *perruque*, who in his day wrote large
volumes now unread. He never dreamed that he was to be remembered mainly
by the shabby little volume with the tiny headpiece pictures—how unlike
the fairy way of drawing by Mr. Ford, said to be known as 'Over-the-wall
Ford' among authors who play cricket, because of the force with which he
swipes! Perrault picked up the rustic tales which the nurse of his
little boy used to tell, and he told them again in his own courtly,
witty way. They do not seem to have been translated into English until
nearly thirty years later, when they were published in English, with the
French on the opposite page, by a Mr. Pote, a bookseller at Eton.
Probably the younger Eton boys learned as much French as they
condescended to acquire from these fairy tales, which are certainly more
amusing than the *Télémaque* of Messire François de Salignac de la
Motte-Fénelon, tutor of the children of France, Archbishop Duke of
Cambrai, and Prince of the Holy Roman Empire.

The success of Perrault was based on the pleasure which the court of
Louis XIV. took in fairy tales; we know that they were told among Court
ladies, from a letter of Madame de Sévigné. Naturally, Perrault had
imitators, such as Madame d'Aulnoy, a wandering lady of more wit than
reputation. To her we owe *Beauty and the Beast* and *The Yellow Dwarf*.
Anthony Hamilton tried his hand with *The Ram*, a story too prolix and
confused, best remembered for the remark, 'Ram, my friend, begin at the
beginning!' Indeed, the narrative style of the Ram is lacking in
lucidity! Then came *The Arabian Nights*, translated by Monsieur
Galland. Nobody has translated *The Arabian Nights* so well as Galland.
His is the reverse of a scientific rendering, but it is as pleasantly
readable as the *Iliad* and *Odyssey* would be if Alexandre Dumas had
kept his promise to translate Homer. Galland omitted the verses and a
great number of passages which nobody would miss, though the
anthropologist is supposed to find them valuable and instructive in
later scientific translations which do not amuse. Later, Persian Tales,
Tales of the Sea, and original inventions, more or less on the fairy
model, were composed by industrious men and women. They are far too
long—are novels, indeed, and would please no child or mature person of
taste. All these were collected in the vast Fairy Cabinet, published in
1786, just before the Revolution. Probably their attempt to be simple
charmed a society which was extremely artificial, talked about 'the
simple life' and the 'state of nature,' and was on the eve of a
revolution in which human nature revealed her most primitive traits in
orgies of blood.

That was the end of the Court and of the Court Fairy Tales, and just
when they were demolished, learned men like the Grimms and Sir Walter
Scott began to take an interest in the popular tales of peasants and
savages all the world over. All the world over the tales were found to
be essentially the same things. *Cinderella* is everywhere; a whole book
has been written on *Cinderella* by Miss Cox, and a very good book it
is, but not interesting to children. For them the best of the
collections of foreign fairy tales are the German stories by the Grimms,
the *Tales from the Norse*, by Sir G. W. Dasent, (which some foolish
'grown-ups' denounced as 'improper'), and Miss Frere's Indian stories.
There are hundreds of collections of savage and peasant fairy tales,
but, though many of these are most interesting, especially Bishop
Callaway's Zulu stories (with the Zulu versions), these do not come in
the way of parents and uncles, and therefore do not come in the way of
children. It is my wish that children should be allowed to choose their
own books. Let their friends give them the money and turn them loose in
the book shops! They know their own tastes, and if the children are born
bookish, while their dear parents are the reverse, (and this does
occur!), then the children make the better choice. They are unaffected
in their selections; some want Shakespeares of their own, and some
prefer a volume entitled *Buster Brown*. A few—alas, how few!—are fond
of poetry; a still smaller number are fond of history. 'We know that
there are no fairies, but history stories are *true*!' say these little
innocents. I am not so sure that there are no fairies, and I am only too
well aware that the best 'history stories' are not true.

What children do love is ghost stories. 'Tell us a ghost story!' they
cry, and I am able to meet the demand, with which I am in sincere
sympathy. Only strong control prevents me from telling the last true
ghost story which I heard yesterday. It would suit children excellently
well. 'The Grey Ghost Story Book' would be a favourite. At a very early
age I read a number of advertisements of books, and wept because I could
not buy dozens of them, and somebody gave me a book on Botany! It looked
all right, nicely bound in green cloth, but within it was full of all
manner of tediousness.

In our Fairy Cabinet, which cannot extend to sixty volumes, we have
aimed at pleasing children, not 'grown-ups,' at whom the old French
writers directed their romances, but have hunted for fairy tales in all
quarters, not in Europe alone. In this volume we open, thanks to Dr.
Ignaz Künos, with a story from the Turks. 'Little King Loc' is an
original invention by M. Anatole France, which he very kindly permitted
Mrs. Lang to adapt from *L'Abeille*.

Major Campbell, as previously, tells tales which he collected among the
natives of India. But the sources are usually named at the end of each
story, and when they are not named children will not miss them. Mrs.
Lang, except in cases mentioned, has translated and adapted to the
conditions of young readers the bulk of the collection, and Mrs.
Skovgaard-Pedersen has done 'The Green Knight' from the Danish. I must
especially thank Monsieur Macler for permitting us to use some of his
*Contes Arméniens* (Paris: Ernest Leroux, Editeur).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Madschun](olfb03)

</div>
