[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](egl06)  [Next](egl08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428056998/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*English Gipsies and Their Language*, by Charles G. Leland, \[1874\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER VI. GIPSY WORDS WHICH HAVE PASSED INTO ENGLISH SLANG.

Jockey.—Tool.—Cove or Covey.—Hook, Hookey, and Walker, Hocus,
Hanky-Panky, and Hocus-Pocus.—Shindy.—Row.—Chivvy.—Bunged
Eye.—Shavers.—Clichy.—Caliban.—A Rum
’un.—Pal.—Trash.—Cadger.—Cad.—Bosh.—Bats.—Chee-chee.—The Cheese.—Chiv
Fencer.—Cooter.—Gorger.—Dick.—Dook.—Tanner.—Drum.—Gibberish.—Ken.—Lil.—Loure.—Loafer.—Maunder.—Moke.—Parny.—Posh.—Queer.
Raclan.—Bivvy.—Rigs.—Moll.—Distarabin.—Tiny.—Toffer.—Tool.—Punch.—Wardo.—Voker
(one of Mr Hotten’s Gipsy words).—Welcher.—Yack.—Lushy.—A
Mull.—Pross.—Toshers.—Up to Trap.—Barney.—Beebee.—Cull,
Culley.—Jomer.—Bloke.—Duffer.—Niggling.—Mug.—Bamboozle, Slang, and
Bite.—Rules to be observed in determining the Etymology of Gipsy Words.

Though the language of the Gipsies has been kept a great secret for
centuries, still a few words have in England oozed out here and there
from some unguarded crevice, and become a portion of our tongue. There
is, it must be admitted, a great difficulty in tracing, with anything
like accuracy, the real origin or identity of such expressions. Some of
them came into English centuries ago, and during that time great changes
have taken place in Rommany. At least one-third of the words now used by
Scottish Gipsies are unintelligible to their English brothers. To
satisfy myself on this point, I have examined an intelligent English
Gipsy on the Scottish Gipsy vocabularies in Mr Simpson’s work, and found
it was as I anticipated; a statement which will not appear incredible
when it is remembered, that even the Rommany of Yetholm have a dialect
marked and distinct from that of other Scotch Gipsies. As for England,
numbers of the words collected by William Marsden, and Jacob Bryant, in
1784-5, Dr Bright in 1817, and by Harriott in 1830, are not known at the
present day to any Gipsies whom I have met. Again, it should be
remembered that the pronunciation of Rommany differs widely with
individuals; thus the word which is given as *cumbo*, a hill, by Bryant,
I have heard very distinctly pronounced *choomure*.

I believe that to Mr Borrow is due the discovery that the word JOCKEY is
of Gipsy origin, and derived from *chuckni*, which means a whip. For
nothing is more clearly established than that the jockey-whip was the
original term in which this word first made its appearance on the turf,
and that the *chuckni* was a peculiar form of whip, very long and heavy,
first used by the Gipsies. “Jockeyism,” says Mr Borrow, “properly means
*the management of a whip*, and the word jockey is neither more nor less
than the term, slightly modified, by which they designate the formidable
whips which they usually carry, and which are at present in general use
among horse-traffickers, under the title of jockey-whips.” In Hungary
and Germany the word occurs as *tschuckini* or *chookni*, and
*tschupni*.

Many of my readers are doubtless familiar with the word to TOOL as
applied to dexterously managing the reins and driving horses. ‘To tool
the horses down the road,’ is indeed rather a fine word of its class,
being as much used in certain clubs as in stables, and often denotes
stylish and gentlemanly driving. And the term is without the slightest
modification, either of pronunciation or meaning, directly and simply
Gipsy, and is used by Gipsies in the same way. It has, however, in
Rommany, as a primitive meaning—to hold, or to take. Thus I have heard
of a feeble old fellow that “he could not tool himself togetherus”—for
which last word, by the way, *kettenus* might have been more correctly
substituted.

COVE is not an elegant, though a very old, word, but it is well known,
and I have no doubt as to its having come from the Gipsy. In Rommany,
all the world over, *cova* means “a thing,” but it is almost indefinite
in its applicability. “It is,” says Pott, “a general helper on all
occasions; is used as substantive and adjective, and has a far wider
scope than the Latin *res*.” Thus *covo* may mean “that man;” *covi*,
“that woman;” and *covo* or *cuvvo*, as it very often does in English,
“that, there.” It sometimes appears in the word *acovat*, or *this*.
There is no expression more frequent in a Gipsy’s mouth, and it is
precisely the one which would be probably overheard by “Gorgios” and
applied to persons. I believe that it first made its appearance in
English slang as *covey*, and was then pronounced *cúvvy*, being
subsequently abbreviated into cove.

Quite a little family of words has come into English from the Rommany,
*Hocben*, *huckaben*, *hokkeny*, or *hooker*, all meaning a lie, or to
lie, deception and *humbug*. Mr Borrow shows us that *hocus*, to
“bewitch” liquor with an opiate, and *hoax*, are probably Rommany from
this root, and I have no doubt that the expression, “Yes, with a
*hook*,” meaning “it is false,” comes from the same. The well-known
“Hookey” who corresponds so closely with his untruthful and disreputable
pal “Walker,” is decidedly of the streets—gipsy. In German Gipsy we find
*chochavav* and *hochewawa*, and in Roumanian Gipsy *kokao*—a lie.
Hanky-panky and Hocus-pocus are each one half almost pure Hindustani.
 [81](egl13.htm#xref_81)

A SHINDY approaches so nearly in sound to the Gipsy word *chingaree*,
which means precisely the same thing, that the suggestion is at least
worth consideration. And it also greatly resembles *chindi*, which may
be translated as “cutting up,” and also quarrel. “To cut up shindies”
was the first form in which this extraordinary word reached the public.
In the original Gipsy tongue the word to quarrel is *chinger-av*,
meaning also (Pott, *Zigeuner*, p. 209) to cut, hew, and fight, while to
cut is *chinav*. “Cutting up” is, if the reader reflects, a very
unmeaning word as applied to outrageous or noisy pranks; but in Gipsy,
whether English, German, or Oriental, it is perfectly sensible and
logical, involving the idea of quarrelling, separating, dividing,
cutting, and stabbing. What, indeed, could be more absurd than the
expression “cutting up shines,” unless we attribute to *shine* its
legitimate Gipsy meaning of *a piece cut off*, and its cognate meaning,
a noise?

I can see but little reason for saying that a man *cut away* or that he
*shinned* it, for run away, unless we have recourse to Gipsy, though I
only offer this as a mere suggestion.

“Applico” to shindy we have the word ROW, meaning nearly the same thing
and as nearly Gipsy in every respect as can be. It is in Gipsy at the
present day in England, correctly, *rov*, or *roven*—to cry—but *v* and
*w* are so frequently transposed that we may consider them as the same
letter. *Rāw* or *me rauaw*, “I howl” or “cry,” is German Gipsy. *Rowan*
is given by Pott as equivalent to the Latin *ululatus*, which
constituted a very respectable *row* as regards mere noise. “Rowdy”
comes from “row” and both are very good Gipsy in their origin. In
Hindustani *Rao mut* is “don’t cry!”

CHIVVY is a common English vulgar word, meaning to goad, drive, vex,
hunt, or throw as it were here and there. It is purely Gipsy, and seems
to have more than one root. *Chiv*, *chib*, or *chipe*, in Rommany, mean
a tongue, inferring scolding, and *chiv* anything sharp-pointed, as for
instance a dagger, or goad or knife. But the old Gipsy word *chiv-av*
among its numerous meanings has exactly that of casting, throwing,
pitching, and driving. To *chiv* in English Gipsy means as much and more
than to *fix* in America, in fact, it is applied to almost any kind of
action.

It may be remarked in this connection, that in German or continental
Gipsy, which represents the English in a great measure as it once was,
and which is far more perfect as to grammar, we find different words,
which in English have become blended into one. Thus, *chib* or *chiv*, a
tongue, and *tschiwawa* (or *chiv*-ava), to lay, place, lean, sow, sink,
set upright, move, harness, cover up, are united in England into *chiv*,
which embraces the whole. “*Chiv it āpré*” may be applied to throwing
anything, to covering it up, to lifting it, to setting it, to pushing
it, to circulating, and in fact to a very great number of similar verbs.

There is, I think, no rational connection between the BUNG of a barrel
and an eye which has been closed by a blow. One might as well get the
simile from a knot in a tree or a cork in a flask. But when we reflect
on the constant mingling of Gipsies with prizefighters, it is almost
evident that the word BONGO may have been the origin of it. A *bongo
yakko* or *yak*, means a distorted, crooked, or, in fact, a bunged eye.
It also means lame, crooked, or sinister, and by a very singular figure
of speech, *Bongo Tem* or the Crooked Land is the name for hell.
 [83](egl13.htm#xref_83)

SHAVERS, as a quaint nick-name for children, is possibly inexplicable,
unless we resort to Gipsy, where we find it used as directly as
possible. *Chavo* is the Rommany word for child all the world over, and
the English term *chavies*, in Scottish Gipsy *shavies*, or shavers,
leaves us but little room for doubt. I am not aware to what extent the
term “little shavers” is applied to children in England, but in America
it is as common as any cant word can be.

I do not know the origin of the French word CLICHY, as applied to the
noted prison of that name, but it is perhaps not undeserving the comment
that in Continental Gipsy it means a key and a bolt.

I have been struck with the fact that CALIBAN, the monster in “The
Tempest,” by Shakespeare, has an appellation which literally signifies
blackness in Gipsy. In fact, this very word, or Cauliban, is given in
one of the Gipsy vocabularies for “black.” Kaulopen or Kauloben would,
however, be more correct.

“A regular RUM ’un” was the form in which the application of the word
“rum” to strange, difficult, or distinguished, was first introduced to
the British public. This, I honestly believe (as Mr Borrow indicates),
came from *Rum* or *Rom*, a Gipsy. It is a peculiar word, and all of its
peculiarities might well be assumed by the sporting Gipsy, who is
always, in his way, a character, gifted with an indescribable
self-confidence, as are all “horsey” men characters, “sports” and
boxers, which enables them to keep to perfection the German eleventh
commandment, “Thou shall not let thyself be *bluffed*!”—*i.e*., abashed.

PAL is a common cant word for brother or friend, and it is purely Gipsy,
having come directly from that language, without the slightest change.
On the Continent it is *prala*, or *pral*. In England it sometimes takes
the form “*pel*.”

TRASH is derived by Mr Wedgwood (Dictionary of English Etymology, 1872)
from the old word *trousse*, signifying the clipping of trees. But in
old Gipsy or in the German Gipsy of the present day, as in the Turkish
Rommany, it means so directly “fear, mental weakness and worthlessness,”
that it may possibly have had a Rommany origin. Terror in Gipsy is
*trash*, while thirst is *trush*, and both are to be found in the
Hindustani. *Tras*, which means *thirst* and *alarm* or *terror*.

It should be observed that in no instance can these Gipsy words have
been borrowed from English slang. They are all to be found in German
Gipsy, which is in its turn identical with the Rommany language of
India—of the Nāts, Bhazeghurs, Doms, Multanee or Banjoree, as I find the
primitive wandering Gipsies termed by different writers.

I am aware that the word CAD was applied to the conductor of an omnibus,
or to a non-student at Universities, before it became a synonym for
vulgar fellow, yet I believe that it was abbreviated from cadger, and
that this is simply the Gipsy word Gorgio, which often means a man in
the abstract. I have seen this word printed as gorger in English slang.
CODGER, which is common, is applied, as Gipsies use the term Gorgio,
contemptuously, and it sounds still more like it.

BOSH, signifying nothing, or in fact empty humbug, is generally credited
to the Turkish language, but I can see no reason for going to the Turks
for what the Gipsies at home already had, in all probability, from the
same Persian source, or else from the Sanskrit. With the Gipsies, *bosh*
is a fiddle, music, noise, barking, and very often an idle sound or
nonsense. “Stop your bosherin,” or “your bosh,” is what they would term
*flickin lav*, or current phrase.

“BATS,” a low term for a pair of boots, especially bad ones, is, I
think, from the Gipsy and Hindustani *pat*, a foot, generally called,
however, by the Rommany in England, Tom Pats. “To pad the hoof,” and “to
stand pad “—the latter phrase meaning to stand upright, or to stand and
beg, are probably derived from *pat*. It should be borne in mind that
Gipsies, in all countries, are in the habit of changing certain letters,
so that *p* and *b*, like *l* and *n*, or *k* and *g* hard, may often be
regarded as identical.

“CHEE-CHEE,” “be silent!” or “fie,” is termed “Anglo-Indian,” by the
author of the Slang Dictionary, but we need not go to India of the
present day for a term which is familiar to every Gipsy and “traveller”
in England, and which, as Mr Simson discovered long ago, is an excellent
“spell” to discourage the advances of thimble-riggers and similar
gentry, at fairs, or in public places.

CHEESE, or “THE CHEESE,” meaning that anything is pre-eminent or
superior; in fact, “the thing,” is supposed by many to be of gipsy
origin because Gipsies use it, and it is to be found as “chiz” in
Hindustani, in which language it means a thing. Gipsies do not, however,
seem to regard it themselves, as *tacho* or true Rommanis, despite this
testimony, and I am inclined to think that it partly originated in some
wag’s perversion of the French word *chose*.

In London, a man who sells cutlery in the streets is called a CHIVE
FENCER, a term evidently derived from the Gipsy *chiv*, a sharp-pointed
instrument or knife. A knife is also called a *chiv* by the lowest class
all over England.

COUTER or COOTER is a common English slang term for a guinea. It was not
necessary for the author of the Slang Dictionary to go to the banks of
the Danube for the origin of a word which is in the mouths of all
English Gipsies, and which was brought to England by their ancestors. A
sovereign, a pound, in Gipsy, is a *bar*.

A GORGER, meaning a gentleman, or well-dressed man, and in theatrical
parlance, a manager, is derived by the author of the Slang
Dictionary—absurdly enough, it must be confessed—from “gorgeous,”—a word
with which it has no more in common than with gouges or chisels. A
gorger or gorgio—the two are often confounded—is the common Gipsy word
for one who is not Gipsy, and very often means with them a *rye* or
gentleman, and indeed any man whatever. Actors sometimes call a
fellow-performer a *cully-gorger*.

DICK, an English slang word for sight, or seeing, is purely Gipsy in its
origin, and in common use by Rommanis over all the world.

DOOK, to tell fortunes, and DOOKING, fortune-telling, are derived by the
writer last cited, correctly enough, from the Gipsy *dukkerin*,—a fact
which I specify, since it is one of the very rare instances in which he
has not blundered when commenting on Rommany words, or other persons’
works.

Mr Borrow has told us that a TANNER or sixpence, sometimes called a
Downer, owes its pseudonym to the Gipsy word *tawno* or *tano*, meaning
“little”—the sixpence being the little coin as compared with a shilling.

DRUM or DROM, is the common English Gipsy word for a road. In English
slang it is applied, not only to highways, but also to houses.

If the word GIBBERISH was, as has been asserted, first applied to the
language of the Gipsies, it may have been derived either from “Gip,” the
nickname for Gipsy, with *ish* or *rish* appended as in Engl-*ish*,
I-*rish*, or from the Rommany word *Jib* signifying a language.

KEN, a low term for a house, is possibly of Gipsy origin. The common
word in every Rommany dialect for a house is, however, neither ken nor
khan, but *Ker*.

LIL, a book, a letter, has passed from the Gipsies to the low “Gorgios,”
though it is not a very common word. In Rommany it can be *correctly*
applied only to a letter or a piece of paper, which is written on,
though English Gipsies call all books by this name, and often speak of a
letter as a *Chinamāngri*.

LOUR or LOWR, and LOAVER, are all vulgar terms for money, and combine
two Gipsy words, the one *lovo* or *lovey*, and the other *loure*, to
steal. The reason for the combination or confusion is obvious. The
author of the Slang Dictionary, in order to explain this word, goes as
usual to the Wallachian Gipsies, for what he might have learned from the
first tinker in the streets of London. I should remark on the word
loure, that Mr Borrow has shown its original identity with *loot*, the
Hindustani for plunder or booty.

I believe that the American word loafer owes something to this Gipsy
root, as well as to the German *laufer* (*landlaufer*), and Mexican
Spanish *galeofar*, and for this reason, that when the term first began
to be popular in 1834 or 1835, I can distinctly remember that it meant
to *pilfer*. Such, at least, is my earliest recollection, and of hearing
school boys ask one another in jest, of their acquisitions or gifts,
“Where did you loaf that from?” A petty pilferer was a loafer, but in a
very short time all of the tribe of loungers in the sun, and
disreputable pickers up of unconsidered trifles, now known as bummers,
were called loafers. On this point my memory is positive, and I call
attention to it, since the word in question has been the subject of much
conjecture in America.

It is a very curious fact, that while the word *loot* is unquestionably
Anglo-Indian, and only a recent importation into our English
“slanguage,” it has always been at the same time English-Gipsy, although
it never rose to the surface.

MAUNDER, to stroll about and beg, has been derived from *Mand*, the
Anglo-Saxon for a basket, but is quite as likely to have come from
Maunder, the Gipsy for “to beg.” Mumper, a beggar, is also from the same
source.

MOKE, a donkey, is *said* to be Gipsy, by Mr Hotten, but Gipsies
themselves do not use the word, nor does it belong to their usual
language. The proper Rommany word for an ass is *myla*.

PARNY, a vulgar word for rain, is supposed to have come into England
from the “Anglo-Indian” source, but it is more likely that it was
derived from the Gipsy *panni* or water. “Brandy pawnee” is undoubtedly
an Anglo-Indian word, but it is used by a very different class of people
from those who know the meaning of *Parny*.

POSH, which has found its way into vulgar popularity, as a term for
small coins, and sometimes for money in general, is the diminutive of
the Gipsy word *pāshero* or *poshero*, a half-penny, from *pāsh* a half,
and *haura* or *hārra*, a penny.

QUEER, meaning across, cross, contradictory, or bad, is “supposed” to be
the German word *quer*, introduced by the Gipsies. In their own language
*atut* means across or against, though to *curry* (German and Turkish
Gipsy *kurava*), has some of the slang meaning attributed to *queer*. An
English rogue will say, “to shove the queer,” meaning to pass
counterfeit money, while the Gipsy term would be to *chiv wafri lovvo*,
or *lovey*.

“RAGLAN, a married woman, originally *Gipsy*, but now a term with
English tramps” (*The Slang Dictionary*, *London* 1865). In Gipsy,
*raklo* is a youth or boy, and *rakli*, a girl; Arabic, *ragol*, a man.
I am informed, on good authority, that these words are known in India,
though I cannot find them in dictionaries. They are possibly transposed
from *Lurka* a youth and *lurki* a girl, such transpositions being
common among the lowest classes in India.

RUMMY or RUMY, as applied to women, is simply the Gipsy word *romi*, a
contraction of *romni*, a wife; the husband being her *rom*.

BIVVY for beer, has been derived from the Italian *bevere*, but it is
probably Gipsy, since in the old form of the latter language, Biava or
Piava, means to drink. To *pivit*, is still known among English Gipsies.

RIGS—running one’s rigs is said to be Gipsy, but the only meaning of
*rig*, so far as I am able to ascertain in Rommany, is *a side* or *an
edge*. It is, however, possible that one’s *side* may in earlier times
have been equivalent to “face, or encounter.” To *rikker* or *rigger* in
Gipsy, is to carry anything.

MOLL, a female companion, is probably merely the nickname for Mary, but
it is worth observing, that *Mal* in old Gipsy, or in German Gipsy,
means an associate, and Mahar a wife, in Hindustani.

STASH, to be quiet, to stop, is, I think, a variation of the common
Gipsy word hatch, which means precisely the same thing, and is derived
from the older word *atchava*.

STURABAN, a prison, is purely Gipsy. Mr Hotten says it is from the Gipsy
*distarabin*, but there is no such word beginning with *dis*, in the
English Rommany dialect. In German Gipsy a prison is called
*stillapenn*.

TINY or TEENY has been derived from the Gipsy *tāno*, meaning “little.”

TOFFER, a woman who is well dressed in new clean clothes, probably gets
the name from the Gipsy *tove*, to wash (German Gipsy *Tovava*). She is,
so to speak, freshly washed. To this class belong Toff, a dandy;
*Tofficky*, dressy or gay, and *Toft*, a dandy or swell.

TOOL as applied to stealing, picking pockets, and burglary, is, like
*tool*, to drive with the reins; derived beyond doubt from the Gipsy
word *tool*, to take or hold. In all the Continental Rommany dialects it
is *Tulliwawa*.

PUNCH, it is generally thought, is Anglo-Indian, derived directly from
the Hindustani *Pantch* or five, from the five ingredients which enter
into its composition, but it may have partially got its name from some
sporting Gipsy in whose language the word for *five* is the same as in
Sanskrit. There have been thousands of “swell” Rommany chals who have
moved in sporting circles of a higher class than they are to be found in
at the present day.

“VARDO formerly was *Old Cant* for a waggon” (*The Slang Dictionary*).
It may be added that it is pure Gipsy, and is still known at the present
day to every Rom in England. In Turkish Gipsy, *Vordon* means a vehicle,
in German Gipsy, *Wortin*.

“Can you VOKER Rommany?” is given by Mr Hotten as meaning “Can you speak
Gipsy,”—but there is no such word in Rommany as *voker*. He probably
meant “Can you *rākker*”—pronounced very often *Roker*. Continental
Gipsy *Rakkervava*. Mr Hotten derives it from the Latin *Vocare*!

I do not know the origin of WELCHER, a betting cheat, but it is worthy
of remark that in old Gipsy a *Walshdo* or Welsher meant a Frenchman
(from the German Wälsch) or any foreigner of the Latin races.

YACK, a watch, probably received its name from the Gipsy *Yak* an eye,
in the old times when watches were called bull’s eyes.

LUSHY, to be tipsy, and LUSH, are attributed for their origin to the
name of Lushington, a once well-known London brewer, but when we find
*Losho* and *Loshano* in a Gipsy dialect, meaning jolly, from such a
Sanskrit root as *Lush*; as Paspati derives it, there seems to be some
ground for supposing the words to be purely Rommany. Dr Johnson said of
lush that it was “opposite to pale,” and this curiously enough shows its
first source, whether as a “slang” word or as indicative of colour,
since one of its early Sanskrit meanings is *light* or *radiance*. This
identity of the so regarded vulgar and the refined, continually
confronts us in studying Rommany.

“To make a MULL of anything,” meaning thereby to spoil or confuse it, if
it be derived, as is said, from the Gipsy, must have come from *Mullo*
meaning *dead*, and the Sanskrit *Mara*. There is, however, no such
Gipsy word as mull, in the sense of entangling or spoiling.

PROSS is a theatrical slang word, meaning to instruct and train a tyro.
As there are several stage words of manifest Gipsy origin, I am inclined
to derive this from the old Gipsy *Priss*, to read. In English Gipsy
*Prasser* or *Pross* means to ridicule or scorn. Something of this is
implied in the slang word *Pross*, since it also means “to sponge upon a
comrade,” &c., “for drink.”

TOSHERS are in English low language, “men who steal copper from ship’s
bottoms.” I cannot form any direct connection between this word and any
in English Gipsy, but it is curious that in Turkish Gipsy *Tasi* is a
cup, and in Turkish Persian it means, according to Paspati, a copper
basin used in the baths. It is as characteristic of English Gipsy as of
any of its cognate dialects, that we often find lurking in it the most
remarkable Oriental fragments, which cannot be directly traced through
the regular line of transmission.

UP TO TRAP means, in common slang, intelligent. It is worth observing,
that in Gipsy, *drab* or *trap* (which words were pronounced alike by
the first Gipsies who came from Germany to England), is used for
medicine or poison, and the employment of the latter is regarded, even
at the present, as the greatest Rommany secret. Indeed, it is only a few
days since a Gipsy said to me, “If you know *drab*, you’re up to
everything; for there’s nothing goes above that.” With *drab* the Gipsy
secures game, fish, pigs, and poultry; he quiets kicking horses until
they can be sold; and last, not least, kills or catches rats and mice.
As with the Indians of North America, *medicine*—whether to kill or
cure—is to the Gipsy the art of arts, and those who affect a knowledge
of it are always regarded as the most intelligent. It is, however,
remarkable, that the Gipsy, though he lives in fields and woods, is, all
the world over, far inferior to the American Indian as regards a
knowledge of the properties of herbs or minerals. One may pick the first
fifty plants which he sees in the woods, and show them to the first
Indian whom he meets, with the absolute certainty that the latter will
give him a name for every one, and describe in detail their qualities
and their use as remedies. The Gipsy seldom has a name for anything of
the kind. The country people in America, and even the farmers’ boys,
have probably inherited by tradition much of this knowledge from the
aborigines.

BARNEY, a mob or crowd, may be derived from the Gipsy *baro*, great or
many, which sometimes takes the form of *barno* or *barni*, and which
suggests the Hindustani Bahrna “to increase, proceed, to gain, to be
promoted;” and Bharná, “to fill, to satisfy, to be filled, &c.”—(Brice’s
“Hindústání and English Dictionary.” London, Trübner & Co., 1864).

BEEBEE, which the author of the Slang Dictionary declares means a lady,
and is “Anglo-Indian,” is in general use among English Gipsies for aunt.
It is also a respectful form of address to any middle-aged woman, among
friends.

CULL or CULLY, meaning a man or boy, in Old English cant, is certainly
of Gipsy origin. *Chulai* signifies man in Spanish Gipsy (Borrow), and
*Khulai* a gentleman, according to Paspati; in Turkish Rommany—a
distinction which the word *cully* often preserves in England, even when
used in a derogatory sense, as of a dupe.

JOMER, a sweetheart or female favourite, has probably some connection in
derivation with choomer, a kiss, in Gipsy.

BLOKE, a common coarse word for a man, may be of Gipsy origin; since, as
the author of the Slang Dictionary declares, it may be found in
Hindustani, as Loke. “*Lok*, people, a world, region.”—(“Brice’s Hind.
Dictionary.”) *Bala’ lok*, a gentleman.

A DUFFER, which is an old English cant term, expressive of contempt for
a man, may be derived from the Gipsy *Adovo*, “that,” “that man,” or
“that fellow there.” *Adovo* is frequently pronounced almost like “a
duffer,” or “*a duvva*.”

NIGGLING, which means idling, wasting time, doing anything slowly, may
be derived from some other Indo-European source, but in English Gipsy it
means to go slowly, “to potter along,” and in fact it is the same as the
English word. That it is pure old Rommany appears from the fact that it
is to be found as *Niglavava* in Turkish Gipsy, meaning “I go,” which is
also found in *Nikliovava* and *Nikaváva*, which are in turn probably
derived from the Hindustani *Nikalná*, “To issue, to go forth or out,”
&c. (Brice, Hind. Dic.)  *Niggle* is one of the English Gipsy words
which are used in the East, but which I have not been able to find in
the German Rommany, proving that here, as in other countries, certain
old forms have been preserved, though they have been lost where the
vocabulary is far more copious, and the grammar much more perfect.

MUG, a face, is derived by Mr Wedgwood from the Italian MOCCA, a mocking
or apish mouth (Dictionary of English Etymology), but in English Gipsy
we have not only *mui*, meaning the face, but the *older* forms from
which the English word was probably taken, such as Māk’h (Paspati), and
finally the Hindustani *Mook* and the Sanskrit *Mukha*, mouth or face
(Shakespeare, Hind. Dic., p. 745). In all cases where a word is so
“slangy” as mug, it seems more likely that it should have been derived
from Rommany than from Italian, since it is only within a few years that
any considerable number of the words of the latter language was imparted
to the lower classes of London.

BAMBOOZLE, BITE, and SLANG are all declared by the author of the Slang
Dictionary to be Gipsy, but, with the exception of the last word, I am
unable to verify their Rommany origin. Bambhorna does indeed mean in
Hindustani (Brice), “to bite or to worry,” and bamboo-bakshish to
deceive by paying with a whipping, while *swang*, as signifying
mimicking, acting, disguise and sham, whether of words or deeds, very
curiously conveys the spirit of the word slang. As for *bite* I almost
hesitate to suggest the possibility of a connection between it and
*Bidorna*, to laugh at. I offer not only these three suggested
derivations, but also most of the others, with every reservation. For
many of these words, as for instance *bite*, etymologists have already
suggested far more plausible and more probable derivations, and if I
have found a place for Rommany “roots,” it is simply because what is the
most plausible, and apparently the most probable, is not always the true
origin. But as I firmly believe that there is much more Gipsy in
English, especially in English slang and cant, than the world is aware
of, I think it advisable to suggest what I can, leaving to abler
philologists the task of testing its value.

Writers on such subjects err, almost without an exception, in insisting
on one accurately defined and singly derived source for every word, when
perhaps three or four have combined to form it. The habits of thought
and methods of study followed by philologists render them especially
open to this charge. They wish to establish every form as symmetrical
and mathematical, where nature has been freakish and bizarre. Some years
ago when I published certain poems in the broken English spoken by
Germans, an American philologist, named Haldemann, demonstrated to his
own satisfaction that the language which I had put into Hans Breitmann’s
mouth was inaccurate, because I had not reduced it to an uniform
dialect, making the same word the same in spelling and pronunciation on
all occasions, when the most accurate observation had convinced me, as
it must any one, that those who have only partially learned a language
continually vary their methods of uttering its words.

That some words have come from one source and been aided by another, is
continually apparent in English Gipsy, as for instance in the word for
reins, “guiders,” which, until the Rommany reached England, was voidas.
In this instance the resemblance in sound between the words undoubtedly
conduced to an union. Gibberish may have come from the Gipsy, and at the
same time owe something to *gabble*, *jabber*, and the old Norse or
Icelandic *gifra*. *Lush* may owe something to Mr Lushington, something
to the earlier English *lush*, or rosy, and something to the Gipsy and
Sanskrit. It is not at all unlikely that the word *codger* owes, through
*cadger*, a part of its being to *kid*, a basket, as Mr Halliwell
suggests (Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial Words, 1852), and yet
come quite as directly from *gorger* or *gorgio*. “The cheese” probably
has the Gipsy-Hidustani *chiz* for a father, and the French *chose* for
a mother, while both originally sprung thousands of years ago in the
great parting of the Aryan nations, to be united after so long a
separation in a distant island in the far northern seas.

The etymologist who hesitates to adopt this principle of joint sources
of derivation, will find abundant instances of something very like it in
many English Gipsy words themselves, which, as belonging to a language
in extreme decay, have been formed directly from different, but somewhat
similarly sounding, words, in the parent German or Eastern Rommany.
Thus, *schukker*, pretty; *bi-shukker*, slow; *tschukko*, dry, and
*tschororanes*, secretly, have in England all united in *shukár*, which
expresses all of their meanings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Proverbs and Chance Phrases](egl08)
