[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010207)  [Next](2010209) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p1"></span> <span id="page_280">p. 280</span>
<span id="iii.xi.xxxviii-Page_280"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVIII.—</span>*The Heresy of
the Elkesites.*

<span id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p2.1"></span>Another</span> error also arose at this
time, called the heresy of the Elkesites, <span
id="fr_2054"></span>[2055](#fn_2054) which was extinguished in the very
beginning. Origen speaks of it in this manner in a public homily on the
eighty-second Psalm: <span id="fr_2055"></span>[2056](#fn_2055)

<span id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p5"></span>“A certain man <span
id="fr_2056"></span>[2057](#fn_2056) came just now, puffed up greatly
with his own ability, proclaiming that godless and impious opinion which
has appeared lately in the churches, styled ‘of the Elkesites.’ I will
show you what evil things that opinion teaches, that you may not be
carried away by it. It rejects certain parts of every scripture. Again
it uses portions of the Old Testament and the Gospel, but rejects the
apostle <span id="fr_2057"></span>[2058](#fn_2057) altogether. It says
that to deny Christ is an indifferent matter, and that he who
understands will, under necessity, deny with his mouth, but not in his
heart. They produce a certain book which they say fell from heaven. They
hold that whoever hears and believes <span
id="fr_2058"></span>[2059](#fn_2058) this shall receive remission of
sins, another remission than that which Jesus Christ has given.” Such is
the account of these persons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2054"></span>[280:2055](2010208.htm#fr_2054) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p3"></span> The Elkesites (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>῾</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p3.2"></span>Ελκεσαιταί</span>)
were not a distinct sect, but “a school scattered among all parties of
the Judæo-Christian Church.” They are described by Hippolytus (*Phil.*
IX. 8–12) and by Epiphanius (in chap. 19 among the Essenes, in 30 among
the Ebionites, and in 53 among the Sampsæans). We learn from Hippolytus
that, in the time of Callistus or soon afterward, a certain Alcibiades,
a native of Apameia in Syria, brought to Rome a book bearing the name of
*Elkesai* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p3.3"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p3.4"></span>Η</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p3.5"></span>λχασαί</span>), which purported to
contain a revelation, made in the time of Trajan, by the Son of God and
the Holy Spirit in the form of angels, and teaching the forgiveness of
all sins, even the grossest, by means of belief in the doctrines of the
book and baptism performed with certain peculiar rites. The controversy
in regard to the forgiveness of gross sins committed after baptism was
raging high at this time in Rome, and Hippolytus, who took the strict
side, naturally opposed this new system of indulgence with the greatest
vigor. Among other doctrines taught in the book, was the lawfulness of
denying the faith in time of persecution, as told us by Origen in this
chapter, and by Epiphanius in chap. 19. The book was strongly Ebionitic
in its teaching, and bore striking resemblances to the Clementine
*Homilies* and *Recognitions.* Its exact relation to those writings has
been disputed; but Uhlhorn (*Homilien und Recognition des Clemens
Romanus*) has shown conclusively that it is older than the latter, and
that it represents a type of Ebionitic Christianity less modified than
the latter by the influence of Christianity. In agreement with the
Ebionites, the Elkesites (as all those were called who accepted the
teachings of the book, to whatever party they might belong) taught that
Christ was a created being; and they also repudiated sacrifices, which
compelled them to reject certain portions of the Old Testament (cf.
Origen’s statement just below). They likewise refused recognition to the
apostle Paul, and ordained the observance of the Jewish law; but they
went beyond the Clementines in teaching the necessity of circumcision
and the repetition of baptism as a means to the forgiveness of sins. The
origin of the name *Elkesai* has also been disputed. Hippolytus says it
was the name of the man who was claimed to have received the revelation,
and Epiphanius calls Elkesai a false prophet; but some critics have
thought them mistaken, and have supposed that Elkesai must have been the
name of the book, or of the angel that gave the revelation. It is more
probable, however, as Salmon concludes, that it was the name of a man
whom the book represented as receiving the revelation, but that the man
was only an imaginary person, and not the real founder of the school, as
Epiphanius supposed. The book cannot well be put back of the beginning
of the third century, when it first began to be heard of in the Catholic
Church. It claimed to have been for a century in secret circulation, but
the claim is quite unfounded. Eusebius speaks of the heresy as
extinguished in the very beginning, and it seems, in fact, to have
played no prominent part in history; and yet it apparently lingered on
for a long time in the East, for we hear of a sect in Arabia, as late as
the tenth century, who counted El-Chasaiach as their founder (see
Salmon’s article, p. 98). See the work of Uhlhorn already mentioned;
also Ritschl’s *Entstehung d. alt. Katholischen Kirche,* p. 234 sq.
(Ritschl holds that the Clementines are older than the book of Elkesai),
and Hilgenfeld’s *Nov. Test. extra Can. rec.* III. 153, where the extant
fragments of the book are collected. See also Salmon’s article in the
*Dict. of Christ. Biog.* II. p. 95 sq.

<span id="fn_2055"></span>[280:2056](2010208.htm#fr_2055) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p3.6"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p4"></span> On Origen’s writings on the Psalms,
see chap. 24, note 3. This fragment is the only portion of his homily on
the eighty-second Psalm extant.

<span id="fn_2056"></span>[280:2057](2010208.htm#fr_2056) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p6"></span> Alciabades, according to Hippolytus
(see above, note 1).

<span id="fn_2057"></span>[280:2058](2010208.htm#fr_2057) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p7"></span> The apostle Paul (see note 1).

<span id="fn_2058"></span>[280:2059](2010208.htm#fr_2058) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p8"></span> Origen does not mention the baptism
of the Elkesites, which is described at length by Hippolytus. It seems
that both belief in the teachings of the book and baptism were
necessary. It may be that in Origen’s opinion the receiving of the book
itself involved the peculiar baptism which it taught, and that,
therefore, he thought it unnecessary to mention the latter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIX](2010209)
