[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010673)  [Next](2010675.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII</span>.—*Of those who are
Ignorant of this Mystery; and that their Ignorance is Voluntary. The
Blessings which await those who know it, especially such as die in the
Confession of the Faith.* <span id="fr_3432"></span>[3433](#fn_3432.md)

<span id="iv.vii.xii-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.xii-p3.1"></span>But</span> it will be said by some, who love
to blaspheme, that it was in the power of God to ameliorate and soften
the natural will of man. What better way, I ask, what better method
could be devised, what more effectual effort put forth for reclaiming
evil man, than converse with God himself? Was not he visibly present to
teach them the principles of virtuous conduct? And if the personal
instructions of God were without effect, how much more, had he continued
absent and unheard? What, then, had power to hinder this most blessed
doctrine? The perverse folly of man. For the clearness of our
perceptions is at once obscured, as often as we receive with angry
impatience those precepts which are given for our blessing and
advantage. In truth, it was the very choice of men to disregard these
precepts, and to turn a deaf ear to the commandments so distasteful to
them; though had they listened, they would have gained a reward well
worthy such attention, and that not for the present only, but the future
life, which is indeed the only true life. For the reward of obedience to
God is imperishable and everlasting life, to which they may aspire who
know him, <span id="fr_3433"></span>[3434](#fn_3433.md) and frame their
course of life so as to afford a pattern to others, and as it were a
perpetual standard for the imitation of those who desire to excel in
virtue. Therefore was the doctrine committed to men of understanding,
that the truths which they communicated might be kept with care and a
pure conscience by the members of their households, and that thus a
truthful and steadfast observance of God’s commands might be secured,
the fruit of which is that boldness in the prospect of death which
springs from pure faith and genuine holiness before God. He who is thus
armed can withstand the tempest of the world, and is sustained even to
martyrdom by the invincible power of God, whereby he boldly overcomes
the greatest terrors, and is accounted worthy of a crown of glory by him
to whom he has thus nobly testi<span id="page_571">p. 571</span> <span
id="iv.vii.xii-Page_571"></span>fied. <span
id="fr_3434"></span>[3435](#fn_3434.md) Nor does he himself assume the
praise, knowing full well that it is God who gives the power both to
endure, and to fulfill with ready zeal the Divine commands. And well may
such a course as this receive the meed of never-failing remembrance and
everlasting honor. For as the martyr’s life is one of sobriety and
obedience to the will of God, so is his death an example of true
greatness and generous fortitude of soul. Hence it is followed by hymns
and psalms, words and songs of praise to the all-seeing God: and a
sacrifice of thanksgiving is offered in memory of such men, a bloodless,
a harmless sacrifice, wherein is no need of the fragrant frankincense,
no need of fire; but only enough of pure light <span
id="fr_3435"></span>[3436](#fn_3435.md) to suffice the assembled
worshipers. Many, too, there are whose charitable spirit leads them to
prepare a temperate banquet for the comfort of the needy, and the relief
of those who had been driven from their homes: a custom which can only
be deemed burdensome <span id="fr_3436"></span>[3437](#fn_3436.md) by those
whose thoughts are not accordant with the divine and sacred doctrine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3432"></span>[570:3433](2010674.htm#fr_3432.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xii-p2"></span> Literally and better, “through the
confession.” It refers to those who are technically known as confessors.
Although in general the distinction prevails by which those who have
suffered, but not unto death, are called “confessors,” while those who
lost their lives are called “martyrs” (cf. Pseud-Cypr. *de dupl. Mart.*
c. 31), yet its use for martyrs is not uncommon (cf. Ambrose, *ad
Gratian,* c. 2). Later the term was used of all, especially faithful
professors of Christ.

<span id="fn_3433"></span>[570:3434](2010674.htm#fr_3433.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xii-p4"></span> Cf. [John
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003.md), [1 John
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.vii.xii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3434"></span>[571:3435](2010674.htm#fr_3434.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xii-p5"></span> This translation “to whom” accords with
the reading of Valesius, followed by *1611,* *Molz.,* “*Zimmermann,*”
*Cous.* (“whose cause he has sustained”), but *Hein.* adopts the reading
“who,” preceded by *Chr.,* who translates “who himself bravely endured
martyrdom.”

<span id="fn_3435"></span>[571:3436](2010674.htm#fr_3435.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xii-p6"></span> \[Alluding to the tapers, &c., lighted
at the tombs of martyrs on the anniversary of their death.—*Bag.*\]
Compare Scudamore, *Lights, The Ceremonial Use of,* in Smith and
Cheetham, *Dict.* 1 (1880), 993 sq.

<span id="fn_3436"></span>[571:3437](2010674.htm#fr_3436.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xii-p7"></span> “Vulgar.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](2010675.md)
