[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010690)  [Next](2010692.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.viii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter I</span>.—*The Oration*.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.viii.ii-p2.1"></span>To-day</span> is the festival of our great
emperor: and we his children rejoice therein, feeling the inspiration of
our sacred theme. He who presides over our solemnity is the Great
Sovereign himself; he, I mean, who is truly great; of whom I affirm (nor
will the sovereign who hears me be offended, but will rather approve of
this ascription of praise to God), that HE is above and beyond all
created things, the Highest, the Greatest, the most Mighty One; whose
throne is the arch of heaven, and the earth the footstool of his
feet. <span id="fr_3497"></span>[3498](#fn_3497.md) His being none can
worthily comprehend; and the ineffable splendor of the glory which
surrounds him repels the gaze of every eye from his Divine majesty.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p4"></span>2. His ministers are the heavenly hosts;
his armies the supernal powers, who own allegiance to him as their
Master, Lord, and King. The countless multitudes of angels, the
companies of archangels, the chorus of holy spirits, draw from and
reflect his radiance as from the fountains of everlasting light. Yea
every light, and specially those divine and incorporeal intelligences
whose place is beyond the heavenly sphere, celebrate this august
Sovereign with lofty and sacred strains of praise. The vast expanse of
heaven, like an azure veil, is interposed between those without, and
those who inhabit his royal mansions: while round this expanse the sun
and moon, with the rest of the heavenly luminaries (like torch-bearers
around the entrance of the imperial palace), perform, in honor of their
sovereign, their appointed courses; holding forth, at the word of his
command, an ever-burning light to those whose lot is cast in the darker
regions without the pale of heaven.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p5"></span>3. And surely when I remember that our
own victorious emperor renders praises to this Mighty Sovereign, I do
well to follow him, knowing as I do that to him alone we owe that
imperial power under which we live. The pious Cæsars, instructed by
their father’s wisdom, acknowledge him as the source of every blessing:
the soldiery, the entire body of the people, both in the country and in
the cities of the empire, with the governors of the several provinces,
assembling together in accordance with the precept of their great
Saviour and Teacher, worship him. In short, the whole family of mankind,
of every nation, tribe, and tongue, both collectively and severally,
however diverse their opinions on other subjects, are unanimous in this
one confession; and, in obedience to the reason implanted in them, and
the spontaneous and uninstructed impulse of their own minds, unite in
calling on the One and only God. <span
id="fr_3498"></span>[3499](#fn_3498.md)

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p7"></span>4. Nay, does not the universal frame of
earth acknowledge him her Lord, and declare, by the vegetable and animal
life which she produces her subjection to the will of a superior Power?
The rivers, flowing with abundant stream, and the perennial fountains,
springing from hidden and exhaustless depths, ascribe to him the cause
of their marvellous source. The mighty waters of the sea, enclosed in
chambers of unfathomable depth, and the swelling surges, which lift
themselves on high, and menace as it were the earth itself, shrink back
when they approach the shore, checked by the power of his Divine law.
The duly measured fall of winter’s rain, the rolling thunder, the
lightning’s flash, the eddying currents of the winds, and the airy
courses of the clouds, all reveal his presence to those to whom his
Person is invisible.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p8"></span>5. The all-radiant sun, who holds his
constant career through the lapse of ages, owns him Lord alone, and
obedient to his will, dares not depart from his appointed path. The
inferior splendor of the moon, alternately diminished and increased at
stated periods, is subject to his Divine command. The beauteous
mechanism of the heavens, glittering with the hosts of stars, moving in
harmonious order, and preserving the measure of each several orbit,
proclaims him the giver of all light: yea, all the heavenly luminaries
maintaining at his will and word a grand and perfect unity of motion,
pursue the track of their ethereal career, and complete in the lapse of
revolving ages their distant course. The alternate recurrence of day and
night, the changing seasons, the order and proportion of the universe,
all declare the manifold wisdom of \[his boundless power\]. To him the
unseen agencies which hold their course throughout the expanse of space,
render the due tribute of praise. To him this terrestrial globe itself,
to him the heavens above, and the choirs beyond the vault of heaven,
give honor as to their mighty Sovereign: the angelic hosts greet him
with ineffable songs of Praise; and the spirits which draw their being
from incorporeal light, adore him as their Creator. The <span
id="page_583">p. 583</span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii-Page_583"></span>everlasting ages which were before this
heaven and earth, with other periods beside them, infinite, and
antecedent to all visible creation, acknowledge him the sole and supreme
Sovereign and Lord.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p9"></span>6. Lastly, he who is in all, before, and
after all, <span id="fr_3499"></span>[3500](#fn_3499.md) his only begotten,
pre-existent Word, the great High Priest of the mighty God, elder than
all time and every age, devoted to his Father’s glory, first and alone
makes intercession with him for the salvation of mankind. <span
id="fr_3500"></span>[3501](#fn_3500.md) Supreme and pre-eminent Ruler of
the universe, he shares the glory of his Father’s kingdom: for he is
that Light, which, transcendent above the universe, encircles the
Father’s Person, interposing and dividing between the eternal and
uncreated Essence and all derived existence: that Light which, streaming
from on high, proceeds from that Deity who knows not origin or end, and
illumines the super-celestial regions, and all that heaven itself
contains, with the radiance of wisdom bright beyond the splendor of the
sun. This is he who holds a supreme dominion over this whole
world, <span id="fr_3501"></span>[3502](#fn_3501.md) who is over and in all
things, and pervades all things <span
id="fr_3502"></span>[3503](#fn_3502.md) visible and invisible; the Word of
God. From whom and by whom our divinely favored emperor, receiving, as
it were a transcript of the Divine sovereignty, directs, in imitation of
God himself, the administration of this world’s affairs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3497"></span>[582:3498](2010691.htm#fr_3497.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p3"></span> Paraphrased from [Is. lxvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.viii.ii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3498"></span>[582:3499](2010691.htm#fr_3498.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p6"></span> \[We must be content here (and probably
in other passages of this *Oration*) to tolerate as rhetorical
embellishment that which, regarded literally, is in every sense palpably
untrue.—*Bag.*\] The intention of the passage is probably like that of
those who say now that there is no nation where, in some form, God is
not worshiped.

<span id="fn_3499"></span>[583:3500](2010691.htm#fr_3499.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p10"></span> \[Referring possibly to [Rev. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.viii.ii-p10.1"></span>.
“I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending saith the Lord,
which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty.”—*Bag.*\]
Or, possibly, refers to <span id="iv.viii.ii-p10.2"></span>[Eph. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.viii.ii-p10.3"></span>,
as it seems to be simply some verbal suggestion.

<span id="fn_3500"></span>[583:3501](2010691.htm#fr_3500.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p10.4"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p11"></span> \[The Arianism implied in this
passage, if referred to the Word as God, disappears if we regard it as
spoken of Christ as the Word manifested in human nature. See the note of
Valesius ad loc.—*Bag.*\]

<span id="fn_3501"></span>[583:3502](2010691.htm#fr_3501.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p12"></span> Universe.

<span id="fn_3502"></span>[583:3503](2010691.htm#fr_3502.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p13"></span> This is directly from [Eph. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.viii.ii-p13.1"></span>:
“Who is over all and through all and in all.” It is thus directly
referred to the Father, and on the basis of the above note of *Bag.*
seems to convict of Arianism, but in reality the conception of a
pre-existing Word is distinctly orthodox.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](2010692.md)
