[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010042)  [Next](2010044.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter I.—</span>*The Course pursued by the
Apostles after the Ascension of Christ.*

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.ii-p2.1"></span>First</span>, then, in the place of Judas,
the betrayer, Matthias, <span id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232.md) who, as
has been shown <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233.md) was also one of
the Seventy, was chosen to the apostolate. And there were appointed to
the diaconate, <span id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234.md) for the service
of the congregation, by prayer and the laying on of the hands of the
apostles, approved men, <span id="page_104">p. 104</span> <span
id="iii.vii.ii-Page_104"></span>seven in number, of whom Stephen was
one. <span id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235.md) He first, after the Lord,
was stoned to death at the time of his ordination by the slayers of the
Lord, as if he had been promoted for this very purpose. <span
id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236.md) And thus he was the first to receive
the crown, corresponding to his name, <span
id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237.md) which belongs to the martyrs of
Christ, who are worthy of the meed of victory.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p13"></span>2. Then James, whom the ancients
surnamed the Just <span id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238.md) on account of
the excellence of his virtue, is recorded to have been the first to be
made bishop of the church of Jerusalem. This James was called the
brother of the Lord <span id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239.md) because he
was known as a son of Joseph, <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240.md)
and Joseph was supposed to be the father of Christ, because the Virgin,
being betrothed to him, “was found with child by the Holy Ghost before
they came together,” <span id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241.md) as the
account of the holy Gospels shows.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p18"></span>3. But Clement in the sixth book of his
Hypotyposes <span id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242.md) writes thus: “For
they say that Peter and James and John after the ascension of our
Saviour, as if also preferred by our Lord, strove not after honor, but
chose James the Just bishop of Jerusalem.” <span
id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243.md)

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p22"></span>4. But the same writer, in the seventh
book of the same work, relates also the following things concerning him:
“The Lord after his resurrection imparted knowledge to James the Just
and to John and Peter, and they imparted it to the rest of the apostles,
and the rest of the apostles to the seventy, of whom Barnabas was
one. <span id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244.md) But there were two
Jameses: <span id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245.md) one called the Just,
who was thrown from the pinnacle of the temple and was beaten to death
with a club by a fuller, <span id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246.md) and
another who was beheaded.” <span id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247.md) Paul
also makes mention of the same James the Just, where he writes, “Other
of the apostles saw I none, save James the Lord’s brother.” <span
id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248.md)

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p28"></span>5. At that time also the promise of our
Saviour to the king of the Osrhœnians was fulfilled. For Thomas, under a
divine impulse, sent Thaddeus to Edessa as a preacher and evangelist of
the religion of Christ, as we have shown a little above from the
document found there. <span id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249.md)

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p30"></span>7. When he came to that place he healed
Abgarus by the word of Christ; and after bringing all the people there
into the right attitude of mind by means of his works, and leading them
to adore the power of Christ, he made them disciples of the Saviour’s
teaching. And from that time down to the present the whole city of the
Edessenes has been devoted to the name of Christ, <span
id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250.md) offering no common proof of the
beneficence of our Saviour toward them also.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p32"></span>8. These things have been drawn from
ancient accounts; but let us now turn again to the divine Scripture.
When the first and greatest persecution was instigated by the Jews
against the church of Jerusalem in connection with the martyrdom of
Stephen, and when all the disciples, except the Twelve, were scattered
throughout Judea and Samaria, <span id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251.md)
some, as the divine Scripture says, went as far as Phœnicia and Cyprus
and Antioch, but could not yet venture to impart the word of faith to
the nations, and therefore preached it to the Jews alone. <span
id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252.md)

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p35"></span>9. During this time Paul was still
persecuting the church, and entering the houses of believers was
dragging men and women away and committing them to prison. <span
id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253.md)

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p37"></span>10. Philip also, one of those who with
Stephen had been entrusted with the diaconate, being among those who
were scattered abroad, went down to Samaria, <span
id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254.md) and being filled with the divine
power, he first preached the word to the inhabitants of that country.
And divine grace worked so mightily with him that even Simon Magus with
many others was attracted by his <span id="page_105">p. 105</span> <span
id="iii.vii.ii-Page_105"></span>words. <span
id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255.md)

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p40"></span>11. Simon was at that time so
celebrated, and had acquired, by his jugglery, such influence over those
who were deceived by him, that he was thought to be the great power of
God. <span id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256.md) But at this time, being
amazed at the wonderful deeds wrought by Philip through the divine
power, he feigned and counterfeited faith in Christ, even going so far
as to receive baptism. <span id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257.md)

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p43"></span>12. And what is surprising, the same
thing is done even to this day by those who follow his most impure
heresy. <span id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258.md) For they, after the
manner of their forefather, slipping into the Church, like a
pestilential and leprous disease greatly afflict those into whom they
are able to infuse the deadly and terrible poison concealed in
themselves. <span id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259.md) The most of these
have been expelled as soon as they have been caught in their wickedness,
as Simon himself, when detected by Peter, received the merited
punishment. <span id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260.md)

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p47"></span>13. But as the preaching of the
Saviour’s Gospel was daily advancing, a certain providence led from the
land of the Ethiopians an officer of the queen of that country, <span
id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261.md) for Ethiopia even to the present day
is ruled, according to ancestral custom, by a woman. He, first among the
Gentiles, received of the mysteries of the divine word from Philip in
consequence of a revelation, and having become the first-fruits of
believers throughout the world, he is said to have been the first on
returning to his country to proclaim the knowledge of the God of the
universe and the life-giving sojourn of our Saviour among men; <span
id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262.md) so that through him in truth the
prophecy obtained its fulfillment, which declares that “Ethiopia
stretcheth out her hand unto God.” <span
id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263.md)

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p51"></span>14. In addition to these, Paul, that
“chosen vessel,” <span id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264.md) “not of men
neither through men, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ himself and
of God the Father who raised him from the dead,” <span
id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265.md) was appointed an apostle, being made
worthy of the call by a vision and by a voice which was uttered in a
revelation from heaven. <span id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_232"></span>[103:233](2010043.htm#fr_232.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p3"></span> See [Acts i.
23-26](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#023.md)<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[103:234](2010043.htm#fr_233.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p4"></span> Bk. I. chap. 12, §2.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[103:235](2010043.htm#fr_234.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p5"></span> The view that the Seven were deacons
appears first in Irenæus (*adv. Hær.* I. 26. 3; III. 12. 10; IV. 15. I),
then in Cyprian (*Ep.* 64. 3), and was the commonly accepted opinion of
the Roman Church in the third century (for, while they had forty-six
presbyters, they had only seven deacons; see below, Bk. VI. chap. 43),
and has been ever since almost universally accepted. In favor of the
identification are urged this early and unanimous tradition, the
similarity of the duties assigned to the Seven and to later deacons, and
the use of the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.ii-p5.1"></span>διακονία</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.ii-p5.2"></span>διακονεῖν</span> in
connection with the “Seven” in [Acts
vi](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.vii.ii-p5.3"></span>.
It must be remarked, however, that ancient tradition is not unanimously
in favor of the identification, for Chrysostom (*Homily XIV. on Acts*)
denies it; still further, the functions of the Seven and of later
deacons were not identical, for the former were put in charge of the
financial affairs of the Jerusalem church, while the latter acted simply
as bishops’ assistants. In fact, it was the bishop of the second
century, not the deacon, that had charge of the church finances. And
finally, no weight can be laid upon the use of the terms <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.ii-p5.4"></span>διακονεῖν</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.ii-p5.5"></span>διακονία</span> in
connection with the Seven, for these words are used always in a general,
never in an official sense in other parts of the Acts and of the New
Testament, and, what is still more decisive, the same word (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.ii-p5.6"></span>διακονία</span>) is used
in the same passage in connection with the apostles; the Seven are “to
serve tables” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.ii-p5.7"></span>διακονεῖν ταῖς τραπέζαις</span>,) the
apostles are to give themselves to “the service of the word” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.ii-p5.8"></span>διακονία τοῦ
λόγου</span>.) There is just as much reason, therefore, on linguistic
grounds, for calling the apostles “deacons” as for giving that name to
the Seven. On the other hand, against the opinion that the Seven were
deacons, are to be urged the facts that they are never called “deacons”
by Luke or by any other New Testament writer; that we are nowhere told,
in the New Testament or out of it, that there were deacons in the
Jerusalem church, although Luke had many opportunities to call the Seven
“deacons” if he had considered them such; and finally, that according to
Epiphanius (*Hær.* XXX. 18), the Ebionitic churches of Palestine in his
time had only presbyters and Archisynagogi (*chiefs of the synagogue*).
These Ebionites were the Jewish Christian reactionaries who refused to
advance with the Church catholic in its normal development; it is
therefore at least significant that there were no deacons among them in
the fourth century.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p6"></span>In view of these considerations I feel
compelled to doubt the traditional identification, although it is
accepted without dissent by almost all scholars (cf. e.g. Lightfoot’s
article on *The Christian Ministry* in his *Commentary on Philippians*).
There remain but two possibilities: either the Seven constituted a
merely temporary committee (as held by Chrysostom, and in modern times,
among others, by Vitringa, in his celebrated work on the Synagogue, and
by Stanley in his *Essays on the Apostolic Age*); or they were the
originals of permanent officers in the Church, other than deacons. The
former alternative is possible, but the emphasis which Luke lays upon
the appointment is against it, as also the fact that the very duties
which these men were chosen to perform were such as would increase
rather than diminish with the growth of the Church, and such as would
therefore demand the creation of a new and similar committee if the old
were not continued.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p7"></span>In favor of the second alternative there
is, it seems to me, much to be said. The limits of this note forbid a
full discussion of the subject. But it may be urged: First, that we find
in the Acts frequent mention of a body of men in the Jerusalem church
known as “elders.” Of the appointment of these elders we have no
account, and yet it is clear that they cannot have been in existence
when the apostles proposed the appointment of the Seven. Secondly,
although the Seven were such prominent and influential men, they are not
once mentioned as a body in the subsequent chapters of the Acts, while,
whenever we should expect to find them referred to with the apostles, it
is always the “elders” that are mentioned. Finally, when the elders
appear for the first time ([Acts xi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#030)<span id="iii.vii.ii-p7.1"></span>.md),
we find them entrusted with the same duties which the Seven were
originally appointed to perform: *they* receive the alms sent by the
church of Antioch. It is certainly, to say the least, a very natural
conclusion that these “elders” occupy the office of whose institution we
read in [Acts vi](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#000.md)<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p7.2"></span>.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p8"></span>Against this identification of the Seven
with the elders of the Jerusalem church it might be urged: First, that
Luke does not call them elders. But it is quite possible that they were
not called by that name at first, and yet later acquired it; and in that
case, in referring to them in later times, people would naturally call
the first appointed “the Seven,” to distinguish them from their
successors, “the elders,”—the well-known and frequently mentioned
officers whose number may well have been increased as the church grew.
It is thus easier to account for Luke’s omission of the name “elder,”
than it would be to account for his omission of the name “deacon,” if
they were deacons. In the second place, it might be objected that the
duties which the Seven were appointed to perform were not commensurate
with those which fell to the lot of the elders as known to us. This
objection, however, loses its weight when we realize that the same kind
of a development went on in connection with the bishop, as has been most
clearly pointed out by Hatch in his *Organization of the Early Christian
Churches,* and by Harnack in his translation of that work and in his
edition of the *Teaching of the Apostles.* Moreover, in the case of the
Seven, who were evidently the chiefest men in the Jerusalem church after
the apostles, and at the same time were “full of the Spirit,” it was
very natural that, as the apostles gradually scattered, the successors
of these Seven should have committed to them other duties besides the
purely financial ones.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p9"></span>The theory presented in this note is not
a novel one. It was suggested first by Böhmer (in his *Diss. Juris
eccles.*), who was followed by Ritschl (in his *Entstehung der alt-kath.
Kirche*), and has been accepted in a somewhat modified form by Lange (in
his *Apostolisches Zeitalter*), and by Lechler (in his *Apost. und
Nachapost. Zeitalter*). Before learning that the theory had been
proposed by others, I had myself adapted it and had embodied it in a
more elaborate form in a paper read before a ministerial association in
the spring of 1888. My confidence in its validity has of course been
increased by the knowledge that it has been maintained by the eminent
scholars referred to above.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[104:236](2010043.htm#fr_235.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p10"></span> See [Acts vi.
1-6](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[104:237](2010043.htm#fr_236.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p11"></span> See [Acts
vii](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.vii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="fn_237"></span>[104:238](2010043.htm#fr_237.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.ii-p12.1"></span>στέφανος</span>, “a crown.”

<span id="fn_238"></span>[104:239](2010043.htm#fr_238.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p14"></span> James is not called the “Just” in the
New Testament, but Hegesippus (quoted by Eusebius, chap. 23) says that
he was called thus by all from the time of Christ, on account of his
great piety, and it is by this name that he is known throughout history.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[104:240](2010043.htm#fr_239.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p15"></span> See above, Bk. I. chap. 12, note 13.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[104:241](2010043.htm#fr_240.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p16"></span> Eusebius testimony is in favor of the
half-brother theory; for had he considered James the son of Mary, he
could not have spoken in this way.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[104:242](2010043.htm#fr_241.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p17"></span> [Matt. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.vii.ii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[104:243](2010043.htm#fr_242.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p19"></span> On Clement’s *Hypotyposes,* see Bk.
VI. chap. 13, note 3. On Clement’s life and writings, see Bk. V. chap.
11.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[104:244](2010043.htm#fr_243.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.ii-p20.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.ii-p20.2"></span>λλ᾽ ᾽Ι€κωβον τὸν δίκαιον ἐπίσκοπον τῶν
῾Ιεροσολύμων ἕλεσθαι</span>, as the majority of the <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.vii.ii-p20.3"></span>mss.</span> and editions
read. Laemmer, followed by Heinichen, substitutes <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.ii-p20.4"></span>γενέσθαι</span> for
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.ii-p20.5"></span>ἕ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.ii-p20.6"></span>λεσθαι</span>on the
authority of two important codices. The other reading, however, is as
well, if not better, supported.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p21"></span>How soon after the ascension of Christ,
James the Just assumed a leading position in the church of Jerusalem, we
do not know. He undoubtedly became prominent very soon, as Paul in 37
(or 40) <span class="c13"><span id="iii.vii.ii-p21.1"></span>a.d.</span>
sees him in addition to Peter on visiting Jerusalem. But we do not know
of his having a position of leadership until the Jerusalem Council in 51
([Acts 15:0](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#000.md), [Gal.
2:0](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#000.md)<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p21.2"></span>.), where he is one of the three pillars,
standing at least upon an equality in influence with Peter and John. But
this very expression “three pillars of the Church” excludes the
supposition that he was bishop of the Church in the modern sense of the
term—he was only *one* of the rulers of the Church. Indeed, we have
abundant evidence from other sources that the monarchical episcopacy was
nowhere known at that early age. It was the custom of all writers of the
second century and later to throw back into the apostolic age their own
church organization, and hence we hear of bishops appointed by the
apostles in various churches where we know that the episcopacy was a
second century growth.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[104:245](2010043.htm#fr_244.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p23"></span> See above, Bk. I. chap. 12, note 3.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[104:246](2010043.htm#fr_245.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p24"></span> Clement evidently identifies James,
the brother of the Lord, with James, the son of Alphæus (compare the
words just above: “These delivered it to the rest of the apostles,” in
which the word “apostles,” on account of the “Seventy” just following,
seems to be used in a narrow sense, and therefore this James to be one
of the Twelve), and he is thus cited as a witness to the cousin
hypothesis (see above, Bk. I. chap. 12, note 13). Papias, too, in a
fragment given by Routh (*Rel. Sac.* I. p. 16) identifies the two. But
Hegesippus (quoted by Eusebius in chap. 23) expressly states that there
were many of this name, and that he was therefore called James the Just
to distinguish him from others. Eusebius quotes this passage of Clement
with apparently no suspicion that it contradicts his own opinion in
regard to the relationship of James to Christ. The contradiction,
indeed, appears only upon careful examination.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[104:247](2010043.htm#fr_246.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p25"></span> Josephus (*Ant.* XX. 9. 1) says he was
stoned to death. The account of Clement agrees with that of Hegesippus
quoted by Eusebius in chap. 23, below, which see.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[104:248](2010043.htm#fr_247.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p26"></span> James, the son of Zebedee, who was
beheaded by Herod Agrippa I., 44 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.ii-p26.1"></span>a.d.</span> See [Acts xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.vii.ii-p26.2"></span>,
and Bk. II. chap. 9 below.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[104:249](2010043.htm#fr_248.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p27"></span> [Gal. i.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.vii.ii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[104:250](2010043.htm#fr_249.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p29"></span> See above, Bk. I. chap. 13.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[104:251](2010043.htm#fr_250.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p31"></span> The date of the introduction of
Christianity into Edessa is not known (see above, Bk. I. chap. 13, notes
1 and 3) but it was the seat of a bishop in the third century, and in
Eusebius’ time was filled with magnificent churches and monasteries.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[104:252](2010043.htm#fr_251.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p33"></span> See [Acts viii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.vii.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="fn_252"></span>[104:253](2010043.htm#fr_252.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p34"></span> See [Acts xi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.vii.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="fn_253"></span>[104:254](2010043.htm#fr_253.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p36"></span> See [Acts viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.vii.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="fn_254"></span>[104:255](2010043.htm#fr_254.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p38"></span> See [Acts viii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.vii.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="fn_255"></span>[105:256](2010043.htm#fr_255.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p39"></span> See [Acts viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.vii.ii-p39.1"></span>
sqq. Upon Simon, see chap. 13, note 3.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[105:257](2010043.htm#fr_256.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.ii-p41.1"></span>τὴν μεγ€λην δύναμιν τοῦ θεοῦ</span>.
Compare <span id="iii.vii.ii-p41.2"></span>[Acts viii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.vii.ii-p41.3"></span>,
which has <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.ii-p41.4"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.ii-p41.5"></span>δύναμις τοῦ θεοῦ ἡ καλουμένη</span>.
According to Irenæus (I. 23. 1) he was called “the loftiest of all
powers, i.e. the one who is father over all things” (*sublissimam
virtutem, hoc est, eum qui sit nuper omnia Pater*); according to Justin
Martyr, *Apol*. I. 26 (see below, chap. 13), <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.ii-p41.6"></span>τὸν πρῶτον θεόν</span>; according to the
Clementine *Homilies* (II. 22) he wished to be called “a certain supreme
power of God” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.ii-p41.7"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.ii-p41.8"></span>νωτ€τη τις δύναμις</span>.) According to
the Clementine *Recognitions* (II. 7) he was called the “Standing one”
(*hinc ergo Stans appellatur*).

<span id="fn_257"></span>[105:258](2010043.htm#fr_257.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p41.9"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p42"></span> Eusebius here utters the universal
belief of the early Church, which from the subsequent career of Simon,
who was considered the founder of all heresies, and the great
arch-heretic himself, read back into his very conversion the hypocrisy
for which he was afterward distinguished in Church history. The account
of the Acts does not say that his belief was hypocritical, and leaves it
to be implied (if it be implied at all) only from his subsequent conduct
in endeavoring to purchase the gift of God with money.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[105:259](2010043.htm#fr_258.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p44"></span> Eusebius may refer here to the
Simonians, an heretical sect (mentioned by Justin, Irenæus, Clement of
Alexandria, and others), which recognized him as its founder and leader
(though they originated probably at a later date), and even looked upon
him as a God. They were exceedingly licentious and immoral. Their
teachings gradually assumed a decidedly Gnostic character, and Simon
came to be looked upon as the father of all Gnostics (compare Irenæus,
I. 27. 4), and hence of heretics in general, and as himself the
arch-heretic. Eusebius, therefore, perhaps refers in this place simply
to the Gnostics, or to the heretics in general.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[105:260](2010043.htm#fr_259.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p45"></span> Another instance of the external and
artificial conception of heresy which Eusebius held in common with his
age.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[105:261](2010043.htm#fr_260.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p46"></span> [Acts
viii](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#000.md)<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p46.1"></span>. tells of no punishment which befell Simon
further than the rebuke of Peter which Hippolytus (*Phil.* vi. 15) calls
a curse, and which as such may have been regarded by Eusebius as a
deserved punishment, its effect clinging to him, and finally bringing
him to destruction (see below, chap. 14, note 8).

<span id="fn_261"></span>[105:262](2010043.htm#fr_261.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p48"></span> [Acts viii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#026.md)<span id="iii.vii.ii-p48.1"></span>
sqq. This queen was Candace, according to the Biblical account; but
Candace was the name, not of an individual, but of a dynasty of queens
who ruled in Meroë, an island formed by two branches of the Nile, south
of Egypt. See Pliny, *H. N.* VI. 35 (Delphin edition); Dion Cassius,
LIV. 5; and Strabo, XVII. 1. 54 (Müller’s edit., Paris, 1877).

<span id="fn_262"></span>[105:263](2010043.htm#fr_262.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p49"></span> Irenæus (*Adv. Hær.* III. 12. 8) says
that this Eunuch returned to Ethiopia and preached there. But by no one
else, so far as I know, is the origin of Christianity in Ethiopia traced
back to him. The first certain knowledge we have of the introduction of
Christianity into Ethiopia is in the fourth century, under Frumentius
and Ædesius, of whom Rufinus, I. 9, gives the original account; and yet
it is probable that Christianity existed there long before this time.
Compare Neander’s *Kirchengeschichte,* I. p. 46. See also H. R.
Reynolds’ article upon the “Ethiopian Church” in Smith and Wace’s
*Dictionary of Christian Biography,* II. 232 sqq.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[105:264](2010043.htm#fr_263.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p50"></span> <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p50.1"></span>[Psa. xviii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#031.md)<span id="iii.vii.ii-p50.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[105:265](2010043.htm#fr_264.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p52"></span> [Acts ix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015.md)<span id="iii.vii.ii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[105:266](2010043.htm#fr_265.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p53"></span> [Gal. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.vii.ii-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[105:267](2010043.htm#fr_266.md) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p54"></span> See [Acts
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#003.md), [Acts
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#006.md), [Acts
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#012.md), [Gal.
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016.md), [1 Cor.
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p54.1"></span>[Acts ix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.vii.ii-p54.2"></span>
sqq.; xxii. 6 sqq.; xxvi. 12 sqq.; [Gal. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.vii.ii-p54.3"></span>;
[1 Cor. xv. 8-10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p54.4"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](2010044.md)
