[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010032)  [Next](2010034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.—</span>*About the Time of Christ,
in accordance with Prophecy, the Rulers who had governed the Jewish
Nation in Regular Succession from the Days of Antiquity came to an End,
and Herod, the First Foreigner, Became King.*

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.vi-p2.1"></span>When</span> Herod, <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) the first ruler of foreign blood, became
King, the prophecy of Moses received its fulfillment, according to which
there should “not be wanting a prince of Judah, nor a ruler from his
loins, until he come for whom it is reserved.” <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) The latter, he also shows, was to be the
expectation of the nations. <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86)

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p6"></span>2. This prediction remained unfulfilled
so long as it was permitted them to live under rulers from their own
nation, that is, from the time of Moses to the reign of Augustus. Under
the latter, Herod, the first foreigner, was given the Kingdom of the
Jews by the Romans. As Josephus relates, <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) he was an Idumean <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) on his father’s side and an Arabian on
his mother’s. But Africanus, <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) who
was also no common writer, says that they who were more accurately
informed about him report that he was a son of Antipater, and that the
latter was the son of a certain Herod of Ascalon, <span
id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) one of the so-called <span
id="page_90">p. 90</span> <span
id="iii.vi.vi-Page_90"></span>servants <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) of the temple of Apollo.

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p12"></span>3. This Antipater, having been taken a
prisoner while a boy by Idumean robbers, lived with them, because his
father, being a poor man, was unable to pay a ransom for him. Growing up
in their practices he was afterward befriended by Hyrcanus, <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) the high priest of the Jews. A son of his
was that Herod who lived in the times of our Saviour. <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93)

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p15"></span>4. When the Kingdom of the Jews had
devolved upon such a man the expectation of the nations was, according
to prophecy, already at the door. For with him their princes and
governors, who had ruled in regular succession from the time of Moses
came to an end.

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p16"></span>5. Before their captivity and their
transportation to Babylon they were ruled by Saul first and then by
David, and before the kings leaders governed them who were called
Judges, and who came after Moses and his successor Jesus.

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p17"></span>6. After their return from Babylon they
continued to have without interruption an aristocratic form of
government, with an oligarchy. For the priests had the direction of
affairs until Pompey, the Roman general, took Jerusalem by force, and
defiled the holy places by entering the very innermost sanctuary of the
temple. <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) Aristobulus, <span
id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) who, by the right of ancient succession,
had been up to that time both king and high priest, he sent with his
children in chains to Rome; and gave to Hyrcanus, brother of
Aristobulus, the high priesthood, while the whole nation of the Jews was
made tributary to the Romans from that time. <span
id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96)

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p21"></span>7. But Hyrcanus, who was the last of the
regular line of high priests, was very soon afterward taken prisoner by
the Parthians, <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) and Herod, the first
foreigner, as I have already said, was made King of the Jewish nation by
the Roman senate and by Augustus.

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p23"></span>8. Under him Christ appeared in bodily
shape, and the expected Salvation of the nations and their calling
followed in accordance with prophecy. <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) From this time the princes and rulers of
Judah, I mean of the Jewish nation, came to an end, and as a natural
consequence the order of the high priesthood, which from ancient times
had proceeded regularly in closest succession from generation to
generation, was immediately thrown into confusion. <span
id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99)

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p27"></span>9. Of these things Josephus is also a
witness, <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) who shows that when
Herod was made King by the Romans he no longer appointed the high
priests from the ancient line, but gave the honor to certain obscure
persons. A course similar to that of Herod in the appointment of the
priests was pursued by his son Archelaus, <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) and after him by the Romans, who took
the government into their own hands. <span
id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102)

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p31"></span>10. The same writer shows <span
id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) that Herod was the first that locked
up the sacred garment of the high priest under his own seal and refused
to permit the high priests to keep it for themselves. The same course
was followed by Archelaus after him, and after Archelaus by the Romans.

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p33"></span>11. These things have been recorded by
us in order to show that another prophecy has been fulfilled in the
appearance of our Saviour Jesus Christ. For the Scripture, in the book
of Daniel, <span id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) having expressly
mentioned a certain number of weeks until the coming of Christ, of which
we have treated in other books, <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105)
most clearly prophesies, that after the completion of those weeks the
unction among the Jews should totally perish. And this, it has been
clearly shown, was fulfilled at the time of the birth of our Saviour
Jesus Christ. This has been neces<span id="page_91">p. 91</span> <span
id="iii.vi.vi-Page_91"></span>sarily premised by us as a proof of the
correctness of the time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_84"></span>[89:85](2010033.htm#fr_84) <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p3"></span> Herod the Great, son of Antipater, an
Idumean, who had been appointed procurator of Judea by Cæsar in <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.vi.vi-p3.1"></span>b.c.</span> 47. Herod was
made governor of Galilee at the same time, and king of Judea by the
Roman Senate in <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.vi-p3.2"></span>b.c.</span> 40.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[89:86](2010033.htm#fr_85) <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p4"></span> [Gen. xlix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)<span id="iii.vi.vi-p4.1"></span>.
The LXX., which Eusebius quotes here, according to his custom, is in the
present instance somewhat different from the Hebrew.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[89:87](2010033.htm#fr_86) <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p5"></span> *Ibid.*

<span id="fn_87"></span>[89:88](2010033.htm#fr_87) <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p7"></span> Eusebius refers here to *Ant.* XIV. 1. 3
and 7. 3. According to Josephus, Herod’s father was Antipater, and his
mother Cypros, an Arabian woman of noble birth.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89:89](2010033.htm#fr_88) <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p8"></span> The Idumeans or Edomites were the
descendants of Esau, and inhabited the Sinaitic peninsula south of the
Dead Sea. Their principal city and stronghold was the famous rock city,
Petra. They were constant enemies of the Jews, refused them free passage
through their land (<span id="iii.vi.vi-p8.1"></span>[Num. xx.
20](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#020)<span id="iii.vi.vi-p8.2"></span>);
were conquered by Saul and David, but again regained their independence,
until they were finally completely subjugated by John Hyrcanus, who left
them in possession of their land, but compelled them to undergo
circumcision, and adopt the Jewish law. Compare Josephus, *Ant.* XIII.
9. 1; XV. 7. 9; *B. J.* IV. 5. 5.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[89:90](2010033.htm#fr_89) <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p9"></span> On Africanus, see Bk. VI. chap. 31. This
account is given by Africanus in his epistle to Aristides, quoted by
Eusebius in the next chapter. Africanus states there (§11) that the
account, as he gives it, was handed down by the relatives of the Lord.
But the tradition, whether much older than Africanus or not, is
certainly incorrect. We learn from Josephus (*Ant.* XIV. 2), who is the
best witness upon this subject, that Antipater, the father of Herod the
Great, was the son of another Antipater, or Antipas, an Idumean who had
been made governor of Idumea by the Jewish king Alexander Jannæus (of
the Maccabæan family). In *Ant.* XVI. 11 Josephus informs us that a
report had been invented by friends and flatterers of Herod that he was
descended from Jewish ancestors. The report originated with Nicolai
Damasceni, a writer of the time of the Herods. The tradition preserved
here by Africanus had its origin, evidently, in a desire to degrade
Herod by representing him as descended from a slave.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[89:91](2010033.htm#fr_90) <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p10"></span> Ascalon, one of the five cities of the
Philistines (mentioned frequently in the Old Testament), lay upon the
Mediterranean Sea, between Gaza and Joppa. It was beautified by Herod
(although not belonging to his dominions), and after his death became
the residence of his sister Salome. It was a prominent place in the
Middle Ages, but is now in ruins. Of this Herod of Ascalon nothing is
known. Possibly no such man existed.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[90:92](2010033.htm#fr_91) <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.vi-p11.1"></span>ἱ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.vi-p11.2"></span>ερόδουλος</span>, “a temple-slave.”

<span id="fn_92"></span>[90:93](2010033.htm#fr_92) <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p13"></span> Hyrcanus II., eldest son of the King
Alexander Jannæus of the Maccabæan family, became high priest upon the
death of his father, in 78 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.vi-p13.1"></span>b.c.</span>; and upon the death of his
mother, in 69 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.vi-p13.2"></span>b.c.</span>, ascended the throne. He gave up
his kingdom afterward (66 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.vi-p13.3"></span>b.c.</span>) to his younger brother,
Aristobulus; but under the influence of Antipater the Idumean endeavored
to regain it, and after a long war with his brother, was re-established
in power by Pompey, in 63 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.vi-p13.4"></span>b.c.</span>, but merely as high priest and
governor, not with the title of king. He retained his position until 40
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.vi.vi-p13.5"></span>b.c.</span>, when he
was driven out by his nephew Antigonus. He was murdered in 30 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.vi.vi-p13.6"></span>b.c.</span>, by command of
Herod the Great, who had married his grand-daughter Mariamne. He was
throughout a weak man, and while in power was completely under the
influence of his minister, Antipater.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[90:94](2010033.htm#fr_93) <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p13.7"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p14"></span> Herod the Great.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[90:95](2010033.htm#fr_94) <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p18"></span> In 63 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.vi-p18.1"></span>b.c.</span>, when Pompey’s curiosity led him
to penetrate into the Holy of Holies. He was much impressed, however, by
its simplicity, and went away without disturbing its treasures,
wondering at a religion which had no visible God.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[90:96](2010033.htm#fr_95) <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p19"></span> Aristobulus II., younger brother of
Hyrcanus, a much abler and more energetic man, assumed the kingdom by an
arrangement with his brother in 66 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.vi-p19.1"></span>b.c.</span> (see note 9, above). In 63 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.vi.vi-p19.2"></span>b.c.</span> he was
deposed, and carried to Rome by Pompey. He died about 48 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.vi.vi-p19.3"></span>b.c.</span> Eusebius is
hardly correct in saying that Aristobulus was king and high priest by
regular succession, as his elder brother Hyrcanus was the true heir, and
he had assumed the power only because of his superior ability.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[90:97](2010033.htm#fr_96) <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p19.4"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p20"></span> The real independence of the Jews
practically ceased at this time. For three years only, from 40 to 37
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.vi.vi-p20.1"></span>b.c.</span>, while
Antigonus, son of Aristobulus and nephew of Hyrcanus, was in power,
Jerusalem was independent of Rome, but was soon retaken by Herod the
Great and remained from that time on in more or less complete
subjection, either as a dependent kingdom or as a province.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[90:98](2010033.htm#fr_97) <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p22"></span> 40 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.vi-p22.1"></span>b.c.</span>, when Antigonus, by the aid of
the Parthians took Jerusalem and established himself as king there,
until conquered by Herod in 37 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.vi-p22.2"></span>b.c.</span> Hyrcanus returned to Jerusalem
in 36 <span class="c13"><span id="iii.vi.vi-p22.3"></span>b.c.</span>,
but was no longer high priest.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[90:99](2010033.htm#fr_98) <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p24"></span> Compare <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p24.1"></span>[Isa. ix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002)<span id="iii.vi.vi-p24.2"></span>;
xlii. 6; xlix. 6, etc.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[90:100](2010033.htm#fr_99) <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p24.3"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p25"></span> Eusebius’ statement is perfectly
correct. The high priestly lineage had been kept with great
scrupulousness until Hyrcanus II., the last of the regular succession.
(His grandson Aristobulus, however, was high priest for a year under
Herod, but was then slain by him.) Afterward the high priest was
appointed and changed at pleasure by the secular ruler.

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p26"></span>Herod the Great first established the
practice of removing a high priest during his lifetime; and under him
there were no less than six different ones.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[90:101](2010033.htm#fr_100) <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p28"></span> Josephus, *Ant.* XX. 8.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[90:102](2010033.htm#fr_101) <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p29"></span> Archelaus, a son of Herod the Great by
Malthace, a Samaritan woman, and younger brother of Herod Antipas. Upon
the death of his father, <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.vi-p29.1"></span>b.c.</span> 4, he succeeded to the
government of Idumea, Samaria, and Judea, with the title of Ethnarch.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[90:103](2010033.htm#fr_102) <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p30"></span> After the death of Archelaus (<span
class="c13"><span id="iii.vi.vi-p30.1"></span>a.d.</span> 7), Judea was
made a Roman province, and ruled by procurators until Herod Agrippa I.
came into power in 37 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.vi-p30.2"></span>a.d.</span> (see below, Bk. II. chap. 4,
note 3). The changes in the high priesthood during the most of this time
were very rapid, one after another being appointed and removed according
to the fancy of the procurator, or of the governor of Syria, who held
the power of appointment most of the time. There were no fewer than
nineteen high priests between the death of Archelaus and the fall of
Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[90:104](2010033.htm#fr_103) <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p32"></span> Josephus, *Ant.* XV. 11. 4.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[90:105](2010033.htm#fr_104) <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p34"></span> [Dan. ix.
26](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#026)<span id="iii.vi.vi-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[90:106](2010033.htm#fr_105) <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p35"></span> It is commonly assumed that Eusebius
refers here to the *Dem. Evang.* VIII. 2 sq., where the prophecies of
Daniel are discussed at length. But, as Lightfoot remarks, the reference
is just as well satisfied by the *Eclogæ Proph.* III. 45. We cannot, in
fact, decide which work is meant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](2010034)
