[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010319)  [Next](2010321) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xvii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii.xiii-p1"></span> On Bk. V. Introd. § I (note 3,
continued). *The Successors of Antoninus Pius*.

<span id="iii.xvii.xiii-p2"></span>Antoninus Pius was succeeded in 161
by his adopted sons, Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Verus and Lucius Ceionius
Ælius Aurelius Commodus Antoninus. Upon his accession to the throne the
former transferred his name Verus to the latter, who was thenceforth
called Lucius Aurelius Verus. In his *Chronicle* Eusebius keeps these
two princes distinct, but in his *History* he falls into sad confusion
in regard to them, and this confusion has drawn upon him the severe
censure of all his critics. He knew of course, as every one did, that
Antoninus Pius had two successors. In Bk. IV. chap. 14, § 10, he states
this directly, and gives the names of the successors as “Marcus Aurelius
Verus, who was also called Antoninus,” and “Lucius.” From that point on
he calls the former of these princes simply Antoninus Verus, Antoninus,
or Verus, dropping entirely the name Marcus Aurelius. In Bk. IV. chap.
18, § 2, he speaks of the emperor “whose times we are now recording,”
that is, the successor of Antoninus Pius, and calls him Antoninus Verus.
In Bk. V. Introd. § I he refers to the same emperor as Antoninus Verus,
and in Bk. V. chap. 4, § 3, and chap. 9, he calls him simply Antoninus,
while in Bk. IV. chap. 13, § 8, he speaks of him as the “Emperor Verus.”
The death of this Emperor Antoninus is mentioned in Bk. V. chap. 9, and
it is there said that he reigned nineteen years and was then succeeded
by Commodus. It is evident that in all these passages he is referring to
the emperor whom we know as Marcus Aurelius, but to whom he gives that
name only once, when he records his accession to the empire. On the
other hand, in Bk. V. chap. 5, § 1, Eusebius speaks of Marcus Aurelius
Cæsar and expressly distinguishes him from the Emperor Antoninus, to
whom he has referred at the close of the previous chapter, and makes him
the brother of that emperor. Again, in the same chapter, § 6, he calls
this Marcus Aurelius Cæsar, just referred to, the “Emperor Marcus,”
still evidently distinguishing him from the Emperor Antoninus. In this
chapter, therefore, he thinks of Marcus Aurelius as the younger of the
two sons left by Antoninus Pius; that is, he identifies him with the one
whom we call Lucius Verus, and whom he himself calls Lucius in Bk. IV.
chap. 14 § 10. Eusebius thus commits a palpable error. How are we to
explain it?

<span id="iii.xvii.xiii-p3"></span>The explanation seems to me to lie in
the circumstance that Eusebius attempted to reconcile the tradition that
Marcus Aurelius was not a persecutor with the fact known to him as a
historian, that the emperor who succeeded Antoninus Pius was. It was the
common belief in the time of Eusebius, as it had been during the entire
preceding century, that all the good emperors had been friendly to the
Christians, and that only the bad <span id="page_391">p. 391</span>
<span id="iii.xvii.xiii-Page_391"></span>emperors had persecuted. Of
course, among the good emperors was included the philosophical Marcus
Aurelius (cf. e.g. Tertullian’s *Apol*. chap. 5, to which Eusebius
refers in Bk. V. chap. 5). It was of Marcus Aurelius, moreover, that the
story of the Thundering Legion was told (see *ibid*.). But Eusebius was
not able to overlook the fact that numerous martyrdoms occurred during
the reign of the successor of Antoninus Pius. He had the documents
recording the terrible persecution at Lyons and Vienne; he had an
apology of Melito, describing the hardships which the Christians endured
under the same emperor (see Bk. IV. chap. 26). He found himself, as an
historian, face to face with two apparently contradictory lines of
facts. How was the contradiction to be solved? He seems to have solved
it by assuming that a confusion of names had taken place, and that the
prince commonly known as Marcus Aurelius, whose noble character was
traditional, and whose friendship to the Christians he could not doubt,
was the younger, not the older of the two brothers, and therefore not
responsible for the numerous martyrdoms which took place after the death
of Antoninus Pius. And yet he is not consistent with himself even in his
History; for he gives the two brothers their proper names when he first
mentions them, and says nothing of an identification of Marcus Aurelius
with Lucius. It is not impossible that the words Marcus Aurelius, which
are used nowhere else of the older brother, are an interpolation; but
for this there is no evidence, and it may be suggested as more probable
that at the time when this passage was written the solution of the
difficulty which he gives distinctly in Bk. V. chap. 5 had not yet
occurred to him. That he should be able to fancy that Marcus Aurelius
was identical with Lucius is perhaps not strange when we remember how
much confusion was caused in the minds of other writers besides himself
by the perplexing identity of the names of the various members of the
Antonine family. To the two successors of Antoninus Pius, the three
names, Aurelius, Verus, and Antoninus, alike belonged. It is not
surprising that Eusebius should under the circumstances think that the
name Marcus may also have belonged to the younger one. This supposition
would seem to him to find some confirmation in the fact that the most
common official designation of the older successor of Antoninus Pius was
not Marcus Aurelius, but Antoninus simply, or M. Antoninus. The name
Marcus Aurelius or Marcus was rather a popular than an official
designation. Even in the *Chronicle* there seems to be a hint that
Eusebius thought of a possible distinction between Antoninus the emperor
and Marcus, or Marcus Aurelius; for while he speaks of the “Emperor
Antoninus” at the beginning of the passages in which he recounts the
story of the Thundering Legion (year of Abr. 2188), he says at the
close: *literæ quoque exstant Marci regis* (the *M. Aureli gravissimi
imperatoris* of Jerome looks like a later expansion of the simpler
original) *quibus testatur copias suas iamiam perituras Christianorum
precibus servatas esse*. But even when he had reached the solution
pointed out, Eusebius did not find himself clear of difficulties; for
his sources put the occurrence of the Thundering Legion after the date
at which the younger brother was universally supposed to have died, and
it was difficult on still other grounds to suppose the prince named
Marcus Aurelius already dead in 169 (the date given by Eusebius himself
in his *Chronicle* for the death of Lucius). In this emergency he came
to the conclusion that there must be some mistake in regard to the date
of his death, and possessing no record of the death of Marcus Aurelius
as distinct from Antoninus, he simply passed it by without mention.

<span id="iii.xvii.xiii-p4"></span>That Eusebius in accepting such a
lame theory showed himself altogether too much under the influence of
traditional views cannot be denied; but when we remember that the
tradition that Marcus Aurelius was not a persecutor was supported by
writers whose honesty and accuracy he could never have thought of
questioning, as well as by the very nature of the case, we must, while
we smile at the result, at least admire his effort to solve the
contradiction which he, as an historian, felt more keenly than a less
learned man, unacquainted with the facts on the other side, would have
done.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note 14](2010321)
