[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010265)  [Next](2010267) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIV.—</span>*The Character of the
Enemies of Religion.*

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiii.xv-p2.1"></span>Maxentius</span> his son, who obtained the
government at Rome, <span id="fr_2577"></span>[2578](#fn_2577) at first
feigned our faith, in complaisance and flattery toward the Roman people.
On this account he commanded his subjects to cease persecuting the
Christians, pretending to religion that he might appear merciful and
mild beyond his predecessors.

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p5"></span>2. But he did not prove in his deeds to
be such a person as was hoped, but ran into all wickedness and abstained
from no impurity or licentiousness, committing adulteries and indulging
in all kinds of corruption. For having separated wives from their lawful
consorts, he abused them and sent them back most dishonorably to their
husbands. And he not only practiced this against the obscure and
unknown, but he insulted especially the most prominent and distinguished
members of the Roman senate.

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p6"></span>3. All his subjects, people and rulers,
honored and obscure, were worn out by grievous oppression. Neither,
although they kept quiet, and bore the bitter servitude, was there any
relief from the murderous cruelty of the tyrant. Once, on a small
pretense, he gave the people to be slaughtered by his guards; and a
great multitude of the Roman populace were slain in the midst of the
city, with the spears and arms, not of Scythians and barbarians, but of
their own fellow-citizens.

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p7"></span>4. It would be impossible to recount
the number of senators who were put to death for the sake of their
wealth; multitudes being slain on various pretenses.

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p8"></span>5. To crown all his wickedness, the
tyrant resorted to magic. And in his divinations he cut open pregnant
women, and again inspected the bowels of newborn infants. He slaughtered
lions, and performed various execrable acts to invoke demons and avert
war. For his only hope was that, by these means, victory would be
secured to him.

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p9"></span>6. It is impossible to tell the ways in
which this tyrant at Rome oppressed his subjects, so that they were
reduced to such an extreme dearth of the necessities of life as has
never been known, according to our contemporaries, either at Rome or
elsewhere.

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p10"></span>7. But Maximinus, the tyrant in the
East, having secretly formed a friendly alliance with the Roman tyrant
as with a brother in wickedness, sought to conceal it for a long time.
But being at last detected, he suffered merited punishment. <span
id="fr_2578"></span>[2579](#fn_2578)

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p13"></span>8. It was wonderful <span
id="page_337">p. 337</span> <span id="iii.xiii.xv-Page_337"></span>how
akin he was in wickedness to the tyrant at Rome, or rather how far he
surpassed him in it. For the chief of sorcerers and magicians were
honored by him with the highest rank. Becoming exceedingly timid and
superstitious, he valued greatly the error of idols and demons. Indeed,
without soothsayers and oracles he did not venture to move even a
finger, <span id="fr_2579"></span>[2580](#fn_2579) so to speak.

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p15"></span>9. Therefore he persecuted us more
violently and incessantly than his predecessors. He ordered temples to
be erected in every city, and the sacred groves which had been destroyed
through lapse of time to be speedily restored. He appointed idol priests
in every place and city; and he set over them in every province, as high
priest, some political official who had especially distinguished himself
in every kind of service, giving him a band of soldiers and a
body-guard. And to all jugglers, as if they were pious and beloved of
the gods, he granted governments and the greatest privileges.

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p16"></span>10. From this time on he distressed
and harassed, not one city or country, but all the provinces under his
authority, by extreme exactions of gold and silver and goods, and most
grievous prosecutions and various fines. He took away from the wealthy
the property which they had inherited from their ancestors, and bestowed
vast riches and large sums of money on the flatterers about him.

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p17"></span>11. And he went to such an excess of
folly and drunkenness that his mind was deranged and crazed in his
carousals; and he gave commands when intoxicated of which he repented
afterward when sober. He suffered no one to surpass him in debauchery
and profligacy, but made himself an instructor in wickedness to those
about him, both rulers and subjects. He urged on the army to live
wantonly in every kind of revelry and intemperance, and encouraged the
governors and generals to abuse their subjects with rapacity and
covetousness, almost as if they were rulers with him.

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p18"></span>12. Why need we relate the licentious,
shameless deeds of the man, or enumerate the multitude with whom he
committed adultery? For he could not pass through a city without
continually corrupting women and ravishing virgins.

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p19"></span>13. And in this he succeeded with all
except the Christians. For as they despised death, they cared nothing
for his power. For the men endured fire and sword and crucifixion and
wild beasts and the depths of the sea, and cutting off of limbs, and
burnings, and pricking and digging out of eyes, and mutilations of the
entire body, and besides these, hunger and mines and bonds. In all they
showed patience in behalf of religion rather than transfer to idols the
reverence due to God.

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p20"></span>14. And the women were not less manly
than the men in behalf of the teaching of the Divine Word, as they
endured conflicts with the men, and bore away equal prizes of virtue.
And when they were dragged away for corrupt purposes, they surrendered
their lives to death rather than their bodies to impurity. <span
id="fr_2580"></span>[2581](#fn_2580)

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p22"></span>15. One only of those who were seized
for adulterous purposes by the tyrant, a most distinguished and
illustrious Christian woman in Alexandria, conquered the passionate and
intemperate soul of Maximinus by most heroic firmness. Honorable on
account of wealth and family and education, she esteemed all of these
inferior to chastity. He urged her many times, but although she was
ready to die, he could not put her to death, for his desire was stronger
than his anger.

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p23"></span>16. He therefore punished her with
exile, and took away all her property. Many others, unable even to
listen to the threats of violation from the heathen rulers, endured
every form of tortures, and rackings, and deadly punishment.

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p24"></span>These indeed should be admired. But
far the most admirable was that woman at Rome, who was truly the most
noble and modest of all, whom the tyrant Maxentius, fully resembling
Maximinus in his actions, endeavored to abuse.

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p25"></span>17. For when she learned that those
who served the tyrant in such matters were at the house (she also was a
Christian), and that her husband, although a prefect of Rome, would
suffer them to take and lead her away, having requested a little time
for adorning her body, she entered her chamber, and being alone, stabbed
herself with a sword. Dying immediately, she left her corpse to those
who had come for her. And by her deeds, more powerfully than by any
words, she has shown to all men now and hereafter that the virtue which
prevails among Christians is the only invincible and indestructible
possession. <span id="fr_2581"></span>[2582](#fn_2581)

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p27"></span>18. Such was the career of wickedness
which was carried forward at one and the same time by the two tyrants
who held the East and the West. Who is there that would hesitate, after
careful examination, to pronounce the persecution against us the cause
of such evils? Especially since this extreme confusion of affairs did
not cease until the Christians had obtained liberty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2577"></span>[336:2578](2010266.htm#fr_2577) <span
id="iii.xiii.xv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p3"></span> See the previous chapter, note 21.

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p4"></span>The character which Eusebius gives to
Maxentius in this chapter is borne out by all our sources, both heathen
and Christian, and seems not to be greatly overdrawn. It has been
sometimes disputed whether he persecuted the Christians, but there is no
ground to suppose that he did, though they, in common with all his
subjects, had to suffer from his oppression, and therefore hated him as
deeply as the others did. His failure to persecute the Christians as
such, and his restoration to them of the rights which they had enjoyed
before the beginning of the great persecution, can hardly be looked upon
as a result of a love or respect for our religion. It was doubtless in
part due to hostility to Galerius, but chiefly to political
considerations. He apparently saw what Constantine later saw and
profited by,—that it would be for his profit, and would tend to
strengthen his government, to gain the friendship of that large body of
his subjects which had been so violently handled under the reign of his
father. And, no doubt, the universal toleration which he offered was one
of the great sources of his strength at the beginning of his reign. Upon
his final defeat by Constantine, and his death, see below, Bk. IX. chap.
9.

<span id="fn_2578"></span>[336:2579](2010266.htm#fr_2578) <span
id="iii.xiii.xv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p11"></span> On the alliance of Maximinus with
Maxentius, his war with Licinius, and his death, see below, Bk. IX.
chaps. 9 and 10. Upon his accession to the Cæsarship, and usurpation of
the title of Augustus, see above, chap. 13, notes 16 and 22.

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p12"></span>Maximinus Daza was a nephew of
Galerius, who owed his advancement, not to his own merits, but solely to
the favor of his uncle, but who, nevertheless, after acquiring power,
was by no means the tool Galerius had expected him to be. Eusebius seems
not to have exaggerated his wickedness in the least. He was the most
abandoned and vicious of the numerous rulers of the time, and was
utterly without redeeming qualities, so far as we can ascertain. Under
him the Christians suffered more severely than under any of his
colleagues, and even after the toleration edict and death of Galerius
(<span class="c13"><span id="iii.xiii.xv-p12.1"></span>a.d.</span> 311),
he continued the persecution for more than a year. His territory
comprised Egypt and Syria, and consequently the greater part of the
martyrdoms recorded by Eusebius in his *Martyrs of Palestine* took place
under him. (See that work, for the details.) Upon the so-called Fifth
Edict, which was issued by him in 308, see *Mart. Pal.* chap. 9, note 1.
Upon his treatment of the Christians after the death of Galerius, and
upon his final toleration edict, see Bk. IX. chap. 2 sq. and chap. 9 sq.

<span id="fn_2579"></span>[337:2580](2010266.htm#fr_2579) <span
id="iii.xiii.xv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p14"></span> Literally, “a finger-nail” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii.xv-p14.1"></span>ὄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii.xv-p14.2"></span>νυχος</span>).

<span id="fn_2580"></span>[337:2581](2010266.htm#fr_2580) <span
id="iii.xiii.xv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p21"></span> Compare chap. 12, note 3, above.

<span id="fn_2581"></span>[337:2582](2010266.htm#fr_2581) <span
id="iii.xiii.xv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p26"></span> *Ibid.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](2010267)
