[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010626)  [Next](2010628.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xli"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xli-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iv.xli-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLI</span>.—*That in the meantime
he ordered a Council to be convened at Tyre, because of Controversies
raised in Egypt.*

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xli-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iv.xli-p2.1"></span>Meanwhile</span> that spirit of envy which
is the enemy of all good, like a dark cloud intercepting the sun’s
brightest rays, endeavored to mar the joy of this festivity, by again
raising contentions to disturb the tranquillity of the Egyptian
churches. Our divinely favored emperor, however, once more convened a
synod composed of many bishops, and set them as it were in armed array,
like the host of God, against this malignant spirit, having commanded
their presence from the whole of Egypt and Libya, from Asia, and from
Europe, in order, first, to decide the questions in dispute, and
afterwards to perform the dedication of the sacred edifice above
mentioned. He enjoined them, by the way, to adjust their differences at
the capital city of Phœnicia, reminding them that they had no right,
while harboring feelings of mutual animosity, to engage in the service
of God, since his law expressly forbids those who are at variance to
offer their gift until they have first become reconciled and mutually
disposed to peace. Such were the salutary precepts which the emperor
continually kept vividly before his own mind, and in accordance with
which he admonished them to undertake their present duties in a spirit
of perfect unanimity and concord, in a letter to the following purport.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLII](2010628.md)
