[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010190)  [Next](2010192) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI.—</span>*The Bishops that were
well known at that Time.*

<span id="iii.xi.xxi-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xxi-p2.1"></span>After</span> Antoninus <span
id="fr_1938"></span>[1939](#fn_1938) had reigned seven years and six
months, Macrinus succeeded him. He held the government but a year, and
was succeeded by another Antoninus. During his first year the Roman
bishop, Zephyrinus, <span id="fr_1939"></span>[1940](#fn_1939) having
held his office for eighteen years, died, and Callistus <span
id="fr_1940"></span>[1941](#fn_1940) received the episcopate.

<span id="iii.xi.xxi-p7"></span>2. He continued for five years, and was
succeeded by <span id="page_269">p. 269</span> <span
id="iii.xi.xxi-Page_269"></span>Urbanus. <span
id="fr_1941"></span>[1942](#fn_1941) After this, Alexander became Roman
emperor, Antoninus having reigned but four years. <span
id="fr_1942"></span>[1943](#fn_1942) At this time Philetus <span
id="fr_1943"></span>[1944](#fn_1943) also succeeded Asclepiades <span
id="fr_1944"></span>[1945](#fn_1944) in the church of Antioch.

<span id="iii.xi.xxi-p12"></span>3. The mother of the emperor,
Mammæa <span id="fr_1945"></span>[1946](#fn_1945) by name, was a most
pious woman, if there ever was one, and of religious life. When the fame
of Origen had extended everywhere and had come even to her ears, she
desired greatly to see the man, and above all things to make trial of
his celebrated understanding of divine things.

<span id="iii.xi.xxi-p14"></span>4. Staying for a time in Antioch, she
sent for him with a military escort. Having remained with her a while
and shown her many things which were for the glory of the Lord and of
the excellence of the divine teaching, he hastened back to his
accustomed work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1938"></span>[268:1939](2010191.htm#fr_1938) <span
id="iii.xi.xxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxi-p3"></span> i.e. Caracalla, who was slain on the
8th of April, 217. Four days later, Marcus Opilius Macrinus, prefect of
the prætorians, was proclaimed emperor. After a reign of fourteen
months, he was defeated and succeeded by Varius Avitus Bassianus, a
cousin of Caracalla, and priest of the Phœnician Sun-god, from which
fact is derived the name by which he is commonly known,—Elagabalus, or
Heliogabalus. Upon his accession to the imperial power, he took the name
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, which became his official designation.

<span id="fn_1939"></span>[268:1940](2010191.htm#fr_1939) <span
id="iii.xi.xxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxi-p4"></span> On Zephyrinus, see Bk. V. chap. 28,
note 5.

<span id="fn_1940"></span>[268:1941](2010191.htm#fr_1940) <span
id="iii.xi.xxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxi-p5"></span> As shown in the next note, a comparison
of our best sources leads us to the year 222 as the date of the
accession of Urban, and consequently of the death of Callistus. A
careful comparison of the various sources, which differ in regard to the
years of the several episcopates of Victor, Zephyrinus, and Callistus,
but agree as to the sum of the three, leads to the result that Callistus
was bishop for five years, and therefore his accession is to be put into
the year 217, and the reign of Macrinus (see Lipsius, *Chron. d. röm.
Bischöfe,* p. 171 sq.). This agrees, so far as the years of our era are
concerned, with the statement of Eusebius in this chapter; but he
wrongly puts Callistus’ accession into the first year of Alexander,
which is a result of an error of a year in his reckoning of the dates of
the emperors, which runs back to Pertinax (see Lipsius, p. 7 sq.). He
does not assign Callistus’ accession to the first year of Heliogabalus
because of a tradition connecting the two, but simply because his
reckoning of the lengths of the various episcopates, which were given in
the source used by him, led him to the year 217 for Callistus’
accession, and this, according to his erroneous table of the reigns of
the emperors, was the first year of Heliogabalus. We thus see that
Eusebius is in real, though not in apparent, agreement with the Liberian
catalogue in regard to the date of Callistus’ accession, which may,
therefore, be accepted as certain.

<span id="iii.xi.xxi-p6"></span>Nothing was known about the character
and life of Callistus until the discovery of Hippolytus’
*Philosophumena,* or *Refutation of All Heresies* (see the next chapter,
note 1). In Bk. IX. of that work is given a detailed description of him,
from the pen of a very bitter opponent. At the same time, it can hardly
be doubted that at least the groundwork of the account is true.
According to Hippolytus, he was a slave; a dishonest banker, who was
punished for his dishonesty; the author of a riot in a Jewish synagogue,
who was sent as a criminal to the mines; finally, after various other
adventures, the right-hand man of the bishop Zephyrinus, and after his
death, his successor. According to Hippolytus, he was a Patripassian,
and he introduced much laxer methods of church discipline than had
hitherto been in vogue; so lax as greatly to scandalize Hippolytus, who
was a very rigid disciplinarian. Whatever truth there may be in this
highly sensational account (and we cannot doubt that it is greatly
overdrawn), it is at least certain that Callistus took the liberal view
of Christian morals and church discipline, over against the stricter
view represented by Hippolytus and his party. It was, perhaps, owing to
his popularity on this account that, after the death of Zephyrinus, he
secured the episcopacy of Rome, for which Hippolytus was also a
candidate. The latter tells us also that Zephyrinus “set him over the
cemetery,”—a most interesting notice, as the largest catacomb in Rome
bears the name of St. Callistus, and may be the very one of which
Zephyrinus made him the superintendent.

<span id="fn_1941"></span>[269:1942](2010191.htm#fr_1941) <span
id="iii.xi.xxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxi-p8"></span> Lipsius, in his *Chron. d. röm.
Bischöfe,* p. 170 sq., shows that the only fixed point for a calculation
of the dates of Urban and the three bishops preceding him, is the
banishment by the Emperor Maximinus of Pontianus to Sardinia, which took
place, according to the Liberian catalogue, while Severus and Quintinus
were consuls; that is, in the year 235. The duration of Pontianus’
episcopate is shown by a comparison of the best sources to have been a
little over five years (see chap. 23, note 3). This brings us to the
year 230 as the date of Urban’s death. According to chap. 23, Urban was
bishop eight years, and with this the Liberian catalogue agrees, so that
this figure is far better supported than the figure nine given by the
*Chron.* Accepting eight years as the duration of Urban’s episcopate, we
are brought back to 222 as the date of his accession, which agrees with
Eusebius’ statement in this chapter (see the previous note). There are
extant *Acta S. Urbani,* which are accepted as genuine by the
Bollandists, and assigned to the second century, but they cannot have
been written before the fifth, and are historically quite worthless. For
a good discussion of his supposed connection with St. Cecilia, which has
played such an important part in ecclesiastical legend, see the article
*Urbanus* in the *Dict. of Christ. Biog.* We have no certain knowledge
of his life and character.

<span id="fn_1942"></span>[269:1943](2010191.htm#fr_1942) <span
id="iii.xi.xxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxi-p9"></span> Elagabalus was slain in March, 222,
after a reign of three years and nine months, and was succeeded by his
cousin, Alexianus Bassianus, who assumed the names Marcus Aurelius
Alexander Severus, by the last two of which he is commonly known.

<span id="fn_1943"></span>[269:1944](2010191.htm#fr_1943) <span
id="iii.xi.xxi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxi-p10"></span> Philetus, according to the *Chron.*
(Armenian), became bishop in the sixth year of Caracalla (216), and was
succeeded by Zebinus in the sixth year of Alexander Severus (227).
Jerome puts his accession into the reign of Macrinus (217–218), and the
accession of Zebinus into the seventh year of Alexander (228). The
accession of Zebinus must have taken place at least as early as 231 (see
chap. 23, note 4), and there remains therefore no reason to doubt the
approximate accuracy of the latter dates. If the dates given for
Philetus’ accession (216–218) be approximately correct, we must
understand the words “at this time” of the present chapter, to refer
back to the reign of Macrinus, or the accession of Alexander Severus,
mentioned at the beginning of this chapter. This does not seem natural,
but we cannot say it is impossible. Knowing the unreliability of the
dates given in the *Chron.*, we are compelled to leave the matter
undecided. He is called by the *Armen.* Philip, by Syncellus <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxi-p10.1"></span>φίλητος ἢ
φίλιππος</span>. The latter assigns him an episcopate of eight years,
which agrees with none of the figures given by the two versions of the
*Chronicle* or by the *History*. We know nothing about the person or the
life of Philetus.

<span id="fn_1944"></span>[269:1945](2010191.htm#fr_1944) <span
id="iii.xi.xxi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxi-p11"></span> On Asclepiades, see chap. 11, note 6.

<span id="fn_1945"></span>[269:1946](2010191.htm#fr_1945) <span
id="iii.xi.xxi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxi-p13"></span> Julia Mamæa or Mammæa (Eusebius, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxi-p13.1"></span>Μαμμαία</span>) was the
niece of Septimius Severus’ wife Julia Domna, the aunt of the Emperor
Elagabalus, and the mother of the Emperor Alexander Severus, by the
Syrian Gessius Marcianus. She accompanied Elagabalus to Rome, and had
strength of character enough to protect her son from the jealousy of the
latter, and to keep him comparatively pure from the vice and debauchery
of the court. During the reign of her son she exerted great influence,
which was in the main highly beneficial; but her pride and avarice
finally proved fatal, both to her son and to herself. Her character
seems to have been in the main pure and elevated; and she was apparently
inclined to the same sort of religious syncretism which led her son to
adopt many Christian principles of action, and to put the busts of
Abraham and of Christ, with those of Orpheus, Apollonius of Tyana, and
the best of the Roman emperors, in his private chapel (see Lampridius,
*Vita Sev.* c. 29, 43). Eusebius calls Mammæa <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xxi-p13.2"></span>θεοσεβεστ€τη</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxi-p13.3"></span>εὐλαβής</span>, and
Jerome calls her a *religiosa femina* (*de vir. ill.* c. 54); but there
is no evidence that she was a Christian. The date of Origen’s interview
with her has been greatly disputed. Huet and Redepenning, accepting the
order of events recorded in this chapter as chronological, put the
interview in the early years of Alexander Severus, Redepenning assuming
an otherwise unrecorded visit of Mammæa to Antioch, Huet connecting her
visit there with the Persian expedition of Alexander. Huet assumes, upon
the authority of Jerome’s *Chron.,* that the Persian expedition took
place in the early part of Alexander’s reign; but this is against all
other ancient authorities, and must be incorrect (see Tillemont, *Mem.*
III. 763 sq.). The only occasions known to us, on which Mammæa can have
been in Antioch, were this expedition of her son (between 230 and 233)
and the visit of her nephew Elagabalus to Antioch, after his victory
over Macrinus in 218. At both these times Origen was quite probably in
Cæsarea (see chap. 19, note 23, and p. 392, below), whence it is more
natural to suppose him summoned than from Alexandria. If we put the
interview in 218, we must suppose (as Tillemont suggests) that Eusebius
is led by his mention of Alexander to give this account of his mother,
and that he does not intend to imply that the interview took place after
Alexander’s accession. There is nothing at all improbable in this. In
fact, it seems more likely that he would mention the interview in
connection with Alexander than in connection with Elagabalus, in spite
of chronology. On the other hand, it is not impossible that the
interview took place subsequently to the year 231, for Origen’s fame was
certainly by that time much greater in Syria than fifteen years
previous. At the same time, to accept this date disarranges seriously
the chronological order of the account of Eusebius, for in chap. 24 we
are told of those works which Origen wrote while yet in Alexandria; that
is, before 231. Moreover, there is not the same reason for inserting
this account of Mammæa at this point, if it occurred later in
Alexander’s reign, that there is if it occurred in the reign of
Elagabalus. We shall, therefore, do best to accept the earlier date with
Tillemont, Westcott, and others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII](2010192)
