[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010583)  [Next](2010585.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lxv"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lxv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.lxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXV</span>.—*The Heretics are
deprived of their Meeting Places.*

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lxv-p2"></span>“<span class="c13"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.lxv-p2.1"></span>Forasmuch</span>, then, as it is no
longer possible to bear with your pernicious errors, we give warning by
this present statute that none of you henceforth presume to assemble
yourselves together. <span id="fr_3304"></span>[3305](#fn_3304.md) We have
directed, accordingly, that you be deprived of all the houses in which
you are accustomed to hold your assemblies: and our care in this respect
extends so far as to forbid the holding of your superstitious and
senseless meetings, not in public merely, but in any private house or
place whatsoever. Let those of you, therefore, who are desirous of
embracing the true and pure religion, take the far better course of
entering the catholic Church, and uniting with it in holy fellowship,
whereby you will be enabled to arrive at the knowledge of the truth. In
any case, the delusions of your perverted understandings must entirely
cease to mingle with and mar the felicity of our present times: I mean
the impious and wretched double-mindedness of heretics and schismatics.
For it is an object worthy of that prosperity which we enjoy through the
favor of God, to endeavor to bring back those who in time past were
living in the hope of future blessing, from all irregularity and error
to the right path, from darkness to light, from vanity to truth, from
death to salvation. And in order that this remedy may be applied with
effectual power, we have commanded, as before said, that you be
positively deprived of every gathering point for your superstitious
meetings, I mean all the houses of prayer, if such be worthy of the
name, which belong to <span id="page_540">p. 540</span> <span
id="iv.vi.iii.lxv-Page_540"></span>heretics, and that these be made over
without delay to the catholic Church; that any other places be
confiscated to the public service, and no facility whatever be left for
any future gathering; in order that from this day forward none of your
unlawful assemblies may presume to appear in any public or private
place. Let this edict be made public.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3304"></span>[539:3305](2010584.htm#fr_3304.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.lxv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lxv-p3"></span> There is throughout this Life a
curious repetition in the details of action against heretics of
precisely the same things which Christians complained of as having been
done to them. The idea of toleration then seems to have been much as it
was in pre-reformation times, or, not to judge other times when there is
a beam in our own eye, as it is in America and England to-day,—the
largest toleration for every one who thinks as we do, and for the others
a temporary suspension of the rule to “judge not,” with an amended
prayer, “Lord, condemn them, for they know not what they do,” and a
vigorous attempt to force the divine judgment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVI](2010585.md)
