[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010191)  [Next](2010193.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXII.—</span>*The Works of
Hippolytus which have reached us.*

<span id="iii.xi.xxii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xxii-p2.1"></span>At</span> that time Hippolytus, <span
id="fr_1946"></span>[1947](#fn_1946.md) besides many other treatises, wrote
a work on the pass<span id="page_270">p. 270</span> <span
id="iii.xi.xxii-Page_270"></span>over. <span
id="fr_1947"></span>[1948](#fn_1947.md) He gives in this a chronological
table, and presents a certain paschal canon of sixteen years, bringing
the time down to the first year of the Emperor Alexander.

<span id="iii.xi.xxii-p6"></span>2. Of his other writings the following
have reached us: On the Hexæmeron, <span
id="fr_1948"></span>[1949](#fn_1948.md) On the Works after the
Hexæmeron, <span id="fr_1949"></span>[1950](#fn_1949.md) Against
Marcion, <span id="fr_1950"></span>[1951](#fn_1950.md) On the Song of
Songs, <span id="fr_1951"></span>[1952](#fn_1951.md) On Portions of
Ezekiel, <span id="fr_1952"></span>[1953](#fn_1952.md) On the
Passover, <span id="fr_1953"></span>[1954](#fn_1953.md) Against All the
Heresies; <span id="fr_1954"></span>[1955](#fn_1954.md) and you can find
many other works preserved by many.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1946"></span>[269:1947](2010192.htm#fr_1946.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxii-p3"></span> Hippolytus (mentioned above in chap.
20) was one of the most learned men and celebrated writers of his age,
and yet his personal history is involved in the deepest obscurity. The
earliest mention of him is by Eusebius in this passage and in chap. 20,
above. But Eusebius tells us there only that he was a bishop of “some
other church” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xxii-p3.1"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xxii-p3.2"></span>τέρας που ἐκκλησίας</span>), and Jerome
(*de vir. ill.* c. 61) says that he was a bishop of some church whose
name he did not know (*Hippolytus, cujusdam Ecclesiæ episcopus, nomen
quippe urbis scire non potui*). In the East, from the fourth century on,
Hippolytus was commonly called bishop of Rome, but the Western tradition
makes him simply a presbyter. The late tradition that he was bishop of
Portus Romanus is quite worthless. We learn from his *Philosophumena,*
or *Refutation of Heresies,* that he was active in Rome in the time of
Zephyrinus and Callistus; but what is significant is the fact that he
never recognizes Callistus as bishop of Rome, but always treats him as
the head of a school opposed to the orthodox Church. This has given
scholars the clue for reconciling the conflicting traditions about his
position and his church. It seems probable that he was a presbyter of
the church of Rome, and was at the head of a party which did not
recognize Callistus as lawful bishop, but set Hippolytus up as
opposition bishop. This explains why Hippolytus calls himself a bishop,
and at the same time recognizes neither Callistus nor any one else as
bishop of Rome. The Western Church therefore preserved the tradition of
Hippolytus only as a presbyter, while in the Orient, where Hippolytus
was known only through his works, the tradition that he was a bishop (a
fact directly stated in those works; see the preface to his
*Philosophumena*) always prevailed; and since he was known to have
resided in Rome, that city was made by tradition his see. The schism,
which has left no trace in the writings either of the Western or Eastern
Church, cannot have been a serious one. Doubtless Callistus had the
support of by far the larger part of the Church, and the opposition of
Hippolytus never amounted to more than talk, and was never strong enough
to enlist, or perhaps even attempt to enlist, the support of foreign
bishops. Callistus and the body of the Church could afford to leave it
unnoticed; and after Callistus’ death Hippolytus undoubtedly returned to
the Church and was gladly received, and the memory of his brief schism
entirely effaced, while the knowledge of his orthodoxy, and of his great
services to the Church as a theologian and a writer, kept his name in
high repute with subsequent generations. A Latin translation of a
Chronicle written by Hippolytus is extant, and the last event recorded
in it is the death of the Emperor Alexander, which took place early in
the year 235. The Liberian catalogue, in an entry which Lipsius (*Chron.
d. röm. Bischöfe,* p. 194) pronounces critically indisputable, records
that, in the year 235, the bishop Pontianus and the presbyter Hippolytus
were transported as exiles to the island of Sardinia. There is little
doubt that this is the Hippolytus with whom we are concerned, and it is
highly probable that both he and Pontianus died in the mines there, and
thus gained the title of martyrs; for not only is the account of
Hippolytus’ martyrdom given by Prudentius in the fifth century not
reliable, but also in the *depositio martyrum* of the Liberian catalogue
the bodies of Pontianus and Hippolytus are said to have been buried in
Rome on the same day; and it is therefore natural to think that
Hippolytus’ body was brought from Sardinia, as we know Pontianus’ was.

<span id="iii.xi.xxii-p4"></span>The character of Hippolytus, as
revealed to us in the *Philosophumena*, is that of a strictly, even
rigidly, moral man, of a puritanic disposition, who believed in drawing
the reins very tight, and allowing to the members of the Christian
Church no license. He was in this directly opposed to Callistus, who was
a lax disciplinarian, and favored the readmission to the Church even of
the worst offenders upon evidence of repentance and suitable penance
(see the previous chapter, note 3). We are reminded greatly of
Tertullian and of Novatian in studying Hippolytus’ character. He was,
moreover, strictly orthodox and bitterly opposed to what he considered
the patripassianism of Zephyrinus and of Callistus. He must be admired
as a thoroughly independent, sternly moral, and rigidly orthodox man;
while at the same time it must be recognized that he was irascible,
bitter, and in some respects narrow and bigoted. He is known to have
been a very prolific writer, composing all his works in Greek. Eusebius
mentions but eight works in this chapter, but says that many others were
extant in his day. Jerome, who in the present instance has other sources
of information than Eusebius’ History, mentions some nineteen works (*de
vir. ill.* c. 61), including all of those named by Eusebius, except the
commentary on portions of Ezekiel and the work on the Events which
followed the Hexæmeron (but see note 4, below). In the year 1551 a
statue representing a venerable man sitting in a chair, and with an
inscription upon it enumerating the writings of the person commemorated,
was found near the church of San Lorenzo, just outside of Rome. The
statue, though it bears no name, has been shown to be that of
Hippolytus; and with the help of the list given upon it (which contains
some thirteen works), together with some extant fragments of writings
which seem to have been composed by him, the titles known to us have
been increased to about forty, the greater part of which are entirely
lost. We cannot discuss these works here. For the most complete list of
Hippolytus’ writings the reader is referred to Caspari’s *Taufsymbol und
Glaubensregel,* III. 377 sq., or to the more accessible article by
Salmon in the *Dict. of Christ. Biog.* In 1842 was discovered the
greater part of a work in ten books directed against heresies, the first
book of which had been long before published by the Benedictines among
Origen’s works with the title of *Philosophumena.* This discovery caused
great discussion, but it has been proved to the complete satisfaction of
almost every scholar that it is a work of Hippolytus (cf., among other
discussions, Döllinger’s *Hippolytus und Callistus,* translated by
Plummer, and the article in the *Dict. of Christ. Biog.* already
referred to). The work was published at Oxford in 1851 by Miller (who,
however, wrongly ascribed it to Origen), and at Göttingen, in 1859, by
Duncker and Schneidewin. It is given also by Migne; and an English
translation is found in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers* (Amer. ed.), Vol. V.,
under the title the *Refutation of All Heresies.*

<span id="fn_1947"></span>[270:1948](2010192.htm#fr_1947.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxii-p5"></span> This chronological work on the
passover, which contained a cycle for the purpose of determining the
date of the festival, is mentioned also by Jerome, and is given in the
list on the statue, on which the cycle itself is also engraved. Jerome
says that this work was the occasion of Eusebius’ work upon the same
subject in which a nineteen-year cycle was substituted for that of
Hippolytus. The latter was a sixteen-year cycle and was formed by
putting together two of the eight-year cycles of the Greek
astronomers,—according to whose calculation the full moon fell on the
same day of the month once in eight years,—in order to exhibit also the
day of the week on which it fell; for he noticed that after sixteen
years the full moon moved one day backward (if on Saturday at the
beginning of the cycle, it fell on Friday after the sixteen years were
past). He therefore put together seven sixteen-year cycles, assuming
that after they had passed the full moon would return again to the same
day of the week, as well as month. This cycle is astronomically
incorrect, the fact being that after sixteen years the full moon falls
not on the same day of the week, but three days later. Hippolytus,
however, was not aware of this, and published his cycle in perfect good
faith. The work referred to seems to have contained an explanation of
the cycle, together with a computation by means of it of the dates of
the Old and New Testament passovers. It is no longer extant, but the
cycle itself, which was the chief thing, is preserved on the statue,
evidently in the form in which it was drawn up by Hippolytus himself.

<span id="fn_1948"></span>[270:1949](2010192.htm#fr_1948.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxii-p7"></span> This treatise on the Hexæmeron, or six
days’ work, is mentioned also by Jerome, but is not in the list on the
statue. It is no longer extant; but according to Jerome (*Ep. ad
Pammachium et Oceanum,* c. 7; Migne’s ed. *Ep.* 84), was used by Ambrose
in the composition of his own work upon the same subject, which is still
preserved (cf. also Bk. V. chap. 27, note 3, above).

<span id="fn_1949"></span>[270:1950](2010192.htm#fr_1949.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxii-p8"></span> Greek, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xxii-p8.1"></span>εἰς τὰ μετὰ τὴν ἐξαήμερον</span>. This work
is not given in the list on the statue. It is mentioned in some of the
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.xi.xxii-p8.2"></span>mss.</span> of
Jerome under the form *et post Hexæmeron;* but the best <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xi.xxii-p8.3"></span>mss.</span> omit these
words, and substitute for them *et in Exodum,* a work which is not
mentioned by any other authority. Jerome mentions also a commentary *in
Genesim,* which we hear of from no other source, and which may be
identical with this work mentioned by Eusebius. If the two be identical
(which is quite possible), the nature of the work is plain enough.
Otherwise we are left wholly to conjecture. No fragments of the work
have been identified.

<span id="fn_1950"></span>[270:1951](2010192.htm#fr_1950.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxii-p8.4"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxii-p9"></span> This work is mentioned also by Jerome,
but is not in the list on the statue. The last work, however, mentioned
in that list bears the title <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xxii-p9.1"></span>περὶ τἀγαθοῦ καὶ πόθεν τὸ κακόν</span>,
which, it has been conjectured, may be identical with Eusebius and
Jerome’s *Contra Marcionem.* No fragments are extant.

<span id="fn_1951"></span>[270:1952](2010192.htm#fr_1951.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxii-p10"></span> Eusebius has simply <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxii-p10.1"></span>τὸ ἆσμα</span> (*The
Song*), which is the title given to the book in the LXX. This commentary
on the Song of Songs is mentioned also by Jerome, but is not in the
statue list. Four fragments of it are given by Lagarde, in his edition
of the works of Hippolytus.

<span id="fn_1952"></span>[270:1953](2010192.htm#fr_1952.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxii-p11"></span> This commentary on portions of
Ezekiel is mentioned by no one else. A supposed fragment of it is given
by Lagarde, *Anal. Syr.,* p. 90.

<span id="fn_1953"></span>[270:1954](2010192.htm#fr_1953.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxii-p12"></span> Jerome agrees with Eusebius in
mentioning a work *On the Passover,* in addition to the chronological
one already referred to. The list on the statue, however, mentions but
one work on the passover, and that the one containing the paschal cycle.
Fragments are extant of Hippolytus’ work *On the Passover,*—one from his
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxii-p12.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxii-p12.2"></span>ξήγησις εἰς τὸ
π€σχα</span> (see Lagarde’s edition of Hippolytus p. 213), and another
from “the first book of the treatise on the holy paschal feast” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxii-p12.3"></span>τοῦ περὶ τοῦ ἁγίου
π€σχα συγγρ€μματος</span>, Lagarde, p. 92). These fragments are of a
dogmatic character, and can hardly have occurred in the chronological
work, except in a separate section or book; but the last is taken from
“the first book” of the treatise, and hence we are safe in concluding
that Eusebius and Jerome are correct in enumerating two separate works
upon the same subject,—the one chronological, the other dogmatic, or
polemical.

<span id="fn_1954"></span>[270:1955](2010192.htm#fr_1954.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxii-p12.4"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxii-p13"></span> This work, *Against All the
Heresies,* is mentioned both by Eusebius (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xxii-p13.1"></span>πρὸς ἁπ€σας τὰς αἱρέσεις</span>) Jerome
(*adv. omnes hæreses*), but is not given in the list on the statue.
Quite a full account of it is given from personal knowledge by Photius
(*Cod.* 121), who calls it a small book (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xxii-p13.2"></span>βιβλιδ€ριον</span>) directed against
thirty-two heresies, beginning with the Dositheans and ending with
Noetus, and says that it purported to be an abstract of lectures
delivered by Irenæus. The work is no longer extant (it must not be
confounded with the *Philosophumena,* or *Refutatio,* mentioned in note
1), but it has been in part restored by Lipsius (in his *Quellenkritik
des Epiphanius*) from the anti-heretical works of Pseudo-Tertullian,
Epiphanius, and Philaster. There is in existence also a fragment of
considerable length, bearing in the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xxii-p13.3"></span>ms.</span> the title *Homily of Hippolytus
against the Heresy of one Noetus.* It is apparently not a homily, but
the conclusion of a treatise against a number of heresies. It was
suggested by Fabricius (who first published the original Greek) that it
constituted the closing chapter of the work against the thirty-two
heresies. The chief objection to this is that if this fragment forms but
one of thirty-two chapters, the entire work can hardly have been called
a “little book” by Photius. Lipsius suggests that the little book of
which Photius speaks was not the complete work of Hippolytus, but only
an abbreviated summary of its contents, and this is quite possible. At
any rate it seems probable, in spite of the objections which have been
urged by some critics, that this constituted a part of the larger work,
and hence we have one chapter of that work preserved. The work seems to
have been composed in Rome and during the episcopate of Victor (as
Lipsius holds), or, as is more probable, in the early part of the
episcopate of Zephyrinus (as is maintained by Harnack). This conclusion
is drawn from the dates of the heretics mentioned in the work, some of
whom were as late as Victor, but none of them later than the early years
of Zephyrinus. It must, too, have been composed some years before the
*Philosophumena,* which (in the preface) refers to a work against
heresies, written by its author a “long time before” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxii-p13.4"></span>π€λαι</span>). Upon
this work and its relation to the lost *Syntagma* of Justin Martyr,
which Lipsius supposes it to have made use of, see his work already
referred to and also his *Quellen der ältesten Ketzergeschichte*
together with Harnack’s *Quellenkritik der Gesch. des Gnosticismus,* and
his article in the *Zeitschrift für historische Theologie,* 1874, p.
143–226.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII](2010193.md)
