[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010129)  [Next](2010131.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI.—</span>*The Ecclesiastical
Writers that flourished in Those Days.*

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p2.1"></span>At</span> that time there flourished in the
Church Hegesippus, whom we know from what has gone before, <span
id="fr_1216"></span>[1217](#fn_1216.md) and Dionysius, <span
id="fr_1217"></span>[1218](#fn_1217.md) bishop of Corinth, and another
bishop, Pinytus of Crete, <span id="fr_1218"></span>[1219](#fn_1218.md) and
besides <span id="page_198">p. 198</span> <span
id="iii.ix.xxi-Page_198"></span>these, Philip, <span
id="fr_1219"></span>[1220](#fn_1219.md) and Apolinarius, <span
id="fr_1220"></span>[1221](#fn_1220.md) and Melito, <span
id="fr_1221"></span>[1222](#fn_1221.md) and Musanus, <span
id="fr_1222"></span>[1223](#fn_1222.md) and Modestus, <span
id="fr_1223"></span>[1224](#fn_1223.md) and finally, Irenæus. <span
id="fr_1224"></span>[1225](#fn_1224.md) From them has come down to us in
writing, the sound and orthodox faith received from apostolic
tradition. <span id="fr_1225"></span>[1226](#fn_1225.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1216"></span>[197:1217](2010130.htm#fr_1216.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p3"></span> On Hegesippus’ life and writings, see
the next chapter. He has been already mentioned in Bk. II. chap. 23; Bk.
III. chaps. 11, 16, 20, 32; and Bk. IV. chap. 8.

<span id="fn_1217"></span>[197:1218](2010130.htm#fr_1217.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p4"></span> On the life and writings of Dionysius,
see below, chap. 23.

<span id="fn_1218"></span>[197:1219](2010130.htm#fr_1218.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p5"></span> On Pinytus, see below, chap, 23, note
14.

<span id="fn_1219"></span>[198:1220](2010130.htm#fr_1219.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p6"></span> On Philip, see below, chap. 25.

<span id="fn_1220"></span>[198:1221](2010130.htm#fr_1220.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p7"></span> On Apolinarius, see below, chap. 27.

<span id="fn_1221"></span>[198:1222](2010130.htm#fr_1221.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p8"></span> On Melito, see chap. 26.

<span id="fn_1222"></span>[198:1223](2010130.htm#fr_1222.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p9"></span> On Musanus, see chap. 28.

<span id="fn_1223"></span>[198:1224](2010130.htm#fr_1223.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p10"></span> On Modestus, see chap. 25.

<span id="fn_1224"></span>[198:1225](2010130.htm#fr_1224.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p11"></span> Irenæus was born in Asia Minor,
probably between the years 120 and 130. There is great uncertainty as to
the date of his birth, some bringing it down almost to the middle of the
second century, while Dodwell carried it back to the year 97 or 98. But
these extremes are wild; and a careful examination of all the sources
which can throw any light on the subject leads to the conclusion adopted
by Lipsius, and stated above. In Asia Minor he was a pupil of Polycarp
(cf. the fragment of Irenæus’ letter to Florinus, quoted by Eusebius,
Bk. V. chap. 20). The Moscow <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p11.1"></span>ms.</span> of the *Martyrium Polycarpi*
states that Irenæus was in Rome at the time of Polycarp’s martyrdom (155
or 156 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p11.2"></span>a.d.</span>), and appeals for its authority
to a statement in Irenæus’ own writings, which does not exist in any
extant work, but may have been taken from an authentic work now lost
(cf. Gebhardt, in the *Zeitschrift für die hist. Theologie,* 1875, p.
362 sqq.). But whatever truth there may be in the report, we find him,
at the time of the great persecution of Lyons and Vienne (described in
the next book, chap. 1), a presbyter of the church at Lyons, and
carrying a letter from the confessors of that church to the bishop
Eleutherus of Rome (see Bk. V. chap. 4). After the death of Pothinus,
which took place in 177 (see Bk. V. *præf*. note 3, and chap. 1, §29),
Irenæus became bishop of Lyons, according to Bk. V. chap. 5. The exact
date of his accession we do not know; but as Pothinus died during the
persecution, and Irenæus was still a presbyter after the close of the
persecution in which he met his death, he cannot have succeeded
immediately. Since Irenæus, however, was, according to Eusebius,
Pothinus’ next successor, no great length of time can have elapsed
between the death of the latter and the accession of the former. At the
time of the paschal controversy, while Victor was bishop of Rome,
Irenæus was still bishop (according to Bk. V. chap. 23). This was toward
the close of the second century. His death is ordinarily put in the year
202 or 203, on the assumption that he suffered martyrdom under Septimius
Severus. Jerome is the first to call him a martyr, and that not in his
*de vir. ill.,* but in his *Comment. in Esaiam* (chap. 64), which was
written some years later. It is quite possible that he confounded the
Irenæus in question with another of the same name, who met his death in
the persecution of Diocletian. Gregory of Tours first gives us a
detailed account of the martyrdom, and in the Middle Ages Irenæus always
figured as a martyr. But all this has no weight at all, when measured
against the silence of Tertullian, Hippolytus, Eusebius, and all the
earlier Fathers. Their silence must be accepted as conclusive evidence
that he was not a martyr; and if he was not, there is no reason for
assigning his death to the year 202 or 203. As we have no trace of him,
however, subsequent to the time of the paschal controversy, it is
probable that he died, at the latest, soon after the beginning of the
third century.

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p12"></span>Irenæus was the most important of the
polemical writers of antiquity, and his works formed a storehouse from
which all subsequent heresiographers drew. He is quoted very frequently
by Eusebius as an authority for events which happened during the second
century, and is treated by him with the most profound respect as one of
the greatest writers of the early Church. Jerome devotes an unusually
long chapter of his *de vir. ill.* to him (chap. 35), but tells us
nothing that is not found in Eusebius’ *History*. His greatest work, and
the only one now extant, is his <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p12.1"></span>῎</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p12.2"></span>Ε</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p12.3"></span>λεγχος καὶ ἀνατροπὴ τῆς ψευδωνύμου
γνωσεως</span>, which is commonly cited under the brief title <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxi-p12.4"></span>πρὸς ῾Αιρέσεις</span>,
or *Adversus Hæreses* (“Against Heresies”). It consists of five books,
and is extant only in a very ancient and literal Latin translation;
though the numerous extracts made from it by later writers have
preserved for us the original Greek of nearly the whole of the first
book and many fragments of the others. There are also extant numerous
fragments of an ancient Syriac version of the work. It was written—or at
least the third book was—while Eleutherus was bishop of Rome, i.e.
between 174 and 189 (see Bk. III. chap. 3, §3, of the work itself). We
are not able to fix the date of its composition more exactly. The
author’s primary object was to refute Valentinianism (cf. Bk. I.
*præf.,* and Bk. III. *præf.*), but in connection with that subject he
takes occasion to say considerable about other related heresies. The
sources of this great work have been carefully discussed by Lipsius, in
his *Quellenkritik des Epiphanios,* and in his *Quellen der ältesten
Ketzergeschichte,* and by Harnack in his *Quellenkritik der Geschichte
des Gnosticismus* (see also the article by Lipsius mentioned below). Of
the other works of Irenæus, many of which Eusebius refers to, only
fragments or bare titles have been preserved. Whether he ever carried
out his intention (stated in *Adv. Hær.* I. 27. 4, and III. 12. 12) of
writing a special work against Marcion, we cannot tell. Eusebius
mentions this intention in Bk. V. chap. 20; and in Bk. IV. chap. 25 he
classes Irenæus among the authors who had written against Marcion. But
we hear nothing of the existence of the work from Irenæus’ successors,
and it is possible that Eusebius is thinking in chap. 25 only of the
great work *Adv. Hær.* For a notice of Irenæus’ epistle *On Schism,*
addressed to Blastus, and the one *On Sovereignty,* addressed to
Florinus, see Bk. V. chap. 20, notes 2 and 3; and on his treatise *On
the Ogdoad,* see the same chapter, note 4. On his epistle to Victor in
regard to the paschal dispute, see below, Bk. V. chap. 24, note 13.
Other epistles upon the same subject are referred to by Eusebius at the
close of the same chapter (see note 21 on that chapter). In Bk. V. chap.
26, Eusebius mentions four other works of Irenæus (see notes on that
chapter). In addition to the works referred to by Eusebius, there are
extant a number of fragments which purport to be from other works of
Irenæus. Some of them are undoubtedly genuine, others not. Upon these
fragments and the works to which they belong, see Harvey’s edition of
Irenæus’ works, II. p. 431 sq., and Lipsius in the *Dict. of Christ.
Biog.* article *Irenæus*, p. 265 sqq.

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p13"></span>The best edition of Irenæus’ works is
that of Harvey (Cambridge, 1857, in 2 vols.). In connection with this
edition, see Loof’s important article on *Irenæushandschriften,* in
*Kirchengeschichtliche Studien,* p. 1–93 (Leipzig, 1888). The literature
on Irenæus is very extensive (for a valuable list, see Schaff’s *Ch.
Hist.* II. 746), but a full and complete biography is greatly to be
desired. Lipsius’ article, referred to just above, is especially
valuable.

<span id="fn_1225"></span>[198:1226](2010130.htm#fr_1225.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p14.1"></span>ὧ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p14.2"></span>ν καὶ εἰς ἡμᾶς τῆς ἀποστολικῆς παραδόσεως,
ἡ τῆς ὑγιοῦς πίστεως žγγραφος κατῆλθεν ὀρθοδοξία</span>. Compare chap.
14, §4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII](2010131.md)
