[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010373)  [Next](2010375) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iv.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv.viii-p1"></span> 7. *The Finding of the Cross*.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.viii-p2"></span>It is said in a certain “tolerably
authentic chronicle,” according to Voragine, that Constantine sent his
mother Helena to Jerusalem to try to find the cross on which our Lord
was crucified. When she arrived, she bade all the Jewish Rabbis of the
whole land gather to meet her. Great was their fear. They suspected that
she sought the wood of the cross, a secret which they had promised not
to reveal even under torture, because it would mean the end of Jewish
supremacy. When they met her, sure enough, she asked for the place of
the crucifixion. When they would not tell, she ordered them all to be
burned. Frightened, they delivered up Judas, their leader and
instigator, saying that he could tell. She gave him his choice of
telling or dying by starvation. At first he was obstinate, but six days
of total abstinence from food brought him to terms, and on the seventh
he promised. He was conducted to the place indicated, and in response to
prayer, there was a sort of earthquake, and a perfume filled the air
which converted Judas. There was a temple of Venus on the spot. This the
queen had destroyed. Then Judas set to digging vigorously, and at the
depth of twenty feet, found three crosses, which he brought to Helena.
The true cross was tested by its causing a man to rise from the dead, or
according to others, by healing a woman, or according to others, by
finding the inscription of Pilate. After an exceedingly vigorous
conversation between the devil and Judas, the latter was baptized and
became Bishop Cyriacus. Then Helena set him hunting for the nails of the
cross. He found them shining like gold and brought them to the queen,
who departed, taking them and a portion of the wood of the cross. She
brought the nails to Constantine, who put them on his bridle and helmet,
or according to another account, two were used in this way, and one was
thrown into the Adriatic Sea.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.viii-p3"></span>It is interesting to trace the
melancholy consequences of this particular enterprise of Constantine’s
in the sad death of St. Cyriacus née Judas. The Emperor Julian, the
apostate, “invited” him to sacrifice to idols. When he refused, melted
lead was poured into his mouth; then an iron bedstead was brought, on
which he was stretched, while a fire was built underneath and the body
of the martyr larded with salt and fat. The saint did not budge, and
Julian had a deep well dug, which was filled with venomous serpents. But
contact with the saint killed the serpents, and a cauldron of boiling
oil succeeded. Julian was so angry at the alacrity and cheerfulness of
the saint’s preparations for this bath, that he killed him with a blow
of his sword. There is some consolation in the thought of this premature
death, in the fact that, unless his claim that he was nephew to Stephen,
the Proto-martyr, be disallowed, he had reached a ripe old age of two
hundred and fifty years or thereabouts.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.viii-p4"></span>The literature on this legend is
very great. The finding of the cross is mentioned as early as Cyril of
Jerusalem (ab. 347–350), within twenty-five years of the visit of Helena
recorded by Eusebius (*V. C*. 3. 26), and with great frequency
afterwards. The failure of any mention by Eusebius seems, however,
conclusive against any finding, or pretended finding, at the time of
Helena’s famous visit, though the contrary is acutely argued by Newman.
The finding and use of the nails is often separated from the other, and
is found in many of the sources on Constantine. But even those who
believe in the miracle of the finding of the cross will hardly vouch for
the story in the above form, which is substantially that of Voragine.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.viii-p5"></span>Compare Sinker’s article, *Cross,
Finding of*, in Smith and Cheetham, *Dict*. 1 (1880), 503–506; Jameson,
*Hist. of Our Lord*, 2 (1872) 385–391; Newman, *Essays on Miracles*
(Lond. 1875) 287–326; and especially Voragine, whom see under Sources.
Under the article Helena, in Smith & W. is a sub-article by Argles on
the *Invention of the Cross*, which gives an admirable abstract of the
sources in order.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.viii-p6"></span>These examples of the stories which
have gathered around the name of Constantine do not <span
id="page_445">p. 445</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iv.viii-Page_445"></span>begin to exhaust the list. The
interesting tales of the sword of Constantine presented to Athelstan
(*Reg. Malms*. 1, 1879, p. 55, 468; *Eul. Hist*. 3, 1863, p. 12), his
conversion through remorse, and the whole series of allusions and
stories in mediæval fiction and poetry must be passed here. If any one
has the curiosity to follow them up, he will find the references in the
articles of Heydenreich a good guide to literature. A few stories, like
that of Constantine and Tiridates, one hesitates to class among the
wholly fictitious (compare, under *Sources*, Agathangelos, Zenobius, and
Faustus).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](2010375)
