[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010358)  [Next](2010360.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.ii.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii.viii-p1"></span> §8. *Summary.*

<span id="iv.iii.ii.viii-p2"></span>With this as center of perspective,
we have a picture of Constantine with lights and shadows, to be sure,
but in the main true in its drawing and coloring. He was a man of rather
more than medium height, strongly built, with broad shoulders, thick
neck, and generally athletic and well-formed figure. His piercing eye,
slightly aquiline nose, scanty reddish beard, and florid complexion,
together with his bright expression, made a countenance striking and
even handsome. Of great physical strength and vigor, he carried himself
in a manly, self-possessed, dignified, and serene manner, uniting a
dignity which might rise at times even to *hauteur,* or even incipient
arrogance, with a general and customary affability. His dress, like his
complexion, was somewhat florid. His mind was active, alert, intense
without being somber, penetrating, sound, fairly cultivated, and well
exercised in expression by pen or word. He was animated, habile, and
attentive in conversation, self-possessed, steady, and calm in formal
address. He was pre-eminently a man of energy, intense and resistless,
with a determination to accomplish whatever he attempted, which rose
under opposition to irresistible impetuosity, and wrought a courage
which, in action, was absolutely fearless. His ambition was limitless,
but not wholly or even mainly selfish.

<span id="iv.iii.ii.viii-p3"></span>With his energy and ambition were
united the ballast of marked prudence, patience, perseverance,
faithfulness to details, steadfastness, and supreme self-control. He was
amiable and tactful, popular with his soldiers, and careful to please.
Toward those who came into his power he showed habitual mildness and
forbearance,—a mildness so great that he was generally blamed for it;
and toward all he showed great kindness, justice, and a generosity which
verged on the lavish. He was open to the charge of over-generosity,
almost of prodigality, a good measure of real vanity, some
over-insistence on his own will and thought as the final standard of
right, and by no means free from mistakes or human weaknesses. He was a
good son, husband, father, a remarkably successful general, a tolerable
legislator, and a clear-sighted, firm-willed statesman. In his religious
life he abounded in creed and confession—believing in the Trinity, the
Divinity of Christ, the Atonement, the Resurrection, and Eternal Life,
in Repentance and Faith, in love to God, and love to man. He preached
his faith on all occasions; he practiced thanksgiving and prayer
abundantly. He regarded everything that he had or was as from God. The
editor’s brief judgment is that Constantine, for his time, made an
astonishingly temperate, wise, and, on the whole, benevolent use of
absolute power, and in morality, kindly qualities, and, at last, in real
Christian character, greatly surpassed most nineteenth century
politicians—standing to modern statesmen as Athanasius to modern
theologians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](2010360.md)
