[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010707)  [Next](2010709) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xix"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.viii.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xix-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.viii.xix-p2.1"></span>These</span> words of ours, however,
\[gracious\] Sovereign, may well appear superfluous in your ears,
convinced as you are, by frequent and personal experience, of our
Saviour’s Deity; yourself also, in actions still more than words, a
herald of the truth to all mankind. Yourself, it may be, will vouchsafe
at a time of leisure to relate to us the abundant manifestations which
your Saviour has accorded you of his presence, and the oft-repeated
visions of himself which have attended you in the hours of sleep. I
speak not of those secret suggestions which to us are unrevealed: but of
those principles which he has instilled into your own mind, and which
are fraught with general interest and benefit to the human race. You
will yourself relate in worthy terms the visible protection which your
Divine shield and guardian has extended in the hour of battle; the ruin
of your open and secret foes; and his ready aid in time of peril. To him
you will ascribe relief in the midst of perplexity; defence in solitude;
expedients in extremity; foreknowledge of events yet future; your
forethought for the general weal; your power to investigate uncertain
questions; your conduct of most important enterprises; your
administration of civil affairs; <span
id="fr_3586"></span>[3587](#fn_3586) your military arrangements, and
correction of abuses in all departments; your ordinances respecting
public right; and, lastly, your legislation for the common benefit of
all. You will, it may be, also detail to us those particulars of his
favor which are secret to us, but known to you alone, and treasured in
your royal memory as in secret storehouses. Such, doubtless, are the
reasons, and such the convincing proofs of your Saviour’s power, which
caused you to raise that sacred edifice which presents to all, believers
and unbelievers alike, a trophy of his victory over death, a holy temple
of the holy God: to consecrate those noble and splendid monuments of
immortal life and his heavenly kingdom: to offer memorials of our
Almighty Saviour’s conquest which well become the imperial dignity of
him by whom they are bestowed. With such memorials have you adorned that
edifice which witnesses of eternal life: thus, as it were in imperial
characters, ascribing victory and triumph to the heavenly Word of God:
thus proclaiming to all nations, with clear and unmistakable voice, in
deed and word, your own devout and pious confession of his name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3586"></span>[610:3587](2010708.htm#fr_3586) <span
id="iv.viii.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xix-p3"></span> Literally, “Your political economies.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index of Subjects](2010709)
