[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010627)  [Next](2010629.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xlii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xlii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iv.xlii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLII</span>.—*Constantine’s
Letter to the Council at Tyre.*

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xlii-p2"></span>“<span class="c13"><span
id="iv.vi.iv.xlii-p2.1"></span>Victor Constantinus, Maximus
Augustus,</span> to the holy Council at Tyre.

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xlii-p3"></span><span id="page_551">p. 551</span>
<span id="iv.vi.iv.xlii-Page_551"></span>“Surely it would best consist
with and best become the prosperity of these our times, that the
Catholic Church should be undivided, and the servants of Christ be at
this present moment clear from all reproach. Since, however, there are
those who, carried away by a baleful and furious spirit of contention
(for I will not charge them with intentionally leading a life unworthy
of their profession), are endeavoring to create that general confusion
which, in my judgment, is the most pernicious of all evils; I exhort
you, forward as you already are, to meet together and form a synod
without delay: to defend those who need protection; to administer
remedies to your brethren who are in peril; to recall the divided
members to unity of judgment; to rectify errors while opportunity is yet
allowed: that thus you may restore to so many provinces that due measure
of concord which, strange and sad anomaly! the arrogance of a few
individuals has destroyed. And I believed that all are alike persuaded
that this course is at the same time pleasing to Almighty God (as well
as the highest object of my own desires), and will bring no small honor
to yourselves, should you be successful in restoring peace. Delay not,
then, but hasten with redoubled zeal to terminate the present
dissensions in a manner becoming the occasion, by assembling together in
that spirit of true sincerity and faith which the Saviour whom we serve
especially demands from us, I may almost say with an audible voice, on
all occasions. No proof of pious zeal on my part shall be wanting.
Already have I done all to which my attention was directed by your
letters. I have sent to those bishops whose presence you desired, that
they may share your counsels. I have despatched Dionysius, a man of
consular rank, who will both remind those prelates of their duty who are
bound to attend the Council with you, and will himself be there to
superintend the proceedings, but especially to maintain good order.
Meantime should any one, though I deem it most improbable, venture on
this occasion to violate my command, and refuse his attendance, a
messenger shall be despatched forthwith to banish that person in virtue
of an imperial edict, and to teach him that it does not become him to
resist an emperor’s decrees when issued in defense of truth. For the
rest, it will be for your Holinesses, unbiased either by enmity or
favor, but consistently with ecclesiastical and apostolic order, to
devise a fitting remedy whether it be for positive offenses or for
unpremeditated errors; in order that you may at once free the Church
from all reproach, relieve my anxiety, and, by restoring the blessings
of peace to those who are now divided, procure the highest honor for
yourselves. God preserve you, beloved brethren!” <span
id="fr_3338"></span>[3339](#fn_3338.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3338"></span>[551:3339](2010628.htm#fr_3338.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iv.xlii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xlii-p4"></span> Compare on the Synod of Tyre (held
335 <span class="c13"><span id="iv.vi.iv.xlii-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span>),
Hefele, *Hist. of Councils,* 2 (1876), 17–26.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIII](2010629.md)
