[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010086)  [Next](2010088) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xviii-p1"></span> <span id="page_148">p. 148</span>
<span id="iii.viii.xviii-Page_148"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII.—</span>*The Apostle John
and the Apocalypse.*

<span id="iii.viii.xviii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xviii-p2.1"></span>It</span> is said that in this
persecution the apostle and evangelist John, who was still alive, was
condemned to dwell on the island of Patmos in consequence of his
testimony to the divine word. <span id="fr_712"></span>[713](#fn_712)

<span id="iii.viii.xviii-p4"></span>2. Irenæus, in the fifth book of his
work Against Heresies, where he discusses the number of the name of
Antichrist which is given in the so-called Apocalypse of John, <span
id="fr_713"></span>[714](#fn_713) speaks as follows concerning
him: <span id="fr_714"></span>[715](#fn_714)

<span id="iii.viii.xviii-p7"></span>3. “If it were necessary for his
name to be proclaimed openly at the present time, it would have been
declared by him who saw the revelation. For it was seen not long ago,
but almost in our own generation, at the end of the reign of Domitian.”

<span id="iii.viii.xviii-p8"></span>4. To such a degree, indeed, did the
teaching of our faith flourish at that time that even those writers who
were far from our religion did not hesitate to mention in their
histories the persecution and the martyrdoms which took place during
it. <span id="fr_715"></span>[716](#fn_715)

<span id="iii.viii.xviii-p10"></span>5. And they, indeed, accurately
indicated the time. For they recorded that in the fifteenth year of
Domitian <span id="fr_716"></span>[717](#fn_716) Flavia Domitilla,
daughter of a sister of Flavius Clement, who at that time was one of the
consuls of Rome, <span id="fr_717"></span>[718](#fn_717) was exiled with
many others to the island of Pontia in consequence of testimony borne to
Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_712"></span>[148:713](2010087.htm#fr_712) <span
id="iii.viii.xviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xviii-p3"></span> Unanimous tradition, beginning with
Irenæus (V. 30. 3, quoted just below, and again in Eusebius V. 8)
assigns the banishment of John and the apocalyptic visions to the reign
of Domitian. This was formerly the common opinion, and is still held by
some respectable writers, but strong internal evidence has driven most
modern scholars to the conclusion that the Apocalypse must have been
written before the destruction of Jerusalem, the banishment therefore
(upon the assumption that John wrote the Apocalypse, upon which see
chap. 24, note 19) taking place under Nero instead of Domitian. If we
accept this, we have the remarkable phenomenon of an event taking place
at an earlier date than that assigned it by tradition, an exceptional
and inexplicable thing. We have too the difficulty of accounting for the
erroneousness of so early and unanimous a tradition. The case thus stood
for years, until in 1886 Vischer published his pamphlet *Die Offenbarung
des Johannes, eine jüdische Apocalypse in Christlicher Bearbeitung*
(Gebhardt and Harnack’s *Texte und Untersuchungen,* Band II. Heft. 3),
which if his theory were true, would reconcile external and internal
evidence in a most satisfactory manner, throwing the original into the
reign of Nero’s successor, and the Christian recension into the reign of
Domitian. Compare especially Harnack’s appendix to Vischer’s pamphlet;
and upon the Apocalypse itself, see chap. 24, below.

<span id="fn_713"></span>[148:714](2010087.htm#fr_713) <span
id="iii.viii.xviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xviii-p5"></span> [Rev. xiii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#018)<span
id="iii.viii.xviii-p5.1"></span>. It will be noticed that Eusebius is
careful not to commit himself here on the question of the authorship of
the Apocalypse. See below, chap. 24, note 20.

<span id="fn_714"></span>[148:715](2010087.htm#fr_714) <span
id="iii.viii.xviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xviii-p6"></span> Irenæus, *Adv. Hær.* V. 30. 3;
quoted also below, in Bk. V. chap. 8.

<span id="fn_715"></span>[148:716](2010087.htm#fr_715) <span
id="iii.viii.xviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xviii-p9"></span> Jerome, in his version of the
*Chron.* of Eusebius (year of Abr. 2112), says that the historian and
chronographer Bruttius recorded that many of the Christians suffered
martyrdom under Domitian. Since the works of Bruttius are not extant, we
have no means of verifying the statement. Dion Cassius (LXVII. 14)
relates some of the banishments which took place under Domitian, among
them that of Flavia Domitilla, who was, as we know, a Christian; but he
does not himself say that any of these people were Christians, nor does
he speak of a persecution of the Christians.

<span id="fn_716"></span>[148:717](2010087.htm#fr_716) <span
id="iii.viii.xviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xviii-p11"></span> We learn from Suetonius (*Domit.*
chap. 15) that the events referred to by Eusebius in the next sentence
took place at the very end of Domitian’s reign; that is, in the year 96
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.xviii-p11.1"></span>a.d.</span>,
the fifteenth year of his reign, as Eusebius says. Dion Cassius also
(LXVII. 14) puts these events in the same year.

<span id="fn_717"></span>[148:718](2010087.htm#fr_717) <span
id="iii.viii.xviii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xviii-p12"></span> Flavius Clemens was a cousin of
Domitian, and his wife, Domitilla, a niece of the emperor. They stood
high in favor, and their two sons were designated as heirs to the
empire, while Flavius Clemens himself was made Domitian’s colleague in
the consulship. But immediately afterward Clemens was put to death and
Domitilla was banished. Suetonius (*Domit,* chap. 15) accuses Clemens of
*contemtissimæ inertiæ,* and Dion Cassius (LXVII. 14) of atheism (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xviii-p12.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xviii-p12.2"></span>θεότητος</span>).
These accusations are just such as heathen writers of that age were fond
of making against the Christians (compare, for instance, Athenagoras’
*Adv. Gent.* chap. 4, and Tertullian’s *Apol.* chap. 42). Accordingly it
has been very commonly held that both Flavius Clemens and Domitilla were
Christians, and were punished on that account. But early tradition makes
only Domitilla a Christian; and certainly if Clemens also—a man of such
high rank—had been a Christian, an early tradition to that effect would
be somewhere preserved. We must, therefore, conclude that his offense
was something else than Christianity. The very silence of Christian
tradition as to Clement is an argument for the truth of the tradition in
regard to Domitilla, and the heathen historians referred to confirm its
main points, though they differ in minor details. The *Acts of Martyrdom
of Nereus and Achilles* represent Domitilla as the niece, not the wife,
of Flavius Clemens, and Eusebius does the same. More than that, while
the heathen writers report that Domitilla was banished to the island
Pandeteria, these *Acts,* as well as Eusebius and Jerome (*Ep. adv.
Eustachium*, Migne’s ed., *Ep.* CVIII. 7), give the island of Pontia as
the place of banishment. Tillemont and other writers have therefore
assumed that there were two Domitillas,—aunt and niece,—one banished to
one island, the other to another. But this is very improbable, and it is
easier to suppose that there was but one Domitilla and but one island,
and that the discrepancies are due to carelessness or to the mistakes of
transcribers. Pandeteria and Pontia were two small islands in the
Mediterranean, just west of central Italy, and were very frequently
employed by the Roman emperors as places of exile for prisoners.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX](2010088)
