[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010027)  [Next](2010029.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.i"></span> <span id="page_81">p. 81</span> <span
id="iii.vi.i-Page_81"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p1"></span><span class="c20"><span
id="iii.vi.i-p1.1"></span>The Church History of Eusebius.</span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="iii.vi.i-p3"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iii.vi.i-p3.1"></span>Book I.</span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.i-p4.1"></span>Chapter I.—</span>*The Plan of the Work.*

<span id="iii.vi.i-p5"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.i-p5.1"></span>It</span> is my purpose to write an account of
the successions of the holy apostles, as well as of the times which have
elapsed from the days of our Saviour to our own; and to relate the many
important events which are said to have occurred in the history of the
Church; and to mention those who have governed and presided over the
Church in the most prominent parishes, and those who in each generation
have proclaimed the divine word either orally or in writing.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p6"></span>2. It is my purpose also to give the names
and number and times of those who through love of innovation have run
into the greatest errors, and, proclaiming themselves discoverers of
knowledge falsely so-called <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md) have
like fierce wolves unmercifully devastated the flock of Christ.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p8"></span>3. It is my intention, moreover, to
recount the misfortunes which immediately came upon the whole Jewish
nation in consequence of their plots against our Saviour, and to record
the ways and the times in which the divine word has been attacked by the
Gentiles, and to describe the character of those who at various periods
have contended for it in the face of blood and of tortures, as well as
the confessions which have been made in our own days, and finally the
gracious and kindly succor which our Saviour has afforded them all.
Since I propose to write of all these things I shall commence my work
with the beginning of the dispensation <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md) of our Saviour and Lord Jesus
Christ. <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md)

<span id="iii.vi.i-p11"></span>4. But at the outset I must crave for my
work the indulgence of the wise, <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md)
for I confess that it is beyond my power to produce a perfect and
complete history, and since I am the first to enter upon the subject, I
am attempting to traverse as it were a lonely and untrodden path. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md) I pray that I may have God as my guide
and the power of the Lord as my aid, since I am unable to find even the
bare footsteps of those who have traveled the way before me, except in
brief fragments, in which some in one way, others in another, have
transmitted to us particular accounts of the times in which they lived.
From afar they raise their voices like torches, and they cry out, as
from some lofty and conspicuous watch-tower, admonishing us where to
walk and how to direct the course of our work steadily and safely.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p14"></span>5. Having gathered therefore from the
matters mentioned here and there by them whatever we consider important
for the present work, and having plucked like flowers from a meadow the
appropriate passages from ancient writers, <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md) we shall endeavor to embody the whole in
an historical narrative, content if we preserve the memory of <span
id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span id="iii.vi.i-Page_82"></span>the
successions of the apostles of our Saviour; if not indeed of all, yet of
the most renowned of them in those churches which are the most noted,
and which even to the present time are held in honor.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p16"></span>6. This work seems to me of especial
importance because I know of no ecclesiastical writer who has devoted
himself to this subject; and I hope that it will appear most useful to
those who are fond of historical research.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p17"></span>7. I have already given an epitome of
these things in the Chronological Canons <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17.md) which I have composed, but
notwithstanding that, I have undertaken in the present work to write as
full an account of them as I am able.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p19"></span>8. My work will begin, as I have said,
with the dispensation <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18.md) of the
Saviour Christ,—which is loftier and greater than human conception,—and
with a discussion of his divinity <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19.md) ;

<span id="iii.vi.i-p22"></span>9. for it is necessary, inasmuch as we
derive even our name from Christ, for one who proposes to write a
history of the Church to begin with the very origin of Christ’s
dispensation, a dispensation more divine than many think.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[81:12](2010028.htm#fr_11.md) <span
id="iii.vi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p7"></span> Cf. [1 Tim. vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020.md)<span id="iii.vi.i-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[81:13](2010028.htm#fr_12.md) <span
id="iii.vi.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p9"></span> Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.i-p9.1"></span>οἰκονομία</span>. Suicer (*Thesaurus Eccles.*)
points out four uses of this word among ecclesiastical writers: (1)
*Ministerium Evangelii.* (2) *Providentia et numen* (i.e. of God). (3)
*Naturæ humanæ assumtio.* (4) *Totius redemptionis mysterium et
passionis Christi sacramentum.* Valesius says, “The ancient Greeks use
the word to denote whatever Christ did in the world to proclaim
salvation for the human race, and thus the first <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vi.i-p9.2"></span>οἰκονομία τοῦ
χριστοῦ</span> is the incarnation, as the last <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.i-p9.3"></span>οἰκονομία</span> is the passion.” The word in
the present case is used in its wide sense to denote not simply the act
of incarnation, but the whole economy or dispensation of Christ upon
earth. See the notes of Heinichen upon this passage, Vol. III. p. 4 sq.,
and of Valesius, Vol. I. p. 2.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[81:14](2010028.htm#fr_13.md) <span
id="iii.vi.i-p9.4"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p10"></span> Five <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.i-p10.1"></span>mss.,</span> followed by nearly all the
editors of the Greek text and by the translators Stigloher and Crusè,
read <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.vi.i-p10.2"></span>τοῦ
θεοῦ</span> after <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.i-p10.3"></span>χριστόν</span>. The words, however, are
omitted by the majority of the best <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.i-p10.4"></span>mss.</span> and by Rufinus, followed by
Heinichen and Closs. (See the note of Heinichen, Vol. I. p. 4).

<span id="fn_14"></span>[81:15](2010028.htm#fr_14.md) <span
id="iii.vi.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p12"></span> All the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.i-p12.1"></span>mss.</span> followed by the majority of the
editors read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.i-p12.2"></span>εὐγνωμονῶν</span>, which must agree with
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.vi.i-p12.3"></span>λόγος</span>.
Heinichen, however, followed by Burton, Schwegler, Closs, and Stigloher,
read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.i-p12.4"></span>εὐγνωμόνων</span>, which I have also
accepted. Closs translates *die Nachsicht der Kenner;* Stigloher,
*wohlwollende Nachsicht.* Crusè avoids the difficulty by omitting the
word; an omission which is quite unwarranted.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[81:16](2010028.htm#fr_15.md) <span
id="iii.vi.i-p12.5"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p13"></span> Eusebius is rightly called the “Father
of Church History.” He had no predecessors who wrote, as he did, with a
comprehensive historical plan in view; and yet, as he tells us, much had
been written of which he made good use in his History. The one who
approached nearest to the idea of a Church historian was Hegesippus (see
Bk. IV. chap. 22, note 1), but his writings were little more than
fragmentary memoirs, or collections of disconnected reminiscences. For
instance, Eusebius, in Bk. II. chap 23, quotes from his fifth and last
book the account of the martyrdom of James the Just, which shows that
his work lacked at least all chronological arrangement. Julius Africanus
(see Bk. VI. chap. 31, note 1) also furnished Eusebius with much
material in the line of chronology, and in his *Chronicle* Eusebius made
free use of him. These are the only two who can in any sense be said to
have preceded Eusebius in his province, and neither one can rob him of
his right to be called the “Father of Church History.”

<span id="fn_16"></span>[81:17](2010028.htm#fr_16.md) <span
id="iii.vi.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p15"></span> One of the greatest values of Eusebius’
History lies in the quotations which it contains from earlier
ecclesiastical writers. The works of many of them are lost, and are
known to us only through the extracts made by Eusebius. This fact alone
is enough to make his History of inestimable worth.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[82:18](2010028.htm#fr_17.md) <span
id="iii.vi.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p18"></span> On Eusebius’ *Chronicle,* see the
Prolegomena, p. 31, above.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[82:19](2010028.htm#fr_18.md) <span
id="iii.vi.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.i-p20.1"></span>οἰκονομία</span>. See above, note 2.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[82:20](2010028.htm#fr_19.md) <span
id="iii.vi.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.i-p21.1"></span>θεολογία</span>. Suicer gives four meanings
for this word: (1) *Doctrina de Deo.* (2) *Doctrina de SS. Trinitate.*
(3) *Divina Christi natura, seu doctrina de ea.* (4) *Scriptura sacra
utriusque Testamenti.* The word is used here in its third signification
(cf. also chap. 2, §3, and Bk. V. chap. 28, §5). It occurs very
frequently in the works of the Fathers with this meaning, especially in
connection with <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.i-p21.2"></span>οἰκονομία</span>, which is then quite
commonly used to denote the “human nature” of Christ. In the present
chapter <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.i-p21.3"></span>οἰκονομία</span> keeps throughout its more
general signification of “the Dispensation of Christ,” and is not
confined to the mere act of incarnation, nor to his “human nature.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](2010029.md)
