[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010460)  [Next](2010462.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI</span>.—*How Licinius
counseled his Soldiers not to attack the Standard of the Cross.*

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p2.1"></span>Having</span> now learned by experience
the Divine and mysterious power which resided in the salutary trophy, by
means of which Constantine’s army had become habituated to victory, he
admonished his soldiers never to direct their attack against this
standard, nor even incautiously to allow their eyes to rest upon it;
assuring them that it possessed a terrible power, and was especially
hostile to him; so that they would do well carefully to avoid any
collision with it. And now, having given these directions, he prepared
for a decisive conflict with him whose humanity prompted him still to
hesitate, and to postpone the fate which he foresaw awaited his
adversary. The enemy, however, confident in the aid of a multitude of
gods, advanced to the attack with a powerful array of military force,
preceded by certain images of the dead, and lifeless statues, as their
defense. On the other side, the emperor, secure in the armor of
godliness, opposed to the numbers of the enemy the salutary and
life-giving sign, as at once a terror to the foe, and a protection from
every harm. And for a while he paused, and preserved at first the
attitude of forbearance, from respect to the treaty of peace to which he
had given his sanction, that he might not be the first to commence the
contest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](2010462.md)
