[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010539)  [Next](2010541) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI</span>.—*Recommendation to
the Bishops, on their Departure, to Preserve Harmony.*

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xxi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.xxi-p2.1"></span>And</span> now, when the council was on
the point of being finally dissolved, he summoned all the bishops to
meet him on an appointed day, and on their arrival addressed them in a
farewell <span id="page_526">p. 526</span> <span
id="iv.vi.iii.xxi-Page_526"></span>speech, in which he recommended them
to be diligent in the maintenance of peace, to avoid contentious
disputations, amongst themselves and not to be jealous, if any one of
their number should appear pre-eminent for wisdom and eloquence, but to
esteem the excellence of one a blessing common to all. On the other hand
he reminded them that the more gifted should forbear to exalt themselves
to the prejudice of their humbler brethren, since it is God’s
prerogative to judge of real superiority. Rather should they
considerately condescend to the weaker, remembering that absolute
perfection in any case is a rare quality indeed. Each then, should be
willing to accord indulgence to the other for slight offenses, to regard
charitably and pass over mere human weaknesses; holding mutual harmony
in the highest honor, that no occasion of mockery might be given by
their dissensions to those who are ever ready to blaspheme the word of
God: whom indeed we should do all in our power to save, and this cannot
be unless our conduct seems to them attractive. But you are well aware
of the fact that testimony is by no means productive of blessing to all,
since some who hear are glad to secure the supply of their mere bodily
necessities, while others court the patronage of their superiors; some
fix their affection on those who treat them with hospitable kindness,
others again, being honored with presents, love their benefactors in
return; but few are they who really desire the word of testimony, and
rare indeed is it to find a friend of truth. Hence the necessity of
endeavoring to meet the case of all, and, physician-like, to administer
to each that which may tend to the health of the soul, to the end that
the saving doctrine may be fully honored by all. Of this kind was the
former part of his exhortation; <span
id="fr_3259"></span>[3260](#fn_3259) and in conclusion he enjoined them
to offer diligent supplications to God on his behalf. Having thus taken
leave of them, he gave them all permission to return to their respective
countries; and this they did with joy, and thenceforward that unity of
judgment at which they had arrived in the emperor’s presence continued
to prevail, and those who had long been divided were bound together as
members of the same body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3259"></span>[526:3260](2010540.htm#fr_3259) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.xxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xxi-p3"></span> Or “such were the injunctions which
the emperor laid especially on their consciences.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII](2010541)
