[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010412)  [Next](2010414.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.i.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII</span>.—*How, while he
was praying, God sent him a Vision of a Cross of Light in the Heavens at
Mid-day, with an Inscription admonishing him to conquer by that.*

<span id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p2.1"></span>Accordingly</span> he called on him with
earnest prayer and supplications that he would reveal to him who he was,
and stretch forth his right hand to help him in his present
difficulties. And while he was thus praying with fervent entreaty, a
most marvelous sign appeared to him from heaven, the account of which it
might have been hard to believe had it been related by any other person.
But since the victorious emperor himself long afterwards declared it to
the writer of this history, <span id="fr_3107"></span>[3108](#fn_3107.md)
when he was honored with his acquaintance and society, and confirmed his
statement by an oath, who could hesitate to accredit the relation,
especially since the testimony of after-time has established its truth?
He said that about noon, when the day was already beginning to decline,
he saw with his own eyes the trophy of a cross of light in the heavens,
above the sun, and bearing the inscription, <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p3.1"></span>Conquer by this</span>. At this sight he
himself was struck with amazement, and his whole army also, which
followed him on this expedition, and witnessed the miracle. <span
id="fr_3108"></span>[3109](#fn_3108.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3107"></span>[490:3108](2010413.htm#fr_3107.md) <span
id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p3"></span> Note here the care Eusebius takes
to throw off the responsibility for the marvelous. It at the same time
goes to show the general credibility of Eusebius, and some doubt in his
mind of the exact nature and reality of what he records.

<span id="fn_3108"></span>[490:3109](2010413.htm#fr_3108.md) <span
id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p4"></span> This very circumstantial account
has met with doubters from the very beginning, commencing with Eusebius
himself. There are all sorts of explanations, from that of an actual
miracle to that of pure later invention. The fact of some, at least
supposed, special divine manifestation at this time can hardly be
denied. It is mentioned vaguely by *Paneg.* 313, and on the triumphal
arch shortly after. It is reported as a dream by Lactantius about the
same time with the erection of the arch, and alluded to in general, but
hardly to be doubted, terms by Nazarius in 321. Moreover, it is
witnessed to by the fact of the standard of the cross which was made. As
to the real nature of the manifestation, it has been thought to be as
recorded by Constantine, and if so, as perhaps some natural phenomenon
of the sun, or to have been a simple dream, or an hallucination. It is
hardly profitable to discuss the possibilities. The lack of contemporary
evidence to details and the description of Lactantius as a dream is
fatal to any idea of a miraculous image with inscriptions clearly seen
by all. Some cross-like arrangement of the clouds, or a “parahelion,” or
some sort of a suggestion of a cross, may have been seen by all, but
evidently there was no definite, vivid, clear perception, or it would
have been in the mouths of all and certainly recorded, or at least it
would not have been recorded as *something else* by Lactantius. It seems
probable that the emperor, thinking intensely, with all the weight of
his great problem resting on his energetic mind, wondering if the
Christian God was perhaps the God who could help, saw in some suggestive
shape of the clouds or of sunlight the form of a cross, and there
flashed out in his mind in intensest reality the vision of the words, so
that for the moment he was living in the intensest reality of such a
vision. His mind had just that intense activity to which such a thing is
possible or actual. It is like Goethe’s famous meeting of his own self.
It is that genius power for the realistic representation of ideal
things. This is not the same exactly as “hallucination,” or even
“imagination.” The hallucination probably came later when Constantine
gradually represented to himself and finally to Eusebius the vivid idea
with its slight ground, as an objective reality,—a common phenomenon.
When the emperor went to sleep, his brain molecules vibrating to the
forms of his late intense thought, he inevitably dreamed, and dreaming
naturally confirmed his thought. This does not say that the suggestive
form seen, or the idea itself, and the direction of the dream itself,
were not providential and the work of the Holy Spirit, for they were,
and were special in character, and so miraculous (or why do ideas
come?); but it is to be feared that Constantine’s own spirit or
something else furnished some of the later details. There is a slight
difference of authority as to when and where the vision took place. The
panegyrist seems to make it before leaving Gaul, and Malalas is
inaccurate as usual in having it happen in a war against the barbarians.
For farther discussion of the subject see monographs under *Literature*
in the Prolegomena, especially under the names: <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p4.1"></span>Baring</span>, <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p4.2"></span>Du</span> <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p4.3"></span>Voisin</span>, <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p4.4"></span>Fabricius</span>, <span
class="c13"><span id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p4.5"></span>Girault</span>, <span
class="c13"><span id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p4.6"></span>Heumann</span>, <span
class="c13"><span id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p4.7"></span>Jacutius</span> <span
class="c13"><span id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p4.8"></span>Mamachi</span>, <span
class="c13"><span id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p4.9"></span>Molinet</span>, <span
class="c13"><span id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p4.10"></span>St</span>. <span
class="c13"><span id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p4.11"></span>Victor</span>, <span
class="c13"><span id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p4.12"></span>Suhr</span>, <span
class="c13"><span id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p4.13"></span>Toderini</span>,
<span class="c13"><span
id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p4.14"></span>Weidener</span>, <span
class="c13"><span id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p4.15"></span>Wernsdorf</span>,
<span class="c13"><span
id="iv.vi.i.xxviii-p4.16"></span>Woltereck</span>. The most concise,
clear, and admirable supporter of the account of Eusebius, or rather
Constantine, as it stands, is Newman, *Miracles* (Lond. 1875), 271–286.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX](2010414.md)
