[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010124)  [Next](2010126) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI</span>.—*Justin the Philosopher
preaches the Word of Christ in Rome and suffers Martyrdom.*

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p2.1"></span>About</span> this time <span
id="fr_1167"></span>[1168](#fn_1167) Justin, who was mentioned by us
just above, <span id="fr_1168"></span>[1169](#fn_1168) after he had
addressed a second work in behalf of our doctrines to the rulers already
named, <span id="fr_1169"></span>[1170](#fn_1169) was crowned with
divine martyrdom, <span id="fr_1170"></span>[1171](#fn_1170) in
consequence of a plot laid against him by Crescens, <span
id="fr_1171"></span>[1172](#fn_1171) a philosopher who emulated the life
and manners of the Cynics, whose name he bore. After Justin had
frequently refuted him in public discussions he won by his martyrdom the
prize of victory, dying in behalf of the truth which he preached.

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p8"></span>2. And he himself, a man most learned in
the truth, in his Apology already referred to <span
id="fr_1172"></span>[1173](#fn_1172) clearly predicts how this was about
to happen to him, although it had not yet occurred.

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p10"></span>3. His words are as follows: <span
id="fr_1173"></span>[1174](#fn_1173) “I, too, <span
id="fr_1174"></span>[1175](#fn_1174) therefore, expect to be plotted
against and put in the stocks <span id="fr_1175"></span>[1176](#fn_1175)
by some one of those whom I have named, or perhaps by Crescens, that
unphilosophical and vainglorious man. For the man is not worthy to be
called a philosopher who publicly bears witness against those concerning
whom he knows nothing, declaring, for the sake of captivating and
pleasing the multitude, that the Christians are atheistical and
impious. <span id="fr_1176"></span>[1177](#fn_1176)

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p15"></span>4. Doing this he errs greatly. For if
he assails us without having read the teachings of Christ, he is
thoroughly depraved, and is much worse than the illiterate, who often
guard against discussing and bearing false witness about matters which
they do not understand. And if he has read them and does not understand
the majesty that is in them, or, understanding it, does these things in
order that he may not be suspected of being an adherent, he is far more
base and totally depraved, being enslaved to vulgar applause and
irrational fear.

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p16"></span>5. For I would have you know that when
I proposed certain questions of the sort and asked him in regard to
them, I learned and proved that he indeed knows nothing. And to show
that I speak the truth I am ready, if these disputations have not been
reported to you, to discuss the questions again in your presence. And
this indeed would be an act worthy of an emperor.

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p17"></span>6. But if my questions and his <span
id="page_194">p. 194</span> <span
id="iii.ix.xvi-Page_194"></span>answers have been made known to you, it
is obvious to you that he knows nothing about our affairs; or if he
knows, but does not dare to speak because of those who hear him, he
shows himself to be, as I have already said, <span
id="fr_1177"></span>[1178](#fn_1177) not a philosopher, but a
vainglorious man, who indeed does not even regard that most admirable
saying of Socrates.” <span id="fr_1178"></span>[1179](#fn_1178) These
are the words of Justin.

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p20"></span>7. And that he met his death as he had
predicted that he would, in consequence of the machinations of Crescens,
is stated by Tatian, <span id="fr_1179"></span>[1180](#fn_1179) a man
who early in life lectured upon the sciences of the Greeks and won no
little fame in them, and who has left a great many <span
id="page_195">p. 195</span> <span
id="iii.ix.xvi-Page_195"></span>monuments of himself in his writings. He
records this fact in his work against the Greeks, where he writes as
follows: <span id="fr_1180"></span>[1181](#fn_1180) “And that most
admirable Justin declared with truth that the aforesaid persons were
like robbers.”

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p27"></span>8. Then, after making some remarks
about the philosophers, he continues as follows: <span
id="fr_1181"></span>[1182](#fn_1181) “Crescens, indeed, who made his
nest in the great city, surpassed all in his unnatural lust, and was
wholly devoted to the love of money.

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p29"></span>9. And he who taught that death should
be despised, was himself so greatly in fear of it that he endeavored to
inflict death, as if it were a great evil, upon Justin, because the
latter, when preaching the truth, had proved that the philosophers were
gluttons and impostors.” And such was the cause of Justin’s martyrdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1167"></span>[193:1168](2010125.htm#fr_1167) <span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p3"></span> That is, during the reign of Marcus
Aurelius and Lucius Verus, 161–169 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> Inasmuch as Eusebius is
certainly in error in ascribing the death of Polycarp, recorded in the
previous chapter, to the reign of Marcus Aurelius (see note 2 on that
chapter), the fact that he here connects Justin’s death with that reign
furnishes no evidence that it really occurred then; but we have other
good reasons for supposing that it did (see below, note 4).

<span id="fn_1168"></span>[193:1169](2010125.htm#fr_1168) <span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p4"></span> In chap. 11.

<span id="fn_1169"></span>[193:1170](2010125.htm#fr_1169) <span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p5"></span> Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus, whom
he mentioned at the close of chap. 14, and the events of whose reign he
is now ostensibly recording. But in regard to this supposed second
apology addressed to them, see chap. 18, note 3.

<span id="fn_1170"></span>[193:1171](2010125.htm#fr_1170) <span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p6"></span> That Justin died a martyr’s death is
the universal tradition of antiquity, which is crystallized in his name.
Irenæus (*Adv. Hær.* I. 28. 1) is the first to mention it, but does so
casually, as a fact well known. The only account of his martyrdom which
we have is contained in the *Acta Martyrii Justini Philosophi* (Galland.
I. 707 sq.), which, although belonging to a later age (probably the
third century), yet bear every evidence of containing a comparatively
truthful account of Justin’s death. According to these Acts, Justin,
with six companions, was brought before Rusticus, prefect of Rome, and
by him condemned to death, upon his refusal to sacrifice to the gods.
The date of his martyrdom is very difficult to determine. There are two
lines of tradition, one of which puts his death under Antoninus Pius,
the other under Marcus Aurelius. The latter has the most in its favor;
and if we are to accept the report of the *Acta Justini* (which can be
doubted least of all at this point), his death took place under
Rusticus, who, as we know, became prefect of Rome in 163. Upon the date
of Justin’s death, see especially Holland, in Smith and Wace, III. p.
562 sq.

<span id="fn_1171"></span>[193:1172](2010125.htm#fr_1171) <span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p7"></span> Of this cynic philosopher Crescens we
know only what is told us by Justin and Tatian, and they paint his
character in the blackest colors. Doubtless there was sufficient ground
for their accusations; but we must remember that we have his portrait
only from the pen of his bitterest enemies. In the *Acta* Crescens is
not mentioned in connection with the death of Justin,—an omission which
is hardly to be explained, except upon the supposition of historical
truthfulness. Eusebius’ report here seems to rest solely upon the
testimony of Tatian (see §§8 and 9, below), but the passage of Tatian
which he cites does not prove his point; it simply proves that Crescens
plotted against Justin; whether his plotting was successful is not
stated, and the contrary seems rather to be implied (see note 13,
below).

<span id="fn_1172"></span>[193:1173](2010125.htm#fr_1172) <span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p9"></span> Harnack thinks that Eusebius at this
point wishes to convey the false impression that he quotes from the
second apology, whereas he really quotes from what was to him the first,
as can be seen from chap. 17. But such conduct upon the part of Eusebius
would be quite inexplicable (at the beginning of the very next chapter,
e.g., he refers to this same apology as the first), and it is far better
to refer the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p9.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p9.2"></span>ν τῇ δεδηλωμένῃ ᾽Απολογί& 139·</span> to
chap. 13 sq., where the apology is quoted repeatedly.

<span id="fn_1173"></span>[193:1174](2010125.htm#fr_1173) <span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p11"></span> Justin, *Apol.* II. 3.

<span id="fn_1174"></span>[193:1175](2010125.htm#fr_1174) <span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p12.1"></span>κἀγὼ οὖν</span>. In the previous chapter
(quoted by Eusebius in the next chapter) Justin has been speaking of the
martyrdom of various Christians, and now goes on to express his
expectation that he, too, will soon suffer death.

<span id="fn_1175"></span>[193:1176](2010125.htm#fr_1175) <span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p13.1"></span>ξύλῳ ἐντιναγῆναι</span>. Compare [Acts
xvii. 24](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#024)<span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p13.2"></span>, and see Otto’s note on this passage, in
his edition of Justin’s *Apology* (*Corpus Apol. Christ.* I. p. 204). He
says: <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p13.3"></span>ξύλον</span> *erat truncus foramina habens,
quibus pedes captivorum immitebantur, ut securius in carcere servarentur
aut tormentis vexarentur* (“a <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p13.4"></span>ξύλον</span> was a block, with holes in
which the feet of captives were put, in order that they might be kept
more securely in prison, or might be afflicted with tortures”).

<span id="fn_1176"></span>[193:1177](2010125.htm#fr_1176) <span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p13.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p14"></span> This accusation was very commonly made
against the Christians in the second century. See above, chap. 7, note
20.

<span id="fn_1177"></span>[194:1178](2010125.htm#fr_1177) <span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p18"></span> In §3, above.

<span id="fn_1178"></span>[194:1179](2010125.htm#fr_1178) <span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p19"></span> This saying of Socrates is given by
Justin as follows: <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p19.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p19.2"></span>λλ᾽ οὔτι γὲ πρὸ τῆς ἀληθείας τιμητέος
ἀνὴρ</span>, “a man must not be honored before the truth” (from Plato’s
*Republic,* Bk. X.). It is hard to say why Eusebius should have omitted
it. Perhaps it was so well known that he did not think it necessary to
repeat it, taking for granted that the connection would suggest the same
to every reader, or it is possible that the omission is the fault of a
copyist, not of Eusebius himself.

<span id="fn_1179"></span>[194:1180](2010125.htm#fr_1179) <span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p21"></span> On Tatian and his writings, see below,
chap. 29.

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p22"></span>Eusebius has been accused by Dembowski,
Zahn, Harnack, and others of practicing deception at this point. The
passage from Tatian’s *Oratio ad Græcos,* which Eusebius appeals to for
testimony in regard to Justin’s death, and which he quotes just below,
is not given by him exactly as it stands in the extant text of the
*Oratio.* In the latter we read, “He who taught that death should be
despised was himself so greatly in fear of it, that he endeavored to
inflict death as if it were an evil upon Justin, *and indeed on me
also,* because when preaching he had proved that the philosophers were
gluttons and impostors.” The difference between the two texts consists
in the substitution of the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p22.1"></span>μεγ€λῳ</span> for the words <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xvi-p22.2"></span>καὶ ἐμὲ ὡς</span>; and
it is claimed that this alteration was intentionally made by Eusebius.
As the text stands in Tatian, the passage is far from proving that
Justin’s death was caused by the machinations of Crescens, for Tatian
puts himself on a level with Justin as the object of these machinations,
and of course since they did not succeed in his case, there is no reason
to suppose that they succeeded in Justin’s case. It is claimed,
therefore, that Justin, realizing this, struck out the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xvi-p22.3"></span>καὶ ἐμὲ ὡς</span> in
order to permit the reader to gather from the passage that Tatian meant
to imply that the plots of Crescens were successful, and resulted in
Justin’s death. Before accepting this conclusion, however, it may be
well to realize exactly what is involved in it. The change does not
consist merely in the omission of the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p22.4"></span>καὶ ἐμὲ ὡς</span>, but in the substitution
for them of the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p22.5"></span>μεγ€λῳ</span>. It cannot, therefore, be
said that Eusebius only omitted some words, satisfying his conscience
that there was no great harm in that; whoever made the change, if he did
it intentionally, directly falsified the text, and substituted the other
word for the sake of covering up his alteration; that is, he committed
an act of deceit of the worst kind, and deliberately took steps to
conceal his act. Certainly such conduct is not in accord with Eusebius’
general character, so far as we can ascertain it from his writings. Even
Zahn and Harnack, who accuse him of intentional deception here, yet
speak of his general conscientiousness, and treat this alteration as one
which Eusebius allowed himself to make while, at the same time, his
“conscientiousness did not permit him even this time to change truth
completely into untruth.” But if he could allow himself to make so
deliberate an alteration, and then cover the change by inserting another
word, there is little cause to speak of “conscientiousness” in
connection with the matter; if he could do that, his conscience would
certainly permit him to make any false quotations, however great, so
long as he thought he could escape detection. But few would care to
accuse Eusebius of possessing such a character. Certainly if he
possessed it, we should find clearer traces of it than we do in his
*History,* where we have the opportunity to control a large portion of
his statements on an immense variety of subjects. Moreover, for such a
grave act of deception as Eusebius is supposed to have committed, some
adequate ground must have existed. But what ground was there? The only
motive suggested is that he desired to appear to possess specific
knowledge about the manner of Justin’s death, when in fact he did not
possess it. It is not maintained that he had any larger motive, such as
reconciling apparent contradictions in sacred records, or shedding an
added luster upon the Christian religion, for neither of these purposes
has any relation to the statement in regard to Crescens’ connection with
Justin’s death. Solely then for the sake of producing the impression
that he knew more about Justin’s death than he did, he must have made
the change. But certainly when we realize how frequently Eusebius
directly avows his ignorance on points far more important (to his mind)
than this (e.g., the dates of the Jerusalem bishops, which he might so
easily have invented), and when we consider how sober his history is in
comparison with the accounts of the majority of his contemporaries, both
Pagan and Christian, how few fables he introduces, how seldom he
embellishes the narratives which he finds related in his sources with
imaginary figments of his own brain,—when, in fact, no such instances
can be found elsewhere, although, writing in the age he did, and for the
public for whom he did, he might have invented so many stories without
fear of detection, as his successors during the ancient and middle ages
were seldom loath to do,—when all this is taken into consideration, we
should hesitate long before we accuse Eusebius of such deceptive conduct
as is implied in the intentional alteration of Tatian’s account at this
point. It has been quite the custom to accuse Eusebius of intentional
deviations from the truth here and there but it must be remembered that
he was either honest or dishonest, and if he ever deliberately and
intentionally deviated from the truth, his general character for
truthfulness is gone, unless the deviation were only in some exceptional
case, where the pressure to misrepresentation was unusually strong,
under which circumstances his reputation for veracity in general might
not be seriously impaired. But the present instance is not such an one,
and if he was false here on so little provocation, why should we think
his character such as to guarantee truthfulness in any place where
falsehood might be more desirable?

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p23"></span>The fact is, however, that the grounds
upon which the accusation against Eusebius is based are very slender.
Nothing but the strongest evidence should lead us to conclude that such
a writer as he practiced such wilful deception for reasons absolutely
trivial. But when we realize how little is known of the actual state of
the text of Tatian’s *Oratio* at the time Eusebius wrote, we must
acknowledge that to base an accusation on a difference between the text
of the *History* and the extant <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p23.1"></span>mss.</span> of the *Oratio* is at least a
little hasty. An examination of the latest critical edition of Tatian’s
*Oratio* (that of Schwartz, in Gebhardt, and Harnack’s *Texte und
Untersuch.* IV. 1) shows us that in a number of instances the testimony
of the <span class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xvi-p23.2"></span>mss.</span>
of Eusebius is accepted over against that of the few extant <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xvi-p23.3"></span>mss.</span> of Tatian.
The <span class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xvi-p23.4"></span>ms.</span> of
Tatian which Eusebius used was therefore admittedly different at a
number of points from all our existing <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p23.5"></span>mss.</span> of Tatian. It is consequently
not at all impossible that the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p23.6"></span>ms.</span> which he used read <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xvi-p23.7"></span>μεγ€λῳ</span> instead
of <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xvi-p23.8"></span>καὶ ἐμὲ
ὡς</span>. It happens, indeed, to be a fact that our three <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xvi-p23.9"></span>mss.</span> of Tatian all
present variations at this very point (one reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xvi-p23.10"></span>καὶ ἐμὲ ὡς</span>,
another, <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xvi-p23.11"></span>καὶ ἐμὲ
οἷον</span>, another, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p23.12"></span>καὶ ἐμὲ οὗς</span>), showing that the
archetype, whatever it was, either offered difficulties to the copyists,
or else was partially illegible, and hence required conjectural
emendations or additions. It will be noticed that the closing verb of
this sentence is in the singular, so that the mention of both Justin and
Tatian in the beginning of the sentence may well have seemed to some
copyist quite incongruous, and it is not difficult to suppose that under
such circumstances, the text at this point being in any case obscure or
mutilated, such a copyist permitted himself to make an alteration which
was very clever and at the same time did away with all the trouble.
Textual critics will certainly find no difficulty in such an assumption.
The <span class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xvi-p23.13"></span>mss.</span> of
Tatian are undoubtedly nearer the original form at this point than those
of Eusebius, but we have no good grounds for supposing that Eusebius did
not follow the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p23.14"></span>ms.</span> which lay before him.

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p24"></span>The question as to Eusebius’
interpretation of the passage as he found it is quite a different one.
It contains no direct statement that Justin met his death in consequence
of the plots of Crescens; and finding no mention of such a fact in the
Acts of Martyrdom of Justin, we may dismiss it as unhistorical and
refuse to accept Eusebius’ interpretation of Tatian’s words. To say,
however, that Eusebius intentionally misinterpreted those words is quite
unwarranted. He found in Justin’s work an expressed expectation that he
would meet his death in this way, and he found in Tatian’s work the
direct statement that Crescens did plot Justin’s death as the latter had
predicted he would. There was nothing more natural than to conclude that
Tatian meant to imply that Crescens had succeeded, for why did he
otherwise mention the matter at all, Eusebius might well say, looking at
the matter from his point of view, as an historian interested at that
moment in the fact of Justin’s death. He does undoubtedly show
carelessness and lack of penetration in interpreting the passage as he
does; but if he had been aware of the defect in the evidence he
presents, and had yet wished deceitfully to assert the fact as a fact,
he would certainly have omitted the passage altogether, or he would have
bolstered it up with the statement that other writers confirmed his
conclusion,—a statement which only a thoroughly and genuinely honest man
would have scrupled to make. Finally, to return to the original charge
of falsification of the sources, he realized that the text of Tatian,
with the <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xvi-p24.1"></span>καὶ ἐμὲ
ὡς</span>, did not establish Justin’s death at the instigation of
Crescens, he must have realized at the same time that his altered text,
while it might imply it, certainly did not absolutely prove it, and
hence he would not have left his conclusion, which he stated as a
demonstrated fact, to rest upon so slender a basis, when he might so
easily have adduced any number of oral traditions in confirmation of it.
If he were dishonest enough to alter the text, he would not have
hesitated to state in general terms that the fact is “*also* supported
by tradition.” We conclude, finally, that he read the passage as we now
find it in the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p24.2"></span>mss.</span> of his *History,* and that his
interpretation of the passage, while false, was not intentionally so.

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p25"></span>The attacks upon Eusebius which have
been already referred to are to be found in Dembowski’s *Quellen der
christlichen Apologetik,* I. p. 60; Zahn’s *Tatian’s Diatessaron,* p.
275 sq., and Harnack’s *Ueberlieferung der griech. Apologeten,* p. 141
sq. Semisch (*Justin der Märtyrer,* I. 53) takes for granted that
Eusebius followed the text of Tatian which lay before him, but does not
attempt to prove it.

<span id="fn_1180"></span>[195:1181](2010125.htm#fr_1180) <span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p26"></span> Tatian, *Oratio ad Græcos,* c. 18. It
is quite probable that Tatian is here appealing, not to a written work
of Justin’s, but to a statement which he had himself heard him make. See
Harnack’s *Ueberlieferung der griech. Apologeten,* p. 130. Harnack is
undoubtedly correct in maintaining that Tatian’s *Oratio* is quite
independent of Justin’s *Apology* and other writings.

<span id="fn_1181"></span>[195:1182](2010125.htm#fr_1181) <span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p28"></span> *Ibid.*chap. 19.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](2010126)
