[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010701)  [Next](2010703.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p2.1"></span>On</span> the other hand, the sacred
doctrine teaches that he who is the supreme Source of good, and Cause of
all things, is beyond all comprehension, and therefore inexpressible by
word, or speech, or name; surpassing the power, not of language only,
but of thought itself. Uncircumscribed by place, or body; neither in
heaven, nor in ethereal space, nor in any other part of the universe;
but entirely independent of all things else, he pervades the depths of
unexplored and secret wisdom. The sacred oracles teach us to acknowledge
him as the only true God, <span id="fr_3544"></span>[3545](#fn_3544.md)
apart from all corporeal essence, distinct from all subordinate
ministration. Hence it is said that all things are from him, but not
through him. <span id="fr_3545"></span>[3546](#fn_3545.md)

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p5"></span>2. And he himself dwelling as
Sovereign in secret and undiscovered regions of unapproachable light,
ordains and disposes all things by the single power of his own will. At
his will whatever is, exists; without that will, it cannot be. And his
will is in every case for good, since he is essentially Goodness itself.
But he through whom are all things, even God the Word, proceeding in an
ineffable manner from the Father above, as from an everlasting and
exhaustless fountain, flows onward like a river with a full and abundant
stream of power for the preservation of the universal whole.

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p6"></span>3. And now let us select an
illustration from our own experience. The invisible and undiscovered
mind within us, the essential nature of which no one has ever known,
sits as a monarch in the seclusion of his secret chambers, and alone
resolves on our course of action. From this proceeds the only-begotten
word from its father’s bosom, begotten in a manner and by a power
inexplicable to us; and is the first messenger of its father’s thoughts,
declares his secret counsels, and, conveying itself to the ears of
others, accomplishes his designs.

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p7"></span>4. And thus the advantage of this
faculty is enjoyed by all: yet no one has ever yet beheld that invisible
and hidden mind, which is the parent of the word itself. <span
id="fr_3546"></span>[3547](#fn_3546.md) In the same manner, or rather in a
manner which far surpasses all likeness or comparison, the perfect Word
of the Supreme God, as the only-begotten Son of the Father (not
consisting in the power of utterance, nor comprehended in syllables and
parts of speech, nor conveyed by a voice which vibrates on the air; but
being himself the living and effectual Word of the most High, and
subsisting personally as the Power and Wisdom of God), <span
id="fr_3547"></span>[3548](#fn_3547.md) proceeds from his Father’s Deity
and kingdom. <span id="fr_3548"></span>[3549](#fn_3548.md) Thus, being the
perfect Offspring of a perfect Father, and the common Preserver of all
things, he diffuses himself with living power throughout creation, and
pours from his own fullness abundant supplies of reason, <span
id="fr_3549"></span>[3550](#fn_3549.md) wisdom, light, and every other
blessing, not only on objects nearest to himself, but on those most
remote, whether in earth, or sea, or any other sphere of being.

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p12"></span>5. To all these he appoints with
perfect equity their limits, places, laws, and inheritance, allotting to
each their suited portion according to his sovereign will. To some he
assigns the super-terrestrial regions, to others heaven itself as their
habitation: others he places in ethereal space, others in air, and
others still on earth. He it is who transfers mankind from hence to
another sphere, impartially reviews their conduct here, and bestows a
recompense according to the life and habits of each. By him provision is
made for the life and food, not of rational creatures only, but also of
the brute creation, for the service of men;

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p13"></span>6. and while to the latter he grants
the enjoyment of a perishable and fleeting term of existence, the former
he invites to a share in the possession of immortal life. Thus universal
is the agency of the Word of God: everywhere present, and pervading all
things by the power of his intelligence, he looks upward to his Father,
and governs this lower creation, inferior to and consequent upon
himself, in accordance with his will, as the common Preserver of all
things.

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p14"></span>7. Interme<span id="page_599">p.
599</span> <span id="iv.viii.xiii-Page_599"></span>diate, as it were,
and attracting the created to the uncreated Essence, this Word of God
exists as an unbroken bond between the two, uniting things most widely
different by an inseparable tie. He is the Providence which rules the
universe; the guardian and director of the whole: he is the Power and
Wisdom of God the only-begotten God, the Word begotten of God himself.
For “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the
Word was God. All things were made by him and without him was not
anything made that hath been made”; as we learn from the words of the
sacred writer. <span id="fr_3550"></span>[3551](#fn_3550.md) Through his
vivifying power all nature grows and flourishes, refreshed by his
continual showers, and invested with a vigor and beauty ever new.

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p16"></span>8. Guiding the reigns of the
universe, he holds its onward course in conformity to the Father’s will
and moves, as it were, the helm of this mighty ship. This glorious
Agent, the only-begotten Son of the Supreme God, begotten by the Father
as his perfect Offspring, the Father has given to this world as the
highest of all goods; infusing his word, as spirit into a lifeless body,
into unconscious nature; imparting light and energy to that which in
itself was a rude, inanimate, and formless mass, through the Divine
power. Him therefore it is ours to acknowledge and regard as everywhere
present, and giving life to matter and the elements of nature: <span
id="fr_3551"></span>[3552](#fn_3551.md) in him we see Light, even the
spiritual offspring of inexpressible Light: one indeed in essence, as
being the Son of one Father; but possessing in himself many and varied
powers.

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p18"></span>9. The world is indeed divided into
many parts; yet let us not therefore suppose that there are many
independent Agents: nor, though creation’s works be manifold, let us
thence assume the existence of many gods. How grievous the error of
those childish and infatuated advocates of polytheistic worship, who
deify the constituent parts of the universe, and divide into many that
system which is only one!

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p19"></span>10. Such conduct resembles theirs who
should abstract the eyes of an individual man, and term them the man
himself, and the ears, another man, and so the head: or again, by an
effort of thought should separate the neck, the breast and shoulders,
the feet and hands, or other members, nay, the very powers of sense, and
thus pronounce an individual to be a multitude of men. Such folly must
surely be rewarded with contempt by men of sense. Yet such is he who
from the component parts of a single world can devise for himself a
multitude of gods, or even deem that world which is the work of a
Creator, and consists of many parts, to be itself a god: <span
id="fr_3552"></span>[3553](#fn_3552.md) not knowing that the Divine Nature
can in no sense be divisible into parts; since, if compounded, it must
be so through the agency of another power; and that which is so
compounded can never be Divine. How indeed could it be so, if composed
of unequal and dissimilar, and hence of worse and better elements?
Simple, indivisible, uncompounded, the Divine Nature exists at an
infinite elevation above the visible constitution of this world.

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p21"></span>11. And hence we are assured by the
clear testimony of the sacred Herald, <span
id="fr_3553"></span>[3554](#fn_3553.md) that the Word of God, who is before
all things, must be the sole Preserver of all intelligent beings: while
God, who is above all, and the Author of the generation of the Word,
being himself the Cause of all things, is rightly called the Father of
the Word, as of his only-begotten Son, himself acknowledging no superior
Cause. God, therefore, himself is One, and from him proceeds the one
only-begotten Word, the omnipresent Preserver of all things. And as the
many-stringed lyre is composed of different chords, both sharp and flat,
some slightly, others tensely strained, and others intermediate between
the two extremes, yet all attuned according to the rules of harmonic
art; even so this material world, compounded as it is of many elements,
containing opposite and antagonist principles, as moisture and dryness,
cold and heat, yet blended into one harmonious whole, may justly be
termed a mighty instrument framed by the hand of God: an instrument on
which the Divine Word, himself not composed of parts or opposing
principles, but indivisible and uncompounded, performs with perfect
skill, and produces a melody at once accordant with the will of his
Father the Supreme Lord of all, and glorious to himself. Again, as there
are manifold external and internal parts and members comprised in a
single body, yet one invisible soul, one undivided and incorporeal mind
pervades the whole; so is it in this creation, which, consisting of many
parts, yet is but one: and so the One mighty, yea, Almighty Word of God,
pervading all things, and diffusing himself with undeviating energy
throughout this universe, is the Cause of all things that exist therein.

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p23"></span>12. Survey the compass of this
visible world. Seest thou not how the same heaven contains within itself
the countless courses and companies of the stars? <span id="page_600">p.
600</span> <span id="iv.viii.xiii-Page_600"></span>Again, the sun is
one, and yet eclipses many, nay all other luminaries, by the surpassing
glory of his rays. Even so, as the Father himself is One, his Word is
also One, the perfect Son of that perfect Father. Should any one object
because they are not more, as well might he complain that there are not
many suns, or moons, or worlds, and a thousand things beside; like the
madman, who would fain subvert the fair and perfect course of Nature
herself. As in the visible, so also in the spiritual world: in the one
the same sun diffuses his light throughout this material earth; in the
other the One Almighty Word of God illumines all things with invisible
and secret power.

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p24"></span>13. Again, there is in man one
spirit, and one faculty of reason, which yet is the active cause of
numberless effects. The same mind, instructed in many things, will essay
to cultivate the earth, to build and guide a ship, and construct houses:
nay, the one mind and reason of man is capable of acquiring knowledge in
a thousand forms: the same mind shall understand geometry and astronomy,
and discourse on the rules of grammar, and rhetoric, and the healing
art. Nor will it excel in science only, but in practice too: and yet no
one has ever supposed the existence of many minds in one human form, nor
expressed his wonder at a plurality of being in man, because he is thus
capable of varied knowledge.

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p25"></span>14. Suppose one were to find a
shapeless mass of clay, to mould it with his hands, and give it the form
of a living creature; the head in one figure, the hands and feet in
another, the eyes and cheeks in a third, and so to fashion the ears, the
mouth and nose, the breast and shoulders, according to the rules of the
plastic art. The result, indeed, is a variety of figure, of parts and
members in the one body; yet must we not suppose it the work of many
hands, but ascribe it entirely to the skill of a single artist, and
yield the tribute of our praise to him who by the energy of a single
mind has framed it all. The same is true of the universe itself, which
is one, though consisting of many parts: yet surely we need not suppose
many creative powers, nor invent a plurality of gods. Our duty is to
adore the all-wise and all-perfect agency of him who is indeed the Power
and the Wisdom of God, whose undivided force and energy pervades and
penetrates the universe, creating and giving life to all things, and
furnishing to all, collectively and severally, those manifold supplies
of which he is himself the source.

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p26"></span>15. Even so one and the same
impression of the solar rays illumines the air at once, gives light to
the eyes, warmth to the touch, fertility to the earth, and growth to
plants. The same luminary constitutes the course of time, governs the
motions of the stars, performs the circuit of the heavens, imparts
beauty to the earth, and displays the power of God to all: and all this
he performs by the sole and unaided force of his own nature. In like
manner fire has the property of refining gold, and fusing lead, of
dissolving wax, of parching clay, and consuming wood; producing these
varied effects by one and the same burning power.

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p27"></span>16. So also the Supreme Word of God,
pervading all things, everywhere existent, everywhere present in heaven
and earth, governs and directs the visible and invisible creation, the
sun, the heaven, and the universe itself, with an energy inexplicable in
its nature, irresistible in its effects. From him, as from an
everlasting fountain, the sun, the moon, and stars receive their light:
and he forever rules that heaven which he has framed as the fitting
emblem of his own greatness. The angelic and spiritual powers, the
incorporeal and intelligent beings which exist beyond the sphere of
heaven and earth, are filled by him with light and life, with wisdom and
virtue, with all that is great and good, from his own peculiar
treasures. Once more, with one and the same creative skill, he ceases
not to furnish the elements with substance, to regulate the union and
combinations, the forms and figures, and the innumerable qualities of
organized bodies; preserving the varied distinctions of animal and
vegetable life, of the rational and the brute creation; and supplying
all things to all with equal power: thus proving himself the Author, not
indeed of the seven-stringed lyre, <span
id="fr_3554"></span>[3555](#fn_3554.md) but of that system of perfect
harmony which is the workmanship of the One world-creating Word. <span
id="fr_3555"></span>[3556](#fn_3555.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3544"></span>[598:3545](2010702.htm#fr_3544.md) <span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p3"></span> \[Referring, apparently, to [John
xvii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p3.1"></span>, “And this is life eternal, that they
might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast
sent:” a passage which has been called a stronghold of the impugners of
the Deity of Christ; but which, simply considered with its context,
cannot fairly be understood to indicate any inferiority of the Son to
the Father; but rather appears to speak of the mission of the former as
the manifestation of the grace of him who is called “the only true God”
in contradistinction to the polytheism of the heathen world. In other
words, the knowledge of “the only true God,” in connection with that of
“Jesus Christ whom he has sent,” constitutes “eternal life”; the one
being ineffectual, and indeed impossible, without the other.—*Bag.*\]
Compare <span id="iv.viii.xiii-p3.2"></span>[1 John v.
20-21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p3.3"></span>: “That we know him that is true and we
are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true
God and eternal life,” which seems to show that John had no idea of any
subordination in essence in this matter.

<span id="fn_3545"></span>[598:3546](2010702.htm#fr_3545.md) <span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p3.4"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p4"></span> \[But see, for a refutation of this
statement, [Rom. 11:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036.md), [Heb.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p4.1"></span>[Rom. xi.
36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036.md)<span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p4.2"></span>, and [Heb. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p4.3"></span>.—*Bag.*\] Yet the second of these
references clearly refers to the Son. Eusebius, speaking of God the
Father, has in mind the truth that all things were made by the Son, “and
without him was not anything made that hath been made.” [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p4.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_3546"></span>[598:3547](2010702.htm#fr_3546.md) <span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p8"></span> The author is now speaking especially
of the spoken or “expressed” word.

<span id="fn_3547"></span>[598:3548](2010702.htm#fr_3547.md) <span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p9"></span> Compare <span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p9.1"></span>[1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p9.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_3548"></span>[598:3549](2010702.htm#fr_3548.md) <span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p10"></span> This conception that the Divine Word
stands in something the same relation with the Father that the human
word (internal and external) does to the human spirit has, at least, an
interesting suggestion towards the unraveling of this curious mystery,
which, for lack of a better word, it is the fashion just now to call a
human personality, and which certainly is made in the image and likeness
of God. Unless there lurks in the idea some subtle heresy, one may
venture to accept as an interesting analogy this relation of invisible
self, self expressed to self (internal word), self revealed (external
word), and an expression carried to the point of embodiment
(incarnation).

<span id="fn_3549"></span>[598:3550](2010702.htm#fr_3549.md) <span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p11"></span> “Logos” again,—here the internal
word.

<span id="fn_3550"></span>[599:3551](2010702.htm#fr_3550.md) <span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p15"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p15.1"></span>[John i.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p15.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_3551"></span>[599:3552](2010702.htm#fr_3551.md) <span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p17"></span> One on the scent for heresy might
prick up his ears, and sound the alarm of “Gnosticism.”

<span id="fn_3552"></span>[599:3553](2010702.htm#fr_3552.md) <span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p20"></span> A curious work just issued
(anonymous), under the authority of the Bureau of Education, very
complacently evolves the truth of existence out of the author’s pure,
untrammeled consciousness,—for he has never read any works either on
science or on theology,—and arrives at the condescending conclusion that
there is a God; or rather, in the words of Eusebius, the author comes to
“deem that world…to be itself God.”

<span id="fn_3553"></span>[599:3554](2010702.htm#fr_3553.md) <span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p22"></span> \[Referring (says Valesius) to St.
John, whose words Eusebius had lately cited, “In the beginning was the
Word,” &c., and now explains paraphrastically. The reader will decide
for himself on the merits of the paraphrase.—*Bag.*\]

<span id="fn_3554"></span>[600:3555](2010702.htm#fr_3554.md) <span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p28"></span> \[In reference, singularly enough,
to the illustration of the lyre in the preceding chapter.—*Bag.*\]

<span id="fn_3555"></span>[600:3556](2010702.htm#fr_3555.md) <span
id="iv.viii.xiii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xiii-p29"></span> It is idle to treat as
philosophically or theologically unworthy of consideration a system of
thought so definitely unified, and with such Scriptural basis as the
above. It may not be profound or original, but is definite and clear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](2010703.md)
