[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010686)  [Next](2010688.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.xxv"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXV</span>.—*Of Diocletian, who
ignobly abdicated* <span id="fr_3487"></span>[3488](#fn_3487.md) *the
Imperial Throne, and was terrified by the Dread of Lightning for his
Persecution of the Church.*

<span id="iv.vii.xxv-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.xxv-p3.1"></span>Diocletian</span>, however, after the
display of relentless cruelty as a persecutor, evinced a consciousness
of his own guilt and owing to the affliction of a disordered mind,
endured the confinement of a mean and separate dwelling. <span
id="fr_3488"></span>[3489](#fn_3488.md) What then, did he gain by his
active hostility against our God? Simply this I believe, that he passed
the residue of his life in continual dread of the lightning’s stroke.
Nicomedia attests the fact; eyewitnesses, of whom I myself am one,
declare it. The palace, and the emperor’s private chamber were
destroyed, consumed by lightning, devoured by the fire of heaven. Men of
understanding hearts had indeed predicted the issue of such conduct; for
they could not keep silence, nor conceal their grief at such unworthy
deeds; but boldly and openly expressed their feeling, saying one to
another: “What madness is this? and what an insolent abuse of power,
that man should dare to fight against God; should deliberately insult
the most holy and just of all religions; and plan, without the slightest
provocation, the destruction of so great a multitude of righteous
persons? O rare example of moderation to his subjects! Worthy instructor
of his army in the care and protection due to their fellow-citizens! Men
who had never seen the backs of a retreating army plunged their swords
into the breasts of their own countrymen!” So great was the effusion of
blood shed, that if shed in battle with barbarian enemies, it had been
sufficient to pur<span id="page_580">p. 580</span> <span
id="iv.vii.xxv-Page_580"></span>chase a perpetual peace. <span
id="fr_3489"></span>[3490](#fn_3489.md) At length, indeed, the providence
of God took vengeance on these unhallowed deeds; but not without severe
damage to the state. For the entire army of the emperor of whom I have
just spoken, becoming subject to the authority of a worthless
person, <span id="fr_3490"></span>[3491](#fn_3490.md) who had violently
usurped the supreme authority at Rome (when the providence of God
restored freedom to that great city), was destroyed in several
successive battles. And when we remember the cries with which those who
were oppressed, and who ardently longed for their native liberty
implored the help of God; and their praise and thanksgiving to him on
the removal of the evils under which they had groaned, when that liberty
was regained, and free and equitable intercourse restored: do not these
things every way afford convincing proofs of the providence of God, and
his affectionate regard for the interests of mankind?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3487"></span>[579:3488](2010687.htm#fr_3487.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xxv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xxv-p2"></span> Cf. Prolegomena, *Life.*

<span id="fn_3488"></span>[579:3489](2010687.htm#fr_3488.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xxv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xxv-p4"></span> \[The derangement of Diocletian appears
to have been temporary only. The causes of his abdication are not very
clearly ascertained; but he seems to have meditated the step a
considerable time previously. See Gibbon, ch. 13, and the note of
Valesius.—*Bag.*\]

<span id="fn_3489"></span>[580:3490](2010687.htm#fr_3489.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xxv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xxv-p5"></span> *Valesius* and *Hein.,* in his first
edition, and *Bag.* read this transposed thus, “…severe damage to the
state, and an effusion of blood; which, if shed,” etc. But *Val.*
suggests, and Heinichen adopts in his second edition, that the whole
sentence should be transposed as above.

<span id="fn_3490"></span>[580:3491](2010687.htm#fr_3490.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xxv-p6"></span> \[“He means Maxentius, as appears from
what follows. How Diocletian’s army came under the command of Maxentius,
it is not difficult to understand. After Diocletian’s abdication,
Galerius Maximian took the command of his forces, giving part to Severus
Cæsar for the defence of Italy. Shortly afterwards, Maxentius having
usurped the Imperial power at Rome, Galerius sent Severus against him
with his forces. Maxentius, however, fraudulently and by promises
corrupted and drew to his own side Severus’s army. After this, Galerius,
having marched against Maxentius with a more numerous force, was himself
in like manner deserted by his troops. Thus the army of Diocletian came
under the power of Maxentius” (Valesius ad loc.).—*Bag.*\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI](2010688.md)
