[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010272)  [Next](2010274) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiv.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.</span>

<span id="iii.xiv.iii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiv.iii-p2.1"></span>What</span> occurred to Romanus on the same
day <span id="fr_2626"></span>[2627](#fn_2626) at Antioch, is also
worthy of record. For he was a native of Palestine, a deacon and
exorcist in the parish of Cæsarea; and being present at the destruction
of the churches, he beheld many men, with women and children, going up
in crowds to the idols and sacrificing. <span
id="fr_2627"></span>[2628](#fn_2627) But, through his great zeal for
religion, he could not endure the sight, and rebuked them with a loud
voice.

<span id="iii.xiv.iii-p5"></span>2. Being arrested for his boldness, he
proved a most noble witness of the truth, if there ever was one. For
when the judge informed him that he was to die by fire, <span
id="fr_2628"></span>[2629](#fn_2628) <span id="page_344">p. 344</span>
<span id="iii.xiv.iii-Page_344"></span>he received the sentence with
cheerful countenance and most ready mind, and was led away. When he was
bound to the stake, and the wood piled up around him, as they were
awaiting the arrival of the emperor before lighting the fire, he cried,
“Where is the fire for me?”

<span id="iii.xiv.iii-p7"></span>3. Having said this, he was summoned
again before the emperor, <span id="fr_2629"></span>[2630](#fn_2629) and
subjected to the unusual torture of having his tongue cut out. But he
endured this with fortitude and showed to all by his deeds that the
Divine Power is present with those who endure any hardship whatever for
the sake of religion, lightening their sufferings and strengthening
their zeal. When he learned of this strange mode of punishment, the
noble man was not terrified, but put out his tongue readily, and offered
it with the greatest alacrity to those who cut it off.

<span id="iii.xiv.iii-p9"></span>4. After this punishment he was thrown
into prison, and suffered there for a very long time. At last the
twentieth anniversary of the emperor being near, <span
id="fr_2630"></span>[2631](#fn_2630) when, according to an established
gracious custom, liberty was proclaimed everywhere to all who were in
bonds, he alone had both his feet stretched over five holes in the
stocks, <span id="fr_2631"></span>[2632](#fn_2631) and while he lay
there was strangled, and was thus honored with martyrdom, as he desired.

<span id="iii.xiv.iii-p12"></span>5. Although he was outside of his
country, yet, as he was a native of Palestine, it is proper to count him
among the Palestinian martyrs. These things occurred in this manner
during the first year, when the persecution was directed only against
the rulers of the Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2626"></span>[343:2627](2010273.htm#fr_2626) <span
id="iii.xiv.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.iii-p3"></span> We learn from the Syriac version that
the death of Romanus occurred on the same day as that of Alphæus and
Zacchæus. His arrest, therefore, must have taken place some time before,
according to §4, below. In fact, we see from the present paragraph that
his arrest took place in connection with the destruction of the
churches; that is, at the time of the execution of the first edict in
Antioch. We should naturally think that the edict would be speedily
published in so important a city, and hence can hardly suppose the
arrest of Romanus to have occurred later than the spring of 303. He
therefore lay in prison a number of months (according to §4, below, a
“very long time,” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiv.iii-p3.1"></span>πλεῖστον χρόνον</span>). Mason is clearly
in error in putting his arrest in November, and his death at the time of
the vicennalia, in December. It is evident from the Syriac version that
the order for the release of prisoners, to which the so-called third
edict was appended, preceded the vicennalia by some weeks, although
issued in view of the great anniversary which was so near at hand. It is
quite possible that the decree was sent out some weeks beforehand, in
order that time might be given to induce the Christians to sacrifice,
and thus enjoy release at the same time with the others.

<span id="fn_2627"></span>[343:2628](2010273.htm#fr_2627) <span
id="iii.xiv.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.iii-p4"></span> There is no implication here that
these persons were commanded, or even asked, to sacrifice. They seem, in
their dread of what might come upon them, when they saw the churches
demolished, to have hastened of their own accord to sacrifice to the
idols, and thus disarm all possible suspicion.

<span id="fn_2628"></span>[343:2629](2010273.htm#fr_2628) <span
id="iii.xiv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.iii-p6"></span> As Mason remarks, to punish Romanus
with death for dissuading the Christians from sacrificing was entirely
illegal, as no imperial edict requiring them to sacrifice had yet been
issued, and therefore no law was broken in exhorting them not to do so.
At the same time, that he should be arrested as a church officer was,
under the terms of the second edict, legal, and, in fact, necessary; and
that the judge should incline to be very severe in the present case,
with the emperor so near at hand, was quite natural. That death,
however, was not yet made the penalty of Christian confession is plain
enough from the fact that, when the emperor was appealed to, as we learn
from the Syriac version, he remanded Romanus to prison, thus inflicting
upon him the legal punishment, according to the terms of the second
edict. Upon the case of Romanus, see Mason, p. 188 sq.

<span id="fn_2629"></span>[344:2630](2010273.htm#fr_2629) <span
id="iii.xiv.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.iii-p8"></span> Valesius assumes that this was
Galerius, and Mason does the same. In the Syriac version, however, he is
directly called Diocletian; but on the other hand, in the Syriac acts
published by Assemani (according to Cureton, p. 55), he is called
“Maximinus, the son-in-law of Diocletian”; i.e. Galerius, who was known
as Maximianus (of which Maximinus, in the present case, is evidently
only a variant form). The emperor’s conduct in the present case is much
more in accord with Galerius’ character, as known to us, than with the
character of Diocletian; and moreover, it is easier to suppose that the
name of Maximinus was later changed into that of Diocletian, by whose
name the whole persecution was known, than that the greater name was
changed into the less. I am therefore convinced that the reference in
the present case is to Galerius, not to Diocletian.

<span id="fn_2630"></span>[344:2631](2010273.htm#fr_2630) <span
id="iii.xiv.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.iii-p10"></span> See above, Bk. VIII. chap. 2, note 8.

<span id="fn_2631"></span>[344:2632](2010273.htm#fr_2631) <span
id="iii.xiv.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.iii-p11"></span> See above, Bk. IV. chap. 16, note 9,
and Bk. VIII. chap. 10, note 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](2010274)
