[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010101)  [Next](2010103) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIII</span>.—*Trajan forbids
the Christians to be sought after.*

<span id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p2.1"></span>So</span> great a persecution was at
that time opened against us in many places that Plinius Secundus, one of
the most noted of governors, being disturbed by the great number of
martyrs, communicated with the emperor concerning the multitude of those
that were put to death for <span id="page_165">p. 165</span> <span
id="iii.viii.xxxiii-Page_165"></span>their faith. <span
id="fr_890"></span>[891](#fn_890) At the same time, he informed him in
his communication that he had not heard of their doing anything profane
or contrary to the laws,—except that they arose at dawn <span
id="fr_891"></span>[892](#fn_891) and sang hymns to Christ as a God; but
that they renounced adultery and murder and like criminal offenses, and
did all things in accordance with the laws.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p6"></span>2. In reply to this Trajan made the
following decree: that the race of Christians should not be sought
after, but when found should be punished. On account of this the
persecution which had threatened to be a most terrible one was to a
certain degree checked, but there were still left plenty of pretexts for
those who wished to do us harm. Sometimes the people, sometimes the
rulers in various places, would lay plots against us, so that, although
no great persecutions took place, local persecutions were nevertheless
going on in particular provinces, <span
id="fr_892"></span>[893](#fn_892) and many of the faithful endured
martyrdom in various forms.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p8"></span>3. We have taken our account from
the Latin Apology of Tertullian which we mentioned above. <span
id="fr_893"></span>[894](#fn_893) The translation runs as follows: <span
id="fr_894"></span>[895](#fn_894) “And indeed we have found that search
for us has been forbidden. <span id="fr_895"></span>[896](#fn_895) For
when Plinius Secundus, the governor of a province, had condemned certain
Christians and deprived them of their dignity, <span
id="fr_896"></span>[897](#fn_896) he was confounded by the multitude,
and was uncertain what further course to pursue. He therefore
communicated with Trajan the emperor, informing him that, aside from
their unwillingness to sacrifice, <span
id="fr_897"></span>[898](#fn_897) he had found no impiety in them.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p14"></span>4. And he reported this also, that
the Christians arose <span id="fr_898"></span>[899](#fn_898) early in
the <span id="page_166">p. 166</span> <span
id="iii.viii.xxxiii-Page_166"></span>morning and sang hymns unto Christ
as a God, and for the purpose of preserving their discipline <span
id="fr_899"></span>[900](#fn_899) forbade murder, adultery, avarice,
robbery, and the like. In reply to this Trajan wrote that the race of
Christians should not be sought after, but when found should be
punished.” Such were the events which took place at that time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_890"></span>[165:891](2010102.htm#fr_890) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p3"></span> Plinius Cæcilius Secundus,
commonly called “Pliny the younger” to distinguish him from his uncle,
Plinius Secundus the elder, was a man of great literary attainments and
an intimate friend of the Emperor Trajan. Of his literary remains the
most important are his epistles, collected in ten books. The epistle of
which Eusebius speaks in this chapter is No. 96 (97), and the reply of
Trajan No. 97 (98) of the tenth book. The epistle was written from
Bithynia, probably within a year after Pliny became governor there,
which was in 110 or 111. It reads as follows: “It is my custom, my Lord,
to refer to thee all questions concerning which I am in doubt; for who
can better direct my hesitation or instruct my ignorance? I have never
been present at judicial examinations of the Christians; therefore I am
ignorant how and to what extent it is customary to punish or to search
for them. And I have hesitated greatly as to whether any distinction
should be made on the ground of age, or whether the weak should be
treated in the same way as the strong; whether pardon should be granted
to the penitent, or he who has ever been a Christian gain nothing by
renouncing it; whether the mere name, if unaccompanied with crimes, or
crimes associated with the name, should be punished. Meanwhile, with
those who have been brought before me as Christians I have pursued the
following course. I have asked them if they were Christians, and if they
have confessed, I have asked them a second and third time, threatening
them with punishment; if they have persisted, I have commanded them to
be led away to punishment. For I did not doubt that whatever that might
be which they confessed, at any rate pertinacious and inflexible
obstinacy ought to be punished. There have been others afflicted with
like insanity who as Roman citizens I have decided should be sent to
Rome. In the course of the proceedings, as commonly happens, the crime
was extended, and many varieties of cases appeared. An anonymous
document was published, containing the names of many persons. Those who
denied that they were or had been Christians I thought ought to be
released, when they had followed my example in invoking the gods and
offering incense and wine to thine image,—which I had for that purpose
ordered brought with the images of the gods,—and when they had besides
cursed Christ—things which they say that those who are truly Christians
cannot be compelled to do. Others, accused by an informer, first said
that they were Christians and afterwards denied it, saying that they had
indeed been Christians, but had ceased to be, some three years, some
several years, and one even twenty years before. All adored thine image
and the statues of the gods, and cursed Christ. Moreover, they affirmed
that this was the sum of their guilt or error; that they had been
accustomed to come together on a fixed day before daylight and to sing
responsively a song unto Christ as God; and to bind themselves with an
oath, not with a view to the commission of some crime, but, on the
contrary, that they would not commit theft, nor robbery, nor adultery,
that they would not break faith, nor refuse to restore a deposit when
asked for it. When they had done these things, their custom was to
separate and to assemble again to partake of a meal, common yet harmless
(which is not the characteristic of a nefarious superstition); but this
they had ceased to do after my edict, in which according to thy demands
I had prohibited fraternities. I therefore considered it the more
necessary to examine, even with the use of torture, two female slaves
who were called deaconesses (*ministræ*), in order to ascertain the
truth. But I found nothing except a superstition depraved and
immoderate; and therefore, postponing further inquiry, I have turned to
thee for advice. For the matter seems to me worth consulting about,
especially on account of the number of persons involved. For many of
every age and of every rank and of both sexes have been already, and
will be brought to trial. For the contagion of this superstition has
permeated not only the cities, but also the villages and even the
country districts. Yet it can apparently be arrested and corrected. At
any rate, it is certainly a fact that the temples, which were almost
deserted, are now beginning to be frequented, and the sacred rites,
which were for a long time interrupted, to be resumed, and fodder for
the victims to be sold, for which previously hardly a purchaser was to
be found. From which it is easy to gather how great a multitude of men
may be reformed if there is given a chance for repentance.”

<span id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p4"></span>The reply of Trajan—commonly called
“Trajan’s Rescript”—reads as follows: “Thou hast followed the right
course, my Secundus, in treating the cases of those who have been
brought before thee as Christians. For no fixed rule can be laid down
which shall be applicable to all cases. They are not to be searched for;
if they are accused and convicted, they are to be punished;
nevertheless, with the proviso that he who denies that he is a
Christian, and proves it by his act (*re ipsa*),—i.e. by making
supplication to our gods,—although suspected in regard to the past, may
by repentance obtain pardon. Anonymous accusations ought not to be
admitted in any proceedings; for they are of most evil precedent, and
are not in accord with our age.”

<span id="fn_891"></span>[165:892](2010102.htm#fr_891) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p5.1"></span>ἅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p5.2"></span>μα τῇ žῳ διεγειρομένους</span>. See
note 9, below.

<span id="fn_892"></span>[165:893](2010102.htm#fr_892) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p7"></span> This is a very good statement of
the case. There was nothing approaching a universal persecution,—that is
a persecution simultaneously carried on in all parts of the empire,
until the time of Decius.

<span id="fn_893"></span>[165:894](2010102.htm#fr_893) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p9"></span> Mentioned in Bk. II. chap. 2. On
the translation of Tertullian’s *Apology* employed by Eusebius, see note
9 on that chapter. The present passage is rendered, on the whole, with
considerable fidelity; much more accurately than in the two cases
noticed in the previous book.

<span id="fn_894"></span>[165:895](2010102.htm#fr_894) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p10"></span> *Apol.*chap. 2.

<span id="fn_895"></span>[165:896](2010102.htm#fr_895) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p11"></span> The view which Tertullian here
takes of Trajan’s rescript is that it was, on the whole, favorable,—that
the Christians stood after it in a better state in relation to the law
than before,—and this interpretation of the edict was adopted by all the
early Fathers, and is, as we can see, accepted likewise by Eusebius (and
so he entitles this chapter, not “Trajan commands the Christians to be
punished, if they persist in their Christianity,” but “Trajan forbids
the Christians to be sought after,” thus implying that the rescript is
favorable). But this interpretation is a decided mistake. Trajan’s
rescript expressly made Christianity a *religio illicita,* and from that
time on it was a crime in the sight of the law to be a Christian;
whereas, before that time, the matter had not been finally determined,
and it had been left for each ruler to act just as he pleased. Trajan,
it is true, advises moderation in the execution of the law; but that
does not alter the fact that his rescript is an unfavorable one, which
makes the profession of Christianity—what it had not been before—a
direct violation of an established law. Compare, further, Bk. IV. chap.
8, note 14.

<span id="fn_896"></span>[165:897](2010102.htm#fr_896) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p12.1"></span>κατακρίνας χριστιανούς τινας καὶ τῆς
ἀξίας ἐκβαλών</span>. The Latin original reads: *damnatis quibusdam
christianis, quibusdam gradu pulsis.* The Greek translator loses
entirely the antithesis of *quibusdam …quibusdam* (*some* he condemned,
*others* he deprived of their dignity). He renders *gradu* by <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p12.2"></span>τῆς ἀξίας</span>,
which is quite allowable; but Thelwall, in his English translation in
the *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* renders the second phrase, “and driven some
from their steadfastness,” in which the other sense of *gradus* is
adopted.

<span id="fn_897"></span>[165:898](2010102.htm#fr_897) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p13"></span> Greek: <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p13.1"></span>ž</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p13.2"></span>ξω τοῦ μὴ βούλεσθαι αὐτοὺς
εἰδωλολατρεῖν</span>. Latin original: *præter obstinationem non
sacrificandi.* The <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p13.3"></span>εἰδωλολατρεῖν</span> is quite
indefinite, and might refer to any kind of idolatry; but the Latin
*sacrificandi* is definite, referring clearly to the sacrifices which
the accused Christians were required to offer in the presence of the
governor, if they wished to save their lives. I have, therefore,
translated the Greek word in the light of the Latin word which it is
employed to reproduce.

<span id="fn_898"></span>[165:899](2010102.htm#fr_898) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p15"></span> Greek: <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p15.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p15.2"></span>νίστασθαι ἕωθεν</span>. Latin
original: *cœtus antelucanos.* The Latin speaks of “assemblies” (which
is justified by the *ante lucem convenire* of Pliny’s epistle), while
the Greek (both here and in §1, above) speaks only of “arising,” and
thus fails to reproduce the full sense of the original.

<span id="fn_899"></span>[166:900](2010102.htm#fr_899) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p16"></span> Greek: <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p16.1"></span>πρὸς τὸ τὴν ἐπιστήμην αὐτῶν
διαφυλ€σσειν</span>. Latin original: *ad confœderandum disciplinam.* The
Greek translation is again somewhat inaccurate. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p16.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxxiii-p16.3"></span>πιστήμη</span>
(literally, “experience,” “knowledge”) expresses certain meanings of the
word *disciplina,* but does not strictly reproduce the sense in which
the latter word is used in this passage; namely, in the sense of moral
discipline. I have again translated the Greek version in the light of
its Latin original.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV](2010103)
