[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010376)  [Next](2010378) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p1"></span> §2. *Sources.*

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p2"></span>Remembering the class of students for
which the series is chiefly intended, effort has been made to refer to
translations of sources where they are at hand, and to refer to the best
accessible English authorities on them. But the plan has been to refer
to the source itself in the edition actually used, and for literature on
them to choose the best for ready reference. Both editions and
authorities on sources are therefore selections, usually from many, of
such as seem most directly useful. The intention has been to guide to
all frequently mentioned sources, whether they were of great value or
not, since a useless one costs often quite as much trouble to hunt up
and find useless, as a good one to use. It is hardly to be hoped that
all the sources often referred to have been gathered, but the following
list represents pretty much all that are worth mentioning, and some
which are not.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p3"></span>1. *Inscriptions, coins, medals, &c.*

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p4"></span>In some sense these are the most
reliable of sources, in spite of counterfeits. A large number will be
found collected in Clinton. For farther critical study, compare the
collections, great and small; for which, with the matter of inscriptions
in general, see Hicks, E. L., and Hübner, E., in the *Encyclopædia
Britannica*, 13 (1881) 121–133; and Babington, in Smith and Cheetham, 1
(1880) 841–862. Monographs on those relating to Constantine will be
found under the names, Cavedoni, Cigola, Eltz, Freherus, Garucci,
Harduin, Penon, Revellot, Valois, Westphalen, Werveke, in the
*Literature* of this volume.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p5"></span>2. *Laws*.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p6"></span>These, with their dates, their official
nature, their fullness and variety, are primary, and are the only
sources recognized by some. They are embodied in the Theodosian and
Justinian Codes, and collected from these are edited in Migne, *Patrol*.
*Latina*, Vol. 8. See under *Writings* of Constantine, above.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p7"></span>3. *Other Writings by Constantine*.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p8"></span>See under *Writings*, above, p. 436.
With this might perhaps be included also writings *to* Constantine, like
that of Anulinus in Augustinus, *Ep*. 88.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p9"></span>4. *General Literary Sources*.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p10"></span>Taking in general chronological order,
without attempting the impossibility of fixing the exact chronological
place, the first group of contemporary sources is that of the
Panegyrists (for collected editions, see Engelmann). <span
id="page_446">p. 446</span> <span id="iv.iii.v.ii-Page_446"></span>It
was a serious mistake, now recognized, to pass them by as worthless.
Like all authentic documents, they have a minimum residuum of undoubted
material, which is larger or smaller according to the critical acumen of
the investigator. In the case of these, however inflated or eulogistic
they may be, the circumstances under which they were spoken give a
considerable value.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p11"></span>(1) *Incerti auctoris Panegyricus
Maximiano et Constantino dictus* (*Paneg*. 307). In Migne, *Patrol.
Lat*. 8 (1844), 609–620. Pronounced at celebration of marriage of
Constantine and Fausta, <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p11.1"></span>a.d.</span> 307. Besides having the great
value of being contemporary evidence, the author shows a certain
ingenuity in enlarging on the virtues of the young Constantine, who had
few deeds to show, and on the deeds of Maximian, who had few virtues,
and has therefore a certain discernible modicum of truth.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p12"></span>Compare the *Monitum* in Migne,
Ramsay’s article on *Drepanius*, in Smith, Dict. 1073–4, and references
under Eumenius.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p13"></span>(2) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p13.1"></span>Eumenius</span> (310–311). *(a) Panegyric
(Panegyricus Constantino Augusto*). In Migne, *Patrol. Lat*. 8 (1884),
619–640. (*b*) *Thanksgiving Oration (Gratiarum Actio Constantino
Augusto*). In Migne, *Patrol. Lat*. 8 (1844), 641–654. Eumenius
flourished during the reigns of Constantius, with whom he was in high
favor, and Constantine. He was head of the school at Autun. The
*Panegyric* was delivered at Treves, in 310. The authorship of Eumenius
has been unwarrantably questioned, on the ground that the flattery and
exaggeration of the work are not consistent with his taste and sense;
but it would seem that both his exaggeration and his taste have been
themselves exaggerated. His praise is hardly more “outrageous” than
panegyrics were wont to be,—or are, for that matter; and so far from
being “worthless,” there is a peculiar deal of interesting,
unquestionable, and primary historical evidence. Still, his taste and
veracity are not much above that of modern eulogists of living or dead
emperors and politicians. The *Gratiarum Actio* is the official oration
of thanks to Constantine in behalf of the citizens of Autun, on account
of favors shown them. It was pronounced at Treves in 311.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p14"></span>Compare Ramsay, in Smith, *Dict*. 2
(1859), 92; the Proœmium, in ed. Migne, 619–622; also for editions,
Ramsay, article *Drepanius*, in Smith, *Dict*. 1. 1073–4; and for
literature, Chevalier. For general account of the Panegyrists, see this
article on Drepanius.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p15"></span>(3) *Incerti Panegyricus Constantino
Augusto* (Paneg. 313). In Migne, *Patrol. Lat*. 8 (1844), 653– . This is
usually ascribed to Nazarius, on the ground of style. It was spoken at
Treves in 313, and relates mainly to the war with Maxentius. Various
details relating to this are of such nature and form as to suggest again
that the author is the same as that of the 321 Paneg.,—Nazarius.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p16"></span>Compare Ramsay, in Smith, *Dict*. 2
(1859), 1145; the Proœmium in ed. Migne, &c., and literature as under
<span class="c13"><span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p16.1"></span>Eumenius</span>,
above.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p17"></span>(4) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p17.1"></span>Nazarius</span>. (321) *Panegyric*
(*Panegyricus Constantino Augusto dictus*). In ed. Migne, *Patrol. Lat*.
8 (1844), 581–608. Nazarius is mentioned by Jerome as a distinguished
rhetorician. This oration was delivered at Rome in 321. Constantine was
not present. It is superlatively eulogistic, but like the related
panegyrics contains many historical facts of greatest value.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p18"></span>Compare Ramsay, in Smith, *Dict*. 2
(1859), 1145, the *Monitum*, in Migne, and references under <span
class="c13"><span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p18.1"></span>Eumenius</span>.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p19"></span>In the midst of the period which these
cover comes one of the two great Christian sources, and he is followed
by a considerable row of great and small Christians during the century.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p20"></span>(5) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p20.1"></span>Lactantius</span> (ab. 313–314). *On the
Deaths of the Persecutors (De M. P.*). Ed. Fritsche (Lips. 1842),
248–286; ed. Migne, *Patrol. Lat*. 7 (Par. 1844), 157–276; tr. in *T. &
T. Clark Library*, 22 (Edinb. 1871), 164–211, and in Ante-Nicene Fathers
(Buffalo and N.Y.), 300–326 \[Lord Hailes’ translation\]. There are many
editions in collected works, and about a dozen separate, and many
translations,—in all a hundred or more editions and translations. There
has been much controversy regarding the author of this work, but there
is little doubt that it was Lactantius. Ebert (*Gesch. chr. Lat. Lit*.
1. 83) claims to have demonstrated the fact, and most of the later
writers agree. The work was composed after the edict of Constantine and
Licinius, and before the break between the two, i.e. 313–314. It was
written thus in the midst of things, and has the peculiar historical
value of a contemporary document, unprejudiced by later events. It is a
sort of psalm of triumph, colored by the passionate rejoicing of one
persecuted over the Divine vengeance which has come upon the
persecutors. “In the use of the work the historian must employ great
critical discernment” (Ebert, in Herzog, 8 \[1881\], 365). But granted
all his prejudice, the facts he witnesses are of first value.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p21"></span>Compare Ffoulkes, in Smith and Wace, 3
(1882), 613–617; Teuffel, *Hist. Rom. Lit*. 2 (1873), 334; Ebert, in
Herzog, *Encyk*. 8 (1881), 364–366, and *Gesch. chr. Lat. Lit*. 1
(1874), 83; and for farther literature, *Bibliog, Synops*.
in*Ante-Nicene Fathers Suppl*. (1887), 77–81.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p22"></span>(6) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p22.1"></span>Eusebius</span> (ab. 260–340). I.
*Ecclesiastical History*. 2. *Constantine*. 3. *Chronicle*.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p23"></span>For 1 and 3 compare Prolegomena of Dr.
McGiffert at the beginning of this volume, and for 2, *Special
Prolegomena*, p. 466.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p24"></span>(7) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p24.1"></span>Optatian</span> (fl. ab. 326).
*Panegyric*, in Migne, *Patrol. Lat*. 19 (1846), 395–432; Letter to
Constantine, do. 391–392. Optatian, Porfirius, or Porphyrius, as he is
variously called, is dubiously Christian, composed this <span
id="page_447">p. 447</span> <span id="iv.iii.v.ii-Page_447"></span>poem,
or series of poems, while in exile, on the occasion of the Vicennalia of
Constantine. It dates, therefore, from 325 or 326. It is a most
extraordinary aggregation of acrostics, pattern poems, and every
possible device of useless, mechanical variety of form, of little value,
excepting as a sort of dime-museum exhibition of patience and ingenuity.
It consists mainly in calling Constantine flattering names, but contains
here and there an historical suggestion. It was accompanied by a letter
to Constantine, and drew one from him, and a pardon as well (Hieronymus,
*Chron.*).

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p25"></span>Compare Wilson, article *Porfirius,*
in Smith & W. 4 (1887), 440; article *Porphyrius,* in Smith, *Dict.* 3
(1859), 502; and for editions and literature, Engelmann.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p26"></span>(8) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p26.1"></span>Athanasius</span> (296–373). *Apology
against the Arians,* and various works, ed. Bened. (1698), 2 v. in 3,
fo; ed. Migne, *Patrol. Gr.* 25–28 (1857), 4 v.; translated in part in
Newman, *Library of the Fathers,* and in Schaff-Wace, *Nicene and
Post-Nicene Fathers* (announced). The works of Athanasius contain
various letters of Constantine (see under *Works*) and much of primary
historical value for the latter part of Constantine’s reign. So far as
it goes, the matter is almost equal to official documents as source.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p27"></span>Compare Bright, in Smith & W. 1
(1877), 179–203; Schaff, *Hist. of Church,* 23 (1884), 884–893; and for
extensive literature and editions, Chevalier and Graesse.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p28"></span>(9) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p28.1"></span>Cyril of Jerusalem</span> (ab. 315–386).
*Catechetical Lectures.* In Migne, *Patrol Gr.* 33 (1857), especially
830. English translations in Newman, *Library of Fathers,* 2 (1838), one
ref. p. 178. *Letter to Constantine II. concerning the sign of the cross
seen at Jerusalem,* c 3. In Migne, *Patrol. Gr.* 33 (1857), 1165–1176,
ref. on 1167–1168. Two or three references only to excavation of the
cross and building of churches, &c., at Jerusalem. They take
significance only in the fact that Cyril is so near the time (the letter
was 351 \[?\], or not many years later), and delivered his lectures in
the very church which Constantine had built (sect. 14, 22).

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p29"></span>Compare Schaff, *Hist. of Church,* 3
(1884) 923–925; Venables, in Smith & W. 1 (1887), 760–763; and
literature in Chevalier Schaff, &c.; also editions in Graesse, Hoffmann,
&c.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p30"></span>(10) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p30.1"></span>Ambrosius of Milan</span> (ab. 340–397).
*Oration on the Death of Theodosius.* In Migne, *Patrol. Lat.* 16
(1866), portion relating to Constantine especially, 1462–1465. Relates
chiefly to the Finding of the Cross.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p31"></span>Compare Davies, in Smith & W. 1
(1877), 91–99; also Chevalier, Engelmann, Schoenemann, &c.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p32"></span>(11) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p32.1"></span>Hieronymus</span> (<span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p32.2"></span>Jerome</span>) (331–420). *Chronicle.* In
Migne, *Patrol. Lat.* 27 (1866). Part relating to Constantine, 493
(497)–500. A translation and continuation of the *Chronicle* of
Eusebius, who ends with the death of Licinius. An indispensable but
aggravating authority.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p33"></span>Compare Salmon, *Eusebius, Chronicle
of,* in Smith & W. 2 (1880), 348–355.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p34"></span>(12) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p34.1"></span>Augustinus</span> (354–430). *Ep.* 43, ed.
Migne, 33 (1865), 159– , §§4, 5, 20, &c. He gives account of the various
Donatist hearings, and speaks of having read aloud from various original
documents, including the petition to Constantine, the proconsular acts,
the proceedings of the court at Rome, and the letters of Constantine. He
speaks of the hearing at Milan. *Ep.* 88, ed. Migne, *Patrol. Lat.* 33
(1865), 302–309. This has the text of letter of Anulinus to Constantine
and Constantine to Probianus. *Eps.* 76. 2; 93. 13–14, 16 (which
contains account of decree of Constantine that property of obstinate
Donatists should be confiscated); 105. 9, 10 (not translated); 141. 8–10
(not translated), in ed. Migne, and tr. English ed. Schaff, contain
various matter on the Donatist acts of Constantine. *Ad Donatistas post
collationem,* c. 33, §56; ed. Migne, 43 (1861), 687 (important for
*dates* given). *Contra litt. Petil.* Bk. II. ch. 92, §205; ed. Migne,
45 (1861), 326. Tr. in Schaff, *Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers,* 4
(1887), 580–581. *Contr. Epist. Parmen.* Bk. I. chs. 5–6, §10–11; ed.
Migne, 43 (1841), 40–41. Augustine as a source is of primary value,
because of the otherwise unknown sources which he uses and quotes.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p35"></span>Compare Schaff, *Hist. of Church,* 3
(1884), 988–1028; Maclear, in Smith & W. *Dict.* 1 (1877), 216–228. For
literature see Schaff, Chevalier, Engelmann, and for particular
literature of the Donatist portions, Hartranft, in Schaff, *Nicene and
Post-Nicene Fathers,* 4 (1887), 369–372; and for editions, see
Schoenemann, Graesse, Brunet, Engelmann, Schaff, Hartranft, &c.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p36"></span>The equally numerous series of
non-Christian writers is headed, in value at least, though not in time,
by Constantine’s secretary.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p37"></span>(13) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p37.1"></span>Eutropius</span> (4th cent.). *Abridgment
of Roman History,* Bk. 10. Multitudes of editions and translations; the
ones used are: (Paris, 1539), 63–68; transl. by Watson, (Bohn, 1853),
527–535. Eutropius was secretary to Constantine, and afterwards the
intimate of Julian. His testimony, though brief, is of peculiar weight
from his position for knowing and from a certain flavor of fairness. It
was early remarked (Nicephorus Gregoras) that his praise of Constantine
had peculiar force, coming from a heathen and friend of Julian. His
dispraise, on the other hand, is conditioned by the fact that he applies
it only to the period after Constantine began peculiarly to favor the
Christians. He seems to be a cool, level-headed man of the world,
unsympathetic with Constantine’s religion and, writing *from this
standpoint,* presents a just, candid, reliable account of him.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p38"></span>Compare Ramsay, in Smith, *Dict.* 2
(1859), 126–127; Watson, *Notice,* in his translations; also for
multitudinous editions and translations, and relatively scanty though
considerable literature, Chevalier, Engelmann, Graesse.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p39"></span><span id="page_448">p. 448</span>
<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-Page_448"></span>(14) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p39.1"></span>Scriptores Historiæ Augustæ</span> (?
2–324). Ed. Jordan and Eyssenhardt, Berol. 1864, 2 v. Contains a few
dedications to and mentions of Constantine, for which see Index.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p40"></span>Compare Teuffel, *Hist. of Rom. Lit.*
tr. Wagner, 2 (Lond. 1873), 320–324.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p41"></span>(15) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p41.1"></span>Victor, Sextus Aurelius</span> (fl.
350–400). *Cæsars*. In ed. Schottius, Antv. Plantin, 1579, p. 97–167.
Section on Constantine chiefly, 157–162. *Epitome,* Antv. 1579. Section
on Constantine, p. 49–52. These works, by different authors, have been
associated since the time of the above edition with the name of Victor.
The former is by him, the latter probably by a slightly later Victor.
They use the same sources with Zosimus, but supplement him (Wordsworth).
Both are interesting and important, and in Manso’s judgment, final where
they agree.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p42"></span>Compare Ramsay, in Smith, *Dict.* 3
(1859), 1256–1257; Thomas, article *Aurelius,* in *Biog. Dict.* (1886),
228; Manso, *Leben Const.* p. 215; and scanty references in Chevalier.
For editions and farther literature, see Engelmann.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p43"></span>(16) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p43.1"></span>Praxagoras Atheniensis</span> (4th cent).
In Photius, *Cod.* 62; Ed. Bekker, p. 20; ed. Müller, *Fragm.* 4 (1868),
2–3. Lived in reign of Constantine (Müller, p. 2). Although a heathen
(Photius, *Cod,* 62), he lauds Constantine above all his predecessors.
He wrote various works in the Ionic dialect, among others a “history of
the deeds of Constantine the Great, in two books,” composed at the age
of twenty-two. The fragments or *resumé* are preserved by Photius, as
above. Though brief (three columns), it is a concise mass of testimony.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p44"></span>Compare Smith, *Dict.* 3. 517; also
for literature, Chevalier; and for editions, the various editions of
Photius in Graesse, Hofmann, Engelmann, &c.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p45"></span>(17) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p45.1"></span>Calendarium Romanum Constantini
Magni</span> (350). In Petavius, *Uranologium* (1630), 112–119. Written
after 337, and in or before 355, probably in 355. It is authority for
the birthday of Constantine, Constantius, &c.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p46"></span>Compare Greswell, *Origines Kalendariæ
Italicæ*, 4 (Oxf. 1854), 388–392.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p47"></span>(18) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p47.1"></span>Julian the Apostate</span> (331–363).
*Cæsars. Orations on Constantius and Constantinus, et pass.* Ed. Paris,
1630, p. 12–96, 422; Vol. 2, 1–54, *passim.* Compare also ed. Hertlein,
Lips. 1875–76, 2 v. 8vo. Editions and translations are very numerous.
(Compare arts. of Wordsworth and Graves; also Engelmann, Graesse, &c.
The orations which are panegyrical were delivered (Wordsworth) 355 and
358, and the *Cæsars* dates from shortly after his accession (in 361).
The latter is a satire which has found literary favor, the substantial
purpose of which is thought to be a suggestion that he (Julian) is much
superior to all the great emperors; but which if one were to venture a
guess at its real motive is quite as much a systematic effort to
minimize by ridicule the lauded Constantine. The laudatory words of
Julian himself in his orations are quite overshadowed by the bitter
sarcasms of the Cæsars. As a matter of estimate of the value of this
source, there is to be remembered the bitterness of Julian’s hostility
to Christianity. What to Eusebius was a virtue would to Julian be a
vice. In view of his prejudice, everything which he concedes is of
primary weight, while his ill-natured gossip carries a presumption of
slanderousness.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p48"></span>Compare Schaff, *Hist. of Church,* 2.
40–59; Wordsworth, in Smith & W. 3. 484–525; Graves, in Smith, *Dict.*
644–655. Compare for endless literature, Wordsworth, Chevalier,
Engelmann, 1 (1880), 476–477.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p49"></span>(19) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p49.1"></span>Libanius,</span> (314 or 316–391 +).
*Orations.* Ed. Morellus, Par. 1606–1627. Contain a few allusions of
more or less interest and historical value, for which, see ed. Morellus,
Index volume 2, fol. Qqqvb.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p50"></span>Compare Schmitz, in Smith, *Dict.* 2
(1859), 774–776; and for editions and literature, Chevalier, Engelmann,
&c.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p51"></span>(21) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p51.1"></span>Ammianus Marcellinus</span> (d. ab. 395).
*Histories.* There are many editions, for which compare Engelmann,
Graesse, and Wordsworth. Among editions are ed. Valesius (1636) and ed.
Eyssenhardt, Berol. 1871. The work was a continuation of Tacitus, but
the first thirteen books (including Constantine’s period) are best. He
says (Bk. 15, ed. Valesius, 1636, p. 56–57) that Constantine
investigated the Manichæans and like sects through Musonius, and gives
account of the bringing of his obelisk to Rome, perhaps by Constantine
(Bk. 17, p. 92–93; compare Parker, *Twelve Egypt. Obelisks in Rome,*
Oxf. 1879, p. 1), and makes other mention, for which see Index to ed.
Eyssenhardt, p. 566.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p52"></span>Compare Wordsworth, in Smith & W. 1
(1879, 99–101, and for literature, Chevalier (scanty) and Engelmann, 2
(1882), 43–45 (Rich).

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p53"></span>(22) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p53.1"></span>Eunapius</span> (Anti-Christian) (ab.
347–414). *Lives of the Philosophers and Sophists; Ædesius.* Ed.
Boissonade (Amst. 1822), 19–46 *passim.* Eunapius was born at Sardis
about 347, and died after 414 <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p53.2"></span>a.d.</span> (cf. Müller, *Fragm.* 87). He
was a teacher of rhetoric, and besides this work wrote a continuation of
the history of Dexippus, extending from 270–404 <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p53.3"></span>a.d.</span> Fragments of this are
preserved, but none relating to Constantine. Photius (*Cod.* 77) says
that he calumniated the Christians, especially Constantine. With the
fragments in Müller, *Fragm.* 4 (1868), 11–56, is included also (14–15)
a fragment from the *Vita Ædes*., relating to Sopater. The death of
Sopater and the relation of Ablavius to it is given more fully in the
*Vita Ædes*. with various suggestive allusions. Much of his history is
supposed to be incorporated in Zosimus, and this gives importance to his
name, weight to Zosimus, and light on the hostile position of Zosimus
towards Constantine.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p54"></span><span id="page_449">p. 449</span>
<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-Page_449"></span>Cf. Photius, *Cod.* 77; Müller,
*Fragm.* 4 (1868), 7–9; Mozley, in Smith & W. 2 (1880), 285–286;
Schmitz, in Smith, *Dict.* 2 (1859), 93; also for further literature and
editions, Chevalier and Engelmann.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p55"></span>(23) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p55.1"></span>Bemarchius</span> (4th cent.) was of
Cæsarea in Cappadocia; wrote the *Acts of Constantine* in ten books
(Suidas, s.v. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p55.2"></span>Βήμαρχιος</span>; cf. Zonaras, p. 386). No
portion is preserved. Wrote under Constantius, on whom he is said
(Libanius, *Orat.* ed. Reiske, p. 24) to have delivered a panegyric.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p56"></span>Cf. Müller, *Fragm.* 4 (1868), 3;
Smith, *Dict.* 1 (1859), 482, &c.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p57"></span>An early but as yet valueless group is
that of Syriac and Armenian sources on the (apocryphal) treaty of
Constantine with Tiridates.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p58"></span>(24) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p58.1"></span>Zenobius of Klag</span> (fl. ab. 324).
*History of Daron.* French translation from Armenian in Langlois, *Coll.
Hist. Arm.* 1 (1867), 353–355. Like the works of the other Armenian
historians, the text of this writer has suffered more or less from
corruption. He has two mentions (p. 344 and 351) of Constantine, the
latter being an account of the treaty with Tiridates.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p59"></span>Compare introduction of Langlois, and
literature in Chevalier.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p60"></span>(25) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p60.1"></span>Agathangelus</span> (ab. 330). *History of
the Reign of Tiridates and of the Preaching of St. Gregory the
Illuminator,* c. 125–127, §163–169; in *Acta SS. Boll.* Sept. VIII. 320–
; also with French translation from Armenian in Langlois *Coll. d. hist.
de l’Arm.* p. 97– . The work extends for 226–330 <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p60.2"></span>a.d.</span> The author was secretary to
Tiridates, but the work as we have it is a redaction made, however, not
long after, as it was used by Moses of Khorene. This was in turn later
(seventh century?) retouched by some Greek hagiographer. This Greek form
is extant in <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p60.3"></span>mss.</span> at Florence and Paris (cf.
editions above), and there is reason to suppose that the extant Armenian
is a version from this Greek form. But with its additions of arrantly
apocryphal matter, it is hard to tell what is what, and so all
considerable mention of the relation of Constantine and Tiridates has
been left out of the account of Constantine’s life. Yet we must hesitate
to put it all down under the mythical; for Tiridates certainly had
intercourse with the Romans, and the original form of this life was
certainly by a competent hand, and the matter relating to Constantine is
in part soberly historical enough.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p61"></span>For farther information, compare
Davidson on Gregorius Illuminator, in Smith & W., *Dict.* 2. 737–739;
Introduction, Langlois, p. 99–103.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p62"></span>(26) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p62.1"></span>Faustus of Byzantium</span> (320–392).
*Historical Library.* French translation from the Armenian in Langlois,
*Coll. d. hist. Arm.* 1. 201–310. There are mentions of Constantine and
Tiridates in Bk. 3, chaps. 10 and 21. The work is open to some
suspicions of having been tampered with, but Langlois inclines to give
it a fairly good character. If genuine, the mention of the treaty with
Tiridates would nearly establish it as historical fact.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p63"></span>Compare Beauvois *Nouv. biog. gén.* 17
(1856), 203, and Introduction of Langlois; also, literature in
Chevalier.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p64"></span>The writers of the following centuries
are for the most part Christian, uncertain or religiously unknown,
excepting the very pronounced non-Christian who heads the list.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p65"></span>(27) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p65.1"></span>Zosimus</span> (fl. ab. 400–450).
*History.* Ed. Bekker (Bonn, 1837), 8vo. Section on Constantine
occupying Bk. 2. 8– , p. 72–106. The date of this writer has been put as
early as the fourth century and as late as the end of the fifth. It will
be safe to divide extremes. He is a heathen who, on the period of
Constantine, draws from an anti-Christian and anti-Constantinian source,
and who regards the introduction of Christianity as a chief cause of the
decline of the Roman Empire (cf. various passages cited by Milligan). He
is prejudiced against Christianity with the bitter prejudice of one who
finds himself in a steadily narrowing minority, and he is occasionally
credulous. But he wrote in a clear, interesting style, without
intentional falsifications, and was quite as moderate as the Christian
writer (Evagrius 3. 41) who calls Zosimus himself a “fiend of hell.” His
extended account is therefore of great value among the sources, and
especially as it is probably drawn in large measure from the earlier
lost work of Eunapius.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p66"></span>Compare Milligan, in Smith & W., 4
(1887), 1225–1227: Mason, in Smith, *Dict.* 3 (1859), 1334–1335; also,
for literature, Chevalier and Engelmann, and for editions, Engelmann.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p67"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p67.1"></span>Anonymus Valesianus</span> (fifth
century). Ed. Valesius (Paris, 1636), p. 471–476. This fragment, first
published by Valesius in the above editions of Ammianus, is of the
highest value for the life of Constantine. It is evidently drawn from
various sources, many of which are now lost. The compiler or writer
shows a judiciousness and soberness which commends his statements as
peculiarly trustworthy.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p68"></span>Compare the exhaustive examination by
Ohnesorge, *Der Anonymus Valesii de Constantino.* Kiel, 1885. 8vo.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p69"></span>(27) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p69.1"></span>Stephen of Byzantium</span> (ab. 400).
*Greek Cities.* Venet. Aldus, 1502, fol. H. iii. s.v. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p69.2"></span>Ναϊσσὸς</span>. The
work is a dictionary of geography, and the fact in these few lines is of
first value.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p70"></span>Compare Smith, in Smith, *Dict.* 3
(1859), 904–906. Chevalier, Hoffmann, etc.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p71"></span>(28) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p71.1"></span>Sozomen</span> (b. ab. 400).
*Ecclesiastical History.* Ed. Hussey, English translation, London, Bohn,
1855; newly edited by Hartranft in Schaff, *Nicene and Post-Nicene
Fathers,* 2 (1890) \[in press\]. This history covers the period 323–423
(not 439). He draws largely from Eusebius. He has been described rightly
(Dowling, <span id="page_450">p. 450</span> <span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-Page_450"></span>*Study of Eccl. Hist.* p. 31) as
relatively inaccurate, rhetorical and credulous. But he works from
sources, though mainly from exact ones. For farther discussion, compare
Hartranft in volume 2 of this series.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p72"></span>Compare also Milligan, in Smith & W. 4
(1887), 722–723, and literature in Chevalier.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p73"></span>(29) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p73.1"></span>Socrates</span> (b. ab. 408).
*Ecclesiastical History*. Ed. Hussey, reprinted with Introduction by
Bright, Oxf. 1878. English translation London, Bohn, newly edited by
Zenos in volume 2 of this series \[in press\]. This history covers the
period 306–439. It is written with general good judgment, but for
Constantine adds little to Eusebius of which it professes to be a
continuation.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p74"></span>For farther description and
discussion, compare Zenos, Milligan, in Smith & W. 4 (1887), 709–711,
and literature in Chevalier.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p75"></span>(30) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p75.1"></span>Theodoret</span> (b. ab. 393?–457?).
*Ecclesiastical History*. In Migne, *Patrol. Gr*. 82 (1859), 879–1280.
English translation, London, Bohn, 1854. The birth of Theodoret has been
placed at various dates, 386, 387, 393, &c., and the exact time of his
death (453–458) is equally uncertain. This work reaches from 324 to 429,
and is generally regarded as learned and impartial. It gives much
concerning Constantine’s relations to the Arian controversy and
incorporates many documents, which appear to be taken mainly from
Eusebius’ *Life of Constantine*. A chief value is, it would seem, for
the text of Eusebius. But his very use of documents shows care and gives
value.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p76"></span>Compare Venables, in Smith & W. 4
(1887), 904–919; Newman, *Hist. Sketches*, 2 (1876), 303–362; Schaff,
*Hist. of Church*, 3 (1884), 881–882; and literature in Chevalier; also
for editions, Graesse and Hoffmann.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p77"></span>(31) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p77.1"></span>Orosius, Paulus</span> (ab. 417).
*Histories*, Bk. 7, chaps. 26–28. Ed. Migne *Patrol. Lat*. 31 (1846),
635–1174; section relating to Constantine occupies 1128–1137. For many
editions and <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p77.2"></span>mss.</span> compare Schoenemann, *Bibl.
Patr. Lat*. 2 (1794), 481–507, and Engelmann, 2 (1882), 441– . It is
said (Manso) that Orosius adds nothing to existing material. This is
only in part true. At all events, his value as corroboratory evidence is
considerable, brief as the work is.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p78"></span>Compare Phillott, in Smith & W, 4
(1887), 157–158; Ebert, *Gesch. d. chr. Lat. Lit*. 1 (1874), 323–330,
and literature in Chevalier and Engelmann.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p79"></span>(32) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p79.1"></span>Prosper Aquitanus</span> (403–463+).
*Chronicle*. Ed. Migne, *Patrol. Lat*. 51 (1861), 535–606 (8). Portion
relating to Constantine, 574–576. The *Chronicle* extends to 444 or 455.
To 326<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p79.2"></span> he depends mainly on
Eusebius’ *Chronicle*, and for the rest of our period on the
continuation of Hieronymus.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p80"></span>Compare Phillott, in Smith & W. 3
(1882), 492–497; Teuffel, *Hist. of Rom. Lit*. 2 (Lond. 1873), 482–484;
and for literature, editions, &c., Chevalier, Engelmann, &c.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p81"></span>(33) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p81.1"></span>Idatius</span> (468+). *List of Consuls*
(Fasti Idatiani). In Migne, *Patrol. Lat*. 51 (1861), 891–914; portion
relating to Constantine, 907–908. Idatius lived until after 469. This
work, which is not generally acknowledged to be his, although quoted
under his name, ends in 468. It contains brief statements of some events
under the most significant years.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p82"></span>Compare Ramsay, in Smith, *Dict*. 2
(1859), and literature under “Idace de Lamego,” in Chevalier.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p83"></span>(34) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p83.1"></span>Gelasius of Cyzicus</span> (ab. 450– ).
*History of the Council of Nicæa*. In Labbe, *Concilia*, 2 (1671),
103–286. There is also an abstract in Photius, *Bibl. Cod*. 88, ed.
Migne, *Patrol. Gr*. 103 (1860), 293–296. Venables is probably just when
he says: “His work is little more than a compilation from the
ecclesiastical histories of Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomen, and Theodoret,
to which he has added little but what is very doubtful or manifestly
untrue.” There is a little on Constantine not in those sources, but to
try to fix on any of it as authoritative quite baffles one. Still, it is
not wholly clear that he did not use sources, as well as his own
imagination, in adding to the other sources. It may be said to be “of
doubtful value,” as source. It is not easy to see what Venables means in
saying that the third hook, as we have it, gives only three letters of
Constantine. This is true; but the second book, “as we have it,” gives
several more.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p84"></span>Compare Venables, in Smith & W. 2
(1880), 621–623.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p85"></span>(35) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p85.1"></span>Jacobus of Sarug</span> (452–521). *Homily
on the Baptism of Constantine*. Ed. Frothingham, Roma, 1882. For further
information consult the extended study of Frothingham.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p86"></span>(25) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p86.1"></span>Philostorgius</span> (b. ab. 468). English
translation by Walford (Lond. Bohn, 1855), 425–528. The original work
covered the period between 300 and 425. The fragments preserved contain
several interesting facts, or fictions, relating to Constantine, some
not found elsewhere. Photius and all the orthodox have always called him
untrustworthy or worse, and a very unorthodox critic (Gibbon) finds him
passionate, prejudiced, and ignorant; but it seems to be agreed that he
used some sources not availed of by others.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p87"></span>Compare Milligan, in Smith & W. 4
(1587), 390; Dowling, *Study of Eccl. Hist*. p. 26–27; and literature in
Chevalier.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p88"></span>(26) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p88.1"></span>Hesychius Milesius</span> (ab. 500?– ).
*Origins of Constantinople*. In Müller, *Fragm*. 4 (1868), 146–155; also
in ed. Orelli (Lips. 1820), 59–73. Hesychius, surnamed Illustris, of
Miletus lived in the early part of the sixth century. This work contains
several allusions to the founding of the city of Constantine. It seems
to have been taken almost word for word in parts by Codinus.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p89"></span>Compare Venables, in Smith & W. 3
(1882), 12–13; Means, in Smith, *Dict*. 2 (1859), 447–448; Müller,
*Fragm*. 4 (1868), 143–145; also literature in Chevalier, and editions
and literature in Engelmann.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p90"></span><span id="page_451">p. 451</span>
<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-Page_451"></span>(27) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p90.1"></span>Cassiodorus</span> (ab. 468–561+).
*Tripartite History.* In Opera, ed. Garetius, 1 (Rotom. 1679, fol.), b
1–b 372. On Constantine, especially p. 207–243. (Same ed. in Migne,
*Patrol. Lat.* 69 \[1865\], 879–1214.) Cassiodorus was born about 468
and lived to be more than ninety-three years old. This work is an
epitome of Socrates, Sozomen, and Theodoret, and has no additional value
as source. A work on the Goths has been preserved to us only in an
epitome by Jordanes. See Jordanes.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p91"></span>Compare Young, in Smith & W. 1 (1877),
416–418, or (better for this work) Ramsay, in Smith, 1 (1859), 623–625;
and for literature and editions, Chevalier, Engelmann, Graesse, etc.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p92"></span>(28) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p92.1"></span>Lydus, Joannes (Laurentius)</span>
(490–550+). *De Mensibus; De Magistratibus; De Ostentis, passim.* Ed.
Bekker, in *Corp. Hist. Byz.* (1837). Other editions of the various
works may be found noticed in Graesse, *Trésor,* 4 (1863), 122; Brunet,
*Manuel,* 3 (1862), 880; Engelmann, *Bibl. scr. class.* 1 (1880),
478–479; Hoffmann, *Lex*. He was born at Philadelphia in 490, and lived
some time after 550. He was a heathen, but respectful toward
Christianity (Photius, Cod. 180). He mentions Constantine ten or a dozen
times; e.g. his foundation of Constantinople (*De O.* 21. 5),
Constantine’s learning and military skill (*De mag.* 3. 53), and quotes
(*De magistr.* 3. 33, ed. Bonn., p. 226), Constantine’s own writings.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p93"></span>Compare Photius, Cod. 180; Means, in
Smith, *Dict.* 2 (1859), 600; Hase, Pref. and in ed. Bekker; Joubert, in
*Nouv. biog. gén.* (Hoefer), 32 (1860), 388–391; and for farther
literature, Chevalier and the article of Joubert, and Engelmann, *Bibl.
scr. class.* 1 (1880), 479.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p94"></span>(29) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p94.1"></span>Jordanes (or Jornandes)</span> ( –551?).
*History of the Goths, (De Getarum origine et rebus gestis).* In
Cassiodorus, Opera, ed. Garetius, 1 (Rotom. 1679), 397–425; same ed. in
Migne, *Patrol. Lat.* 69 (1865), 1251–1296. This work on the Goths is
said by its author to be an epitome of the work of Cassiodorus. It says
(p. 406–407) that Constantine employed Goths in his campaign against
Licinius, and also in the building of Constantinople. It was composed in
551 or 552 (cf. Wattenbach, *Deutschland’s Geschichtsq.* 1 \[1877\],
66).

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p95"></span>Compare Hodgkin, in *Encycl. Brit.* 13
(1881), 747–749; Acland, in Smith & W. 3 (1882), 431–438 (exhaustive);
and abundant literature in Chevalier, Engelmann, Wattenbach, &c.; also
editions in Engelmann, “Potthast. *Bibl. hist. med. æv.* 1862, p. 102,”
&c.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p96"></span>(30) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p96.1"></span>Anonymous, qui Dionis Cassii historias
continuavit</span> (sixth century?). 14. Licinius (18 lines); 15.
Constantinus (9 lines). In Müller, *Fragm.* 4 (1868), 199; of especially
Introd. in Müller, p. 191–192. These were first published by Ang. Mai in
*Script. Vet. Nov. Call.* 2, 135–, 527–, and are found also in various
editions of Dion Cassius; e.g. ed. Sturz. 9 (Spz. 1843). Mai strongly
inclines to suspect that Johannes Antiochenus is the author, but this
Müller (p. 191) argues to be impossible. They are sometimes referred to
as Excerpta Vaticana. Petrus Patricius and various others have been
suggested as authors, but all that is affirmed with any assurance is
that the author was a Christian. This is on the ground of Diocletianus,
1 (p. 198). The fragments are very brief, but contain several little
facts and turns not found elsewhere.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p97"></span>(31) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p97.1"></span>Evagrius</span> (536?–594+).
*Ecclesiastical History,* 3. 40–41. English translation (1709), 472–474.
A violent invective against and disproval of the charges of Zosimus
against Constantine and adds nothing to historical facts.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p98"></span>Compare Milligan, in Smith & W. 2
(1880), 423–424.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p99"></span>(32) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p99.1"></span>Procopius Cæsariensis</span> (fl.
547–565). *Histories.* Ed. Dindorf, Bonn, 1833–1838, 3 v. Two or three
slight mentions, of which the nearest to any account is the division of
the empire by Constantine, and the founding of Constantinople (*De bel.
Vand,* 1. 1). He flourished from about 547 to 565. Whether he was
Christian or heathen is uncertain. He is characterized by peculiar
truthfulness (cf. his *De ædif.* 1; Praf. ed. Bonn, v. 3, 170–, and
Milligan).

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p100"></span>Compare Milligan, in Smith & W. 4
(1887), 487–488; Plate, in Smith, *Dict.* 3, 538–540; also for
literature, Chevalier and Engelmann, 1. 655; and for editions, Milligan,
Plate, and the various bibliographies.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p101"></span>(33) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p101.1"></span>Petrus Patricius</span> (fl. 550–562).
*Fragments.* In Müller, *Fragm.* 4 (1868), 189. Gives account of an
embassy of Licinius to Constantine.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p102"></span>Compare Means, in Smith, *Dict.* 3
(1859), 226–227; also Chevalier and Hoffmann.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p103"></span>(34) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p103.1"></span>Gregory of Tours</span> (ab. 573–594).
*History of the Franks,* 1. 34. Ed. Ruinart (Paris, 1699), 27, &c. (?)
*History of the Seven Sleepers,* do. 1272–1273, &c. *Liber miraculorum,*
do. 725–729. The edition of Ruinart is reprinted in Migne, *Patrol.
Lat.* vol. 71 (1867). In the first of these he quotes as authorities,
Eusebius and Junius; the latter are full of legendary matter.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p104"></span>Compare Buchanan, in Smith & W. 2
(1880), 771–776; also for editions and literature, Engelmann, Chevalier,
and Graesse.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p105"></span>(35) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p105.1"></span>Chronicon Paschale</span> (ab. 630 <span
class="c13"><span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p105.2"></span>a.d.</span>) Ed.
Dindorf, Bonn, 1832, 2 v.; section relating to Constantine occupies vol.
1, p. 516–533. Ed. Migne, *Patrol. Gr.* 92 (Paris, 1865). The work is a
chronicle of the world from the creation until 630. It has been thought,
but on insufficient grounds (cf. Salmon), that the first part ended with
<span class="c13"><span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p105.3"></span>a.d.</span> 354
and was written about that time. It is really a homogeneous work and
written probably not long after 630 <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p105.4"></span>a.d.</span> (Salmon). It is frequently
quoted, unfortunately, as Alexandrian Chronicle (e.g. M’Clintock and
Strong Cycl.). The chief value is the chronological, but the author has
used good sources and presumably some not now extant. It has something
the value of a primary source of second rate.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p106"></span><span id="page_452">p. 452</span>
<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-Page_452"></span>Compare Salmon, In Smith & W. 1.
(1877), 509–513; Clinton, *Fasti. Rom.* 2 (1850), 169; Ideler, *Handb.
d. Chron.* 2 (1826), 350–351, 462–463; and for literature and editions,
Salmon.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p107"></span>(36) *Anonymous Acts of Metrophanes
and Alexander* (seventh century?), “in which is contained also a life of
the emperor Constantine the Great.” In Photius, Cod. 256; ed. Migne,
*Patrol. Gr.* 104 (1860), 105–120. A more complete recession of this
anonymous piece was edited by Combefis, who regards it as the work of a
contemporary, written therefore in the middle of the fourth century (cf.
his *Hist. Mon.* p. 573, teste Fabricius). The authentic details can be
traced word for word, according to Tillemont, in other historians, while
impossible statements show it to be not the work of a contemporary. It
seems to fall under the class of works where “What is true is not new,
and what is new is not true,” but it can hardly be regarded as
sufficiently determined whether or no it is worthless.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p108"></span>Compare Tillemont, *Mém.* 7 (1732),
657; Fabricius, *Bibl. Gr.* 9 (1737), 124 and 498; *Acta. SS*. Nov. 1.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p109"></span>(37) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p109.1"></span>Johannes Antiochenus</span> (fl.
610–650). *Chronological History.* Fragments in Müller, 4 (1868), 535
(8)–622; *Fragm.* 168–169, on Constantius and Galerius, and 170–171a, on
Constantine, p. 602–603. This writer is to be distinguished from
Johannes Malalas, also known as Johannes Antiochenus. He flourished
somewhere between 610–650 (Müller, p. 536). The sections relating to
Constantine are in the main exactly correspondent to Eutropius. It has
been conjectured (Müller, p. 1538) that Eutropius and Johannes copied
from a common Greek source; but the curious error in the section on
Constantine (p. 603), by which “commodæ” is converted into a proper
name, and becomes the name of the sister whose son Constantine put to
death, shows it to have been translated from the Latin. The work of
Johannes has, however, some interesting suggestions and additions; e.g.
its paraphrase of the word “dubius” in the characterization of
Constantine’s conduct towards his friends.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p110"></span>Compare Müller, p. 535–538; Means, in
Smith, *Dict.* 2 (1859), 587; also article of Stokes, and other
literature under Malalas.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p111"></span>(38) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p111.1"></span>Malalas</span> (= <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p111.2"></span>John</span> of Antioch) (ab. 700).
*Chronography,* Bk. 13, 1–11. Ed. Dindorf (Bonnæ, 1831); in *Corp. scr.
hist. Byz.* (section on Constantine, p. 316–324); also in Migne,
*Patrol. Gr.* 97 (Par. 1865), 1–70. Earlier editions are, Oxf. 1691, 8o;
Venice, 1733, fol. \[reprint of 1691, “quite useless”\]. Lived about 700
(Müller, *Fragm.* 4 \[1868\], 536), or about 650 (Chevalier, 1205). He
has been placed as late as ninth century (Hody), and as early as 601
(Cave). Noting is known of his personal history. He is to be
distinguished from the John of Antioch in Müller’s *Fragm.* who is
earlier than Malalas. He is very credulous and inaccurate and the
section on Constantine is no exception to the rule.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p112"></span>Compare Prolegomena of Hody and
Dindorf; Stokes, in Smith & W. 3 (1882), 787–788, &c.; and farther
literature in Chevalier, *Rép*. 1205; Hoefer, *Nouv. biog. gén.* 32
(1060), 1007, and the article of Stokes.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p113"></span>(39) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p113.1"></span>Pseudo-Isidore</span> (eighth cent.?).
*Decretals.* In Migne, *Patrol. Lat.* 130 (1853), 245–252. The famous
“Donation of Constantion,” which appears here for the first time. See
under *The Mythical Constantine.*

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p114"></span>Compare Schaff, *Hist. of Church,* 4
(1885), 268–733; and for literature, Chevalier under Isidore Mercator;
also the literature of the *Donation.*

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p115"></span>(40) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p115.1"></span>Theophanes</span> (758–818).
*Chronography.* Ed. Classen, Bonn. 1839–41, 2 v. Section on Constantine
occupying vol. 1, p. 10–51; also in Migne, *Patrol. Gr.* 108 (186). This
work “is justly regarded as one of the most important in the whole
series of Byzantine historians” (Dowling, p. 69). Theophanes was friend
of Georgius Syncellus; and at his request (Prœm. p. 5) took up the
latter work at the point where he left off (Diocletian), extending it to
811. He is an authority of judgment and weight for matters relating to
his own times, and on quite a different level of historical character
from Cedrenus and Zonaras. Although of very much less value for
Constantine, he shows even here a certain historical judgment and
discrimination. His book is an intelligent work from various sources,
one of which is Eusebius. He says that he has diligently examined many
works, and reports nothing on his own authority, but on the authority of
ancient historiographers and “logographers” (Prœm. p. 5).

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p116"></span>Compare Dowling *Introd.* (Lond.
1838), 69–70; Smith, in Smith, *Dict.* 3. 1082–1083; Gass, in Herzog,
*Real Enc.* 15 (1885), 536–537; *Acta sanctorum Boll.* March 12; and for
(extensive) literature, Chevalier.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p117"></span>(41) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p117.1"></span>Anastasius Bibliothecarius</span> (d.
879). *Lives of the Roman Pontiffs.* In Migne, *Patrol. Lat.* 127–128
(1852). 34. S. Silvester, vol. 127, 1511–1527. Small use.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p118"></span>Compare Schaff, *Hist. of the
Church,* 4 (1885), 774–776; and for literature and editions, Chevalier
and Graesse.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p119"></span>(42) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p119.1"></span>Photius</span> (ninth cent.).
*Bibliotheca.* In Migne, *Patrol. Gr.* vols. 103–104 (1860). Contains
excerpts from and comments on Praxagoras, Eunapius, Gelasius, Anon.
Metroph., and Eusebius, which see.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p120"></span>Compare Schaff, *Hist. of Church,* 4
(1885), 636–642; Means, in Smith, *Dict.* 3 (1859), 347–355.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p121"></span>(43) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p121.1"></span>Constantinus Porphyrogenitus</span> (c.
VII.) (fl. 911–959). *De thematibus.* Ed. Bekker (Bonn. 1840), 1–64, in
*Corp. scr. hist. Byz.;* and in ed. Migne, *Patrol. Gr.* 113 (1864),
63–140. Gives (2. 8, ed. Bonn. p. 57–58) account of division of the
empire among his sons by Constantine. He also mentions in his *De cer.
aul. Byz.* (ed. Reiske, Bonn. 1829; ed. Migne, *Patrol. Gr.* 112); e.g.
the “cross of Constantine” several times mentioned, and gives a few
facts of archæological interest. Constantinus VII was emperor 911–959.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p122"></span><span id="page_453">p. 453</span>
<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-Page_453"></span>Compare Plate, in Smith, *Dict*.
1. 349–351; Ceillier, 12 (1862), 811–813; and for farther literature,
Chevalier and Engelmann, 1 (1880), 249; also for editions, Plate, who
has admirable survey.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p123"></span>(44) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p123.1"></span>Leo Diaconus</span> (tenth century).
*Histories*, 5. 9 and 8. 8. In ed. Hase (Bonn. 1828), p. 91 and 138.
Mentions the foundation of a city, the vision of the cross, the Scythian
wars, and burial in the Church of the Apostles at Constantinople, and
characterizes him as “among emperors the one renowned in story” (8. 8).
For other editions, compare Brunet, Graesse, Hoffmann, and Engelmann. He
lived from about 950 to at least 993. He was used by Scylitzes (cf.
Cedrenus) and perhaps Zonaras. “Style vicious,” and “knowledge…of
ancient history is slight” (Means).

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p124"></span>Compare Means, in Smith, *Dict.* 2
(1859), 743–744; M’Clintock and Strong, *Encycl*. 5 (1875), 351; Hase,
Præf.; and for literature, Chevalier.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p125"></span>It is by some stretching of the term
that many of those dating before the year 1000 are admitted as sources.
Some contribute hardly a single fact not in other sources. This is still
more true of the period following, but this period is especially rich in
sources of historical fictions—and these must be considered. So the
Byzantine historians to the invention of printing are given, and some
Western writings, which contain relevant matter.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p126"></span>(45) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p126.1"></span>Zonaras, Johannes</span> (1042–1130?).
*Chronicle*. Ed. Migne, *Patrol. Gr*. 134–135 (Par. 1864). The section
relating to Constantine occupies Vol. I. 1097–1118, Bk. 13, chs. 1–4;
cf. also end of Bk. 12. The ed. Pinder, Bonn. 1841–1844, 2 v., is
unfinished, containing only twelve books. It has since been edited by
Dindorf, Lips. 1868–1875, 6 v. Bk. 13 is in Vol. 3 (1870). This work
consists of eighteen books extending from the beginning of the world
until 1118. Zonaras draws, for Christian period, from Eusebius,
Philostorgius, &c., with some discernment, and so deserves a tolerably
high place among the Byzantine historians (Zöckler). He incorporates a
choice variety of fables, but gives more or less facts which seem to be
facts. He actually adds almost nothing to the sources of Constantine,
though there are certain facts over which one lingers a little before
relegating to the great class of “interesting, if true.”

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p127"></span>Compare Smith, *Dict*. 3. 1331;
(Zöckler), in Herzog, *Real Enc*. 17 (1886), 555–556; and for (rich)
literature, Zöckler, Chevalier, and Engelmann, 1 (1880), 798.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p128"></span>(46) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p128.1"></span>Cedrenus, Georgius</span> (ab. 1057).
*Compendium of History*. Ed. Bekker, Bonn. 1838–1839, 2 v., the section
relating to Constantine occupying Vol. I, p. 472–520 *et pass*. Also in
Migne, *Patrol. Gr*. 121–122 (Par. 1864). Nothing is known of his
personal history. The work is a chronicle from the beginning of the
world until 1057 <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p128.2"></span>a.d.</span> He mentions as his chief
sources Georgius Syncellus, “until the time of Maximianus and
Maximinus,” and from this point Theophanes, Siculus, Psellus, and others
(cf. p. 4; cf. also Glycas. *Chron.,* ed. Bonn. p. 457), and claims to
have collected facts not in these sources. He mentions the work of
Joannes Thracesius, or Curopalates, who is probably Scylitzes, whose
work corresponds so exactly with that of Cedrenus in parts as to suggest
the one or the other a better copier than compiler. The statement of
Ceillier is that Cedrenus copied the work of Scylitzes for the period
811–1057, and that Scylitzes afterwards continued his work to 1081; i.e.
there was a double edition of the work of Scylitzes, and Cedrenus wrote
between. But Means (p. 760) thinks otherwise, and gives good reasons,
making one edition and placing Cedrenus’ work later, i.e. after 1081.
The “additional facts” are few, the compilation is uncritical and
credulous; but the work is recognized as a source to be consulted,
though with greatest critical care.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p129"></span>Compare Plate, in Smith, *Dict*. 1.
658; Ceillier, 13 (1863), 560; Means, *Scylitzes*, in Smith, *Dict*. 3.
759–762; and for literature, Chevalier, under the words *Cedrene* and
*Scylitzes*.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p130"></span>(47) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p130.1"></span>Pseudo-Leo</span>. *Chronography*, under
*Constantius Chlorus* and *Constantinus Magnus*. Ed. Bekker (Bonn.
1842), p. 83–90. In *Corp. scr. hist. Byz*. from Cramer, *Anecd. gr.
bibl. reg. Par*. 2 (1839), 243–379. It is published as the first part of
the *Chronography* of Leo Grammaticus, because assigned to him by the
catalogues of the <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p130.2"></span>ms.</span> at Paris. It is thought by
Cramer, however, not to be by him, but to be “compiled from various
writers,—Cedrenus, Joannes Antiochenus, *Chronicon Paschali*, and
perhaps others which are lost” (cf. Cramer, *Anecd. gr.* 2. 243–379,
quoted by Bekker, Præf. iii.–iv.). In this section the author quotes
Socrates and Eusebius, but uses other and some unusual sources. While
one hesitates to lay much weight on an author of such unknown age and
personality, and which contains obvious errors, yet it carries the
conviction of a certain moderate weight. Many passages are identical,
almost word for word, with Cedrenus. In one of these passages the author
refers to Socrates as his authority, while there is no such mention in
Cedrenus. They may have taken from the same source. At all events, this
work appears on its face much more like sober history than do Cedrenus
and Zonaras. Its absolute value as source is very slight.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p131"></span>Compare Preface of Bekker.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p132"></span>(48) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p132.1"></span>Attaliata, Michael</span> (ab. 1072).
*History*. Ed. De Presle and Bekker, Bonn. 1853. 8°. He mentions (p.
217, also p. 222) half a dozen things relating to Constantine; that he
was reckoned among the apostles, the sign of the cross, &c., but nothing
of value, unless (p. 222) the transposition of a colony from Iberia to
Assyria (?).

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p133"></span>Compare Præf. of De Presle, also
Graves, in Smith, *Dict*. 1. 409, who, however, does not mention this
work; and for literature, Chevalier and De Presle, p. 7–8.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p134"></span><span id="page_454">p. 454</span>
<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-Page_454"></span>(49) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p134.1"></span>Anna Comnena.</span> *Alexias*. Ed.
Schopen-Reifferscheid, Bonn. 1839–1878. Mentions among two or three
other deeds, a statue which this “father and lord of the city” had made
over for him (12. 4), and that he has been counted among the apostles
(14. 8).

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p135"></span>Compare Plate, in Smith, *Dict*. 1.
179; Klippel, in Herzog, 1 (1877), 427–429, &c.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p136"></span>(50) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p136.1"></span>Glycas</span>, <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p136.2"></span>Mich</span> (after 1118). *Chronicle* (or
*Annals*). Ed. Bekker, Bonn. 1836; the section relating to Constantine
occupies p. 460–468, ed. Migne, 158 (Par. 1866), 1–958. This work of
Glycas extends from the beginning of the world to <span
class="c13"><span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p136.3"></span>a.d.</span> 1118.
Though “justly placed among the better Byzantine historians” (Plate),
for the period of Constantine he is one of the worst. His critical
judgment seems to incline to the selection of the most unhistoric. He
gives at end of preceding section a description of the work of Scylitzes
(cf. Cedrenus), and quotes in it a work of Alexander on the Invention of
the Cross.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p137"></span>Compare Plate, in Smith, *Dict*. 2.
277; Joubert. in *<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p137.1"></span>Nouv. biog. gén*.
(Hoefer), 20 (1857), 845–846; and for literature, Chevalier; also for
editions, Hoffmann.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p138"></span>(51) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p138.1"></span>Nicetas Choniatas</span> (Acominatus)
(1150–1216+). *History*. Ed. Bekker, in *Corp. scr. hist. Byz*. Bonn.
1835, 8°; ed. Migne, *Patrol. Gr*. 139 (1865), 282–1088 (=Mai, *Bibl.
nov. patr.* 6. ?). *Thesaurus*, in Migne, *Patrol. Gr*. 139–140 (1865),
1087–1443, 1–282 (=Mai, *Spicil. Rom.* v. 4). Born about 1150, and lived
until 1216 at least. Gives in his *History* two or three things which
relate to “the first and mightiest among Christian emperors” (*De Is.
Aug*. 3. 7, ed. Bonn. p. 583); e.g. the tale of the nails from the cross
(do. p. 584), and the despoiling of his tomb (*De Al. Is. Aug.* 1. 7, p.
632); also a few in the *Thesauri*, e.g. his conciliation to Arianism
through his sister and her friend, the Arian presbyter (6. 3 and 6), and
various matters relating to the Arian controversy (mainly in Bk. 5),
where he uses the familiar sources,—Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomen,
Theodoret, Philostorgius, &c, but also some other less familiar ones.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p139"></span>Compare Worman, in M’Clintock and
Strong, *Cyclop*. 7 (1877), 54–55; Plate, in Smith, *Dict*. 2.
1182–1183; Ullmann, in *Stud. u. Krit*. (1833), 674–700; Gass, in
Herzog, 10 (1882), 540–541, and abridged in Schaff-Herz. 2. 1652.
Compare for literature, the above and Chevalier; and for editions,
Worman, Plate, Brunet, Graesse, Hoffmann, &c.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p140"></span>(52) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p140.1"></span>Gregoras, Nicephoras</span> (1295–1359).
*Byzantine History*, Bks. 1–37. Ed. Shopen (v. 1–2) and Bekker (v. 3),
Bonn. 1829, 1830, and 1855. In *Corp. scr. hist. Byz.*; ed. Migne,
*Patrol. Lat*. 148–149 (1865). Mentions incidentally half a dozen facts
relating to foundation of Constantinople (10.1; 14. 3, &c.), his
destruction of idolatry (19. 1), treatment of the Jews (26. 15), and
enlargement of empire (26. 37). He was born 1295, and died after 1359.
Was more learned but less judicious than Cantacuzenus (Plate).

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p141"></span>Compare Plate, in Smith, *Dict*. 2.
304–306; Joubert, in *<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p141.1"></span>Nouv. biog.
gén*. 21 (1857), 889–891; also for literature, Chevalier, and for
editions, Plate and Joubert.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p142"></span>(53) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p142.1"></span>Ephræmius</span> (fourteenth century).
*Cæsars* (?). Constantinus. Ed. Bekker, Bonn. 1840, 8°; section on
Constantine occupies p. 21–25; ed. Migne, 143 (Par. 1865), 1–380. It was
first edited by Mai, *Scr. vet. nov. coll*. 3 (1828), 1–225 (Dowl.).
This metrical chronicle introduces one or two fables, but is in the main
at least semi-historical, but its additional facts give no impression of
having special sources,—in brief, it is scarcely a source, rather
literature.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p143"></span>Compare Smith, *Dict.* 2. 28;
Bonneau, in *Nouv. biog. gén*. (Hoefer) 16 (1856), 127; Mai, *Præf*. in
ed. Bekker, also ed. Migne. Compare for literature, Chevalier.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p144"></span>(54) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p144.1"></span>Cantacuzenus, Joannes. Angelus Comnenus
Palæologus</span> (d. 1375+). *Histories*. Ed. Schopen, Bonn. 1828–1832,
3 v.; also in Migne, *Patrol. Gr*. 153–154 (Dowl. 1866). Speaks of
Constantine as a model of clemency (4. 2; ed. Bonn. v. 3, p. 18) worthy
to be compared with the apostles (3. 92), and as led by the spirit of
God like David (4. 48; ed. Bonn. v. 3, p. 351), and mentions the time
(in May) when his memory is celebrated (4. 4; 3. 92), but has hardly a
half-dozen mentions and fewer facts of interest or value. He reigned
1342–1355, abdicated, and lived until after 1375.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p145"></span>Compare Plate, in Smith, *Dict*.
579–581; and for farther literature, Chevalier and Engelmann, also for
editions.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p146"></span>(55) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p146.1"></span>Nicephorus Callistus</span> (d. ab.
1450). *Ecclesiastical History*, 7. 17–18, 55. In Migne, *Patrol. Gr.*
145–147. Bk. 7 is in 145, and Bk. 8 in 146. This late history, not so
bad as some in style, but full of legendary matter, was compiled from
the standard existing historians, and perhaps some others. The portions
on Constantine are taken almost wholly from Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomen,
and other existing historians.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p147"></span>Compare Schaff, *Church Hist*. 3
(1884), 883–884; Plate, in Smith, *Dict*. 2 (1859), 1180–1181; Dowling,
*Introd*.(1838), 91–93.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p148"></span>(56) *Monody on the Younger
Constantine* (ab. 1450). Ed. Frotscher, *Anon. Græci oratio funebris*,
Freiberg i. S., 1855. This work has not been seen, but according to
Seeck (*Ztschr. f. Wiss. Theol.* 1890, p. 64) and Wordsworth (p. 630)
this edition contains the result of a study by Wesseling, which shows
that this work, referring to an anonymous emperor, does not refer to
Constantine II. at all, but to some ruler who belongs in the fifteenth
century.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p149"></span>Compare Seeck and Wordsworth for
editions.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p150"></span>(57) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p150.1"></span>Codinus</span> (d. ab. 1453?). *Excerpts
on the origins of Constantinople*. Ed. Bekker (Bonn. 1843). For <span
id="page_455">p. 455</span> <span id="iv.iii.v.ii-Page_455"></span>other
editions, compare articles of Plate and the *<span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p150.2"></span>Nouv. biog. gén*. Contains considerable
relating to Constantine, especially respecting the founding of
Constantinople, and the buildings and statues in it. Mainly compilation,
or compilation from compilation, but is from partly lost sources and far
from unnecessary. He died about 1453 (?).

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p151"></span>Compare Plate, in Smith, *Dict*. 1
(1859), 810–811; *Nouv. biog. gén*. 11 (1855), 24–25; and for
literature, Chevalier.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p152"></span>(58) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p152.1"></span>Ducas</span> (fl. 1450–1460 <span
class="c13"><span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p152.2"></span>a.d.</span>) gives
“From the incarnation until Constantine the Great, 318 years,” and
speaks of a church restored by him. Ed. Bekker, in *Corp. scr. hist.
Byz*. (1834), p. 13 and 48.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p153"></span>(59) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p153.1"></span>Geoffrey of Monmouth</span> (d. 1154).
*British History*. English translation (Lond. Bohn, 1848), 162– . The
passage relating to Constantine covers a number of pages, and is
ninety-five per cent fiction, five per cent fact.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p154"></span>Compare Tedder, in Stephen, *Dict. of
Nat. Biog.* 21 (1890), 133–135.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p155"></span>Various of the old chronicles are
only translations or paraphrases of this; e.g. the *Chronicle* of Pierre
de Langtoft (ed. Wright, Lond. 1866, p. 76–78), various Welsh,
Anglo-Saxon, and French chronicles, Waurin’s *<span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p155.1"></span>Recueil des Chroniques* (ed. Hardy, Lond.
1864), although Hardy maintains that neither Waurin or any of the other
versions are real translations, but says there is some lost common
source.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p156"></span>(60) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p156.1"></span>Henry of Huntingdon</span> (1135).
*History of the English.* Ed. Arnold, Lond. 1879, 8°, p. 29–31. Engl.
translation, Lond. Bohn, 1853, p. 28–29. This is written from generally
good sources, notably Eutropius, and means to be historical; but its
mythical details—e.g. Helena, a British princess, Constantine cured of
leprosy—make it useless.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p157"></span>Compare Forester, Preface to
translation; Wright, *Biog. Brit. Lit.* 2 (1846), 167–173.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p158"></span>(61) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p158.1"></span>William of Malmesbury</span> (1137).
*Chronicle of England*. English translation, Giles (Lond. Bohn, 1847),
6. Mentioned as a source because often quoted in literature. He ascribes
to Constantine the introduction of the British settlement in France.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p159"></span>Compare Wright, *Biog. Brit. Lit.* 2
(1846), 134–142.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p160"></span>(62) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p160.1"></span>Diceto, Ralph de</span> (d. 1202?).
*Abbreviated Chronicles*. Ed. Stubbs, Lond. 1876; section on
Constantine, p. 73–76. This work was composed before 1188. It consists
in the main of abstracts from Eutropius, Eusebius, Jerome, and Rufinus,
with various mythical details from William of Malmesbury and other
sources.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p161"></span>Compare Poole, in Stephen, *Dict. of
Nat. Biog*. 15 (1888), 12–14. This is taken from Stubbs, Introduction,
q.v.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p162"></span>(63) *Eulogium Historiarum* (ab.
1366). Ed. Haydon, Lond. 1858, 3 v.; section on Constantine, 1. 337–339;
2. 267–268, 332–333; 3. 12, 265. This was probably written by Peter, a
monk of Malmesbury (Haydon), about 1366. Compiled from various sources,
has familiar facts, but is of no value except for legends.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p163"></span>Compare Preface of Haydon.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p164"></span>(64) <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v.ii-p164.1"></span>Voragine</span> (1230–1298). *Golden
Legend. Legend concerning the Invention of the Cross.* Ed. Graesse
(Lips. 1846, repr. Vratisl. 1890). French translation by Brunet, 2
(1843), 118–116. Early English translation printed by Caxton. A curious
mixture of fact and fable, in which legendary is gathered, but all facts
are expressed with a curious conscientiousness, or pretended
conscientiousness, in quoting authorities. But on Constantine, however,
his authorities do not always come to the test of containing what he
quotes from them.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p165"></span>Compare article *Varaggio*, in
M’Clintock and Strong, *Cyclop*. 10 (1881), 719, Brunet’s *Preface* and
the Proceedings of the American Soc. of Ch. Hist. for 1889.

<span id="iv.iii.v.ii-p166"></span>Besides the above-mentioned sources
there are many mentions which may be found in the various collections of
mediæval documents, such, e.g., as Pertz, *Monumenta Germaniæ
Historica*, which has various interesting chronicles covering the period
of Constantine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3](2010378)
