[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010092)  [Next](2010094) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIV</span>.—*The Order of the
Gospels.*

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>This</span> extract from Clement I have
inserted here for the sake of the history and for the benefit of my
readers. Let us now point out the undisputed writings of this apostle.

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p3"></span>2. And in the first place his Gospel,
which is known to all the churches under heaven, must be acknowledged as
genuine. <span id="fr_756"></span>[757](#fn_756) That it has with good
reason been put by the ancients in the fourth place, after the other
three Gospels, may be made evident in the following way.

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p5"></span>3. Those great and truly divine men,
I mean the apostles of Christ, were purified in their life, and were
adorned with every virtue of the soul, but were uncultivated in speech.
They were confident indeed in their trust in the divine and
wonder-working power which was granted unto them by the Saviour, but
they did not know how, nor did they attempt to proclaim the doctrines of
their teacher in studied and artistic language, but employing only the
demonstration of the divine Spirit, which worked with them, and the
wonder-working power of Christ, which was displayed through them, they
published the knowledge of the kingdom of heaven throughout the whole
world, paying little attention to the composition of written works.

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p6"></span>4. And this they did because they
were assisted in their ministry by one greater than man. Paul, for
instance, who surpassed them all in vigor of expression and in richness
of thought, committed to writing no more than the briefest
epistles, <span id="fr_757"></span>[758](#fn_757) although he had
innumerable mysterious matters to communicate, for he had attained even
unto the sights of the third heaven, had been carried to the very
paradise of God, and had been deemed worthy to hear unspeakable
utterances there. <span id="fr_758"></span>[759](#fn_758)

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p9"></span>5. And the rest of the followers of
our Saviour, the twelve apostles, the seventy disciples, and countless
others besides, were not ignorant of these things. Nevertheless, of all
the disciples <span id="fr_759"></span>[760](#fn_759) of the Lord, only
Matthew and John have left us written memorials, and they, tradition
says, were led to write only under the pressure of necessity.

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p11"></span>6. For Matthew, who had at first
preached to the Hebrews, when he was about to go to other peoples,
committed his Gospel to writing in his native tongue, <span
id="fr_760"></span>[761](#fn_760) and thus <span id="page_153">p.
153</span> <span id="iii.viii.xxiv-Page_153"></span>compensated those
whom he was obliged to leave for the loss of his presence.

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p14"></span>7. And when Mark and Luke had
already published their Gospels, <span id="fr_761"></span>[762](#fn_761)
they say that John, who had employed all his time in proclaiming the
Gospel orally, finally proceeded to write for the following reason. The
three Gospels already mentioned having come into the hands of all and
into his own too, they say that he accepted them and bore witness to
their truthfulness; but that there was lacking in them an account of the
deeds done by Christ at the beginning of his ministry. <span
id="fr_762"></span>[763](#fn_762)

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p17"></span>8. And this indeed is true. For it
is evident that the three evangelists recorded only the deeds done by
the Saviour for one year after the imprisonment of John the
Baptist, <span id="fr_763"></span>[764](#fn_763) and indicated this in
the beginning of their account.

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p19"></span>9. For Matthew, after the forty
days’ fast and the temptation which followed it, indicates the
chronology of his work when he says: “Now when he heard that John was
delivered up he withdrew from Judea into Galilee.” <span
id="fr_764"></span>[765](#fn_764)

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p21"></span>10. Mark likewise says: “Now after
that John was delivered up Jesus came into Galilee.” <span
id="fr_765"></span>[766](#fn_765) And Luke, before commencing his
account of the deeds of Jesus, similarly marks the time, when he says
that Herod, “adding to all the evil deeds which he had done, shut up
John in prison.” <span id="fr_766"></span>[767](#fn_766)

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p24"></span>11. They say, therefore, that the
apostle John, being asked to do it for this reason, gave in his Gospel
an account of the period which had been omitted by the earlier
evangelists, and of the deeds done by the Saviour during that period;
that is, of those which were done before the imprisonment of the
Baptist. And this is indicated by him, they say, in the following words:
“This beginning of miracles did Jesus”; <span
id="fr_767"></span>[768](#fn_767) and again when he refers to the
Baptist, in the midst of the deeds of Jesus, as still baptizing in Ænon
near Salim; <span id="fr_768"></span>[769](#fn_768) where he states the
matter clearly in the words: “For John was not yet cast into
prison.” <span id="fr_769"></span>[770](#fn_769)

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p28"></span>12. John accordingly, in his Gospel,
records the deeds of Christ which were performed before the Baptist was
cast into prison, but the other three evangelists mention the events
which happened after that time.

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p29"></span>13. One who understands this can no
longer think that the Gospels are at variance with one another, inasmuch
as the Gospel according to John contains the first acts of Christ, while
the others give an account of the latter part of his life. And the
genealogy of our Saviour according to the flesh John quite naturally
omitted, because it had been already given by Matthew and Luke, and
began with the doctrine of his divinity, which had, as it were, been
reserved for him, as their superior, by the divine Spirit. <span
id="fr_770"></span>[771](#fn_770)

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p31"></span>14. These things may suffice, which
we have said concerning the Gospel of John. The cause which led to the
composition of the Gospel of Mark has been already stated by us. <span
id="fr_771"></span>[772](#fn_771)

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p33"></span>15. But as for Luke, in the
beginning of his Gospel, he states himself the reasons which led him to
write it. <span id="page_154">p. 154</span> <span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-Page_154"></span>He states that since many others had
more rashly undertaken to compose a narrative of the events of which he
had acquired perfect knowledge, he himself, feeling the necessity of
freeing us from their uncertain opinions, delivered in his own Gospel an
accurate account of those events in regard to which he had learned the
full truth, being aided by his intimacy and his stay with Paul and by
his acquaintance with the rest of the apostles. <span
id="fr_772"></span>[773](#fn_772)

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p35"></span>16. So much for our own account of
these things. But in a more fitting place we shall attempt to show by
quotations from the ancients, what others have said concerning them.

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p36"></span>17. But of the writings of John, not
only his Gospel, but also the former of his epistles, has been accepted
without dispute both now and in ancient times. <span
id="fr_773"></span>[774](#fn_773) But the other two are disputed. <span
id="fr_774"></span>[775](#fn_774)

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p39"></span>18. In regard to the Apocalypse, the
opinions of most men are still divided. <span
id="fr_775"></span>[776](#fn_775) But at the proper time this question
<span id="page_155">p. 155</span> <span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-Page_155"></span>likewise shall be decided from the
testimony of the ancients. <span id="fr_776"></span>[777](#fn_776)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_756"></span>[152:757](2010093.htm#fr_756) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p4"></span> The testimony of antiquity,—both
orthodox and heretical,—to the authenticity of John’s Gospel is
universal, with the exception of a single unimportant sect of the second
century, the Alogi, who denied the Johannine authorship on account of
the Logos doctrine, which they rejected, and very absurdly ascribed the
Gospel to the Gnostic Cerinthus; though its absolute opposition to
Cerinthus’ views is so apparent that Irenæus (III. 11. 1) even supposed
John to have written the Gospel against Cerinthus. The writings of the
second century are full of the spirit of John’s Gospel, and exhibit
frequent parallels in language too close to be mistaken; while from the
last quarter of the second century on it is universally and expressly
ascribed to John (Theophilus of Antioch and the Muratorian Fragment
being the first to name him as its author). The Church never entertained
a doubt of its authenticity until the end of the seventeenth century,
when it was first questioned by the English Deists; but its genuineness
was vindicated, and only scattering and occasional attacks were made
upon it until the rise of the Tübingen school, since which time its
authenticity has been one of the most fiercely contested points in
apostolic history. Its opponents have been obliged gradually to throw
back the date of its origin, until now no sensible critic thinks of
assigning it to a time later than the early part of the second century,
which is a great gain over the position of Baur and his immediate
followers, who threw it into the latter half of the century. See
Schaff’s *Ch. Hist.* I. 701–724 for a full defense of its authenticity
and a comprehensive account of the controversy; also p. 406–411 for the
literature of the subject. For the most complete summary of the external
evidence, see Ezra Abbott’s *The Authorship of the Fourth Gospel,* 1880.
Among recent works, compare Weiss’ *Leben Jesu,* I. 84–124, and his *N.
T. Einleitung,* 586–620, for a defense of the Gospel, and upon the other
side Holtzmann’s *Einleitung,* 413–460, and Weizsäcker’s *Apost.
Zeitalter,* p. 531–558.

<span id="fn_757"></span>[152:758](2010093.htm#fr_757) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p7"></span> Overbeck remarks that Eusebius in
this passage is the first to tell us that Paul wrote no more than what
we have in the canon. But this is a mistake, for Origen (quoted by
Eusebius in VI. 25, below) states it just as distinctly as Eusebius
does. The truth is, neither of them says it directly, and yet it is
clear enough when this passage is taken in connection with chapter 3,
that it is what Eusebius meant, and the same idea underlies the
statement of the Muratorian Fragment. Of course this does not prove that
Paul wrote only the epistles which we have (which is indeed contrary to
fact), but it shows what the idea of the early Church was.

<span id="fn_758"></span>[152:759](2010093.htm#fr_758) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p8"></span> See [2 Cor. xii.
2-4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002)<span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_759"></span>[152:760](2010093.htm#fr_759) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p10"></span> The majority of the <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p10.1"></span>mss.</span>, followed
by Burton, Schwegler, and Laemmer, read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p10.2"></span>διατριβῶν</span> instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p10.3"></span>μαθητῶν</span>; and
Burton therefore translates, *sed tamen ex his omnibus sole Matthæus et
Joannes nobis reliquerunt commentarios de vita et sermonibus Domini,*
“but of all these only Matthew and John have left us commentaries on the
life and conversations of the Lord.” Two important <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p10.4"></span>mss.</span>, however,
read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p10.5"></span>μαθητῶν</span>, and this is confirmed by
Rufinus and adopted by Heinichen, Closs, and Crusè.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[152:761](2010093.htm#fr_760) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p12"></span> That Matthew wrote a gospel in
Hebrew, although denied by many, is at present the prevailing opinion
among scholars, and may be accepted as a fact both on account of its
intrinsic probability and of the testimony of the Fathers, which begins
with the statement of Papias, quoted by Eusebius in chap. 39, below, is
confirmed by Irenæus (III. 1. 1, quoted below, V. 8, §2),—whether
independently of Papias or not, we cannot say,—by Pantænus (but see
below, Bk. V. chap. 10), by Origen (see below, VI. 25), by Jerome (*de
vir. ill.* 3),—who says that a copy of it still existed in the library
at Cæsarea,—and by Epiphanius (*Hær.* XXIX. 9). The question as to the
relation of this Hebrew original to our present Greek Matthew is much
more difficult. That our Greek Matthew is a mere translation of the
original Hebrew was once a prevailing theory, but is now completely
abandoned. That Matthew himself wrote both is a common conservative
position, but is denied by most critical scholars, many of whom deny him
the composition even of the Hebrew original. Upon the theory that the
original Hebrew Matthew was identical with the “Gospel according to the
Hebrews,” see chap. 27, note 8. Upon the synoptic problem, see above,
II. 15, note 4; and see the works mentioned there for a discussion of
this original Matthew, and in addition the recent works by Gla,
*Original-Sprache des Matt. Evang.,* 1887, and Resch, *Agrapha,*
Leipzig, 1889.

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p13"></span>The very natural reason which
Eusebius gives for the composition of Matthew’s Gospel—viz. that, when
on the point of going to other nations, he committed it to writing, and
thus compensated them for the loss of his presence—occurs in none of the
earlier reports of the composition of the Gospel which we now possess.
It was probably a fact which he took from common tradition, as he
remarks in the previous sentence that tradition says “they undertook it
from necessity.”

<span id="fn_761"></span>[153:762](2010093.htm#fr_761) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p15"></span> Upon the date and authorship of the
Gospel of Luke, see above, chap. 4, notes 12 and 15. Upon Mark, see Bk.
II. chap. 15, note 4.

<span id="fn_762"></span>[153:763](2010093.htm#fr_762) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p16"></span> No writer before Eusebius’ time, so
far as is known, assigned the reason given by him for the composition of
John’s Gospel. Jerome, *de vir. ill.* chap. 9, repeats the view,
combining with it the anti-heretical purpose. The indefinite expression,
“they say,” shows that Eusebius was recording tradition commonly
received in his time, and does not involve the authority of any
particular writer. This object—viz. the supplementing and filling out of
the accounts of the Synoptists—is assumed as the real object by some
modern scholars; but it is untenable, for though the book serves this
purpose to a great extent, the author’s real aim was much higher,—viz.
the establishment of belief in the Messiahship and divinity of Christ
([John xx. 31](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#031)<span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p16.1"></span> sqq.),—and he chose his materials
accordingly. The Muratorian Fragment says, “The Fourth Gospel is that of
John, one of the disciples. When his fellow-disciples and bishops
entreated him, he said, ‘Fast ye now with me for the space of three
days, and let us recount to each other whatever may be revealed to us.’
On the same night it was revealed to Andrew, one of the apostles, that
John should narrate all things in his own name as they called them to
mind.” Irenæus (III. 11. 1) supposes John to have written his Gospel as
a polemic against Cerinthus. Clement of Alexandria, in his *Hypotyposes*
(quoted by Eusebius, VI. 14), says that John wrote a spiritual Gospel,
as a supplement to the other Gospels, which had sufficiently described
the external facts. The opinion of Eusebius is very superficial. Upon
examination of the Gospels it will be seen that, of the events which
John relates independently of the synoptists, but a small portion
occurred before the imprisonment of John the Baptist. John’s Gospel
certainly does incidentally supplement the Synoptists in a remarkable
manner, but not in any such intentional and artificial way as Eusebius
supposes. Compare Weiss’ *Einleitung,* p. 602 sqq., and Schaff’s *Ch.
Hist.* II. p. 680 sqq.

<span id="fn_763"></span>[153:764](2010093.htm#fr_763) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p18"></span> The Synoptic Gospels certainly give
the impression that Christ’s public ministry lasted but a single year;
and were it not for the additional light which John throws upon the
subject, the one year ministry would be universally accepted, as it was
by many of the early Fathers,—e.g. Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian,
Origen, Lactantius, &c. John, however, expressly mentions three, perhaps
four, passovers, so that Christ’s ministry lasted either two or three
years. Upon comparison of the Synoptists with John, it will be seen that
the events which they record are not all comprised within a single year,
as Eusebius thought, but that they are scattered over the whole period
of his ministry, although confined to his work in Galilee up to the time
of his last journey to Judea, six months before his crucifixion. The
distinction between John and the Synoptists, as to the events recorded,
is therefore rather that of place than of time: but the distinction is
not absolute.

<span id="fn_764"></span>[153:765](2010093.htm#fr_764) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p20"></span> [Matt. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#012)<span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_765"></span>[153:766](2010093.htm#fr_765) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p22"></span> [Mark i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#014)<span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_766"></span>[153:767](2010093.htm#fr_766) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p23"></span> [Luke iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#020)<span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[153:768](2010093.htm#fr_767) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p25"></span> [John ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#011)<span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p25.1"></span>. The arguments of Eusebius, whether
original or borrowed from his predecessors, are certainly very
ingenious, and he makes out apparently quite a strong case for his
opinion; but a careful harmony of the four Gospels shows that it is
untenable.

<span id="fn_768"></span>[153:769](2010093.htm#fr_768) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p26"></span> [John iii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#023)<span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[153:770](2010093.htm#fr_769) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p27"></span> [John
3.24](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#024)<span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[153:771](2010093.htm#fr_770) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p30"></span> Eusebius approaches here the
opinion of Clement of Alexandria, mentioned in note 7, above, who
considered John’s Gospel a spiritual supplement to the others,—a
position which the Gospel certainly fills most admirably.

<span id="fn_771"></span>[153:772](2010093.htm#fr_771) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p32"></span> See Bk. II. chap. 15.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[154:773](2010093.htm#fr_772) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p34"></span> See [Luke i.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)<span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p34.1"></span>. Eusebius puts the case more strongly
than Luke himself. Luke does not say that others had rashly undertaken
the composition of their narratives, nor does he say that he himself
writes in order to free his readers from the uncertain suppositions of
others; but at the same time the interpretation which Eusebius gives is,
though not an exact, yet certainly a natural one, and we have no right
to accuse him, as has been done, of intentional falsification of the
text of the Gospel. Eusebius also augments Luke’s statement by the
mention of the source from which the latter gained his knowledge, viz.,
“from his intimacy and stay with Paul, and from his acquaintance with
the rest of the apostles.” If Eusebius intended to convey the impression
that Luke said this, he is of course inexcusable, but we have no reason
to suppose this to be the case. It is simply the explanation on the part
of Eusebius of an indefinite statement of Luke’s by a fact which was
universally assumed as true. That he was adding to Luke’s own account
probably never occurred to him. He does not pretend to quote Luke’s
exact words.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[154:774](2010093.htm#fr_773) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p37"></span> The testimony to the first Epistle
of John goes hand in hand with that to the fourth Gospel (cf. note 1,
above). But we can find still clearer trace of the Epistle in the early
part of the second century than of the Gospel (e.g. in Polycarp’s
Epistle, where traces of the Gospel are wanting; and so, too, in Papias,
according to chap. 39, below). The writings of the second century are
full of the spirit of the Epistle as well as of the Gospel and exhibit
frequent parallels in language too close to be mistaken. The first
express testimony as to its authorship occurs in the Muratorian
Fragment. The first systematic attack upon the Epistle was made by
Bretschneider, in 1820, in connection with the attack upon the Gospel.
The Tübingen school likewise rejected both. Before Bretschneider there
had been a few critics (e.g. Lange, 1797) who had rejected the Epistle
while accepting the Gospel, and since then a few have accepted the
Epistle while rejecting the Gospel; but these are exceptional cases. The
Gospel and Epistle have almost universally, and quite rightly, been
regarded as the work of the same author, and may be said to stand or
fall together. Cf. the works cited in note 1, and also Westcott’s
*Epistles of St. John.* (On the use of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p37.1"></span>πρότερα</span> instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p37.2"></span>πρώτη</span>, see p.
388, note.)

<span id="fn_774"></span>[154:775](2010093.htm#fr_774) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p38"></span> The Muratorian Fragment expressly
ascribes two epistles to John. Citations from the second Epistle appear
first in Irenæus, though he does not distinguish it from the first.
Clement of Alexandria (*Strom.* II. 15) quotes from 1 John under the
formula “John says in his larger Epistle,” showing that he knew of a
second. The lack of citations from the second and third Epistles is
easily explained by their brevity and the minor importance of their
doctrinal contents. The second and third Epistles belong to the seven
*Antilegomena.* Origen cites the first Epistle often, the second and
third never, and of the latter he says “not all agree that they are
genuine” (quoted by Eusebius, VI. 25), and apparently he himself did not
consider them of apostolic origin (cf. Weiss’ *Einleitung,* p. 87).
Origen’s treatment of the Catholic Epistles was implicitly followed by
his pupil Dionysius and by succeeding generations. Eusebius himself does
not express his own judgment in the matter, but simply records the state
of tradition which was a mere repetition of Origen’s position in regard
to them. Jerome (*de vir. ill.* 9 and 18) says that most writers ascribe
them to the presbyter John—an opinion which evidently arose upon the
basis of the author’s self-designation in [2 John.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#001), [3 John.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#001)<span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p38.1"></span>, and some modern critics (among them
Reuss and Wieseler) have done the same. Eusebius himself in the next
chapter implies that such an opinion existed in his day, though he does
not express his own view on the matter. He placed them, however, among
the *Antilegomena.* (On the presbyter John, see below chap. 39, note 4.)
That the two epistles fell originally into the class of *Antilegomena*
was due doubtless to the peculiar self-designation mentioned, which
seemed to distinguish the author from the apostle, and also to their
private and doctrinally unimportant character. But in spite of the
slight external testimony to the epistles the conclusion of Weiss seems
correct, that “inasmuch as the second and third clearly betray the same
author, and inasmuch as the second is related to the first in such a
manner that they must either be by the same author or the former be
regarded as an entirely aimless imitation of the latter, so everything
favors the ascription of them both to the author of the first, viz. to
the apostle.” (*ibid.* p. 469.)

<span id="fn_775"></span>[154:776](2010093.htm#fr_775) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p40"></span> The Apocalypse is one of the best
authenticated books of the New Testament. It was used by Papias and
others of the earliest Fathers, and already by Justin Martyr was
expressly ascribed to the apostle John. (Compare also the epistle of the
Churches of Lyons and Vienne, Eusebius, V. 1.) Tradition, so far as we
have it, is unanimous (with the exception of the Alogi, an insignificant
heretical sect of the second century, who attributed the Apocalypse as
well as the Gospel to Cerinthus. Caius is not an exception: see below,
chap. 28, note 4) in ascribing the Apocalypse to the apostle John, until
Dionysius of Alexandria, who subjected the book to severe literary
criticism (see below, Bk. VII. chap. 25), and upon the assumption of the
genuineness of the Gospel and the first Epistle, doubted its
authenticity on account of its divergence from these writings both in
spirit and in style. He says (VII. 25, §2) that some others before him
had denied the Johannine authorship and ascribed the book to Cerinthus,
but the way in which he speaks of them shows that there cannot have been
a ruling tradition to that effect. He may have referred simply to the
Alogi, or he may have included others of whom we do not know. He himself
rejects this hypothesis, and supposes the books to have been written by
some John, not the apostle (by what John he does not decide), and does
not deny the inspiration and prophetic character of the book. Dionysius
was led to exercise criticism upon the Apocalypse (which was as well
supported by tradition as any book of the New Testament) from dogmatic
reasons. The supposed sensuous and materialistic conceptions of the
Apocalypse were offensive to the spiritualizing tendencies of the
Alexandrian school, and the offensiveness increased with time. Although
Dionysius held the work as inspired and authoritative, yet his position
would lead logically to the exclusion of the Apocalypse from the canon,
just as Hermas had been already excluded, although Origen held it to be
inspired and authoritative in the same sense in which Dionysius held the
Apocalypse to be,—i.e. as composed by an apostle’s pupil, not by an
apostle. Apocalyptic literature did not belong properly to the New
Testament, but rather to the prophetic portion of the Old Testament; but
the number of the Old Testament prophets was already complete (according
to the Muratorian Fragment), and therefore no prophetic writing (e.g.
Hermas) could find a place there; nor, on the other hand, could it be
made a part of the New Testament, for it was not apostolic. The same was
true of the Apocalypse of Peter, and the only thing which kept the
Apocalypse of John in the canon was its supposed apostolic authorship.
It was received as a part of the New Testament not because it was
apocalyptic, but because it was apostolic, and thus the criticism of
Dionysius would lead logically to its rejection from the canon. John’s
Apocalypse is the only New Testament book cited by Justin as <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p40.1"></span>γραφή</span> (so
also by the Epistle of Vienne and Lyons, Eusebius, V. 1), and this
because of its prophetic character. It must have been (according to
their opinion) either a true prophecy (and therefore inspired by the
Holy Spirit) or a forgery. Its authenticity being accepted, the former
alternative necessarily followed, and it was placed upon a line with the
Old Testament prophets, i.e. with the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p40.2"></span>γραφή</span>. After Dionysius’ time
doubts of its authenticity became quite widespread in the Eastern
Church, and among the doubters was Eusebius, who evidently wished to
ascribe it to the mysterious presbyter John, whose existence he supposed
to be established by Papias in a passage quoted in chap. 39, §4, below
(compare the note on the passage). Eusebius’ treatment of the book is
hesitating. He evidently himself discredited its apostolic authority,
but at the same time he realized (as a historian more keenly than
Dionysius the theologian) the great weight of external testimony to its
authenticity, and therefore he gives his readers the liberty (in the
next chapter) of putting it either with the *Homologoumena* or with the
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p40.3"></span>νόθοι</span>.
It legitimately belonged among the *Homologoumena,* but Dionysius’
attitude toward it doubtless led Eusebius to think that it might at some
time in the future be thrown out of the canon, and of course his own
objections to its contents and his doubts as to its apostolicity caused
him to contemplate such a possibility not without pleasure (see the next
chapter, note 1). In chapter 18, above, he speaks of it as the
“so-called” Apocalypse of John, but in other places he repeats many
testimonies in favor of its authenticity (see the next note), and only
in chapter 39 does he state clearly his own opinion in the matter, which
even there he does not press as a fixed conviction. The reason for the
doubts of the book’s genuineness on the part of Eusebius and so many
others lay evidently most of all in objections to the contents of the
book, which seemed to favor chiliasm, and had been greatly abused for
the advancement of the crassest chiliastic views. Many, like Dionysius
of Alexandria were no doubt influenced also by the idea that it was
impossible that the Gospel and the Apocalypse could be the works of one
author, and they preferred to sacrifice the latter rather than the
former. The book has found objectors in almost every age of the Church,
but has continued to hold its place in the canon (its position was never
disturbed in the Western Church, and only for some two or three
centuries after Eusebius in parts of the Eastern Church) as an authentic
work of the apostle John. The Tübingen school exalted the Apocalypse to
the honorable position of one of the five genuine monuments of the
apostolic age, and from it as a basis conducted their attacks upon the
other Johannine writings. The more modern critical school is doubtful
about it as well as the rest of the Johannine literature, and the latest
theory makes the Apocalypse a Jewish document in a Christianized form
(see above, chap. 18, note 1). Compare especially Holtzmann’s
*Einleitung,* p. 411–413, and Weiss’ *Einleitung,* p. 93.

<span id="fn_776"></span>[155:777](2010093.htm#fr_776) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiv-p40.4"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiv-p41"></span> See Bk. VII. chap. 25, where
Eusebius quotes a lengthy discussion of the Apocalypse by Dionysius of
Alexandria. He also cites opinions favorable to the authenticity of the
Apocalypse from Justin (in IV. 18, below), Theophilus (IV. 24), Irenæus
(V. 8), and Origen (VI. 25), but such scattered testimonies can hardly
be regarded as the fulfillment of the definite promise which he makes in
this passage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV](2010094)
