[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010354)  [Next](2010356.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii.iv-p1"></span> §4. *Mental Characteristics.*

<span id="iv.iii.ii.iv-p2"></span>According to his biographer-friend,
Constantine was even more conspicuous for the excellence of his
psychical qualities than his physical (*V. C.* 1. 19). Among these
qualities are natural intelligence (*V. C.* 1. 19), sound judgment (*V.
C.* 1. 19), well-disciplined power of thought (Theoph. p. 29), and
peculiarly, as might be expected from his eye and general energy,
penetration (Theoph. p. 29). In respect of *Education,* it is said on
the one hand that he “reaped the advantages of a liberal education” (*V.
C.* 1. 19), and particularly that he was thoroughly trained in the art
of reasoning (*V. C.*); but according to Anonymous Vales. (p. 471), and
also Cedrenus (p. 473), his literary education was scanty. If there was
early lack, he made up for it afterwards with characteristic energy, for
he attained very considerable erudition (of a sort) for an emperor, as
is shown in his *Oration.* According to Eutropius he was devoted to
liberal studies. According to Lydus he was skilled both in the science
of letters and the science of arms; for “if he had not excelled in both
sciences, he would not have been made emperor of the Romans” (Lydus, *de
Magist.* 3. 33),—a somewhat subjective ground. Such was his devotion to
study that, according to Eusebius (*V. C.* 4. 29), “he sometimes passed
sleepless nights in furnishing his mind with divine knowledge.” The
measure of his thoroughness may be gathered from the fact that his
knowledge of Greek even, does not seem to have been very extensive—“with
which he was not altogether unacquainted” (*V. C.* 3. 13). His learning,
as shown in his orations, is the learning of a man of affairs, and has
many elements of crudity and <span id="page_423">p. 423</span> <span
id="iv.iii.ii.iv-Page_423"></span>consequent pretentiousness; but he is
no worse than many authors—much better than most royal authors.

<span id="iv.iii.ii.iv-p3"></span>His learning had at least the
excellent quality that it was radiated with reference to expression, as
all sound learning must be. According to Eusebius, much of his time was
spent in composing discourses, many of which he delivered in public (*V.
C.* 4. 29), and he continued to the last to compose discourses and to
deliver frequent orations in public.

<span id="iv.iii.ii.iv-p4"></span>The description by Eusebius of the
character of his orations (*V. C.* 4. 24) seems to forbid any assumption
of pure vanity as his motive. It is the most natural thing in the world
that an emperor should make speeches, and that he should speak on
scholastic or religious themes, and with the use of classical
philosophy, mythology, and literature, should be no surprise in the days
of President Harrison, Mr. Gladstone, and the Emperor William. There is
no doubt he wrote and spoke vigorously and effectively to his soldiers,
and on political and judicial matters (witness his laws), and his
learned literary production is very fair amateur work, considering. In
the *Delivery* of his speeches he seems to have had self-possession and
modesty of manner, as e.g. at the Council of Nicæa, where “he looked
serenely around on the assembly with a cheerful aspect, and having
collected his thoughts in a calm and gentle tone…proceeded to speak”
(*V. C.* 3. 11). His *Literary style* was somewhat inflated and verbose,
but for this, compare *Special Prolegomena.* His *Patronage of learning*
showed his interest in it. Following his father’s example and continuing
his work, he encouraged the schools in Gaul (cf. above). Hosius and
Eusebius were his friends and counselors. He made Lactantius tutor to
Crispus (Hieron. Chron.). He had copies of the Scriptures made and
distributed (*V. C.* 3. 1). In short, he especially “encouraged the
study of letters” (Vict. *Epit.* 51) in every way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](2010356.md)
