[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010285)  [Next](2010287) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xv.i"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_357">p. 357</span> <span
id="iii.xv.i-Page_357"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iii.xv.i-p1.1"></span>Book IX.</span>

<span id="iii.xv.i-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xv.i-p2.1"></span>Chapter I.—</span>*The Pretended Relaxation.*

<span id="iii.xv.i-p3"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xv.i-p3.1"></span>The</span> imperial edict of recantation,
which has been quoted above, <span id="fr_2709"></span>[2710](#fn_2709)
was posted in all parts of Asia and in the adjoining provinces. After
this had been done, Maximinus, the tyrant in the East,—a most impious
man, if there ever was one, and most hostile to the religion of the God
of the universe,—being by no means satisfied with its contents, <span
id="fr_2710"></span>[2711](#fn_2710) instead of sending the above-quoted
decree to the governors under him, gave them verbal commands to relax
the war against us.

<span id="iii.xv.i-p6"></span>2. For since he could not in any other way
oppose the decision of his superiors, keeping the law which had been
already issued secret, and taking care that it might not be made known
in the district under him, he gave an unwritten order to his governors
that they should relax the persecution against us. They communicated the
command to each other in writing.

<span id="iii.xv.i-p7"></span>3. Sabinus, <span
id="fr_2711"></span>[2712](#fn_2711) at least, who was honored with the
highest official rank among them, communicated the will of the emperor
to the provincial governors in a Latin epistle, the translation of which
is as follows:

<span id="iii.xv.i-p9"></span>4. “With continuous and most devoted
earnestness their Majesties, our most divine masters, the
emperors, <span id="fr_2712"></span>[2713](#fn_2712) formerly directed
the minds of all men to follow the holy and correct course of life, that
those also who seemed to live in a manner foreign to that of the Romans,
should render the worship due to the immortal gods. But the obstinacy
and most unconquerable determination of some went so far that they could
neither be turned back from their purpose by the just reason of the
command, nor be intimidated by the impending punishment.

<span id="iii.xv.i-p11"></span>5. Since therefore it has come to pass
that by such conduct many have brought themselves into danger, their
Majesties, our most powerful masters, the emperors, in the exalted
nobility of piety, esteeming it foreign to their Majesties’ purpose to
bring men into so great danger for such a cause, have commanded their
devoted servant, myself, to write to thy wisdom, <span
id="fr_2713"></span>[2714](#fn_2713) that if any Christian be found
engaging in the worship of his own people, thou shouldst abstain from
molesting and endangering him, and shouldst not suppose it necessary to
punish any one on this pretext. For it has been proved by the experience
of so long a time that they can in no way be persuaded to abandon such
obstinate conduct.

<span id="iii.xv.i-p13"></span>6. Therefore it should be thy care to
write to the curators <span id="fr_2714"></span>[2715](#fn_2714) and
magistrates and district overseers <span
id="fr_2715"></span>[2716](#fn_2715) of every city, that they may know
that it is not necessary for them to give further attention to this
matter.” <span id="fr_2716"></span>[2717](#fn_2716)

<span id="iii.xv.i-p18"></span>7. Thereupon the rulers of the prov<span
id="page_358">p. 358</span> <span id="iii.xv.i-Page_358"></span>inces,
thinking that the purpose of the things which were written was truly
made known to them, declared the imperial will to the curators and
magistrates and prefects of the various districts <span
id="fr_2717"></span>[2718](#fn_2717) in writing. But they did not limit
themselves to writing, but sought more quickly to accomplish the
supposed will of the emperor in deeds also. Those whom they had
imprisoned on account of their confession of the Deity, they set at
liberty, and they released those of them who had been sent to the mines
for punishment; for they erroneously supposed that this was the true
will of the emperor.

<span id="iii.xv.i-p20"></span>8. And when these things had thus been
done, immediately, like a light shining forth in a dark night, one could
see in every city congregations gathered and assemblies thronged, and
meetings held according to their custom. And every one of the
unbelieving heathen was not a little astonished at these things,
wondering at so marvelous a transformation, and exclaiming that the God
of the Christians was great and alone true.

<span id="iii.xv.i-p21"></span>9. And some of our people, who had
faithfully and bravely sustained the conflict of persecution, again
became frank and bold toward all; but as many as had been diseased in
the faith and had been shaken in their souls by the tempest, strove
eagerly for healing, beseeching and imploring the strong to stretch out
to them a saving hand, and supplicating God to be merciful unto them.

<span id="iii.xv.i-p22"></span>10. Then also the noble athletes of
religion who had been set free from their sufferings in the mines
returned to their own homes. Happily and joyfully they passed through
every city, full of unspeakable pleasure and of a boldness which cannot
be expressed in words.

<span id="iii.xv.i-p23"></span>11. Great crowds of men pursued their
journey along the highways and through the market-places, praising God
with hymns and psalms. And you might have seen those who a little while
before had been driven in bonds from their native countries under a most
cruel sentence, returning with bright and joyful faces to their own
firesides; so that even they who had formerly thirsted for our blood,
when they saw the unexpected wonder, congratulated us on what had taken
place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2709"></span>[357:2710](2010286.htm#fr_2709) <span
id="iii.xv.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.i-p4"></span> The toleration edict of Galerius, given
in Bk. VIII. chap. 17.

<span id="fn_2710"></span>[357:2711](2010286.htm#fr_2710) <span
id="iii.xv.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.i-p5"></span> For the reason of Maximin’s failure to
join with the other emperors in the issue of this edict, see Bk. VIII.
chap. 17, note 1.

<span id="fn_2711"></span>[357:2712](2010286.htm#fr_2711) <span
id="iii.xv.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.i-p8"></span> Of Sabinus we know only what is told us
here. He seems to have been Maximin’s prime minister, or prætorian
prefect (τῷ τῶν ἐξοχωτ€των ἐπ€ρχων ἀξιώματι τετιμημένος, Eusebius says
of him). He is mentioned again in chap. 9, where an epistle of Maximin
addressed to him is quoted.

<span id="fn_2712"></span>[357:2713](2010286.htm#fr_2712) <span
id="iii.xv.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.i-p10"></span> Literally, “the divinity of our most
divine masters, the emperors.” The style throughout the epistle is of an
equally stilted character.

<span id="fn_2713"></span>[357:2714](2010286.htm#fr_2713) <span
id="iii.xv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.i-p12"></span> Literally, “have commanded my
devotedness to write to thy wisdom.” It is clear that the communication
was dictated, or at least directly inspired, by Maximin himself.

<span id="fn_2714"></span>[357:2715](2010286.htm#fr_2714) <span
id="iii.xv.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.i-p14"></span> τοὺς λογιστ€ς, commonly used to
translate the Latin *curatores urbium*.

<span id="fn_2715"></span>[357:2716](2010286.htm#fr_2715) <span
id="iii.xv.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.i-p15"></span> τοὺς στρατηγοὺς (the common designation
for the chief magistrates of cities in the eastern part of the empire)
καὶ τοὺς πραιποσίτους τοῦ π€γου.

<span id="fn_2716"></span>[357:2717](2010286.htm#fr_2716) <span
id="iii.xv.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.i-p16"></span> The <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xv.i-p16.1"></span>mss.</span> all read <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xv.i-p16.2"></span>γρ€μματος</span>, but
Valesius conjectures that <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.i-p16.3"></span>πρ€γματος</span> is the true reading, and his
conjecture is supported by Nicephorus, who has <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.i-p16.4"></span>φροντίδα περὶ χριστιανῶν ποιεῖθαι</span>.
Stroth follows Valesius, and I have done the same. Heinichen remarks:
“*Sed non necessaria, credo, est hæc emendatio, immo eadem fere exsistet
sententia per* <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.i-p16.5"></span>γρ€μματος</span>, *hoc modo: ut scient sibi
non licere operam dare sc. ut facile intelligitur persequendis
Christianis, ultra hoc scriptum, id est, magis quam hoc scripto est
designatum.*” Closs interprets in the same way, translating: “dass sie
sich nicht weiter, als in diesem Schreiben befohlen ist, mit den
Christen zu befassen haben.” The Greek, however, does not seem to me to
admit of this interpretation (it reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.i-p16.6"></span>ἵ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.i-p16.7"></span>να γνῷεν, περαιτέρω αὐτοῖς τούτου τοῦ
γρ€μματος φροντίδα ποιεῖσθαι μὴ προσήκειν</span>), and there seems to be
no other alternative than to change the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.i-p16.8"></span>γρ€μματος</span> to <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.i-p16.9"></span>πρ€γματος</span>, or at least give it the
meaning of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.i-p16.10"></span>πρ€γματος</span>, as Mason does, without
emending the text (though I am not aware that <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.i-p16.11"></span>γρ€μμα</span> can legitimately be rendered
in any such way). I am inclined to think that the word *negotium* stood
in the original, and that it was translated by the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xv.i-p16.12"></span>πρ€γμα</span>. Had
*epistola* or *litteræ* been used, referring to the present
document,—and it could not well refer to anything else,—we should expect
Eusebius to translate by <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.i-p16.13"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.i-p16.14"></span>πιστολγή</span>, for he calls the document
an <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xv.i-p16.15"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xv.i-p16.16"></span>πιστολή</span> in §3,
above. On the other hand, if *scriptura,* or any other similar word, had
been used and translated <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.i-p16.17"></span>γρ€μμα</span> by Eusebius, we should have
expected him to call the document a <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.i-p16.18"></span>γρ€μμα</span>, not an <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xv.i-p16.19"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xv.i-p16.20"></span>πιστολή</span> in §3.

<span id="iii.xv.i-p17"></span>The general drift of the letter cannot be
mistaken. As Mason paraphrases it: “In other words, Christianity
strictly is still illicit, though in particular cases not to be punished
as severely as heretofore; and the emperor, though forced for the
present not to *require* you to persecute, will expect you not to relax
your exertions more than can be helped.” Mason justly emphasizes in the
same connection the use of the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.i-p17.1"></span>μὴ προσήκειν</span> in the last clause, which
do not mean *non licere* (“it is not permitted”) as Valesius, followed
by many others, render them, but “it is not necessary,” “they need not.”
It is plain that Maximin made his concessions very unwillingly and only
because compelled to; and it is clear that he suppressed the edict of
Galerius, and substituted general and not wholly unambiguous directions
of his own, in order that as little as possible might be done for the
Christians, and that he might be left free for a future time when he
should find himself in a more independent position; he evidently did not
care to compromise and hamper himself by officially sanctioning the full
and explicit toleration accorded in the edict of Galerius. For a fuller
discussion of Maximin’s attitude in the matter, see Mason, p. 309 sq. As
he remarks, it is “almost a wonder that the judges interpreted Maximin’s
document in a sense so favorable to the brotherhood as they really did.
Though no effectual security was given against the recurrence of the
late atrocities, the Persecution of Diocletian was at an end, even in
the East. The subordinate officers issued and posted local mandates,
which conceded more than they were bidden to concede.”

<span id="fn_2717"></span>[358:2718](2010286.htm#fr_2717) <span
id="iii.xv.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.i-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.i-p19.1"></span>τοῖς κατ᾽ ἀγροὺς ἐπιτεταγμένοις</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](2010287)
