[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010699)  [Next](2010701) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.viii.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xi-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.viii.xi-p2.1"></span>Much</span> might indeed be said of this
salutary Sign, by those who are skilled in the mysteries of our Divine
religion. For it is in very truth the symbol of salvation, wondrous to
speak of, more wondrous still to conceive; the appearance of which on
earth has thrown the fictions of all false religion from the beginning
into the deepest shade, has buried superstitious error in darkness and
oblivion, and has revealed to all that spiritual light which enlightens
the souls of men, even the knowledge of the only true God.

<span id="iv.viii.xi-p3"></span>2. Hence the universal change for the
better, which leads men to spurn their lifeless idols, to trample under
foot the lawless rites of their demon deities, and laugh to scorn the
time-honored follies of their fathers. Hence, too, the establishment in
every place of those schools of sacred learning, wherein men are taught
the precepts of saving truth, and dread no more those objects of
creation which are seen by the natural eye, nor direct a gaze of wonder
at the sun, the moon, or stars; but acknowledge him who is above all
these, that invisible Being who is the Creator of them all, and learn to
worship him alone.

<span id="iv.viii.xi-p4"></span>3. Such are the blessings resulting to
mankind from this great and wondrous Sign, by virtue of which the evils
which once existed are now no more, and virtues heretofore unknown shine
everywhere resplendent with the light of true godliness.

<span id="iv.viii.xi-p5"></span>4. Discourses, and precepts, and <span
id="page_595">p. 595</span> <span
id="iv.viii.xi-Page_595"></span>exhortations to a virtuous and holy
life, are proclaimed in the ears of all nations. Nay, the emperor
himself proclaims them: and it is indeed a marvel that this mighty
prince, raising his voice in the hearing of all the world, like an
interpreter of the Almighty Sovereign’s will, invites his subjects in
every country to the knowledge of the true God.

<span id="iv.viii.xi-p6"></span>5. No more, as in former times, is the
babbling of impious men heard in the imperial palace; but priests and
pious worshipers of God together celebrate his majesty with royal hymns
of praise. The name of the one Supreme Ruler of the universe is
proclaimed to all: the gospel of glad tidings connects the human race
with its Almighty King, declaring the grace and love of the heavenly
Father to his children on the earth.

<span id="iv.viii.xi-p7"></span>6. His praise is everywhere sung in
triumphant strains: the voice of mortal man is blended with the harmony
of the angelic choirs in heaven; and the reasoning soul employs the body
which invests it as an instrument for sounding forth a fitting tribute
of praise and adoration to his name. The nations of the East and the
West are instructed at the same moment in his precepts: the people of
the Northern and Southern regions unite with one accord, under the
influence of the same principles and laws, in the pursuit of a godly
life, in praising the one Supreme God, in acknowledging his only
begotten Son their Saviour as the source of every blessing, and our
emperor as the one ruler on the earth, together with his pious sons.

<span id="iv.viii.xi-p8"></span>7. He himself, as a skillful pilot, sits
on high at the helm of state, and directs the vessel with unerring
course, conducting his people as it were with favoring breeze to a
secure and tranquil haven. Meanwhile God himself, the great Sovereign,
extends the right hand of his power from above for his protection,
giving him victory over every foe, and establishing his empire by a
lengthened period of years: and he will bestow on him yet higher
blessings, and confirm in every deed the truth of his own promises. But
on these we may not at present dwell; but must await the change to a
better world: for it is not given to mortal eyes or ears of flesh, fully
to apprehend the things of God. <span
id="fr_3535"></span>[3536](#fn_3535)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3535"></span>[595:3536](2010700.htm#fr_3535) <span
id="iv.viii.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xi-p9"></span> At this point, according to some
(compare Special Prolegomena), one oration ends and another begins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](2010701)
