[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010678)  [Next](2010680.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII</span>.—*Of the Wisdom of
Moses, which was an Object of Imitation to the Wise among Heathen
Nations. Also concerning Daniel, and the Three Children.*

<span id="iv.vii.xvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.xvii-p2.1"></span>No</span> nation has ever been more highly
blessed than that which Moses led: none would have continued to enjoy
higher blessings, had they not willingly withdrawn themselves from the
guidance of the Holy Spirit. But who can worthily describe the praises
of Moses himself; who, after reducing to order an unruly nation, and
disciplining their minds <span id="fr_3448"></span>[3449](#fn_3448.md) to
habits of obedience and respect, out of captivity restored them to a
state of freedom, turned their mourning into gladness, and so far
elevated their minds, <span id="fr_3449"></span>[3450](#fn_3449.md) that,
through the excess of contrast with their former circumstances, and the
abundance of their prosperity, the spirit of the people was elated with
haughtiness and pride? So far did he surpass in wisdom those who had
lived before him, that even the wise men and philosophers <span
id="fr_3450"></span>[3451](#fn_3450.md) who are extolled by heathen nations
aspired to imitate his wisdom. For Pythagoras, following his wisdom,
attained to such a pitch of self-control, that he became to Plato,
himself a model of discretion, the standard of his own self-mastery.
Again, how great and terrible the cruelty of that ancient Syrian king,
over whom Daniel triumphed, the prophet who unfolded the secrets of
futurity, whose actions evinced transcendent greatness of soul, and the
luster of whose character and life shone conspicuous above all? The name
of this tyrant was Nebuchadnezzar, whose race afterward became extinct,
and his vast and mighty power was transferred to Persian hands. The
wealth of this tyrant was then, and is even now, celebrated far and
wide, as well as his ill-timed devotion to unlawful worship, his idol
statues, lifting their heads to heaven, and formed of various metals,
and the terrible and savage laws ordained to uphold this worship. These
terrors Daniel, sustained by genuine piety towards the true God, utterly
despised, and predicted that the tyrant’s unseasonable zeal would be
productive of fearful evil to himself. He failed, however, to convince
the tyrant (for excessive wealth is an effectual barrier to true
soundness of judgment), and at length the monarch displayed the savage
cruelty of his character, by commanding that the righteous prophet
should be exposed to the fury of wild beasts. Noble, too, indeed was the
united spirit exhibited by those brethren <span
id="fr_3451"></span>[3452](#fn_3451.md) (whose example others have since
followed, and <span id="page_574">p. 574</span> <span
id="iv.vii.xvii-Page_574"></span>have won surpassing glory by their
faith in the Saviour’s name), <span id="fr_3452"></span>[3453](#fn_3452.md)
those, I mean, who stood unharmed in the fiery furnace, and the terrors
appointed to devour them, repelling by the holy touch of their bodies
the flame by which they were surrounded. On the overthrow of the
Assyrian Empire, which was destroyed by thunderbolts from Heaven, <span
id="fr_3453"></span>[3454](#fn_3453.md) the providence of God conducted
Daniel to the court of Cambyses the Persian king. Yet envy followed him
even here; nor envy only, but the deadly plots of the magians against
his life, with a succession of many and urgent dangers, from all which
he was easily delivered by the providential care of Christ, <span
id="fr_3454"></span>[3455](#fn_3454.md) and shone conspicuous in the
practice of every virtue. Three times in the day did he present his
prayers to God, and memorable were the proofs of supernatural power
which he displayed: and hence the magians, filled with envy at the very
efficacy of his petitions, represented the possession of such power to
the king as fraught with danger, and prevailed on him to adjudge this
distinguished benefactor of the Persian people to be devoured by savage
lions. Daniel, therefore, thus condemned, was consigned to the lions’
den (not indeed to suffer death, but to win unfading glory); and though
surrounded by these ferocious beasts of prey, he found them more gentle
than the men who had enclosed him there. Supported by the power of calm
and steadfast prayer, he was enabled to subdue all these animals,
ferocious as, by nature, they were. Cambyses, on learning the event (for
so mighty a proof of Divine power could not possibly be concealed),
amazed at the marvelous story, and repenting the too easy credence he
had given to the slanderous charges of the magians, resolved,
notwithstanding, to be himself a witness of the spectacle. But when he
saw the prophet with uplifted hands rendering praises to Christ, and the
lions crouching, and as it were worshiping, at his feet, immediately he
adjudged the magians, to whose persuasions he had listened, to perish by
the self-same sentence, and shut them up in the lions’ den. <span
id="fr_3455"></span>[3456](#fn_3455.md) The beasts, erewhile so gentle,
rushed at once upon their victims, and with all the fierceness of their
nature tore and destroyed them all. <span
id="fr_3456"></span>[3457](#fn_3456.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3448"></span>[573:3449](2010679.htm#fr_3448.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xvii-p3"></span> “Souls.”

<span id="fn_3449"></span>[573:3450](2010679.htm#fr_3449.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xvii-p4"></span> “Souls.”

<span id="fn_3450"></span>[573:3451](2010679.htm#fr_3450.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xvii-p5"></span> The sage commentators on this passage
have thought it incumbent to explain and, as it were, apologize for the
apparent tautology, “wise men or philosophers,—whichever you choose to
call them” (*Val.* and *Hein.*). Colloquially speaking, there is a vast
difference between being a philosopher and being a wise man. Probably
this is no slip of style nor gracious option of language such as the
editors impute, but some more or less clear distinction of technical
terms.

<span id="fn_3451"></span>[573:3452](2010679.htm#fr_3451.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xvii-p6"></span> “Spirit exhibited by these brethren in
suffering martyrdom.”

<span id="fn_3452"></span>[574:3453](2010679.htm#fr_3452.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xvii-p7"></span> *Molz.*remarks that to get any
intelligent meaning out of this mass of sounding words, the translator
often has to guess and translate very freely.

<span id="fn_3453"></span>[574:3454](2010679.htm#fr_3453.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xvii-p8"></span> \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.xvii-p8.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.xvii-p8.2"></span>Α</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.xvii-p8.3"></span>ναιρεθείσης κεραυνῶν βολαῖς</span>. This
must be regarded as a *rhetorical* rather than *historical* allusion to
the extinction of the Assyrian Empire. The critical reader will not fail
to mark occasional instances of inaccuracy and looseness of statement in
this chapter, and generally in the course of the oration.—*Bag.*\]
Valesius objects to this passage as follows in the language of *1711:*
“Neither do I well understand that. For Men, Towns, and Cities may be
destroyed by Thunder-bolts,…But, truly I can’t see how a kingdom could
be ruined by Thunder.”

<span id="fn_3454"></span>[574:3455](2010679.htm#fr_3454.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xvii-p8.4"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xvii-p9"></span> Constantine evidently believed in an
eternal Christ.

<span id="fn_3455"></span>[574:3456](2010679.htm#fr_3455.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xvii-p10"></span> “He adjudged to perish by the
self-same sentence, and shut them up in the lions’ den,” is bracketed by
Valesius and the second clause omitted by *Bag.*

<span id="fn_3456"></span>[574:3457](2010679.htm#fr_3456.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xvii-p11"></span> “Eliminated them all.” Valesius calls
attention to the characteristic slight inaccuracies of our author! e.g.
in the Biblical account (1) it was not the magi; (2) it was not
Cambyses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII](2010680.md)
