[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010573)  [Next](2010575) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lv"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.lv-p1.1"></span>Chapter LV</span>.—*Overthrow of an Idol
Temple, and Abolition of Licentious Practices, at Aphaca in Phœnicia.*

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.lv-p2.1"></span>The</span> emperor’s next care was to
kindle, as it were, a brilliant torch, by the light of which he directed
his imperial gaze around, to see if any hidden vestiges of error might
still exist. And as the keen-sighted eagle in its heavenward flight is
able to descry from its lofty height the most distant objects on the
earth, so did he, while residing in the imperial palace of his own fair
city, discover as from a watch-tower a hidden and fatal snare of souls
in the province of Phœnicia. This was a grove and temple, not situated
in the midst of any city, nor in any public place, as for splendor of
effect is generally the case, but apart from the beaten and frequented
road, at Aphaca, on part of the summit of Mount Lebanon, and dedicated
to the foul demon known by the name of Venus. It was a school of
wickedness for all the votaries of impurity, and such as destroyed their
bodies with effeminacy. Here men undeserving of the name forgot the
dignity of their sex, and propitiated the demon by their effeminate
conduct; here too unlawful commerce of women and adulterous intercourse,
with other horrible and infamous practices, were <span id="page_535">p.
535</span> <span id="iv.vi.iii.lv-Page_535"></span>perpetrated in this
temple as in a place beyond the scope and restraint of law. Meantime
these evils remained unchecked by the presence of any observer, since no
one of fair character ventured to visit such scenes. These proceedings,
however, could not escape the vigilance of our august emperor, who,
having himself inspected them with characteristic forethought, and
judging that such a temple was unfit for the light of heaven, gave
orders that the building with its offerings should be utterly destroyed.
Accordingly, in obedience to the imperial command, these engines of an
impure superstition were immediately abolished, and the hand of military
force was made instrumental in purging the place. And now those who had
heretofore lived without restraint learned self-control through the
emperor’s threat of punishment, as likewise those superstitious Gentiles
wise in their own conceit, who now obtained experimental proof of their
own folly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LVI](2010575)
