[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010104)  [Next](2010106) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVI</span>.—*Ignatius and His
Epistles.*

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p2.1"></span>At</span> that time Polycarp, <span
id="fr_905"></span>[906](#fn_905) a disciple of the apostles, was a man
of eminence in Asia, having been entrusted with the episcopate of the
church of Smyrna by those who had seen and heard the Lord.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p4"></span>2. And at the same time
Papias, <span id="fr_906"></span>[907](#fn_906) bishop of the parish of
Hierapolis, <span id="fr_907"></span>[908](#fn_907) became well known,
as did also Ignatius, who was chosen bishop of Antioch, second in
succession to Peter, and whose fame is still celebrated by a great
many. <span id="fr_908"></span>[909](#fn_908)

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p13"></span><span id="page_167">p. 167</span>
<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-Page_167"></span>3. Report says that he was
sent from Syria to Rome, and became food for wild beasts on account of
his testimony to Christ. <span id="fr_909"></span>[910](#fn_909)

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p15"></span>4. And as he made the journey
through Asia under the strictest military surveillance, he fortified the
parishes in the various cities where he stopped by oral homilies and
exhortations, and warned them above all to be especially on their guard
against the heresies that were then beginning to prevail, and exhorted
them to hold fast to the tradition of the apostles. Moreover, he thought
it necessary to attest that tradition in writing, and to give it a fixed
form for the sake of greater security.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p16"></span>5. So when he came to Smyrna, where
Polycarp was, he wrote an epistle to the church of Ephesus, <span
id="fr_910"></span>[911](#fn_910) in which he <span id="page_168">p.
168</span> <span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-Page_168"></span>mentions Onesimus,
its pastor; <span id="fr_911"></span>[912](#fn_911) and another to the
church of Magnesia, situated upon the Mæander, in which he makes mention
again of a bishop Damas; and finally one to the church of Tralles, whose
bishop, he states, was at that time Polybius.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p19"></span>6. In addition to these he wrote
also to the church of Rome, entreating them not to secure his release
from martyrdom, and thus rob him of his earnest hope. In confirmation of
what has been said it is proper to quote briefly from this epistle.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p20"></span>7. He writes as follows: <span
id="fr_912"></span>[913](#fn_912) “From Syria even unto Rome I fight
with wild beasts, by land and by sea, by night and by day, being bound
amidst ten leopards <span id="fr_913"></span>[914](#fn_913) that is, a
company of soldiers who only become worse when they are well treated. In
the midst of their wrongdoings, however, I am more fully learning
discipleship, but I am not thereby justified. <span
id="fr_914"></span>[915](#fn_914)

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p24"></span>8. May I have joy of the beasts
that are prepared for me; and I pray that I may find them ready; I will
even coax them to devour me quickly that they may not treat me as they
have some whom they have refused to touch through fear. <span
id="fr_915"></span>[916](#fn_915) And if they are unwilling, I will
compel them. Forgive me.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p26"></span>9. I know what is expedient for me.
Now do I begin to be a disciple. May naught of things visible and things
invisible envy me; <span id="fr_916"></span>[917](#fn_916) that I may
attain unto Jesus Christ. Let fire and cross and attacks of wild beasts,
let wrenching of bones, cutting of limbs, crushing of the whole body,
tortures of the devil,—let all these come upon me if only I may attain
unto Jesus Christ.”

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p28"></span>10. These things he wrote from the
above-mentioned city to the churches referred to. And when he had left
Smyrna he wrote again from Troas <span id="fr_917"></span>[918](#fn_917)
to the Philadelphians and to the church of Smyrna; and particularly to
Polycarp, who presided over the latter church. And since he knew him
well as an apostolic man, he commended to him, like a true and good
shepherd, the flock at Antioch, and besought him to care diligently for
it. <span id="fr_918"></span>[919](#fn_918)

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p31"></span>11. And the same man, writing to
the Smyrnæans, used the following words concerning Christ, taken I know
not whence: <span id="fr_919"></span>[920](#fn_919) “But I know and
believe that he was in the flesh after the resurrection. And when he
came to Peter and his companions he said to them, Take, handle me, and
see that I am not an incorporeal spirit. <span
id="fr_920"></span>[921](#fn_920) And immediately they touched him and
believed.” <span id="fr_921"></span>[922](#fn_921)

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p35"></span>12. Irenæus also knew of his
martyrdom and mentions his epistles in the following words: <span
id="fr_922"></span>[923](#fn_922) “As one of our people said, when he
was condemned to the beasts on account of his testimony unto God, I am
God’s wheat, and by the teeth of wild beasts am I ground, that I may be
found pure bread.”

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p37"></span>13. Polycarp also mentions these
letters in the epistle to the Philippians which is ascribed to
him. <span id="fr_923"></span>[924](#fn_923) His words are as
follows: <span id="fr_924"></span>[925](#fn_924) “I exhort all of you,
therefore, to be obedient and to practice all patience such as ye saw
with your own eyes not only in the blessed Ignatius and Rufus and
Zosimus, <span id="fr_925"></span>[926](#fn_925) but also in others from
among yourselves as well as in Paul himself and the rest of the
apostles; being persuaded that all these ran not in vain, but in faith
and righteousness, and that they are gone to their rightful place beside
the Lord, with whom also they suffered. For they loved not the present
world, but him that died for our sakes and was raised by God for us.”

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p41"></span>14. And afterwards he adds: <span
id="fr_926"></span>[927](#fn_926) “You have written to me, both you and
Ignatius, that if any one go to Syria he may carry with him the letters
from you. And this I will do if I have a suitable opportunity, either I
myself or one whom I send to be an ambassador for you also.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p43"></span>15. The epistles of Ignatius which
were sent to us by him and the others which we had with us we sent to
you as you gave charge. They are appended to this epistle, and from them
you will be able <span id="page_169">p. 169</span> <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-Page_169"></span>to derive great advantage. For they
comprise faith and patience, and every kind of edification that
pertaineth to our Lord.” So much concerning Ignatius. But he was
succeeded by Heros <span id="fr_927"></span>[928](#fn_927) in the
episcopate of the church of Antioch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_905"></span>[166:906](2010105.htm#fr_905) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p3"></span> On Polycarp, see Bk. IV. chap. 14,
note 5.

<span id="fn_906"></span>[166:907](2010105.htm#fr_906) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p5"></span> Of the life of Papias, bishop of
Hierapolis, we know very little. He is mentioned by Irenæus, *Adv. Hær.*
V. 33. 3 and 4, who informs us that he was a companion of Polycarp and a
hearer of the apostle John. The latter statement is in all probability
incorrect (see chap. 39. note 4): but there is no reason to question the
truth of the former. Papias’ dates we cannot ascertain with any great
degree of accuracy. A notice in the *Chron. Paschale,* which makes him a
martyr and connects his death with that of Polycarp, assigning both to
the year 164 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> has been shown by Lightfoot
(*Contemp. Review,* 1875, II. p. 381) to rest upon a confusion of names,
and to be, therefore, entirely untrustworthy. We learn, however, from
chap. 39, below, that Papias was acquainted with personal followers of
the Lord (e.g. with Aristion and the “presbyter John”), and also with
the daughters of Philip. He must, therefore, have reached years of
maturity before the end of the first century. On the other hand, the
five books of his *Expositions* cannot have been written very long
before the middle of the second century, for some of the extant
fragments seem to show traces of the existence of Gnosticism in a
somewhat advanced form at the time he wrote. With these data we shall
not be far wrong in saying that he was born in the neighborhood of 70
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p5.2"></span>a.d.</span>, and
died before the middle of the second century. He was a pronounced
chiliast (see chap. 39, note 19), and according to Eusebius, a man of
limited understanding (see chap. 39, note 20); but the claim of the
Tübingen school that he was an Ebionite is not supported by extant
evidence (see Lightfoot, *ibid.* p. 384). On the writings of Papias, see
below, chap. 39, note 1.

<span id="fn_907"></span>[166:908](2010105.htm#fr_907) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p6"></span> Four <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p6.1"></span>mss.</span> insert at this point the
words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p6.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p6.3"></span>νὴρ τὰ π€ντα ὅτι μ€λιστα λογιώτατος καὶ
τῆς γραφῆς εἰδήμων</span> (“a man of the greatest learning in all lines
and well versed in the Scriptures”), which are accepted by Heinichen,
Closs, and Crusè. The large majority of the best <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p6.4"></span>mss.</span>, however, supported by
Rufinus, and followed by Valesius (in his notes), Stroth, Laemmer,
Burton, and the German translator, Stigloher, omit the words, which are
undoubtedly to be regarded as an interpolation, intended perhaps to
offset the derogatory words used by Eusebius in respect to Papias in
chap. 39, §13. In discussing the genuineness of these words, critics
(among them Heinichen) have concerned themselves too much with the
question whether the opinion of Papias expressed here contradicts that
expressed in chap. 39, and therefore, whether Eusebius *can* have
written these words. Even if it be possible to reconcile the two
passages and to show that Papias may have been a learned man, while at
the same time he was of “limited judgment,” as Eusebius informs us, the
fact nevertheless remains that the weight of <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p6.5"></span>ms.</span> authority is heavily against
the genuineness of the words, and that it is much easier to understand
the interpolation than the omission of such an expression in praise of
one of the apostolic Fathers, especially when the lack of any
commendation here and in chap. 39 must be unpleasantly noticeable.

<span id="fn_908"></span>[166:909](2010105.htm#fr_908) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p6.6"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p7"></span> Eusebius follows what was
undoubtedly the oldest tradition in making Evodius the first bishop of
Antioch, and Ignatius the second (see above, chap. 22, note 2). Granting
the genuineness of the shorter Greek recension of the Ignatian epistles
(to be mentioned below), the fact that Ignatius was bishop of the church
of Antioch in Syria is established by *Ep. ad Rom.* 9, compared with *ad
Smyr.* 11 and *ad Polycarp.* 7. If the genuineness of the epistles be
denied, these passages seem to prove at least his connection with the
church of Antioch and his influential position in it, for otherwise the
forgery of the epistles under his name would be inconceivable.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p8"></span>There are few more prominent figures
in early Church history than Ignatius, and yet there are few about whom
we have less unquestioned knowledge. He is known in history
pre-eminently as a martyr. The greater part of his life is buried in
complete obscurity. It is only as a man condemned to death for his
profession of Christianity that he comes out into the light, and it is
with him in this character and with the martyrdom which followed that
tradition has busied itself. There are extant various Acts of the
Martyrdom of St. Ignatius which contain detailed accounts of his death,
but these belong to the fourth and subsequent centuries, are quite
contradictory in their statements, and have been conclusively proved to
be utterly unreliable and to furnish no trustworthy information on the
subject in hand. From writers before Eusebius we have but four notices
of Ignatius (Polycarp’s *Ep. ad Phil.* 9, 13; Irenæus’ *Adv. Hær.* V.
18. 3, quoted below; Origen, *Prol. in Cant.,* and *Hom. VI. in Luc.*).
These furnish us with very little information. If the notice in
Polycarp’s epistle be genuine (and though it has been widely attacked,
there is no good reason to doubt it), it furnishes us with our earliest
testimony to the martyrdom of a certain Ignatius and to the existence of
epistles written by him. Irenæus does not name Ignatius, but he
testifies to the existence of the Epistle to the Romans which bears his
name, and to the martyrdom of the author of that epistle. Origen informs
us that Ignatius, the author of certain epistles, was second bishop of
the church of Antioch and suffered martyrdom at Rome. Eusebius, in the
present chapter, is the first one to give us an extended account of
Ignatius, and his account contains no information beyond what he might
have drawn from the Ignatian epistles themselves as they lay before him,
except the statements, already made by Origen, that Ignatius was the
second bishop of Antioch and suffered martyrdom at Rome. The former
statement must have rested on a tradition, at least in part, independent
of the epistles (for they imply only the fact of his Antiochian
episcopacy, without specifying the time); the latter might have arisen
from the epistles themselves (in which it is clearly stated that the
writer is on his way to Rome to suffer martyrdom), for of course it
would be natural to assume that his expectation was realized.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p9"></span>The connection in which Eusebius
records the martyrdom implies that he believed that it took place in the
reign of Trajan, and in his *Chronicle* he gives precise dates for the
beginning of his episcopate (the 212th Olympiad, i.e. 69–72 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p9.1"></span>a.d.</span>) and for
his martyrdom (the tenth year of Trajan, i.e. 107 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p9.2"></span>a.d.</span>).
Subsequent notices of Ignatius are either quite worthless or are based
solely upon the epistles themselves or upon the statements of Eusebius.
The information, independent of the epistles, which has reached us from
the time of Eusebius or earlier, consequently narrows itself down to the
report that Ignatius was second bishop of Antioch, and that he was
bishop from about 70 to 107 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p9.3"></span>a.d.</span> The former date may be
regarded as entirely unreliable. Even were it granted that there could
have been a bishop at the head of the Antiochian church at so early a
date (and there is no warrant for such a supposition), it would
nevertheless be impossible to place any reliance upon the date given by
Eusebius, as it is impossible to place any reliance upon the dates given
for the so-called bishops of other cities during the first century (see
Bk. IV. chap. 1, note 1). But the date of Ignatius’ martyrdom given by
Eusebius seems at first sight to rest upon a more reliable tradition,
and has been accepted by many scholars as correct. Its accuracy,
however, has been impugned, especially by Zahn and Lightfoot, who leave
the date of Ignatius’ death uncertain, claiming simply that he died
under Trajan; and by Harnack, who puts his death into the reign of
Hadrian. We shall refer to this again further on. Meanwhile, since the
information which we have of Ignatius, independent of the Ignatian
epistles, is so small in amount, we are obliged to turn to those
epistles for our chief knowledge of his life and character.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p10"></span>But at this point a difficulty
confronts us. There are extant three different recensions of epistles
ascribed to Ignatius. Are any of them genuine, and if so, which? The
first, or longer Greek recension, as it is called, consists of fifteen
epistles, which were first published in the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries. Of these fifteen, eight are clearly spurious, and seven are
at least largely interpolated. The genuineness of the former and the
integrity of the latter now find no defenders among scholars. The
second, or shorter Greek recension, contains seven of the fifteen
epistles of the longer recension, in a much shorter form. Their titles
are the same that are given by Eusebius in this chapter. They were first
discovered and published in the seventeenth century. The third, or
Syriac recension, contains three of these seven epistles (to Polycarp,
to the Ephesians, and to the Romans), in a still shorter form, and was
discovered in the present century. Since its discovery, opinions have
been divided between it and the shorter Greek recension; but the defense
of the genuineness of the latter by Zahn and Lightfoot may be regarded
as finally settling the matter, and establishing the originality of the
shorter Greek recension as over against that represented by the Syriac
version. The former, therefore, alone comes into consideration in
discussing the genuineness of the Ignatian epistles. Their genuineness
is still stoutly denied by some; but the evidence in their favor,
external and internal, is too strong to be set aside; and since the
appearance of Lightfoot’s great work, candid scholars almost unanimously
admit that the question is settled, and their genuineness triumphantly
established. The great difficulties which have stood in the way of the
acceptance of the epistles are, first and chiefly, the highly developed
form of church government which they reveal; and secondly, the attacks
upon heresy contained in them. Both of these characteristics seem to
necessitate a date later than the reign of Trajan, the traditional time
of Ignatius’ martyrdom. Harnack regards these two difficulties as very
serious, if not absolutely fatal to the supposition that the epistles
were written during the reign of Trajan; but in a very keen tract,
entitled *Die Zeit des Ignatius* (Leipzig, 1878), he has endeavored to
show that the common tradition that Ignatius suffered martyrdom under
Trajan is worthless, and he therefore brings the martyrdom down into the
reign of Hadrian, and thus does away with most of the internal
difficulties which beset the acceptance of the epistles. Whether or not
Harnack’s explanation of Eusebius’ chronology of the Antiochian bishops
be accepted as correct (and the number of its adherents is not great),
he has, at least, shown that the tradition that Ignatius suffered
martyrdom under Trajan is not as strong as it has been commonly supposed
to be, and that it is possible to question seriously its reliability.
Lightfoot, who discusses Harnack’s theory at considerable length (II. p.
450–469), rejects it, and maintains that Ignatius died sometime during
the reign of Trajan, though, with Zahn and Harnack, he gives up the
traditional date of 107 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p10.1"></span>a.d.</span>, which is found in the
*Chronicle* of Eusebius, and has been very commonly accepted as
reliable. Lightfoot, however, remarks that the genuineness of the
epistles is much more certain than the chronology of Ignatius, and that,
therefore, if it is a question between the rejection of the epistles and
the relegation of Ignatius’ death to the reign of Hadrian (which he,
however, denies), the latter alternative must be chosen without
hesitation. A final decision upon this knotty point has not yet been,
and perhaps never will be, reached; but Harnack’s theory that the
epistles were written during the reign of Hadrian deserves even more
careful consideration than it has yet received.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p11"></span>Granting the genuineness of the
Ignatian epistles, we are still in possession of no great amount of
information in regard to his life. We know from them only that he was
bishop of the church of Antioch in Syria, and had been condemned to
martyrdom, and that he was, at the time of their composition, on his way
to Rome to suffer death in the arena. His character and opinions,
however, are very clearly exhibited in his writings. To quote from
Schaff, “Ignatius stands out in history as the ideal of a Catholic
martyr, and as the earliest advocate of the hierarchical principle in
both its good and its evil points. As a writer, he is remarkable for
originality, freshness, and force of ideas, and for terse, sparkling,
and sententious style; but in apostolic simplicity and soundness, he is
inferior to Clement and Polycarp, and presents a stronger contrast to
the epistles of the New Testament. Clement shows the calmness, dignity,
and governmental wisdom of the Roman character. Ignatius glows with the
fire and impetuosity of the Greek and Syrian temper which carries him
beyond the bounds of sobriety. He was a very uncommon man, and made a
powerful impression upon his age. He is the incarnation, as it were, of
the three closely connected ideas: the glory of martyrdom, the
omnipotence of episcopacy, and the hatred of heresy and schism.
Hierarchical pride and humility, Christian charity and churchly
exclusiveness, are typically represented in Ignatius.”

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p12"></span>The literature on Ignatius and the
Ignatian controversy is very extensive. The principal editions to be
consulted are Cureton’s *The Ancient Syriac Version of the Epistles of
St. Ignatius to St. Polycarp, the Ephesians, and the Romans,* with
English translation and notes (the *editio princeps* of the Syriac
version), London and Berlin, 1845; Zahn’s *Ignatii et Polycarpi
Epistulæ, Martyria fragmenta,* Lips. 1876 (*Patrum Apostolicorum Opera,*
ed. Gebhardt, Harnack, and Zahn, Vol. II); Bishop Lightfoot’s *St.
Ignatius and St. Polycarp* (*The Apostolic Fathers,* Part II.), London,
1885. This edition (in two volumes) is the most complete and exhaustive
edition of Ignatius’ epistles which has yet appeared, and contains a
very full and able discussion of all questions connected with Ignatius
and his writings. It contains the text of the longer Greek recension and
of the Syriac version, in addition to that of the seven genuine
epistles, and practically supersedes all earlier editions. An English
translation of all the epistles of Ignatius (Syriac and Greek, in both
recensions) is given in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers* (Am. ed.), Vol. I. pp.
45–126. The principal discussions which it is necessary to refer to here
are those of Lightfoot in his edition of the Ignatian epistles just
referred to; Zahn’s *Ignatius von Antiochien,* Gotha, 1873 (very full
and able); Harnack’s *Die Zeit des Ignatius,* Leipzig, 1878; and the
reviews of Lightfoot’s edition contributed by Harnack to the
*Expositor,* December, 1885, January and March, 1886. For a more
extended list of works on the subject, and for a brief review of the
whole matter, see Schaff’s *Church History,* Vol. II. p. 651–664.

<span id="fn_909"></span>[167:910](2010105.htm#fr_909) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p14"></span> That Ignatius was on his way from
Syria to Rome, under condemnation for his testimony to Christ, and that
he was expecting to be cast to the wild beasts upon reaching Rome,
appears from many passages of the epistles themselves. Whether the
tradition, as Eusebius calls it, that he actually did suffer martyrdom
at Rome was independent of the epistles, or simply grew out of the
statements made in them, we cannot tell. Whichever is the case, we may
regard the tradition as reliable. That he suffered martyrdom somewhere
is too well attested to be doubted for a moment; and there exists no
tradition in favor of any other city as the place of his martyrdom,
except a late one reported by John Malalas, which names Antioch as the
place. This is accepted by Volkmar and by the author of *Supernatural
Religion,* but its falsity has been conclusively shown by Zahn (see his
edition of the Ignatian epistles, p. xii. 343, 381).

<span id="fn_910"></span>[167:911](2010105.htm#fr_910) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p17"></span> The seven genuine epistles of
Ignatius (all of which are mentioned by Eusebius in this chapter) fall
into two groups, four having been written from one place and three from
another. The first four—to the *Ephesians, Magnesians, Trallians,* and
*Romans*—were written from Smyrna, while Ignatius was on his way to
Rome, as we can learn from notices in the epistles themselves, and as is
stated below by Eusebius, who probably took his information from the
statements of the epistles, as we take ours. Ephesus, Magnesia, and
Tralles lay to the south of Smyrna, on one of the great highways of Asia
Minor. But Ignatius was taken by a road which lay further north, passing
through Philadelphia and Sardis (see Lightfoot, I. 33 sq.). and thus did
not visit the three cities to which he now sends epistles from Smyrna.
The four epistles written from Smyrna contain no indication of the
chronological order in which they were written, and whether Eusebius in
his enumeration followed the manuscript of the epistles which he used
(our present <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p17.1"></span>mss.</span> give an entirely different
order, which is not at all chronological and does not even keep the two
groups distinct), or whether he exercised his own judgment, we do not
know.

<span id="fn_911"></span>[168:912](2010105.htm#fr_911) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p18"></span> Of this Onesimus, and of Damas and
Polybius mentioned just below, we know nothing more.

<span id="fn_912"></span>[168:913](2010105.htm#fr_912) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p21"></span> Ignatius, *Ep. ad Rom.* chap. 5.

<span id="fn_913"></span>[168:914](2010105.htm#fr_913) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p22.1"></span>λεοπ€ρδοις</span>. This is the earliest
use of this word in any extant writing, and an argument has been drawn
from this fact against the authenticity of the epistle. For a careful
discussion of the matter, see Lightfoot’s edition, Vol. II. p. 212.

<span id="fn_914"></span>[168:915](2010105.htm#fr_914) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p23"></span> Compare <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p23.1"></span>[1 Cor. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#004)<span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p23.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_915"></span>[168:916](2010105.htm#fr_915) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p25"></span> Compare the instances of this
mentioned by Eusebius in Bk. V. chap. I, §42, and in Bk. VIII. chap. 7.

<span id="fn_916"></span>[168:917](2010105.htm#fr_916) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p27"></span> The translation of this sentence
is Lightfoot’s, who prefers with Rufinus and the Syriac to read the
optative <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p27.1"></span>ζηλώσαι</span> instead of the
infinitive <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p27.2"></span>ζηλῶσαι</span>, which is found in most
of the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p27.3"></span>mss.</span> and is given by Heinichen
and the majority of the other editors. The sense seems to require, as
Lightfoot asserts, the optative rather than the infinitive.

<span id="fn_917"></span>[168:918](2010105.htm#fr_917) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p29"></span> That Troas was the place from
which Ignatius wrote to the Philadelphians, to the Smyrnæans, and to
Polycarp is clear from indications in the epistles themselves. The
chronological order in which the three were written is uncertain. He had
visited both churches upon his journey to Troas and had seen Polycarp in
Smyrna.

<span id="fn_918"></span>[168:919](2010105.htm#fr_918) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p30"></span> See *Ep. ad Polycarp.* chap. 7.

<span id="fn_919"></span>[168:920](2010105.htm#fr_919) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p32"></span> *Ep. ad Smyr.* chap. 3. Jerome,
quoting this passage from Ignatius in his *de vir. ill.* 16, refers it
to the gospel which had lately been translated by him (according to *de
vir. ill.* 3), viz.: the *Gospel of the Nazarenes* (or the *Gospel
according to the Hebrews*). In his *Comment. in Isaiam*, Bk. XVIII.
introd., Jerome quotes the same passage again, referring it to the same
gospel (*Evangelium quod Hebræorum lectitant Nazaræi*). But in Origen
*de prin.* præf. 8, the phrase is quoted as taken from the *Teaching of
Peter* (“*qui Petri doctrina apellatur*”). Eusebius’ various references
to the Gospel according to the Hebrews show that he was personally
acquainted with it (see above, chap. 25, note 24), and knowing his great
thoroughness in going through the books which he had access to, it is
impossible to suppose that if this passage quoted from Ignatius were in
the Gospel according to the Hebrews he should not have known it. We seem
then to be driven to the conclusion that the passage did not originally
stand in the Gospel according to the Hebrews, but was later incorporated
either from the *Teaching of Peter,* in which Origen found it, or from
some common source or oral tradition.

<span id="fn_920"></span>[168:921](2010105.htm#fr_920) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p33.1"></span>δαιμόνιον ἀσώματον</span>.

<span id="fn_921"></span>[168:922](2010105.htm#fr_921) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p34"></span> Compare <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p34.1"></span>[Luke xxiv.
39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039)<span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p34.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_922"></span>[168:923](2010105.htm#fr_922) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p36"></span> Irenæus, *Adv. Hær.* V. 28. 4.

<span id="fn_923"></span>[168:924](2010105.htm#fr_923) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p38"></span> On Polycarp’s epistle to the
Philippians, see Bk. IV. chap. 14, note 16.

<span id="fn_924"></span>[168:925](2010105.htm#fr_924) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p39"></span> Polycarp, *Ep. ad Phil.* chap. 9.

<span id="fn_925"></span>[168:926](2010105.htm#fr_925) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p40"></span> Of these men, Rufus and Zosimus,
we know nothing.

<span id="fn_926"></span>[168:927](2010105.htm#fr_926) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p42"></span> Polycarp, *Ep. ad Phil.* chap. 13.
The genuineness of this chapter, which bears such strong testimony to
the Ignatian epistles, has been questioned by some scholars, but without
good grounds. See below, Bk. IV. chap. 14, note 16.

<span id="fn_927"></span>[169:928](2010105.htm#fr_927) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p44"></span> According to Eusebius’ *Chronicle*
Heros became bishop of Antioch in the tenth year of Trajan (107 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p44.1"></span>a.d.</span>), and was
succeeded by Cornelius in the twelfth year of Hadrian (128 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.xxxvi-p44.2"></span>a.d.</span>). In the
*History* he is mentioned only once more (Bk. IV. chap. 20), and no
dates are given. The dates found in the *Chronicle* are entirely
unreliable (see on the dates of all the early Antiochian bishops,
Harnack’s *Zeit des Ignatius*). Of Heros himself we have no trustworthy
information. His name appears in the later martyrologies, and one of the
spurious Ignatian epistles is addressed to him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVII](2010106)
