[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010043)  [Next](2010045.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.—</span>*How Tiberius was
affected when informed by Pilate concerning Christ.*

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.iii-p2.1"></span>And</span> when the wonderful resurrection
and ascension of our Saviour were already noised abroad, in accordance
with an ancient custom which prevailed among the rulers of the
provinces, of reporting to the emperor the novel occurrences which took
place in them, in order that nothing might escape him, Pontius Pilate
informed Tiberius <span id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267.md) of the reports
which were noised abroad through all Palestine concerning the
resurrection of our Saviour Jesus from the dead.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p4"></span>2. He gave an account also of other
wonders which he had learned of him, and how, after his death, having
risen from the dead, he was now believed by many to be a God. <span
id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268.md) They say that Tiberius referred the
matter to the Senate, <span id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269.md) but that
they rejected it, ostensibly because they had not first examined into
the matter (for an ancient law prevailed <span id="page_106">p.
106</span> <span id="iii.vii.iii-Page_106"></span>that no one should be
made a God by the Romans except by a vote and decree of the Senate), but
in reality because the saving teaching of the divine Gospel did not need
the confirmation and recommendation of men.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p7"></span>3. But although the Senate of the
Romans rejected the proposition made in regard to our Saviour, Tiberius
still retained the opinion which he had held at first, and contrived no
hostile measures against Christ. <span id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270.md)

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p9"></span>4. These things are recorded by
Tertullian, <span id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271.md) a man well versed in
the laws of the Romans, <span id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272.md) and in
other respects of high repute, and one of those especially distinguished
in Rome. <span id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273.md) In his apology for the
Christians, <span id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274.md) which was written by
him in the Latin language, and has been translated into Greek, <span
id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275.md) he writes as follows: <span
id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276.md)

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p16"></span>5. “But in order that we may give an
account of these laws from their origin, it was an ancient decree <span
id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277.md) that no one should be consecrated a
God by the emperor until the Senate had expressed its approval. Marcus
Aurelius did thus concerning a certain idol, Alburnus. <span
id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278.md) And this is a point in favor of our
doctrine, <span id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279.md) that among you divine
dignity is conferred by human decree. If a God does not please a man he
is not made a God. Thus, according to this custom, it is necessary for
man to be gracious to God.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p21"></span>6. Tiberius, therefore, under whom the
name of Christ made its entry into the world, when this doctrine was
reported to him from Palestine, where it first began, communicated with
the Senate, making it clear to them that he was pleased with the
doctrine. <span id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280.md) But the Senate, since
it had not itself proved the matter, rejected it. But Tiberius continued
to hold his own opinion, and threatened death to the accusers of the
Christians.” <span id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281.md) Heavenly providence
had wisely instilled this into his mind in order that the doctrine of
the Gospel, unhindered at its beginning, might spread in all directions
throughout the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_267"></span>[105:268](2010044.htm#fr_267.md) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p3"></span> That Pilate made an official report to
Tiberius is stated also by Tertullian (*Apol.* 21), and is in itself
quite probable. Justin Martyr (*Apol.* I. 35 and *Apol.* I. 48) mentions
certain *Acts of Pilate* as well known in his day, but the so-called
*Acts of Pilate* which are still extant in various forms are spurious,
and belong to a much later period. They are very fanciful and curious.
The most important of these *Acts* is that which is commonly known under
the title of the *Gospel of Nicodemus.* There are also extant numerous
spurious epistles of Pilate addressed to Herod, to Tiberius, to
Claudius, &c. The extant Acts and Epistles are collected in
Tischendorf’s *Evang. Apoc.,* and most of them are translated by Cowper
in his *Apocryphal Gospels.* See also the *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* Am.
ed., VIII. p. 416 sqq. Compare the excellent article of Lipsius upon the
Apocryphal Gospels in the *Dict. of Christ. Biog.* II. p. 707 sqq., also
the Prolegomena of Tischendorf, p. lxii sqq.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[105:269](2010044.htm#fr_268.md) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p5"></span> The existing *Report of Pilate*
(translated in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers*, *ibid*. p. 460, 461) answers
well to Eusebius’ description, containing as it does a detailed account
of Christ’s miracles and of his resurrection. According to Tischendorf,
however, it is in its present form of a much later date, but at the same
time is very likely based upon the form which Eusebius saw, and has been
changed by interpolations and additions. See the Prolegomena of
Tischendorf referred to in the previous note.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[105:270](2010044.htm#fr_269.md) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p6"></span> See below, note 12.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[106:271](2010044.htm#fr_270.md) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p8"></span> That Tiberius did not persecute the
Christians is a fact; but this was simply because they attracted no
notice during his reign, and not because of his respect for them or of
his belief in Christ.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[106:272](2010044.htm#fr_271.md) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p10"></span> Tertullian was born in Carthage about
the middle of the second century. The common opinion is that he was born
about 160, but Lipsius pushes the date back toward the beginning of the
fifties, and some even into the forties. For a recent study of the
subject, see Ernst Nöldechen in the *Zeitschrift für wissenschaftliche
Theologie,* 1886, Heft 2. He concludes that he was born about 150 and
lived until about 230. Tertullian’s father was a Roman centurion, and he
himself became a lawyer and rhetorician in Rome. He was converted to
Christianity probably between 180 and 190, and according to Jerome,
became a presbyter and continued as such until middle life (whether in
Rome or in Carthage we cannot tell; probably in the latter, for he
certainly spent the later years of his life, while he was a Montanist,
in Carthage, and also a considerable part of his earlier life, as his
writings indicate), when he went over to Montanism (probably about 200
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.vii.iii-p10.1"></span>a.d.</span>), and
died at an advanced age (220+). That he was a presbyter rests only upon
the authority of Jerome (*de vir. ill.* 53), and is denied by some Roman
Catholic historians in the interest of clerical celibacy, for Tertullian
was a married man. He wrote a great number of works,—apologetic,
polemic, and practical—a few in Greek, but most of them in Latin,—and
many of the Latin ones are still extant. The best edition of them is by
Oehler, Leipzig, 1853, in three volumes. Vol. III. contains valuable
dissertations upon the life and works of Tertullian by various writers.
An English translation of his works is given in the *Ante-Nicene
Fathers,* Vols. III. and IV. 1–125. Our main sources for a knowledge of
his life are his own writings, and Jerome’s *de vir. ill.* chap. 53. For
a fuller account of Tertullian, see any of the larger Church histories,
and especially a good monograph by A. Hauck, *Tertullian’s Leben und
Schriften,* Erlangen, 1877. For the literature, see Schaff’s *Church
Hist.* II. p. 818.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[106:273](2010044.htm#fr_272.md) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p11"></span> His accurate acquaintance with the
laws of the Romans is not very conspicuous in his writings. His books
lead us to think that as a lawyer he must have been noted rather for
brilliancy and fertility of resource than for erudition. And this
conclusion is borne out by his own description of his life before his
conversion, which seems to have been largely devoted to pleasure, and
thus to have hardly admitted the acquirement of extensive and accurate
learning.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[106:274](2010044.htm#fr_273.md) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.iii-p12.1"></span>Καὶ τῶν μ€λιστα ἐπὶ ῾Ρώμης λαμπρῶν</span>.
Rufinus translates *inter nostros Scriptores celeberrimus,* and Valesius
*inter Latinos Scriptores celeberrimus,* taking <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.iii-p12.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.iii-p12.3"></span>πὶ ῾Ρώμης</span> to
mean the *Latin language*. But this is not the literal translation of
the words of Eusebius. He says expressly, *one of the especially
distinguished men in Rome.* From his work *de cultu Feminarum,* Lib. I.
chap. 7, we know that he had spent some time in Rome, and his
acquaintance with the Roman records would imply a residence of some
duration there. He very likely practiced law and rhetoric in Rome until
his conversion.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[106:275](2010044.htm#fr_274.md) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p12.4"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p13"></span> Tertullian’s *Apology* ranks first
among his extant works, and is “one of the most beautiful monuments of
the heroic age of the Church” (Schaff). The date of its composition is
greatly disputed, though it must have been written during the reign of
Septimius Severus, and almost all scholars are agreed in assigning it to
the years 197–204. Since the investigations of Bonwetsch (*Die Schriften
Tertullian’s,* Bonn, 1878), of Harnack (in the *Zeitschrift für
Kirchengeschichte,* 1878, p. 572 sqq.), and of Nöldechen (in Gebhardt
and Harnack’s *Texte und Untersuchungen,* Band V. Heft 2), all of whom
agree in assigning its composition to the latter part (summer or fall)
of the year 197, its date may be accepted as practically established.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[106:276](2010044.htm#fr_275.md) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p14"></span> Some have contended that Eusebius
himself translated this passage from Tertullian, but his words show
clearly enough that he quotes from an already existing translation. His
knowledge of the Latin language appears to have been very limited. He
must have had some acquaintance with it, for he translates Hadrian’s
rescript to Fundanus from Latin into Greek, as he informs us in Bk. IV.
chap. 8; but the translation of so brief and simple a piece of writing
would not require a profound knowledge of the language, and there are
good reasons for concluding that he was not a fluent Latin scholar. For
instance, the only work of Tertullian’s which he quotes is his
*Apology,* and he uses only a Greek translation of that. It is not
unnatural to conclude that the rest of Tertullian’s works, or at least
the most of them, were not translated, and that Eusebius was not enough
of a Latin scholar to be able to read them in the original with any
degree of ease. Moreover, this conclusion in regard to his knowledge of
Latin is confirmed by the small acquaintance which he shows with the
works of Latin writers in general. In fact, he does not once betray a
personal acquaintance with any of the important Latin works which had
been produced before his time, except such as existed in Greek
translations. Compare Heinichen’s note in his edition of Eusebius’
*History,* Vol. III. p. 128 sqq. The translation of Tertullian’s
*Apology* used by Eusebius was very poor, as may be seen from the
passage quoted here, and also from the one quoted in Bk. II. chap. 25,
§4. For the mistakes, however, of course not Eusebius himself, but the
unknown translator, is to be held responsible.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[106:277](2010044.htm#fr_276.md) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p15"></span> Tertullian’s *Apology,* chap. 5.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[106:278](2010044.htm#fr_277.md) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p17"></span> Havercamp remarks (in his edition of
Tertullian’s *Apology,* p. 56) that this law is stated in the second
book of Cicero’s *De Legibus* in the words: *Separatim nemo habessit
deos, neve novos; sed ne advenas nisi publice adscitos privatim
colunto.*

<span id="fn_278"></span>[106:279](2010044.htm#fr_278.md) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.iii-p18.1"></span>Μ€ρκος ᾽Αιμίλιος οὕτως περί τινος εἰδώλου
πεποίηκεν ᾽Αλβούρνου</span>. Latin: *Scit M. Æmilius de deo suo
Alburno.* In *Adv. Marcionem,* I. 18, Tertullian says, *Alioquin si sic
homo Deum commentabitur, quomodo Romulus Consum, et Tatius Cloacinam, et
Hostilius Pavorem, et Metellus Alburnum, et quidam ante hoc tempus
Antinoum; hoc aliis licebit; nos Marcionem nauclerum novimus, non regem,
nec imperatorem.*

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p19"></span>I cannot discover that this <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.iii-p19.1"></span>εἰδωλος</span> or
*Deus* Alburnus is mentioned by any other writer than Tertullian, nor do
I find a reference to him in any dictionary accessible to me.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[106:280](2010044.htm#fr_279.md) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p20"></span> Literally, “This has been done in
behalf of (or for the sake of) our doctrine” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.iii-p20.1"></span>καὶ τοῦτο ὑπὲρ τοῦ ἡμῶν λόγου
πεποίηται</span>); but the freer translation given in the text better
expresses the actual sense. The original Latin reads: *facit et hoc ad
causam nostram.*

<span id="fn_280"></span>[106:281](2010044.htm#fr_280.md) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p22"></span> This entire account bears all the
marks of untruthfulness, and cannot for a moment be thought of as
genuine. Tertullian was probably, as Neander suggests, deceived by
falsified or interpolated documents from some Christian source. He
cannot have secured his knowledge from original state records. The
falsification took place, probably, long after the time of Tiberius.
Tertullian is the first writer to mention these circumstances, and
Tertullian was not by any means a critical historian. Compare Neander’s
remarks in his *Church History,* Vol. I. p. 93 sqq. (Torrey’s
Translation).

<span id="fn_281"></span>[106:282](2010044.htm#fr_281.md) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p23"></span> Were this conduct of Tiberius a fact,
Trajan’s rescript and all subsequent imperial action upon the subject
would become inexplicable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](2010045.md)
