[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010007)  [Next](2010009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.i.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i.ii-p1"></span> §2. *Eusebius’ Birth and Training.
His Life in Cæsarea until the Outbreak of the Persecution.*

<span id="iii.iii.i.ii-p2"></span>Our author was commonly known among
the ancients as Eusebius of Cæsarea or Eusebius Pamphili. The former
designation arose from the fact that he was bishop of the church in
Cæsarea for many years; the latter from the fact that he was the
intimate friend and devoted admirer of Pamphilus, a presbyter of Cæsarea
and a martyr. Some such specific appellation was <span id="page_4">p.
4</span> <span id="iii.iii.i.ii-Page_4"></span>necessary to distinguish
him from others of the same name. Smith and Wace’s *Dictionary of
Christian Biography* mentions 137 men of the first eight centuries who
bore the name Eusebius, and of these at least forty were contemporaries
of our author. The best known among them were Eusebius of Nicomedia
(called by Arius the brother of Eusebius of Cæsarea), Eusebius of Emesa,
and Eusebius of Samosata.

<span id="iii.iii.i.ii-p3"></span>The exact date of our author’s birth
is unknown to us, but his *Ecclesiastical History* contains notices
which enable us to fix it approximately. In *H. E.* V. 28 he reports
that Paul of Samosata attempted to revive again in his day (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.i.ii-p3.1"></span>καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς</span>) the
heresy of Artemon. But Paul of Samosata was deposed from the episcopate
of Antioch in 272, and was condemned as a heretic at least as early as
268, so that Eusebius must have been born before the latter date, if his
words are to be strictly interpreted. Again, according to *H. E.* III.
28, Dionysius was bishop of Alexandria in Eusebius’ time (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.i.ii-p3.2"></span>καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς</span>). But
Dionysius was bishop from 247 or 248 to 265, and therefore if Eusebius’
words are to be interpreted strictly here as in the former case, he must
have been born before 265. On the other hand, inasmuch as his death
occurred about 340, we cannot throw his birth much earlier than 260. It
is true that the references to Paul and to Dionysius do not prove
conclusively that Eusebius was alive in their day, for his words may
have been used in a loose sense. But in *H. E.* VII. 26, just before
proceeding to give an account of Paul of Samosata, he draws the line
between his own and the preceding generation, declaring that he is now
about to relate the events of his own age (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i.ii-p3.3"></span>τὴν καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς</span>). This still further
confirms the other indications, and we shall consequently be safe in
concluding that Eusebius was born not far from the year 260 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.iii.i.ii-p3.4"></span>a.d.</span> His
birthplace cannot be determined with certainty. The fact that he is
called “Eusebius the Palestinian” by Marcellus (*Euseb. lib. adv.
Marcell*. I. 4), Basil (*Lib. ad. Amphil. de Spir. Sancto*, c. 29), and
others, does not prove that he was a Palestinian by birth; for the
epithet may be used to indicate merely his place of residence (he was
bishop of Cæsarea in Palestine for many years). Moreover, the argument
urged by Stein and Lightfoot in support of his Palestinian birth,
namely, that it was customary to elect to the episcopate of any church a
native of the city in preference to a native of some other place, does
not count for much. All that seems to have been demanded was that a man
should have been already a member of the particular church over which he
was to be made bishop, and even this rule was not universal (see
Bingham’s *Antiquities*, II. 10, 2 and 3). The fact that he was bishop
of Cæsarea therefore would at most warrant us in concluding only that he
had made his residence in Cæsarea for some time previous to his election
to that office. Nevertheless, although neither of these arguments proves
his Palestinian birth, it is very probable that he was a native of that
country, or at least of that section. He was acquainted with Syriac as
well as with Greek, which circumstance taken in connection with his
ignorance of Latin (see below, p. 47) points to the region of Syria as
his birthplace. Moreover, we learn from his own testimony that he was in
Cæsarea while still a youth (*Vita Constantini*, I. 19), and in his
epistle to the church of Cæsarea (see below, p. 16) he says that he was
taught the creed of the Cæsarean church in his childhood (or at least at
the beginning of his Christian life: <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i.ii-p3.5"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i.ii-p3.6"></span>ν τῇ κατηχήσει</span>), and that he
accepted it at baptism. It would seem therefore that he must have lived
while still a child either in Cæsarea itself, or in the neighborhood,
where its creed was in use. Although no one therefore (except Theodorus
Metochita of the fourteenth century, in his *Cap. Miscell. 17;* Migne,
*Patr. Lat.* CXLIV. 949) directly states that Eusebius was a Palestinian
by birth, we have every reason to suppose him such.

<span id="iii.iii.i.ii-p4"></span>His parents are entirely unknown.
Nicephorus Callistus (*H. E.* VI. 37) reports that his mother was a
sister of Pamphilus. He does not mention his authority for this
statement, and it is extremely unlikely, in the face of the silence of
Eusebius himself and of all other writers, that it is true. It is far
more probable that the relationship was later assumed to account for the
close intimacy of the two men. Arius, in an epistle addressed to
Eusebius of Nicomedia (contained in Theodoret’s *Hist. Eccles*. I. 5),
calls Eusebius of Cæsarea the latter’s brother. It is objected to this
that Eusebius of Nicomedia refers to Eusebius of Cæsarea on one occasion
as his <span id="page_5">p. 5</span> <span
id="iii.iii.i.ii-Page_5"></span>“master” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i.ii-p4.1"></span>τοῦ δεσπότου μου</span>, in his epistle to
Paulinus contained in Theodoret’s *Hist. Eccles*. I. 6), and that on the
other hand Eusebius of Cæsarea calls Eusebius of Nicomedia, “the great
Eusebius” (*Euseb. lib. adv. Marcell*. I. 4), both of which expressions
seem inconsistent with brotherhood. Lightfoot justly remarks that
neither the argument itself nor the objections carry much weight. The
term <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i.ii-p4.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i.ii-p4.3"></span>δελφός</span> may well have been used to
indicate merely theological or ecclesiastical association, while on the
other hand, brotherhood would not exclude the form of expression
employed by each in speaking of the other. Of more weight is the fact
that neither Eusebius himself nor any historian of that period refers to
such a relationship, and also the unlikelihood that two members of one
family should bear the same name.

<span id="iii.iii.i.ii-p5"></span>From Eusebius’ works we gather that he
must have received an extensive education both in secular philosophy and
in Biblical and theological science. Although his immense erudition was
doubtless the result of wide and varied reading continued throughout
life, it is highly probable that he acquired the taste for such reading
in his youth. Who his early instructors were we do not know, and
therefore cannot estimate the degree of their influence over him. As he
was a man, however, who cherished deep admiration for those whom he
regarded as great and good men, and as he possessed an unusually
acquisitive mind and a pliant disposition, we should naturally suppose
that his instructors must have possessed considerable influence over
him, and that his methods of study in later years must have been largely
molded by their example and precept. We see this exemplified in a
remarkable degree in the influence exerted over him by Pamphilus, his
dearest friend, and at the same time the preceptor, as it were, of his
early manhood. Certainly this great bibliopholist must have done much to
strengthen Eusebius’ natural taste for omnivorous reading, and the
opportunities afforded by his grand library for the cultivation of such
a taste were not lost. To the influence of Pamphilus, the devoted
admirer and enthusiastic champion of Origen, was doubtless due also in
large measure the deep respect which Eusebius showed for that
illustrious Father, a respect to which we owe one of the most delightful
sections of his Church History, his long account of Origen in the sixth
book, and to which in part antiquity was indebted for the elaborate
*Defense of Origen,* composed by Pamphilus and himself, but
unfortunately no longer extant. Eusebius certainly owed much to the
companionship of that eager student and noble Christian hero, and he
always recognized with deep gratitude his indebtedness to him. (Compare
the account of Pamphilus given below in Bk. VII. chap. 32, §25 sq.) The
names of his earlier instructors, who were eminently successful, at
least in fostering his thirst for knowledge, are quite unknown to us.
His abiding admiration for Plato, whom he always placed at the head of
all philosophers (see Stein, p. 6), would lead us to think that he
received at least a part of his secular training from some ardent
Platonist, while his intense interest in apologetics, which lasted
throughout his life, and which affected all his works, seems to indicate
the peculiar bent of his early Christian education. Trithemius concluded
from a passage in his *History* (VII. 32) that Eusebius was a pupil of
the learned Dorotheus of Antioch, and Valesius, Lightfoot and others are
apparently inclined to accept his conclusion. But, as Stroth remarks
(*Eusebii Kirchengeschichte,* p. xix), all that Eusebius says is that he
had heard Dorotheus expound the Scriptures in the church (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.i.ii-p5.1"></span>τούτου μετρίως τὰς
γραφὰς ἐπὶ τῆς ἐκκλησίας διηγουμένου κατηκούσαμεν</span>), that is, that
he had heard him preach. To conclude from this statement that he was a
pupil of Dorotheus is certainly quite unwarranted.

<span id="iii.iii.i.ii-p6"></span>Stroth’s suggestion that he probably
enjoyed the instruction of Meletius for seven years during the
persecution rests upon no good ground, for the passage which he relies
upon to sustain his opinion (*H. E.* VII. 32. 28) says only that
Eusebius “observed Meletius well” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i.ii-p6.1"></span>κατενοήσαμεν</span>) during those seven
years.

<span id="iii.iii.i.ii-p7"></span>In Cæsarea Eusebius was at one time a
presbyter of the church, as we may gather from his words in the epistle
to that church already referred to, where, in speaking of the creed, he
says, “As we believed and taught in the presbytery and in the episcopate
itself.” But the attempt to fix the date of his ordination to that
office is quite vain. It is commonly assumed that he <span
id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span id="iii.iii.i.ii-Page_6"></span>became
presbyter while Agapius was bishop of Cæsarea, and this is not unlikely,
though we possess no proof of it (upon Agapius see below, *H. E.* VII.
32, note 39). In his *Vita Constantini,* I. 19, Eusebius reports that he
saw Constantine for the first time in Cæsarea in the train of the
Emperor Diocletian. In his *Chron*. Eusebius reports that Diocletian
made an expedition against Egypt, which had risen in rebellion in the
year 296 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.i.ii-p7.1"></span>a.d.</span>, and Theophanes, in his
*Chron.*, says that Constantine accompanied him. It is probable
therefore that it was at this time that Eusebius first saw Constantine
in Cæsarea, when he was either on his way to Egypt, or on his way back
(see Tillemont’s *Hist. des Emp.,* IV. p. 34).

<span id="iii.iii.i.ii-p8"></span>During these years of quiet, before
the great persecution of Diocletian, which broke out in 303 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.iii.i.ii-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span>, Eusebius’
life must have been a very pleasant one. Pamphilus’ house seems to have
been a sort of rendezvous for Christian scholars, perhaps a regular
divinity school; for we learn from Eusebius’ *Martyrs in Palestine*
(Cureton’s edition, pp. 13 and 14) that he and a number of others,
including the martyr Apphianus, were living together in one house at the
time of the persecution, and that the latter was instructed in the
Scriptures by Pamphilus and acquired from him virtuous habits and
conduct. The great library of Pamphilus would make his house a natural
center for theological study, and the immense amount of work which was
done by him, or under his direction, in the reproduction of copies of
the Holy Scriptures, of Origen’s works (see Jerome’s *de vir. ill.* 75
and 81, and *contra Ruf.* I. 9), and in other literary employments of
the same kind, makes it probable that he had gathered about him a large
circle of friends and students who assisted him in his labors and
profited by his counsel and instruction. Amidst these associations
Eusebius passed his early manhood, and the intellectual stimulus thus
given him doubtless had much to do with his future career. He was above
all a literary man, and remained such to the end of his life. The
pleasant companionships of these days, and the mutual interest and
sympathy which must have bound those fellow-students and
fellow-disciples of Pamphilus very close together, perhaps had much to
do with that broad-minded spirit of sympathy and tolerance which so
characterized Eusebius in later years. He was always as far as possible
from the character of a recluse. He seems ever to have been bound by
very strong ties to the world itself and to his fellow-men. Had his
earlier days been filled with trials and hardships, with the bitterness
of disappointed hopes and unfulfilled ambitions, with harsh experiences
of others’ selfishness and treachery, who shall say that the whole
course of his life might not have been changed, and his writings have
exhibited an entirely different spirit from that which is now one of
their greatest charms? Certainly he had during these early years in
Cæsarea large opportunities for cultivating that natural trait of
admiration for other men, which was often so strong as to blind him even
to their faults, and that natural kindness which led him to see good
wherever it existed in his Christian brethren. At the same time these
associations must have had considerable influence in fostering the
apologetic temper. The pursuits of the little circle were apparently
exclusively Christian, and in that day when Christianity stood always on
its defense, it would naturally become to them a sacred duty to
contribute to that defense and to employ all their energies in the task.
It has been remarked that the apologetic temper is very noticeable in
Eusebius’ writings. It is more than that; we may say indeed in general
terms that everything he wrote was an apology for the faith. His
*History* was written avowedly with an apologetic purpose, his
*Chronicle* was composed with the same end in view. Even when
pronouncing a eulogy upon a deceased emperor he seized every possible
opportunity to draw from that emperor’s career, and from the
circumstances of his reign, arguments for the truth and grandeur of the
Christian religion. His natural temper of mind and his early training
may have had much to do with this habit of thought, but certainly those
years with Pamphilus and his friends in Cæsarea must have emphasized and
developed it.

<span id="iii.iii.i.ii-p9"></span>Another characteristic which Pamphilus
and the circle that surrounded him doubtless did something to develop in
our author was a certain superiority to the trammels of mere
traditionalism, or we might perhaps better say that they in some measure
checked the opposite tendency of <span id="page_7">p. 7</span> <span
id="iii.iii.i.ii-Page_7"></span>slavishness to the traditional which
seems to have been natural to him. Pamphilus’ deep reverence for Origen
proclaims him at once superior to that kind of narrow conservatism which
led many men as learned and doubtless as conscientious as himself to
pass severe and unconditional condemnation upon Origen and all his
teaching. The effect of championing his cause must have fostered in this
little circle, which was a very hotbed of Origenism, a contempt for the
narrow and unfair judgments of mere traditionalists, and must have led
them to seek in some degree the truth solely for its own sake, and to
become in a measure careless of its relation to the views of any school
or church. It could hardly be otherwise than that the free and fearless
spirit of Origen should leave its impress through his writings upon a
circle of followers so devoted to him as were these Cæsarean students.
Upon the impressionable Eusebius these influences necessarily operated.
And yet he brought to them no keen speculative powers, no deep
originality such as Origen himself possessed. His was essentially an
acquisitive, not a productive mind, and hence it was out of the question
that he should become a second Origen. It was quite certain that
Origen’s influence over him would weaken somewhat his confidence in the
traditional as such,—a confidence which is naturally great in such minds
as his,—but at the same time would do little to lessen the real power of
the past over him. He continued to get his truth from others, from the
great men of the past with whom he had lived and upon whose thought he
had feasted. All that he believed he had drawn from them; he produced
nothing new for himself, and his creed was a traditional creed. And yet
he had at the same time imbibed from his surroundings the habit of
questioning and even criticising the past, and, in spite of his abiding
respect for it, had learned to feel that the voice of the many is not
always the voice of truth, and that the widely and anciently accepted is
sometimes to be corrected by the clearer sight of a single man. Though
he therefore depended for all he believed so completely upon the past,
his associations had helped to free him from a slavish adherence to all
that a particular school had accepted, and had made him in some small
measure an eclectic in his relations to doctrines and opinions of
earlier generations. A notable instance of this eclecticism on his part
is seen in his treatment of the Apocalypse of John. He felt the force of
an almost universal tradition in favor of its apostolic origin, and yet
in the face of that he could listen to the doubts of Dionysius, and
could be led by his example, in a case where his own dissatisfaction
with the book acted as an incentive, almost, if not quite, to reject it
and to ascribe it to another John. Instances of a similar mode of
conduct on his part are quite numerous. While he is always a staunch
apologist for Christianity, he seldom, if ever, degenerates into a mere
partisan of any particular school or sect.

<span id="iii.iii.i.ii-p10"></span>One thing in fact which is
particularly noticeable in Eusebius’ works is the comparatively small
amount of time and space which he devotes to heretics. With his wide and
varied learning and his extensive acquaintance with the past, he had
opportunities for successful heresy hunting such as few possessed, and
yet he never was a heresy hunter in any sense. This is surprising when
we remember what a fascination this employment had for so many scholars
of his own age, and when we realize that his historical tastes and
talents would seem to mark him out as just the man for that kind of
work. May it not be that the lofty spirit of Origen, animating that
Cæsarean school, had something to do with the happy fact that he became
an apologist instead of a mere polemic, that he chose the honorable task
of writing a history of the Church instead of anticipating Epiphanius’
Panarium?

<span id="iii.iii.i.ii-p11"></span>It was not that he was not alive to
the evils of heresy. He shared with nearly all good church-men of his
age an intense aversion for those who, as he believed, had corrupted the
true Gospel of Christ. Like them he ascribed heresy to the agency of the
evil one, and was no more able than they to see any good in a man whom
he looked upon as a real heretic, or to do justice in any degree to the
error which he taught. His condemnations of heretics in his *Church
History* are most severe. Language is hardly strong enough to express
his aversion for them. And yet, although he is thus most thoroughly the
child of his age, the difference between him and most of his
contemporaries is very apparent. He mentions these heretics only to
dismiss them with dis<span id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span
id="iii.iii.i.ii-Page_8"></span>approval or condemnation. He seldom, if
ever, discusses and refutes their views. His interests lie evidently in
other directions; he is concerned with higher things. A still more
strongly marked difference between himself and many churchmen of his age
lies in his large liberality towards those of his own day who differed
with him in minor points of faith, and his comparative indifference to
the divergence of views between the various parties in the Church. In
all this we believe is to be seen not simply the inherent nature of the
man, but that nature as trained in the school of Pamphilus, the disciple
of Origen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3](2010009.md)
