[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010242)  [Next](2010244.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXV</span>.—*The Apocalypse of
John.* <span id="fr_2339"></span>[2340](#fn_2339.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p3"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>Afterward</span> he speaks in this manner
of the Apocalypse of John.

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p4"></span>“Some before us have set aside and
rejected the book altogether, criticising it chapter by chapter, and
pronouncing it without sense or argument, and maintaining that the title
is fraudulent.

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p5"></span>2. For they say that it is not the
work of John, nor is it a revelation, because it is covered thickly and
densely by a vail of obscurity. And they affirm that none of the
apostles, and none of the saints, nor any one in the Church is its
author, but that Cerinthus, who founded the sect which was called after
him the Cerinthian, desiring reputable authority for his fiction,
prefixed the name.

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p6"></span>3. For the doctrine which he taught
was this: that the kingdom of Christ will be an earthly one. And as he
was himself devoted to the pleasures of the body and altogether sensual
in his nature, he dreamed that that kingdom would consist in those
things which he desired, namely, in the delights of the belly and of
sexual passion; that is to say, in eating and drinking and marrying, and
in festivals and sacrifices and the slaying of victims, under the guise
of which he thought he could indulge his appetites with a better
grace. <span id="fr_2340"></span>[2341](#fn_2340.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p8"></span>4. “But I could not venture to reject
the book, as many brethren hold it in high esteem. But I suppose that it
is beyond my comprehension, and that there is a certain concealed and
more wonderful meaning in every part. For if I do not understand I
suspect that a deeper sense lies beneath the words.

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p9"></span>5. I do not measure and judge them by
my own reason, but leaving the more to faith I regard them as too high
for me to grasp. And I do not reject what I cannot comprehend, but
rather wonder because I do not understand it.”

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p10"></span>6. After this he examines the entire
Book of Revelation, and having proved that it is impossible to
understand it according to the literal sense, proceeds as follows:

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p11"></span>“Having finished all the prophecy, so
to speak, the prophet pronounces those blessed who shall observe it, and
also himself. For he says, ‘Blessed is he that keepeth the words of the
prophecy of this book, and I, John, who saw and heard these
things.’ <span id="fr_2341"></span>[2342](#fn_2341.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p13"></span>7. Therefore that he was called John,
and that this book is the work of one John, I do not deny. And I agree
also that it is the work of a holy and inspired man. But I cannot
readily admit that he was the apostle, the son of Zebedee, the brother
of James, by whom the Gospel of John and the Catholic Epistle <span
id="fr_2342"></span>[2343](#fn_2342.md) were written.

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p15"></span>8. For I judge from the character of
both, and the forms of expression, and the entire execution of the
book, <span id="fr_2343"></span>[2344](#fn_2343.md) that it is not his. For
<span id="page_310">p. 310</span> <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-Page_310"></span>the evangelist nowhere gives his name,
or proclaims himself, either in the Gospel or Epistle.”

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p17"></span>9. Farther on he adds:

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p18"></span>“But John never speaks as if
referring to himself, or as if referring to another person. <span
id="fr_2344"></span>[2345](#fn_2344.md) But the author of the Apocalypse
introduces himself at the very beginning: ‘The Revelation of Jesus
Christ, which he gave him to show unto his servants quickly; and he sent
and signified it by his angel unto his servant John, who bare witness of
the word of God and of his testimony, even of all things that he
saw.’ <span id="fr_2345"></span>[2346](#fn_2345.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p21"></span>10. Then he writes also an epistle:
‘John to the seven churches which are in Asia, grace be with you, and
peace.’ <span id="fr_2346"></span>[2347](#fn_2346.md) But the evangelist
did not prefix his name even to the Catholic Epistle; but without
introduction he begins with the mystery of the divine revelation itself:
‘That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have
seen with our eyes.’ <span id="fr_2347"></span>[2348](#fn_2347.md) For
because of such a revelation the Lord also blessed Peter, saying,
‘Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-Jonah, for flesh and blood hath not
revealed it unto thee, but my heavenly Father.’ <span
id="fr_2348"></span>[2349](#fn_2348.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p25"></span>11. But neither in the reputed second
or third epistle of John, though they are very short, does the name John
appear; but there is written the anonymous phrase, ‘the elder.’ <span
id="fr_2349"></span>[2350](#fn_2349.md) But this author did not consider it
sufficient to give his name once and to proceed with his work; but he
takes it up again: ‘I, John, who also am your brother and companion in
tribulation, and in the kingdom and in the patience of Jesus Christ, was
in the isle that is called Patmos for the Word of God and the testimony
of Jesus.’ <span id="fr_2350"></span>[2351](#fn_2350.md) And toward the
close he speaks thus: ‘Blessed is he that keepeth the words of the
prophecy of this book, and I, John, who saw and heard these
things.’ <span id="fr_2351"></span>[2352](#fn_2351.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p29"></span>12. “But that he who wrote these
things was called John must be believed, as he says it; but who he was
does not appear. For he did not say, as often in the Gospel, that he was
the beloved disciple of the Lord, <span
id="fr_2352"></span>[2353](#fn_2352.md) or the one who lay on his
breast, <span id="fr_2353"></span>[2354](#fn_2353.md) or the brother of
James, or the eyewitness and hearer of the Lord.

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p32"></span>13. For he would have spoken of these
things if he had wished to show himself plainly. But he says none of
them; but speaks of himself as our brother and companion, and a witness
of Jesus, and blessed because he had seen and heard the revelations.

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p33"></span>14. But I am of the opinion that
there were many with the same name as the apostle John, who, on account
of their love for him, and because they admired and emulated him, and
desired to be loved by the Lord as he was, took to themselves the same
surname, as many of the children of the faithful are called Paul or
Peter.

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p34"></span>15. For example, there is also
another John, surnamed Mark, mentioned in the Acts of the
Apostles, <span id="fr_2354"></span>[2355](#fn_2354.md) whom Barnabas and
Paul took with them; of whom also it is said, ‘And they had also John as
their attendant.’ <span id="fr_2355"></span>[2356](#fn_2355.md) But that it
is he who wrote this, I would not say. For it not written that he went
with them into Asia, but, ‘Now when Paul and his company set sail from
Paphos, they came to Perga in Pamphylia and John departing from them
returned to Jerusalem.’ <span id="fr_2356"></span>[2357](#fn_2356.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p38"></span>16. But I think that he was some
other one of those in Asia; as they say that there are two monuments in
Ephesus, each bearing the name of John. <span
id="fr_2357"></span>[2358](#fn_2357.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p40"></span>17. “And from the ideas, and from the
words and their arrangement, it may be reasonably conjectured that this
one is different from that one. <span
id="fr_2358"></span>[2359](#fn_2358.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p42"></span>18. For the Gospel and Epistle agree
with each other and begin in the same manner. The one says, ‘In the
beginning was the Word’; <span id="fr_2359"></span>[2360](#fn_2359.md) the
other, ‘That which was from the beginning.’ <span
id="fr_2360"></span>[2361](#fn_2360.md) The one: ‘And the Word was made
flesh and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the
only begotten of the Father’; <span id="fr_2361"></span>[2362](#fn_2361.md)
the other says the same things slightly altered: ‘Which we have heard,
which we have seen with our eyes; which we have looked upon and our
hands have handled of the Word of life,—and the life was
manifested.’ <span id="fr_2362"></span>[2363](#fn_2362.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p47"></span>19. For he introduces these things at
the beginning, maintaining them, as is evident from what follows, in
opposition to those who said that the Lord had not come in the flesh.
Wherefore also he carefully adds, ‘And we have seen and bear witness,
and declare unto you the eternal life which was with the Father and was
manifested unto us. That which we have seen and heard declare we unto
you also.’ <span id="fr_2363"></span>[2364](#fn_2363.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p49"></span>20. He holds to this and does not
digress from his subject, but discusses every<span id="page_311">p.
311</span> <span id="iii.xii.xxvi-Page_311"></span>thing under the same
heads and names some of which we will briefly mention.

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p50"></span>21. Any one who examines carefully
will find the phrases, ‘the life,’ ‘the light,’ ‘turning from darkness,’
frequently occurring in both; also continually, ‘truth,’ ‘grace,’ ‘joy,’
‘the flesh and blood of the Lord,’ ‘the judgment,’ ‘the forgiveness of
sins,’ ‘the love of God toward us,’ the ‘commandment that we love one
another,’ that we should ‘keep all the commandments’; the ‘conviction of
the world, of the Devil, of Anti-Christ,’ the ‘promise of the Holy
Spirit,’ the ‘adoption of God,’ the ‘faith continually required of us,’
‘the Father and the Son,’ occur everywhere. In fact, it is plainly to be
seen that one and the same character marks the Gospel and the Epistle
throughout.

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p51"></span>22. But the Apocalypse is different
from these writings and foreign to them; not touching, nor in the least
bordering upon them; almost, so to speak, without even a syllable in
common with them.

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p52"></span>23. Nay more, the Epistle—for I pass
by the Gospel—does not mention nor does it contain any intimation of the
Apocalypse, nor does the Apocalypse of the Epistle. But Paul, in his
epistles, gives some indication of his revelations, <span
id="fr_2364"></span>[2365](#fn_2364.md) though he has not written them out
by themselves.

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p54"></span>24. “Moreover, it can also be shown
that the diction of the Gospel and Epistle differs from that of the
Apocalypse.

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p55"></span>25. For they were written not only
without error as regards the Greek language, but also with elegance in
their expression, in their reasonings, and in their entire structure.
They are far indeed from betraying any barbarism or solecism, or any
vulgarism whatever. For the writer had, as it seems, both the requisites
of discourse,—that is, the gift of knowledge and the gift of
expression,—as the Lord had bestowed them both upon him.

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p56"></span>26. I do not deny that the other
writer saw a revelation and received knowledge and prophecy. I perceive,
however, that his dialect and language are not accurate Greek, but that
he uses barbarous idioms, and, in some places, solecisms.

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p57"></span>27. It is unnecessary to point these
out here, for I would not have any one think that I have said these
things in a spirit of ridicule, for I have said what I have only with
the purpose of showing clearly the difference between the writings.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2339"></span>[309:2340](2010243.htm#fr_2339.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p2"></span> Upon the Apocalypse in the early
Church, and especially upon Dionysius’ treatment of it, see above, Bk.
III. chap. 24, note 20.

<span id="fn_2340"></span>[309:2341](2010243.htm#fr_2340.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p7"></span> A portion of this extract (§§2 and 3)
has been already quoted by Eusebius in Bk. III. chap. 28.

<span id="fn_2341"></span>[309:2342](2010243.htm#fr_2341.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p12"></span> <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p12.1"></span>[Rev.
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p12.2"></span>. Dionysius punctuates this passage
peculiarly, and thus interprets it quite differently from all our
versions of the Book of Revelation. The Greek text as given by him
agrees with our received text of the Apocalypse; but the words <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p12.3"></span>κἀγὼ ᾽Ιω€ννης ὁ
ἀκούων καὶ βλέπων ταῦτα</span>, which Dionysius connects with the
preceding, should form an independent sentence: “And I, John, am he that
heard and saw these things.”

<span id="fn_2342"></span>[309:2343](2010243.htm#fr_2342.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p14"></span> On the Gospel and Epistle, see Bk.
III. chap. 24, notes 1 and 18.

<span id="fn_2343"></span>[309:2344](2010243.htm#fr_2343.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p16.1"></span>τῆς τοῦ βιβλίου διεξαγωγῆς
λεγομένης</span>. Valesius considers <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p16.2"></span>διεξαγωγή</span> equivalent to
*dispositionem* or <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p16.3"></span>οἰκονομίαν</span>, “for <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p16.4"></span>διεξαγωγεῖν</span> is
the same as <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p16.5"></span>διοικεῖν</span>, as Suidas says.” He
translates *ex libelli totius ductu ac dispositione,* remarking that the
words may be interpreted also as *formam et rationem scribendi, seu
characterem.* The phrase evidently means the “general disposition” or
“form” of the work. Closs translates “aus ihrer ganzen Ausführung”;
Salmond, “the whole disposition and execution of the book”; Crusè, “the
execution of the whole book.”

<span id="fn_2344"></span>[310:2345](2010243.htm#fr_2344.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p19"></span> i.e. never speaks of himself in the
first person, as “I, John”; nor in the third person, as e.g. “his
servant, John.”

<span id="fn_2345"></span>[310:2346](2010243.htm#fr_2345.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p20"></span> [Rev.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#002.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2346"></span>[310:2347](2010243.htm#fr_2346.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p22"></span> [Rev. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2347"></span>[310:2348](2010243.htm#fr_2347.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p23"></span> [1 John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2348"></span>[310:2349](2010243.htm#fr_2348.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p24"></span> [Matt. xvi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2349"></span>[310:2350](2010243.htm#fr_2349.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p26"></span> See [2 John.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#001.md), [3 John.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2350"></span>[310:2351](2010243.htm#fr_2350.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p27"></span> [Rev. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2351"></span>[310:2352](2010243.htm#fr_2351.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p28"></span> <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p28.1"></span>[Rev.
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p28.2"></span>. See above, note 3.

<span id="fn_2352"></span>[310:2353](2010243.htm#fr_2352.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p30"></span> See [John
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#023.md), [John
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#026.md), [John
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#002.md), [John
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#007.md),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#020.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2353"></span>[310:2354](2010243.htm#fr_2353.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p31"></span> See [John
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#023.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#025.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p31.1"></span>. These words, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p31.2"></span>οὐδὲ τὸν ἀναπεσόντα ἐπὶ τὸ στῆθος
αὐτοῦ</span>, are wanting in Heinichen’s edition; but as they are found
in all the other editions and versions and Heinichen gives no reason for
their omission, it is clear that they have been omitted inadvertently.

<span id="fn_2354"></span>[310:2355](2010243.htm#fr_2354.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p35"></span> In [Acts
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#012.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#025.md), [Acts
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#005.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#013.md), [Acts
15:37](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#037.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p35.1"></span>. On Mark and the second Gospel, see
above, Bk. II. chap. 15, note 4.

<span id="fn_2355"></span>[310:2356](2010243.htm#fr_2355.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p36"></span> [Acts xiii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#005.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2356"></span>[310:2357](2010243.htm#fr_2356.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p37"></span> [Acts xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2357"></span>[310:2358](2010243.htm#fr_2357.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p39"></span> See above, Bk. III. chap. 39, note
13; and on the “presbyter John,” mentioned by Papias, see also note 4 on
the same chapter, and on his relation to the Apocalypse, the same
chapter, note 14.

<span id="fn_2358"></span>[310:2359](2010243.htm#fr_2358.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p41"></span> i.e. the writer of the Apocalypse is
different from the writer of the Gospel and Epistles.

<span id="fn_2359"></span>[310:2360](2010243.htm#fr_2359.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p43"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2360"></span>[310:2361](2010243.htm#fr_2360.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p44"></span> [1 John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2361"></span>[310:2362](2010243.htm#fr_2361.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p45"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2362"></span>[310:2363](2010243.htm#fr_2362.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p46"></span> <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p46.1"></span>[1 John
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#002.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p46.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2363"></span>[310:2364](2010243.htm#fr_2363.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p48"></span> <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p48.1"></span>[1 John
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p48.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2364"></span>[311:2365](2010243.htm#fr_2364.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p53"></span> See [2 Cor.
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#001.md), [Gal.
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p53.1"></span>[2 Cor. xii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xii.xxvi-p53.2"></span>
sq., [Gal. ii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xxvi-p53.3"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI](2010244.md)
