[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010095)  [Next](2010097.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVII.—</span>*The Heresy of the
Ebionites.* <span id="fr_823"></span>[824](#fn_823.md)

<span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p3"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxvii-p3.1"></span>The</span> evil demon, however, being
unable to tear certain others from their allegiance <span
id="page_159">p. 159</span> <span id="iii.viii.xxvii-Page_159"></span>to
the Christ of God, yet found them susceptible in a different direction,
and so brought them over to his own purposes. The ancients quite
properly called these men Ebionites, because they held poor and mean
opinions concerning Christ. <span id="fr_824"></span>[825](#fn_824.md)

<span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p5"></span>2. For they considered him a plain
and common man, who was justified only because of his superior virtue,
and who was the fruit of the intercourse of a man with Mary. In their
opinion the observance of the ceremonial law was altogether necessary,
on the ground that they could not be saved by faith in Christ alone and
by a corresponding life. <span id="fr_825"></span>[826](#fn_825.md)

<span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p7"></span>3. There were others, however,
besides them, that were of the same name, <span
id="fr_826"></span>[827](#fn_826.md) but avoided the strange and absurd
beliefs of the former, and did not deny that the Lord was born of a
virgin and of the Holy Spirit. But nevertheless, inasmuch as they also
refused to acknowledge that he pre-existed, <span
id="fr_827"></span>[828](#fn_827.md) being God, Word, and Wisdom, they
turned aside into the impiety of the former, especially when they, like
them, endeavored to observe strictly the bodily worship of the
law. <span id="fr_828"></span>[829](#fn_828.md)

<span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p11"></span>4. These men, moreover, thought
that it was necessary to reject all the epistles of the apostle, whom
they called an apostate from the law; <span
id="fr_829"></span>[830](#fn_829.md) and they used only the so-called
Gospel according to the Hebrews <span id="fr_830"></span>[831](#fn_830.md)
and made small account of the rest.

<span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p17"></span>5. The Sabbath and the rest of the
discipline of the Jews they observed just like them, but at the same
time, like us, they celebrated the Lord’s days as a memorial of the
<span id="page_160">p. 160</span> <span
id="iii.viii.xxvii-Page_160"></span>resurrection of the Saviour. <span
id="fr_831"></span>[832](#fn_831.md)

<span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p19"></span>6. Wherefore, in consequence of
such a course they received the name of Ebionites, which signified the
poverty of their understanding. For this is the name by which a poor man
is called among the Hebrews. <span id="fr_832"></span>[833](#fn_832.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_823"></span>[158:824](2010096.htm#fr_823.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p2"></span> The Ebionites were not originally
heretics. Their characteristic was the more or less strict insistence
upon the observance of the Jewish law; a matter of cultus, therefore,
not of theology, separated them from Gentile Christians. Among the early
Jewish Christians existed all shades of opinion, in regard to the
relation of the law and the Gospel, from the freest recognition of the
uncircumcised Gentile Christian to the bitterest insistence upon the
necessity for salvation of full observance of the Jewish law by Gentile
as well as by Jewish Christians. With the latter Paul himself had to
contend, and as time went on, and Christianity spread more and more
among the Gentiles, the breach only became wider. In the time of Justin
there were two opposite tendencies among such Christians as still
observed the Jewish law: some wished to impose it upon all Christians;
others confined it to themselves. Upon the latter Justin looks with
charity; but the former he condemns as schismatics (see *Dial. c.
Trypho.* 47). For Justin the distinguishing mark of such schismatics is
not a doctrinal heresy, but an anti-Christian principle of life. But the
natural result of these Judaizing tendencies and of the involved
hostility to the apostle of the Gentiles was the ever more tenacious
clinging to the Jewish idea of the Messiah; and as the Church, in its
strife with Gnosticism, laid an ever-increasing stress upon Christology,
the difference in this respect between itself and these Jewish
Christians became ever more apparent until finally left far behind by
the Church in its rapid development, they were looked upon as heretics.
And so in Irenæus (I. 26. 2) we find a definite heretical sect called
Ebionites, whose Christology is like that of Cerinthus and Carpocrates,
who reject the apostle Paul, use the Gospel of Matthew only, and still
cling to the observance of the Jewish law; but the distinction which
Justin draws between the milder and stricter class is no longer drawn:
all are classed together in the ranks of heretics, because of their
heretical Christology (cf. *ibid.* III. 21. 1; IV. 33. 4; V. 1. 3). In
Tertullian and Hippolytus their deviation from the orthodox Christology
is still more clearly emphasized, and their relation to the Jewish law
drops still further into the background (cf. Hippolytus, *Phil.* VII.
22; X. 18; and Tertullian, *De Carne Christi,* 14, 18, &c.). So Origen
is acquainted with the Ebionites as an heretical sect, but, with a more
exact knowledge of them than was possessed by Irenæus who lived far away
from their chief centre, he distinguishes two classes; but the
distinction is made upon Christological lines, and is very different
from that drawn by Justin. This distinction of Origen’s between those
Ebionites who accepted and those who denied the supernatural birth of
Christ is drawn also by Eusebius (see below, §3). Epiphanius (*Hær.*
XXIX. sqq.) is the first to make two distinct heretical sects—the
Ebionites and the Nazarenes. It has been the custom of historians to
carry this distinction back into apostolic times, and to trace down to
the time of Epiphanius the continuous existence of a milder party—the
Nazarenes—and of a stricter party—the Ebionites; but this distinction
Nitzsch (*Dogmengesch.* p. 37 sqq.) has shown to be entirely groundless.
The division which Epiphanius makes is different from that of Justin, as
well as from that of Origen and Eusebius; in fact, it is doubtful if he
himself had any clear knowledge of a distinction, his reports are so
contradictory. The Ebionites known to him were most pronounced heretics;
but he had heard of others who were said to be less heretical, and the
conclusion that they formed another sect was most natural. Jerome’s use
of the two words is fluctuating; but it is clear enough that they were
not looked upon by him as two distinct sects. The word “Nazarenes” was,
in fact, in the beginning a general name given to the Christians of
Palestine by the Jews (cf. [Acts xxiv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#005.md)<span
id="iii.viii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>), and as such synonymous with
“Ebionites.” Upon the later syncretistic Ebionism, see Bk. VI. chap. 38,
note 1. Upon the general subject of Ebionism, see especially Nitzsch,
*ibid.,* and Harnack, *Dogmengeschichte,* I. p. 226 sqq.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[159:825](2010096.htm#fr_824.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p4"></span> The word Ebionite comes from the
Hebrew <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.viii.xxvii-p4.1"></span>אֶבְיֹון</span>, which signifies “poor.”
Different explanations more or less fanciful have been given of the
reason for the use of the word in this connection. It occurs first in
Irenæus (I. 26. 2), but without a definition of its meaning. Origen, who
uses the term often, gives different explanations, e.g., in *Contra
Celsum,* II. 1, he says that the Jewish converts received their name
from the poverty of the law, “for Ebion signifies *poor* among the Jews,
and those Jews who have received Jesus as Christ are called by the name
of Ebionites.” In *De Prin.* IV. 1. 22, and elsewhere, he explains the
name as referring to the poverty of their understanding. The explanation
given by Eusebius refers to their assertion that Christ was only a
common man, born by natural generation, and applied only to the first
class of Ebionites, a description of whom follows. For the same name as
applied to the second class (but see note 9) who accepted Christ’s
supernatural birth, he gives a different reason at the end of the
chapter, the same which Origen gives for the application of the name to
Ebionites in general. The explanation given in this place is so far as
we know original with Eusebius (something similar occurs again in
Epiphanius, *Hær.* XXX. 17), and he shows considerable ingenuity in thus
treating the name differently in the two cases. The various reasons do
not of course account for the existence of the name, for most of them
could have become reasons only long after the name was in use.
Tertullian (*De Præscr. Hær.* 33, *De Carne Christi,* 14, 18, &c.) and
Hippolytus (in his *Syntagma,*—as can be gathered from
Pseudo-Tertullian, *Adv. Hær.* chap. 3, and Epiph. *Hær.* XXX.,—and also
in his *Phil.* chap. 23, where he mentions Ebion incidentally) are the
first to tell us of the existence of a certain Ebion from whom the sect
derived its name, and Epiphanius and later writers are well acquainted
with the man. But Ebion is a myth invented simply for the purpose of
explaining the origin of Ebionism. The name Ebionite was probably used
in Jerusalem as a designation of the Christians there, either applied to
them by their enemies as a term of ridicule on account of their poverty
in worldly goods, or, what is more probable, assumed by themselves as a
term of honor,—“the poor in spirit,”—or (as Epiphanius, XXX. 17, says
the Ebionites of his day claimed) on account of their voluntarily taking
poverty upon themselves by laying their goods at the feet of the
apostles. But, however the name originated, it became soon, as
Christianity spread outside of Palestine, the special designation of
Jewish Christians as such, and thus when they began to be looked upon as
heretical, it became the name of the sect.

<span id="fn_825"></span>[159:826](2010096.htm#fr_825.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxvii-p6.1"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxvii-p6.2"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxvii-p6.3"></span>μὴ ἂν διὰ μόνης τῆς εἰς τὸν χριστὸν
πίστεως καὶ τοῦ κατ᾽ αὐτὴν βίου σωθησομένοις</span>. The addition of the
last clause reveals the difference between the doctrine of Eusebius’
time and the doctrine of Paul. Not until the Reformation was Paul
understood and the true formula, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxvii-p6.4"></span>διὰ μόνης τῆς εἰς τὸν χριστὸν
πίστεως</span>, restored.

<span id="fn_826"></span>[159:827](2010096.htm#fr_826.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p8"></span> Eusebius clearly knew of no
distinction in name between these two classes of Ebionites such as is
commonly made between Nazarenes and Ebionites,—nor did Origen, whom he
follows (see note 1, above).

<span id="fn_827"></span>[159:828](2010096.htm#fr_827.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p9"></span> That there were two different views
among the Ebionites as to the birth of Christ is stated frequently by
Origen (cf. e.g. *Contra Cels.* V. 61), but there was unanimity in the
denial of his pre-existence and essential divinity, and this constituted
the essence of the heresy in the eyes of the Fathers from Irenæus on.
Irenæus, as remarked above (note 1), knows of no such difference as
Eusebius here mentions: and that the denial of the supernatural birth
even in the time of Origen was in fact ordinarily attributed to the
Ebionites in general, without a distinction of the two classes, is seen
by Origen’s words in his *Hom. in Luc.* XVII.

<span id="fn_828"></span>[159:829](2010096.htm#fr_828.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p10"></span> There seems to have been no
difference between these two classes in regard to their relation to the
law; the distinction made by Justin is no longer noticed.

<span id="fn_829"></span>[159:830](2010096.htm#fr_829.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxvii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p12"></span> This is mentioned by Irenæus (I.
26. 2) and by Origen (*Cont. Cels.* V. 65 and *Hom. in Jer.* XVIII. 12).
It was a general characteristic of the sect of the Ebionites as known to
the Fathers, from the time of Origen on, and but a continuation of the
enmity to Paul shown by the Judaizers during his lifetime. But their
relations to Paul and to the Jewish law fell more and more into the
background, as remarked above, as their Christological heresy came into
greater prominence over against the developed Christology of the
Catholic Church (cf. e.g. the accounts of Tertullian and of Hippolytus
with that of Irenæus).

<span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p13"></span>The “these” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p13.1"></span>οὗτοι δὲ</span>)
here would seem to refer only to the second class of Ebionites; but we
know from the very nature of the case, as well as from the accounts of
others, that this conduct was true as well of the first, and Eusebius,
although he may have been referring only to the second, cannot have
intended to exclude the first class in making the statement.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[159:831](2010096.htm#fr_830.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxvii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p14"></span> Eusebius is the first to tell us
that the Ebionites used the Gospel according to the Hebrews. Irenæus
(*Adv. Hær.* I. 26. 2, III. 11. 7) says that they used the Gospel of
Matthew, and the fact that he mentions no difference between it and the
canonical Matthew shows that, so far as he knew, they were the same. But
according to Eusebius, Jerome, and Epiphanius the Gospel according to
the Hebrews was used by the Ebionites, and, as seen above (chap. 25,
note 18), this Gospel cannot have been identical with the canonical
Matthew. Either, therefore, the Gospel used by the Ebionites in the time
of Irenæus, and called by him simply the Gospel of Matthew, was
something different from the canonical Matthew, or else the Ebionites
had given up the Gospel of Matthew for another and a different gospel
(for the Gospel of the Hebrews cannot have been an outgrowth of the
canonical Matthew, as has been already seen, chap. 25, note 24). The
former is much more probable, and the difficulty may be most simply
explained by supposing that the Gospel according to the Hebrews is
identical with the so-called Hebrew Gospel of Matthew (see chap. 24,
note 5), or at least that it passed among the earliest Jewish Christians
under Matthew’s name, and that Irenæus, who was personally acquainted
with the sect, simply hearing that they used a Gospel of Matthew,
naturally supposed it to be identical with the canonical Gospel. In the
time of Jerome a Hebrew “Gospel according to the Hebrews” was used by
the “Nazarenes and Ebionites” as the Gospel of Matthew (cf. *in Matt.*
XII. 13; *Contra Pelag.* III. 2). Jerome refrains from expressing his
own judgment as to its authorship, but that he did not consider it in
its existing form identical with the Hebrew Gospel of Matthew is clear
from his words in *de vir. ill.* chap. 3, taken in connection with the
fact that he himself translated it into Greek and Latin, as he states in
chap. 2. Epiphanius (*Hær.* XXIX. 9) says that the Nazarenes still
preserved the original Hebrew Matthew in full, while the Ebionites (XXX.
13) had a Gospel of Matthew “not complete, but spurious and mutilated”;
and elsewhere (XXX. 3) he says that the Ebionites used the Gospel of
Matthew and called it the “Gospel according to the Hebrews.” It is thus
evident that he meant to distinguish the Gospel of the Ebionites from
that of the Nazarenes, i.e. the Gospel according to the Hebrews from the
original Hebrew Matthew. So, likewise. Eusebius’ treatment of the Gospel
according to the Hebrews and of the Hebrew Gospel of Matthew clearly
indicates that he considered them two different gospels (cf. e.g. his
mention of the former in chap. 25 and in Bk. IV. chap. 22, and his
mention of the latter in chap. 24, and in Bk. IV. chap. 10). Of course
he knew that the former was not identical with the canonical Matthew,
and hence, naturally supposing that the Hebrew Matthew agreed with the
canonical Matthew, he could not do otherwise than make a distinction
between the Gospel according to the Hebrews and the Hebrew Matthew, and
he must therefore make the change which he did in Irenæus’ statement in
mentioning the Gospel used by the Ebionites, as he knew them. Moreover,
as we learn from Bk. VI. chap. 17, the Ebionite Symmachus had written
against the Gospel of Matthew (of course the canonical Gospel), and this
fact would only confirm Eusebius in his opinion that Irenæus was
mistaken, and that the Ebionites did not use the Gospel of Matthew.

<span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p15"></span>But none of these facts militate
against the assumption that the Gospel of the Hebrews in its original
form was identical with the Hebrew Gospel of Matthew, or at least passed
originally under his name among Jewish Christians. For it is by no means
certain that the original Hebrew Matthew agreed with the canonical
Matthew, and, therefore, lack of resemblance between the Gospel
according to the Hebrews and the canonical Matthew is no argument
against its identity with the Hebrew Matthew. Moreover, it is quite
conceivable that, in the course of time, the original Gospel according
to the Hebrews underwent alterations, especially since it was in the
hands of a sect which was growing constantly more heretical, and that,
therefore, its resemblance to the canonical Matthew may have been even
less in the time of Eusebius and Jerome than at the beginning. It is
possible that the Gospel of Matthew, which Jerome claims to have seen in
the library at Cæsarea (*de vir. ill.* chap. 3), may have been an
earlier, and hence less corrupt, copy of the Gospel according to the
Hebrews.

<span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p16"></span>Since the writing of this note,
Handmann’s work on the Gospel according to the Hebrews (*Das
Hebräer-Evangelium,* von Rudolf Handmann. Von Gebhardt and Harnack’s
*Texte und Untersuchungen,* Bd. V. Heft 3) has come into my hands, and I
find that he denies that that Gospel is to be in any way identified with
the traditional Hebrew Matthew, or that it bore the name of Matthew. The
reasons which he gives, however, are practically the same as those
referred to in this note, and, as already shown, do not prove that the
two were not originally identical. Handmann holds that the Gospel among
the Jewish Christians was called simply “the Gospel,” or some general
name of the kind, and that it received from others the name “Gospel
according to the Hebrews,” because it was used by them. This may well
be, but does not militate at all against the existence of a tradition
among the Jewish Christians that Matthew was the author of their only
gospel. Handmann makes the Gospel according to the Hebrews a second
independent source of the Synoptic Gospels alongside of the “Ur-Marcus,”
(a theory which, if accepted, would go far to establish its identity
with the Hebrew Matthew), and even goes so far as to suggest that it is
to be identified with the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxvii-p16.1"></span>λόγια</span> of Papias (cf. the
writer’s notice of Handmann’s book, in the *Presbyterian Review,* July,
1889). For the literature on this Gospel, see chap. 25, note 24. I find
that Resch in his *Agrapha* emphasizes the apocryphal character of the
Gospel in its original form, and makes it later than and in part
dependent upon our Matthew, but I am unable to agree with him.

<span id="fn_831"></span>[160:832](2010096.htm#fr_831.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxvii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p18"></span> The question again arises whether
Eusebius is referring here to the second class of Ebionites only, and is
contrasting their conduct in regard to Sabbath observance with that of
the first class, or whether he refers to all Ebionites, and contrasts
them with the Jews. The subject remains the same as in the previous
sentence; but the persons referred to are contrasted with <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p18.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p18.2"></span>κεῖνοι</span>, whom
they resemble in their observance of the Jewish Sabbath, but from whom
they differ in their observance of the Lord’s day. The most natural
interpretation of the Greek is that which makes the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p18.3"></span>οὗτοι δὲ</span>
refer to the second class of Ebionites, and the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p18.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p18.5"></span>κεῖνοι</span> to
the first; and yet we hear from no one else of two sharply defined
classes separated by religious customs, in addition to doctrinal
opinions, and it is not likely that they existed. If this
interpretation, however, seems necessary, we may conclude that some of
them observed the Lord’s day, while others did not, and that Eusebius
naturally identified the former with the more, and the latter with the
less, orthodox class, without any especial information upon the subject.
It is easier, too, to explain Eusebius’ suggestion of a second
derivation for the name of Ebionite, if we assume that he is
distinguishing here between the two classes. Having given above a reason
for calling the first class by that name, he now gives the reason for
calling the second class by the same.

<span id="fn_832"></span>[160:833](2010096.htm#fr_832.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxvii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxvii-p20"></span> See note 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII](2010097.md)
