[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010175)  [Next](2010177) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.—</span>*Clement of Alexandria.*

<span id="iii.xi.vi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.vi-p2.1"></span>Clement <span
id="fr_1802"></span>[1803](#fn_1802) </span> having succeeded
Pantænus, <span id="fr_1803"></span>[1804](#fn_1803) had charge at that
time of the catechetical instruction in Alexandria, so that Origen also,
while still a boy, <span id="fr_1804"></span>[1805](#fn_1804) was one of
his pupils. In the first <span id="page_254">p. 254</span> <span
id="iii.xi.vi-Page_254"></span>book of the work called Stromata, which
Clement wrote, he gives a chronological table, <span
id="fr_1805"></span>[1806](#fn_1805) bringing events down to the death
of Commodus. So it is evident that that work was written during the
reign of Severus, whose times we are now recording.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1802"></span>[253:1803](2010176.htm#fr_1802) <span
id="iii.xi.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.vi-p3"></span> This chapter has no connection with the
preceding, and its insertion at this point has no good ground, for
Clement has been already handled in the fifth book; and if Eusebius
wished to refer to him again in connection with Origen, he should have
done so in chap. 3, where Origen’s appointment as head of the
catechetical school is mentioned. (Redepenning, however, approves the
present order; vol. I. p. 431 sqq.) Rufinus felt the inconsistency, and
hence inserted chaps. 6 and 7 in the middle of chap. 3, where the
account of Origen’s appointment by Demetrius is given. Valesius
considers the occurrence of this mention of Clement at this point a sign
that Eusebius did not give his work a final revision. Chap. 13 is
inserted in the same abrupt way, quite out of harmony with the context.
Upon the life of Clement of Alexandria, see Bk. V. chap. 11, note 1. The
catechetical school was vacant, as we learn from chap. 2, in the year
203, and was then taken in charge by Origen, so that the “that time”
referred to by Eusebius in this sentence must be carried back of the
events related in the previous chapters. The cause of Clement’s leaving
the school was probably the persecution begun by Severus in 202 (“all
were driven away by the threatening aspect of persecution,” according to
chap. 3, §1); for since Origen was one of his pupils he can hardly have
left long before that time. That it was not unworthy cowardice which led
Clement to take his departure is clear enough from the words of
Alexander in chaps. 11 and 14, from the high reputation which he
continued to enjoy throughout the Church, and from his own utterances on
the subject of martyrdom scattered through his works.

<span id="fn_1803"></span>[253:1804](2010176.htm#fr_1803) <span
id="iii.xi.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.vi-p4"></span> On Pantænus, see Bk. V. chap. 10, note
2.

<span id="fn_1804"></span>[253:1805](2010176.htm#fr_1804) <span
id="iii.xi.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.vi-p5"></span> Stephanus, Stroth, Burton, Schwegler,
Laemmer, and Heinichen, following two important <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.vi-p5.1"></span>mss.</span> and the translation of Rufinus,
omit the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.vi-p5.2"></span>παῖδα ὄντα</span> “while a boy.” But the
words are found in all the other codices (the chief witnesses of two of
the three great families of <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.vi-p5.3"></span>mss.</span> being for them) and in
Nicephorus. The manuscript authority is therefore overwhelmingly in
favor of the words, and they are adopted by Valesius, Zimmermann, and
Crusè. Rufinus is a strong witness against the words but, as Redepenning
justly remarks, having inserted this chapter, as he did, in the midst of
the description of Origen’s early years (see note 1), the words <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.vi-p5.4"></span>παῖδα ὄντα</span> would
be quite superfluous and even out of place, and hence he would naturally
omit them. So far as the probabilities of the insertion or omission of
the words in the present passage are concerned, it seems to me more
natural to suppose that a copyist, finding the words at this late stage
in the account of Origen’s life, would be inclined to omit them, than
that not finding them there he should, upon historical grounds (which he
could have reached only after some reflection), think that they ought to
be inserted. The latter would be not only a more difficult but also a
much graver step than the former. There seems, then, to be no good
warrant for omitting these words. We learn from chap. 3 that he took
charge of the catechetical school when he was in his eighteenth year,
within a year therefore after the death of his father. And we learn that
before he took charge of the school, all who had given instruction there
had been driven away by the persecution. Clement, therefore, must have
left before Origen’s eighteenth year, and hence the latter must have
studied with him before the persecution had broken up the school, and in
all probability before the death of Leonides. In any case, therefore, he
was still a boy when under Clement, and even if we omit the words—“while
a boy”—here, we shall not be warranted in putting his student days into
the period of his maturity, as some would do. Upon this subject, see
Redepenning, I. p. 431 sqq., who adduces still other arguments for the
position taken in this note which it is not necessary to repeat here.

<span id="fn_1805"></span>[254:1806](2010176.htm#fr_1805) <span
id="iii.xi.vi-p5.5"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.vi-p6"></span> In *Stromata*, Bk. I. chap. 21. On this
and the other works of Clement, see chap. 13.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](2010177)
