[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010654)  [Next](2010656.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iv.lxix"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv.lxix-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iv.lxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXIX</span>.—*Mourning for
Constantine at Rome; and the Honor paid him there through Paintings
after his Death.*

<span id="iv.vi.iv.lxix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iv.lxix-p2.1"></span>On</span> the arrival of the news of the
emperor’s death in the imperial city, the Roman senate and people felt
the announcement as the heaviest and most afflictive of all calamities,
and gave themselves up to an excess of grief. The baths and markets were
closed, the public spectacles, and all other recreations in which men of
leisure are accustomed to indulge, were interrupted. Those who had
erewhile lived in luxurious ease, now walked the streets in gloomy
sadness, while all united in blessing the name of the deceased, as the
one who was dear to God, and truly worthy of the imperial dignity. Nor
was their sorrow expressed only in words: they proceeded also to honor
him, by the dedication of paintings to his memory, with the same respect
as before his death. The design of these pictures embodied a
representation of heaven itself, and depicted the emperor reposing in an
ethereal mansion above the celestial vault. They too declared his sons
alone to be emperors and Augusti, and begged with earnest entreaty that
they might be permitted to receive the body of their emperor, and
perform his obsequies in the imperial city.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXX](2010656.md)
