[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010156)  [Next](2010158) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI.—</span>*The Circumstances
related of Montanus and his False Prophets.* <span
id="fr_1567"></span>[1568](#fn_1567)

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p6"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p6.1"></span>Against</span> the so-called Phrygian <span
id="fr_1568"></span>[1569](#fn_1568) heresy, the power which always
contends for the <span id="page_230">p. 230</span> <span
id="iii.x.xvii-Page_230"></span>truth raised up a strong and invincible
weapon, Apolinarius of Hierapolis, whom we have mentioned before, <span
id="fr_1569"></span>[1570](#fn_1569) and with him many other men of
ability, by whom abundant material for our history has been left.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p9"></span>2. A certain one of these, in the
beginning of his work against them, <span
id="fr_1570"></span>[1571](#fn_1570) first intimates that he had
contended with them in oral controversies.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p11"></span>3. He commences his work in this
manner: <span id="fr_1571"></span>[1572](#fn_1571)

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p13"></span>“Having for a very long and sufficient
time, O beloved Avircius Marcellus, <span
id="fr_1572"></span>[1573](#fn_1572) been urged by you to write a
treatise against the heresy of those who are called after
Miltiades, <span id="fr_1573"></span>[1574](#fn_1573) I have hesitated
till the present time, not through lack of ability to refute the
falsehood or bear testimony for the truth, but from fear and
apprehension that I might seem to some to be making additions to the
doctrines or precepts of the Gospel of the New Testament, which it is
impossible for one who has chosen to live according to the Gospel,
either to increase or to diminish.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p16"></span>4. But being recently in Ancyra <span
id="fr_1574"></span>[1575](#fn_1574) in Galatia, I found the church
there <span id="fr_1575"></span>[1576](#fn_1575) greatly agitated by
this novelty, not prophecy, as they call it, but rather false prophecy,
as will be shown. Therefore, to the best of our ability, with the Lord’s
help, we disputed in the church many days concerning these and other
matters separately brought forward by them, so that the church rejoiced
and was strengthened in the truth, and those of the opposite side were
for the time confounded, and the adversaries were grieved.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p19"></span>5. The presbyters in the place, our
fellow-presbyter Zoticus <span id="fr_1576"></span>[1577](#fn_1576) of
Otrous also being present, requested us to leave a record of what had
been said against the opposers of the truth. We did not do this, but we
promised to write it out as soon as the Lord permitted us, and to send
it to them speedily.”

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p22"></span><span id="page_231">p. 231</span> <span
id="iii.x.xvii-Page_231"></span>6. Having said this with other things,
in the beginning of his work, he proceeds to state the cause of the
above-mentioned heresy as follows:

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p23"></span>“Their opposition and their recent
heresy which has separated them from the Church arose on the following
account.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p24"></span>7. There is said to be a certain
village called Ardabau in that part of Mysia, which borders upon
Phrygia. <span id="fr_1577"></span>[1578](#fn_1577) There first, they
say, when Gratus was proconsul of Asia, <span
id="fr_1578"></span>[1579](#fn_1578) a recent convert, Montanus by name,
through his unquenchable desire for leadership, <span
id="fr_1579"></span>[1580](#fn_1579) gave the adversary opportunity
against him. And he became beside himself, and being suddenly in a sort
of frenzy and ecstasy, he raved, and began to babble and utter strange
things, prophesying in a manner contrary to the constant custom of the
Church handed down by tradition from the beginning. <span
id="fr_1580"></span>[1581](#fn_1580)

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p29"></span>8. Some of those who heard his spurious
utterances at that time were indignant, and they rebuked him as one that
was possessed, and that was under the control of a demon, and was led by
a deceitful spirit, and was distracting the multitude; and they forbade
him to talk, remembering the distinction <span
id="fr_1581"></span>[1582](#fn_1581) drawn by the Lord and his warning
to guard watchfully against the coming of false prophets. <span
id="fr_1582"></span>[1583](#fn_1582) But others imagining themselves
possessed of the Holy Spirit and of a prophetic gift, <span
id="fr_1583"></span>[1584](#fn_1583) were elated and not a little puffed
up; and forgetting the distinction of the Lord, they challenged the mad
and insidious and seducing spirit, and were cheated and deceived by him.
In consequence of this, he could no longer be held in check, so as to
keep silence.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p33"></span>9. Thus by artifice, or rather by such
a system of wicked craft, the devil, devising destruction for the
disobedient, and being unworthily honored by them, secretly excited and
inflamed their understandings which had already become estranged from
the true faith. And he stirred up besides two women, <span
id="fr_1584"></span>[1585](#fn_1584) and filled them with the false
spirit, so that they talked wildly and unreasonably and strangely, like
the person already mentioned. <span id="fr_1585"></span>[1586](#fn_1585)
And the spirit pronounced them blessed as they rejoiced and gloried in
him, and puffed them up by the magnitude of his promises. But sometimes
he rebuked them openly in a wise and <span id="page_232">p. 232</span>
<span id="iii.x.xvii-Page_232"></span>faithful manner, that he might
seem to be a reprover. But those of the Phrygians that were deceived
were few in number.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p36"></span>“And the arrogant spirit taught them to
revile the entire universal Church under heaven, because the spirit of
false prophecy received neither honor from it nor entrance into it.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p37"></span>10. For the faithful in Asia met often
in many places throughout Asia to consider this matter, <span
id="fr_1586"></span>[1587](#fn_1586) and examined the novel utterances
and pronounced them profane, and rejected the heresy, and thus these
persons were expelled from the Church and debarred from communion.”

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p39"></span>11. Having related these things at the
outset, and continued the refutation of their delusion through his
entire work, in the second book he speaks as follows of their end:

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p40"></span>12. “Since, therefore, they called us
slayers of the prophets <span id="fr_1587"></span>[1588](#fn_1587)
because we did not receive their loquacious prophets, who, they say, are
those that the Lord promised to send to the people, <span
id="fr_1588"></span>[1589](#fn_1588) let them answer as in God’s
presence: Who is there, O friends, of these who began to talk, from
Montanus and the women down, that was persecuted by the Jews, or slain
by lawless men? None. Or has any of them been seized and crucified for
the Name? Truly not. Or has one of these women ever been scourged in the
synagogues of the Jews, or stoned? No; never anywhere. <span
id="fr_1589"></span>[1590](#fn_1589)

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p44"></span>13. But by another kind of death
Montanus and Maximilla are said to have died. For the report is that,
incited by the spirit of frenzy, they both hung themselves; <span
id="fr_1590"></span>[1591](#fn_1590) not at the same time, but at the
time which common report gives for the death of each. And thus they
died, and ended their lives like the traitor Judas.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p46"></span>14. So also, as general report says,
that remarkable person, the first steward, <span
id="fr_1591"></span>[1592](#fn_1591) as it were, of their so-called
prophecy, one Theodotus—who, as if at sometime taken up and received
into heaven, fell into trances, and entrusted himself to the deceitful
spirit—was pitched like a quoit, and died miserably. <span
id="fr_1592"></span>[1593](#fn_1592)

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p49"></span>15. They say that these things happened
in this manner. But as we did not see them, O friend, we do not pretend
to know. Perhaps in such a manner, perhaps not, Montanus and Theodotus
and the above-mentioned woman died.”

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p50"></span>16. He says again in the same book that
the holy bishops of that time attempted to refute the spirit in
Maximilla, but were prevented by others who plainly co-operated with the
spirit.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p51"></span>17. He writes as follows:

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p52"></span>“And let not the spirit, in the same
work of Asterius Urbanus, <span id="fr_1593"></span>[1594](#fn_1593) say
through Maximilla, ‘I am driven away from the sheep like a wolf. <span
id="fr_1594"></span>[1595](#fn_1594) I am not a wolf. I am word and
spirit and power.’ But let him show clearly and prove the power in the
spirit. And by the spirit let him compel those to confess him who were
then present for the purpose of proving and reasoning with the talkative
spirit,—those eminent men <span id="page_233">p. 233</span> <span
id="iii.x.xvii-Page_233"></span>and bishops, Zoticus, <span
id="fr_1595"></span>[1596](#fn_1595) from the village Comana, and
Julian, <span id="fr_1596"></span>[1597](#fn_1596) from Apamea, whose
mouths the followers of Themiso <span
id="fr_1597"></span>[1598](#fn_1597) muzzled, refusing to permit the
false and seductive spirit to be refuted by them.”

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p59"></span>18. Again in the same work, after
saying other things in refutation of the false prophecies of Maximilla,
he indicates the time when he wrote these accounts, and mentions her
predictions in which she prophesied wars and anarchy. Their falsehood he
censures in the following manner:

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p60"></span>19. “And has not this been shown
clearly to be false? For it is to-day more than thirteen years since the
woman died, and there has been neither a partial nor general war in the
world; but rather, through the mercy of God, continued peace even to the
Christians.” <span id="fr_1598"></span>[1599](#fn_1598) These things are
taken from the second book.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p62"></span>20. I will add also short extracts from
the third book, in which he speaks thus against their boasts that many
of them had suffered martyrdom:

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p63"></span>“When therefore they are at a loss,
being refuted in all that they say, they try to take refuge in their
martyrs, alleging that they have many martyrs, and that this is sure
evidence of the power of the so-called prophetic spirit that is with
them. But this, as it appears, is entirely fallacious. <span
id="fr_1599"></span>[1600](#fn_1599)

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p65"></span>21. For some of the heresies have a
great many martyrs; but surely we shall not on that account agree with
them or confess that they hold the truth. And first, indeed, those
called Marcionites, from the heresy of Marcion, say that they have a
multitude of martyrs for Christ; yet they do not confess Christ himself
in truth.”

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p66"></span>A little farther on he continues:

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p67"></span>22. “When those called to martyrdom
from the Church for the truth of the faith have met with any of the
so-called martyrs of the Phrygian heresy, they have separated from them,
and died without any fellowship with them, <span
id="fr_1600"></span>[1601](#fn_1600) because they did not wish to give
their assent to the spirit of Montanus and the women. And that this is
true and took place in our own time in Apamea on the Mæander, <span
id="fr_1601"></span>[1602](#fn_1601) among those who suffered martyrdom
with Gaius and Alexander of Eumenia, is well known.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1567"></span>[229:1568](2010157.htm#fr_1567) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p2"></span> Montanism must not be looked upon as a
heresy in the ordinary sense of the term. The movement lay in the sphere
of life and discipline rather than in that of theology. Its fundamental
proposition was the continuance of divine revelation which was begun
under the old Dispensation, was carried on in the time of Christ and his
apostles, and reached its highest development under the dispensation of
the Paraclete, which opened with the activity of Montanus. This Montanus
was a Phrygian, who, in the latter part of the second century, began to
fall into states of ecstasy and to have visions, and believed himself a
divinely inspired prophet, through whom the promised Paraclete spoke,
and with whom therefore the dispensation of that Paraclete began. Two
noble ladies (Priscilla and Maximilla) attached themselves to Montanus,
and had visions and prophesied in the same way. These constituted the
three original prophets of the sect, and all that they taught was
claimed to be of binding authority on all. They were quite orthodox,
accepted fully the doctrinal teachings of the Catholic Church, and did
not pretend to alter in any way the revelation given by Christ and his
apostles. But they claimed that some things had not been revealed by
them, because at that early stage the Church was not able to bear them;
but that such additional revelations were now given, because the
fullness of time had come which was to precede the second coming of
Christ. These revelations had to do not at all with theology, but wholly
with matters of life and discipline. They taught a rigid asceticism over
against the growing worldliness of the Church, severe discipline over
against its laxer methods, and finally the universal priesthood of
believers (even female), and their right to perform all the functions of
church officers, over against the growing sacerdotalism of the Church.
They were thus in a sense reformers, or perhaps reactionaries is a
better term, who wished to bring back, or to preserve against
corruption, the original principles and methods of the Church. They
aimed at a puritanic reaction against worldliness, and of a democratic
reaction against growing aristocracy in the Church. They insisted that
ministers were made by God alone, by the direct endowment of his Spirit
in distinction from human ordination. They looked upon their
prophets—supernaturally called and endowed by the Spirit—as supreme in
the Church. They claimed that all gross offenders should be
excommunicated, and that neither they nor the lax should ever be
re-admitted to the Church. They encouraged celibacy, increased the
number and severity of fasts, eschewed worldly amusements, &c. This
rigid asceticism was enjoined by the revelation of the Spirit through
their prophets, and was promoted by their belief in the speedy coming of
Christ to set up his kingdom on earth, which was likewise prophesied.
They were thus pre-Millenarians or Chiliasts.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p3"></span>The movement spread rapidly in Asia
Minor and in North Africa, and for a time in Rome itself. It appealed
very powerfully to the sterner moralists, stricter disciplinarians, and
more deeply pious minds among the Christians. All the puritanically
inclined schisms of this period attracted many of the better class of
Christians, and this one had the additional advantage of claiming the
authority of divine revelation for its strict principles. The greatest
convert was Tertullian, who, in 201 or 202, attracted by the asceticism
and disciplinary rigor of the sect, attached himself to it, and remained
until his death its most powerful advocate. He seems to have stood at
the head of a separatist congregation of Montanists in Carthage, and yet
never to have been excommunicated by the Catholic Church. Montanism made
so much stir in Asia Minor that synods were called before the end of the
second century to consider the matter, and finally, though not without
hesitation, the whole movement was officially condemned. Later, the
condemnation was ratified in Rome and also in North Africa, and
Montanism gradually degenerated, and finally, after two or three
centuries, entirely disappeared.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p4"></span>But although it failed and passed away,
Montanism had a marked influence on the development of the Church. In
the first place, it aroused a general distrust of prophecy, and the
result was that the Church soon came to the conviction that prophecy had
entirely ceased. In the second place, the Church was led to see the
necessity of emphasizing the historical Christ and historical
Christianity over against the Montanistic claims of a constantly
developing revelation, and thus to put great emphasis upon the Scripture
canon. In the third place, the Church had to lay increased stress upon
the organization—upon its appointed and ordained officers—over against
the claims of irregular prophets who might at any time arise as organs
of the Spirit. The development of Christianity into a religion of the
book and of the organization was thus greatly advanced, and the line
began to be sharply drawn between the age of the apostles, in which
there had been direct supernatural revelations, and the later age, in
which such revelations had disappeared. We are, undoubtedly, to date
from this time that exalted conception of the glory of the apostolic
age, and of its absolute separation from all subsequent ages, which
marks so strongly the Church of succeeding centuries, and which led men
to endeavor to gain apostolic authority for every advance in the
constitution, in the customs, and in the doctrine of the Church. There
had been little of this feeling before, but now it became universal, and
it explains the great number of pseudo-apostolic works of the third and
following centuries. In the fourth place, the Chiliastic ideas of
Montanism produced a reaction in the Church which caused the final
rejection of all grossly physical Premillenarian beliefs which up to
this time had been very common. For further particulars in regard to
Montanism, see the notes on this and the following chapters.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p5"></span>Our chief sources for a knowledge of
Montanism are to be found in the writings of Tertullian. See, also,
Epiphanius, *Hær.* XLVIII. and XLIX., and Jerome’s Epistle to Marcella
(Migne, *Ep.* 41). The fragments from the anonymous anti-Montanistic
writer quoted by Eusebius in this and the following chapter, and the
fragments of Apollonius’ work, quoted in chap. 18, are of the greatest
importance. It is to be regretted that Eusebius has preserved for us no
fragments of the anti-Montanistic writings of Apolinarius and Melito,
who might have given us still earlier and more trustworthy accounts of
the sect. It is probable that their works were not decided enough in
their opposition to Montanism to suit Eusebius, who, therefore, chose to
take his account from somewhat later, but certainly bitter enough
antagonists. The works of the Montanists themselves (except those of
Tertullian) have entirely perished, but a few “Oracles,” or prophetic
utterances, of Montanus, Priscilla, and Maximilla, have been preserved
by Tertullian and other writers, and are printed by Bonwetsch, p.
197–200. The literature upon Montanism is very extensive. We may mention
here C. W. F. Walch’s *Ketzerhistorie,* I. p. 611–666, A. Schwegler’s
*Der Montanismus und die christliche Kirche des zweiten Jahrh.*
(Tübingen, 1841), and especially G. N. Bonwetzsch’s *Die Geschichte des
Montanismus* (Erlangen, 1881), which is the best work on the subject,
and indispensable to the student. Compare, also, Schaff’s *Ch. Hist.*
II. p. 415 sq., where the literature is given with great fullness,
Salmon’s article in the *Dict. of Christ. Biog.,* and especially
Harnack’s *Dogmengeschichte,* I. p. 319 sq.

<span id="fn_1568"></span>[229:1569](2010157.htm#fr_1568) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p7.1"></span>τὴν λεγομένην κατὰ Φρύγας αἵρεσιν</span>.
The heresy of Montanus was commonly called the Phrygian heresy because
it took its rise in Phrygia. The Latins, by a solecism, called it the
Cataphrygian heresy. Its followers received other names also, e.g.
Priscillianists (from the prophetess Priscilla), and Pepuziani (from
Pepuza, their headquarters). They called themselves <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xvii-p7.2"></span>πνευματικοί</span>
(spiritual), and the adherents of the Church <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p7.3"></span>ψυχιχοί</span> (carnal).

<span id="fn_1569"></span>[230:1570](2010157.htm#fr_1569) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p7.4"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p8"></span> In Bk. IV. chaps. 21, 26 and 27, and in
Bk. V. chap. 5. See especially Bk. IV. chap. 27, note 1.

<span id="fn_1570"></span>[230:1571](2010157.htm#fr_1570) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p10"></span> The author of this work is unknown.
Jerome (*de vir. ill.* 37) ascribes it to Rhodo (but see above, chap.
13, note 1). It is sometimes ascribed to Asterius Urbanus, mentioned by
Eusebius in §17 below, but he was certainly not its author (see below,
note 27). Upon the date of the work, see below, note 32.

<span id="fn_1571"></span>[230:1572](2010157.htm#fr_1571) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p12"></span> The fragments of this anonymous work
are given by Routh, *Rel. Sac.* Vol. II. p. 183 sqq., and in English in
the *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* Vol. VII. p. 335 sqq.

<span id="fn_1572"></span>[230:1573](2010157.htm#fr_1572) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p14.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p14.2"></span>Α</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p14.3"></span>ουίρκιε</span>, as most of the <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.x.xvii-p14.4"></span>mss.</span> read. Others
have <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p14.5"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p14.6"></span>Α</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p14.7"></span>υίρκιε</span> or <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p14.8"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p14.9"></span>Α</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p14.10"></span>βίρκιε</span>; Nicephorus, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xvii-p14.11"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xvii-p14.12"></span>Α</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xvii-p14.13"></span>βέρκιε</span>. The
name is quite commonly written Abercius in English, and the person
mentioned here is identified by many scholars (among them Lightfoot)
with Abercius, a prominent bishop of Hieropolis (not Hierapolis, as was
formerly supposed). A spurious *Life of S. Abercius* is given by Simeon
Metaphrastes (in Migne’s *Patr. Gr.* CXV. 1211 sq.), which, although of
a decidedly legendary character, rests upon a groundwork of fact as
proved by the discovery, in recent years of an epitaph from Abercius’
tomb. This Abercius was bishop in the time of Marcus Aurelius, and
therefore must have held office at least twelve or fifteen years (on the
date of this anonymous treatise, see below, note 32), or, if the date
given by the spurious Acts for Abercius’ visit to Rome be accepted (163
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.x.xvii-p14.14"></span>a.d.</span>), at
least thirty years. On Abercius and Avercius, see the exhaustive note of
Lightfoot, in his *Apostolic Fathers,* Part II. (*Ignatius and
Polycarp*), Vol. I. p. 477–485.

<span id="fn_1573"></span>[230:1574](2010157.htm#fr_1573) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p14.15"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p15.1"></span>εἰς τὴν τῶν κατὰ Μιλτι€δην λεγομένων
αἵρεσιν</span>. The occurrence of the name Miltiades, in this
connection, is very puzzling, for we nowhere else hear of a Montanist
Miltiades, while the man referred to here must have held a very
prominent place among them. It is true that it is commonly supposed that
the Muratorian Canon refers to some heretic Miltiades, but since
Harnack’s discussion of the matter (see especially his *Texte und
Untersuchungen,* I. 1, p. 216, note) it is more than doubtful whether a
Miltiades is mentioned at all in that document. In any case the
prominent position given him here is surprising, and, as a consequence,
Valesius (in his notes), Stroth, Zimmermann, Schwegler, Laemmer, and
Heinichen substitute <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p15.2"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p15.3"></span>Α</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p15.4"></span>λκιβι€δην</span> (who is mentioned in chap.
3 as a prominent Montanist) for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p15.5"></span>Μιλτι€δην</span>. The <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.x.xvii-p15.6"></span>mss.</span>, however, are
unanimous in reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p15.7"></span>Μιλτι€δην</span>; and it is impossible to
see how, if <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p15.8"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p15.9"></span>Α</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p15.10"></span>λκιβι€δην</span> had originally stood in
the text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p15.11"></span>Μιλτι€δην</span> could have been
substituted for it. It is not impossible that instead of Alcibiades in
chap. 3 we should read, as Salmon suggests, Miltiades. The occurrence of
the name Alcibiades in the previous sentence might explain its
substitution for Miltiades immediately afterward. It is at least easier
to account for that change than for the change of Alcibiades to
Miltiades in the present chapter. Were Salmon’s suggestion accepted, the
difficulty in this case would be obviated, for we should then have a
Montanist Miltiades of sufficient prominence to justify the naming of
the sect after him in some quarters. The suggestion, however, rests upon
mere conjecture, and it is safer to retain the reading of our <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.x.xvii-p15.12"></span>mss.</span> in both
cases. Until we get more light from some quarter we must be content to
let the matter rest, leaving the reason for the use of Miltiades’ name
in this connection unexplained. There is, of course, nothing strange in
the existence of a Montanist named Miltiades; it is only the great
prominence given him here which puzzles us. Upon the ecclesiastical
writer, Miltiades, and Eusebius’ confusion of him with Alcibiades, see
chap. 17, note 1.

<span id="fn_1574"></span>[230:1575](2010157.htm#fr_1574) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p17"></span> Ancyra was the metropolis and one of
the three principal cities of Galatia. Quite an important town, Angora,
now occupies its site.

<span id="fn_1575"></span>[230:1576](2010157.htm#fr_1575) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p18.1"></span>κατὰ τόπον</span>, which is the reading of
two of the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p18.2"></span>mss.</span> and Nicephorus, and is adopted
by Burton and Heinichen. The phrase seems harsh, but occurs again in the
next paragraph. The majority of the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p18.3"></span>mss.</span> read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p18.4"></span>κατὰ Πόντον</span>, which is adopted by
Valesius, Schwegler, Laemmer, and Crusè. It is grammatically the easier
reading, but the reference to Pontus is unnatural in this connection,
and in view of the occurrence of the same phrase, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xvii-p18.5"></span>κατὰ τόπον</span>, in
the next paragraph, it seems best to read thus in the present case as
well.

<span id="fn_1576"></span>[230:1577](2010157.htm#fr_1576) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p20"></span> Of this Zoticus we know only what is
told us here. He is to be distinguished, of course, from Zoticus of
Comana, mentioned in §17, below, and in chap. 18, §13.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p21"></span>Otrous (or Otrys, as it is sometimes
written) was a small Phrygian town about two miles from Hieropolis (see
W. H. Ramsay’s paper, entitled *Trois Villes Phrygiennes,* in the
*Bulletin de Correspondance Hellenique,* Juillet, 1882). Its bishop was
present at the Council of Chalcedon, and also at the second Council of
Nicæa (see Wiltsch’s *Geography and Statistics of the Church*). We may
gather from this passage that the anonymous author of this
anti-Montanistic work was a presbyter (he calls Zoticus <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xvii-p21.1"></span>συμπρεσβύτερος</span>),
but we have no hint of his own city, though the fact that Avircius
Marcellus, to whom the work was addressed, was from Hieropolis (see note
6), and that the anonymous companion Zoticus was from Otrous, would lead
us to look in that neighborhood for the home of our author, though
hardly to either of those towns (the mention of the name of the town in
connection with Zoticus’ name would seem to shut out the latter, and the
opening sentences of the treatise would seem to exclude the former).

<span id="fn_1577"></span>[231:1578](2010157.htm#fr_1577) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p25.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p25.2"></span>ν τῇ κατὰ τὴν Φρυγίαν Μυσί& 139·</span>. It
is not said here that Montanus was born in Ardabau, but it is natural to
conclude that he was, and so that village is commonly given as his
birthplace. As we learn from this passage, Ardabau was not in Phrygia,
as is often said, but in Mysia. The boundary line between the two
districts was a very indefinite one, however, and the two were often
confounded by the ancients themselves; but we cannot doubt in the
present instance that the very exact statement of the anonymous writer
is correct. Of the village of Ardabau itself we know nothing.

<span id="fn_1578"></span>[231:1579](2010157.htm#fr_1578) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p26"></span> The exact date of the rise of
Montanism cannot be determined. The reports which we have of the
movement vary greatly in their chronology. We have no means of fixing
the date of the proconsulship of the Gratus referred to here, and thus
the most exact and reliable statement which we have does not help us. In
his *Chron.* Eusebius fixes the rise of the movement in the year 172,
and it is possible that this statement was based upon a knowledge of the
time of Gratus’ proconsulship. If so, it possesses considerable weight.
The first notice we have of a knowledge of the movement in the West is
in connection with the martyrs of Lyons, who in the year 177 (see
Introd. to this book, note 3) were solicited to use their influence with
the bishop of Rome in favor of the Montanists (see above, chap. 3, note
6). This goes to confirm the approximate accuracy of the date given by
Eusebius, for we should expect that the movement cannot have attracted
public notice in the East very many years before it was heard of in
Gaul, the home of many Christians from Asia Minor. Epiphanius (*Hær.*
XLVIII.) gives the nineteenth year of Antoninus Pius (156–157) as the
date of its beginning, but Epiphanius’ figures are very confused and
contradictory, and little reliance can be placed upon them in this
connection. At the same time Montanus must have begun his prophesying
some years before his teaching spread over Asia Minor and began to
agitate the churches and alarm the bishops, and therefore it is probable
that Montanism had a beginning some years before the date given by
Eusebius; in fact, it is not impossible that Montanus may have begun his
work before the end of the reign of Antoninus Pius.

<span id="fn_1579"></span>[231:1580](2010157.htm#fr_1579) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p27"></span> Ambition was almost universally looked
upon by the Church Fathers as the occasion of the various heresies and
schisms. Novatian, Donatus, and many others were accused of it by their
orthodox opponents. That heretics or schismatics could be actuated by
high and noble motives was to them inconceivable. We are thus furnished
another illustration of their utter misconception of the nature of
heresy so often referred to in these notes.

<span id="fn_1580"></span>[231:1581](2010157.htm#fr_1580) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p28"></span> The fault found by the Church with
Montanus’ prophecy was rather because of its form than because of its
substance. It was admitted that the prophecies contained much that was
true, but the soberer sense of the Church at large objected decidedly to
the frenzied ecstasy in which they were delivered. That a change had
come over the Church in this respect since the apostolic age is
perfectly clear. In Paul’s time the speaking with tongues, which
involved a similar kind of ecstasy, was very common; so, too, at the
time the *Didache* was written the prophets spoke in an ecstasy (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xvii-p28.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xvii-p28.2"></span>ν πνεύματι</span>,
which can mean nothing else; cf. Harnack’s edition, p. 122 sq.). But the
early enthusiasm of the Church had largely passed away by the middle of
the second century; and though there were still prophets (Justin, for
instance, and even Clement of Alexandria knew of them), they were not in
general characterized by the same ecstatic and frenzied utterance that
marked their predecessors. To say that there were none such at this time
would be rash; but it is plain that they had become so decidedly the
exception that the revival by the Montanists of the old method on a
large scale and in its extremest form could appear to the Church at
large only a decided innovation. Prophecy in itself was nothing strange
to them, but prophecy in this form they were not accustomed to, and did
not realize that it was but a revival of the ancient form (cf. the words
of our author, who is evidently quite ignorant of that form). That they
should be shocked at it is not to be wondered at, and that they should,
in that age, when all such manifestations were looked upon as
supernatural in their origin, regard these prophets as under the
influence of Satan, is no more surprising. There was no other
alternative in their minds. Either the prophecies were from God or from
Satan; not their content mainly, but the manner in which they were
delivered aroused the suspicion of the bishops and other leaders of the
Church. Add to that the fact that these prophets claimed supremacy over
the constituted Church authorities, claimed that the Church must be
guided by the revelations vouchsafed to women and apparently half-crazy
enthusiasts and fanatics, and it will be seen at once that there was
nothing left for the leaders of the Church but to condemn the movement,
and pronounce its prophecy a fraud and a work of the Evil One. That all
prophecy should, as a consequence, fall into discredit was natural.
Clement (*Strom.* I. 17) gives the speaking in an ecstasy as one of the
marks of a false prophet,—Montanism had evidently brought the Church to
distinct consciousness on that point,—while Origen, some decades later,
is no longer acquainted with prophets, and denies that they existed even
in the time of Celsus (see *Contra Cels.* VII. 11).

<span id="fn_1581"></span>[231:1582](2010157.htm#fr_1581) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p30"></span> i.e. between true and false prophets.

<span id="fn_1582"></span>[231:1583](2010157.htm#fr_1582) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p31"></span> Cf. [Matt. vii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015)<span id="iii.x.xvii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1583"></span>[231:1584](2010157.htm#fr_1583) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p32.1"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p32.2"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p32.3"></span>ἁγί& 251· πνεύματι καὶ προφητικῷ
χαρίσματι</span>

<span id="fn_1584"></span>[231:1585](2010157.htm#fr_1584) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p34"></span> Maximilla and Priscilla, or Prisca
(mentioned in chap. 14). They were married women, who left their
husbands to become disciples of Montanus, were given the rank of virgins
in his church, and with him were the greatest prophets of the sect. They
were regarded with the most profound reverence by all Montanists, who in
many quarters were called after the name of the latter, Priscillianists.
It was a characteristic of the Montanists that they insisted upon the
religious equality of men and women; that they accorded just as high
honor to the women as to the men, and listened to their prophecies with
the same reverence. The human person was but an instrument of the
Spirit, according to their view, and hence a woman might be chosen by
the Spirit as his instrument just as well as a man, the ignorant just as
well as the learned. Tertullian, for instance, cites, in support of his
doctrine of the materiality of the soul, a vision seen by one of the
female members of his church, whom he believed to be in the habit of
receiving revelations from God (*de anima,* 9).

<span id="fn_1585"></span>[231:1586](2010157.htm#fr_1585) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p35"></span> i.e. Montanus.

<span id="fn_1586"></span>[232:1587](2010157.htm#fr_1586) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p38"></span> That synods should early be held to
consider the subject Montanism is not at all surprising. Doubtless our
author is quite correct in asserting that many such met during these
years. They were probably all of them small, and only local in their
character. We do not know the places or the dates of any of these
synods, although the *Libellus Synodicus* states that one was held at
Hierapolis under Apolinarius, with twenty-six bishops in attendance, and
another at Anchialus under Sotas, with twelve bishops present. The
authority for these synods is too late to be of much weight, and the
report is just such as we should expect to have arisen upon the basis of
the account of Montanism given in this chapter. It is possible,
therefore, that synods were held in those two cities, but more than that
cannot be said. Upon these synods, see Hefele (*Conciliengesch.* I. p.
83 sq.), who accepts the report of the *Libellus Synodicus* as
trustworthy.

<span id="fn_1587"></span>[232:1588](2010157.htm#fr_1587) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p41"></span> Cf. the complaint of Maximilla, quoted
in §17, below. The words are employed, of course, only in the figurative
sense to indicate the hostility of the Church toward the Montanists. The
Church, of course, had at that time no power to put heretics to death,
even if it had wished to do so. The first instance of the punishment of
heresy by death occurred in 385, when the Spanish bishop Priscillian and
six companions were executed at Trêves.

<span id="fn_1588"></span>[232:1589](2010157.htm#fr_1588) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p42"></span> Cf. [Matt. xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#034)<span id="iii.x.xvii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1589"></span>[232:1590](2010157.htm#fr_1589) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p43"></span> There is a flat contradiction between
this passage and §21, below, where it is admitted by this same author
that the Montanists have had their martyrs. The sweeping statements
here, considered in the light of the admission made in the other
passage, furnish us with a criterion of the trustworthiness and honesty
of the reports of our anonymous author. It is plain that, in his
hostility to Montanism, he has no regard whatever for the truth; that
his aim is to paint the heretics as black as possible, even if he is
obliged to misrepresent the facts. We might, from the general tone of
the fragment which Eusebius has preserved, imagine this to be so: the
present passage proves it. We know, indeed, that the Montanists had many
martyrs and that their principles were such as to lead them to
martyrdom, even when the Catholics avoided it (cf. Tertullian’s *De fuga
in persecutione*).

<span id="fn_1590"></span>[232:1591](2010157.htm#fr_1590) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p45"></span> Whether this story is an invention of
our author’s, or whether it was already in circulation, as he says, we
cannot tell. Its utter worthlessness needs no demonstration. Even our
anonymous author does not venture to call it certain.

<span id="fn_1591"></span>[232:1592](2010157.htm#fr_1591) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p47.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p47.2"></span>πίτροπος</span>: a steward, or
administrator of funds. The existence of such an officer shows that the
Montanists formed a compact organization at an early date, and that much
stress was laid upon it (cf. chap. 18, §2). According to Jerome (*Ep. ad
Marcellam;* Migne, *Ep*. XLI. 3) the Montanists at Pepuza had three
classes of officers: first, Patriarchs; second, *Cenonæ;* third, Bishops
*(Habent enim primos de Pepusa Phrygiæ Patriarchas: secundos, quos
appellant Cenonas: atque ita in tertium, id est, pene ultimum locum
Episcopi devolvuntur).* The peculiar word *Cenonas* occurs nowhere else,
so far as I am aware, but its meaning is plain enough. Whether it is
merely a reproduction of the Greek οἰκονομοι (“administrators”), or
whether it is a Latin word connected with *cœna,* in either case the
officers designated by it were economic officers, and thus performed the
same class of duties as this <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p47.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p47.4"></span>πίτροπος</span>, Theodotus. The reliability
of Jerome’s report is confirmed by its agreement in this point with the
account of the Anonymous. Of Theodotus himself (to be distinguished, of
course, from the two Theodoti mentioned in chap. 28) we know only what
is told us in this chapter and in chap. 3, above. It is plain that he
was a prominent man among the early Montanists.

<span id="fn_1592"></span>[232:1593](2010157.htm#fr_1592) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p47.5"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p48"></span> The reference here seems to be to a
death like that recorded by a common tradition of Simon Magus, who by
the help of demons undertook to fly up to heaven, but when in mid air
fell and was killed. Whether the report in regard to Theodotus was in
any way connected with the tradition of Simon’s death we cannot tell,
though our author can hardly have thought of it, or he would certainly
have likened Theodotus’ fate to that of the arch-heretic Simon, as he
likened the fate of Montanus and Maximilla to that of Judas. Whatever
the exact form of death referred to, there is of course no more
confidence to be placed in this report than in the preceding one.

<span id="fn_1593"></span>[232:1594](2010157.htm#fr_1593) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p53"></span> Of this Asterius Urbanus we know only
what we can gather from this reference to him. Valesius, Tillemont, and
others supposed that the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p53.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p53.2"></span>ν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ τῷ κατὰ ᾽Αστέριον
Οὐρβανόν</span> were a scholium written on the margin of his copy by
Eusebius himself or some ancient commentator to indicate the authorship
of the anonymous work from which the fragments in this chapter are taken
(and so in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* Vol. VII., these fragments are
given as from the work of Asterius Urbanus). But Eusebius himself
evidently did not know the author, and it is at any rate much easier to
suppose the words a part of the text, and the work of Asterius a work
which our anonymous author has been discussing and from which he quotes
the words of Maximilla, just below. Accepting this most natural
interpretation of the words, we learn that Asterius Urbanus was a
Montanist who had written a work in defense of that sect.

<span id="fn_1594"></span>[232:1595](2010157.htm#fr_1594) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p53.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p54"></span> Cf. note 21, above.

<span id="fn_1595"></span>[233:1596](2010157.htm#fr_1595) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p55"></span> Of this Bishop Zoticus we know only
what is told us here and in chap. 18, §13. On the proposed
identification of Zoticus and Sotas, bishop of Anchialus, see chap. 19,
note 10.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p56"></span>Comana (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p56.1"></span>Κομ€νης</span>, according to most of the
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.x.xvii-p56.2"></span>mss.</span> and
editors; <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p56.3"></span>Κουμ€νης</span>, according to a few of the
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.x.xvii-p56.4"></span>mss.</span>
followed by Laemmer and Heinichen) was a village of Pamphylia, and is to
be distinguished from Comana in Pontus and from Comana in Cappadocia
(Armenia), both of which were populous and important cities.

<span id="fn_1596"></span>[233:1597](2010157.htm#fr_1596) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p56.5"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p57"></span> Of this Julian we know nothing more.
His city was Apamea Cibotus or Ciboti, which, according to Wiltsch, was
a small town on Mount Signia in Pisidia, to be distinguished from the
important Phrygian Apamea Cibotus on the Mæander. Whether Wiltsch has
good grounds for this distinction I am unable to say. It would certainly
seem natural to think in the present case of Apamea on the Mæander,
inasmuch as it is spoken of without any qualifying phrase, as if there
could be no doubt about its identity.

<span id="fn_1597"></span>[233:1598](2010157.htm#fr_1597) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p58"></span> Themiso is mentioned again in chap. 18
as a confessor, and as the author of a catholic epistle. It is plain
that he was a prominent man among the Montanists in the time of our
anonymous author, that is, after the death of Montanus himself; and it
is quite likely that he was, as Salmon suggests, the head of the sect.

<span id="fn_1598"></span>[233:1599](2010157.htm#fr_1598) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p61"></span> This gives us a clear indication of
the date of the composition of this anonymous work. The thirteen years
must fall either before the wars which began in the reign of Septimius
Severus, or after their completion. The earliest possible date in the
latter case is 232, and this is certainly much too late for the
composition of this work, which speaks of Montanism more than once as a
recent thing, and which it seems clear from other indications belongs
rather to the earlier period of the movement. If we put its composition
before those wars, we cannot place it later than 192, the close of the
reign of Commodus. This would push the date of Maximilla’s death back to
179, which though it seems rather early, is not at all impossible. The
period from about 179 to 192 might very well be called a time of peace
by the Christians; for no serious wars occurred during that interval,
and we know that the Christians were left comparatively undisturbed
throughout the reign of Commodus.

<span id="fn_1599"></span>[233:1600](2010157.htm#fr_1599) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p64"></span> Our author tacitly admits in this
paragraph, what he has denied in §12, above, that the Montanists had
martyrs among their number; and having admitted it, he endeavors to
explain away its force. In the previous paragraph he had claimed that
the lack of martyrs among them proved that they were heretics; here he
claims that the existence of such martyrs does not in any way argue for
their orthodoxy. The inconsistency is glaringly apparent (cf. the
remarks made in note 23, above).

<span id="fn_1600"></span>[233:1601](2010157.htm#fr_1600) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p68"></span> This shows the bitterness of the
hostility of the Catholics toward the Montanists. That even when
suffering together for the one Lord they could not recognize these
brethren seems very sad, and it is not to be wondered at that the
Montanists felt themselves badly used, and looked upon the Catholics as
“slayers of the prophets,” &c. More uncompromising enmity than this we
can hardly imagine. That the Catholics, however, were sincere in their
treatment of the Montanists, we cannot doubt. It is clear that they
firmly believed that association with them meant association with the
devil, and hence the deeper their devotion to Christ, the deeper must be
their abhorrence of these instruments of Satan. Compare, for instance,
Polycarp’s words to Marcion, quoted in Bk. IV. chap. 14, above. The
attitude of these Catholic martyrs is but of a piece with that of nearly
all the orthodox Fathers toward heresy. It only shows itself here in its
extremest form.

<span id="fn_1601"></span>[233:1602](2010157.htm#fr_1601) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p69"></span> Apamea Cibotus in Eastern Phrygia, a
large and important commercial center. Of the two martyrs, Gaius and
Alexander, we know only what is told us here. They were apparently both
of them from Eumenia, a Phrygian town lying a short distance north of
Apamea. We have no means of fixing the date of the martyrdoms referred
to here, but it seems natural to assign them to the reign of Marcus
Aurelius, after Montanism had become somewhat widespread, and when
martyrdoms were a common thing both in the East and West. Thraseas,
bishop of Eumenia, is referred to as a martyr by Polycrates in chap. 24,
but he can hardly have suffered with the ones referred to here, or his
name would have been mentioned instead of the more obscure names of
Gaius and Alexander.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](2010158)
