[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010371)  [Next](2010373) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iv.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv.vi-p1"></span> 5. *Dream concerning the Founding of
Constantinople*.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.vi-p2"></span>“As Constantine was sleeping in this
city \[Byzantium\], he imagined that there stood before him an old woman
whose forehead was furrowed with age; but that presently, clad in an
imperial robe, she became transformed into a beautiful girl, and so
fascinated his eyes by the elegance of her youthful charms that he could
not refrain from kissing her; that Helena, his mother, being present,
then said, ‘She shall be yours forever; nor shall she die till the end
of time.’ The solution of this dream, when he awoke, the emperor
extorted from heaven, by fasting and alms-giving. And behold, within
eight days, being cast again into a deep sleep, he thought he saw Pope
Silvester, who died some little time before, regarding his convert with
complacency, and saying, ‘You have acted with your customary prudence in
waiting for a solution from God of that enigma which was beyond the
comprehension of man. The old woman you saw is this city, worn down by
age, whose time-struck walls, menacing approaching ruin, require a
restorer. But you, renewing its walls, and its affluence, shall
signalize it also with your name; and here shall the imperial progeny
reign forever’” (William of Malmesbury, Chronicle, tr. English. Lond.
1847, p. 372–3. The final section, which instructs Constantine how to
lay out the city, is omitted). This is taken by the Chronicler from
Aldhelm’s (d. 709) *de laudibus virginitatis* (c. 52, ed. Giles, 1844,
p. 28–29), where, however, instead of kissing her, he much more
appropriately “clothes her with his mantle, and puts his diadem adorned
with pure gold and brilliant gems on her head.” It is given also by
Ralph de Diceto (ed. Stubbs, Lond. 1876), 74–75, and probably by many
others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](2010373)
