[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010137)  [Next](2010139) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.xxix"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIX</span>.—*The Heresy of
Tatian.* <span id="fr_1322"></span>[1323](#fn_1322)

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p4.1"></span>He</span> is the one whose words we quoted
a little above <span id="fr_1323"></span>[1324](#fn_1323) in regard to
that admirable <span id="page_208">p. 208</span> <span
id="iii.ix.xxix-Page_208"></span>man, Justin, and whom we stated to have
been a disciple of the martyr. Irenæus declares this in the first book
of his work Against Heresies, where he writes as follows concerning both
him and his heresy: <span id="fr_1324"></span>[1325](#fn_1324)

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p7"></span>2. “Those who are called
Encratites, <span id="fr_1325"></span>[1326](#fn_1325) and who sprung
from Saturninus <span id="fr_1326"></span>[1327](#fn_1326) and Marcion,
preached celibacy, setting aside the original arrangement of God and
tacitly censuring him who made male and female for the propagation of
the human race. They introduced also abstinence from the things called
by them animate, <span id="fr_1327"></span>[1328](#fn_1327) thus showing
ingratitude to the God who made all things. And they deny the salvation
of the first man. <span id="fr_1328"></span>[1329](#fn_1328)

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p12"></span>3. But this has been only recently
discovered by them, a certain Tatian being the first to introduce this
blasphemy. He was a hearer of Justin, and expressed no such opinion
while he was with him, but after the martyrdom of the latter he left the
Church, and becoming exalted with the thought of being a teacher, and
puffed up with the idea that he was superior to others, he established a
peculiar type of doctrine of his own, inventing certain invisible æons
like the followers of Valentinus, <span
id="fr_1329"></span>[1330](#fn_1329) while, like Marcion and Saturninus,
he pronounced marriage to be corruption and fornication. His argument
against the salvation of Adam, however, he devised for <span
id="page_209">p. 209</span> <span
id="iii.ix.xxix-Page_209"></span>himself.” Irenæus at that time wrote
thus.

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p14"></span>4. But a little later a certain man
named Severus <span id="fr_1330"></span>[1331](#fn_1330) put new
strength into the aforesaid heresy, and thus brought it about that those
who took their origin from it were called, after him, Severians.

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p16"></span>5. They, indeed, use the Law and
Prophets and Gospels, but interpret in their own way the utterances of
the Sacred Scriptures. And they abuse Paul the apostle and reject his
epistles, and do not accept even the Acts of the Apostles.

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p17"></span>6. But their original founder, Tatian,
formed a certain combination and collection of the Gospels, I know not
how, <span id="fr_1331"></span>[1332](#fn_1331) to which he gave the
title *Diatessaron,* <span id="fr_1332"></span>[1333](#fn_1332) and
which is still in the hands of some. But they say that he ventured to
paraphrase certain words of the apostle, <span
id="fr_1333"></span>[1334](#fn_1333) in order to improve their style.

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p21"></span>7. He has left a great many writings.
Of these the one most in use among many persons is his celebrated
Address to the Greeks, <span id="fr_1334"></span>[1335](#fn_1334) which
also appears to be the best and most useful of all his works. In it he
deals with the most ancient times, and shows that Moses and the Hebrew
prophets were older than all the celebrated men among the Greeks. <span
id="fr_1335"></span>[1336](#fn_1335) So much in regard to these men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1322"></span>[207:1323](2010138.htm#fr_1322) <span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p2"></span> From his *Oratio* (chap. 42) we learn
that Tatian was born in Assyria, and that he was early educated in Greek
philosophy, from which we may conclude that he was of Greek parentage,—a
conclusion confirmed by the general tone of the *Oratio* (cf. Harnack,
*Ueberlieferung der Griech. Apol.* p. 199 sq., who refutes Zahn’s
opinion that Tatian was a Syrian by race). We learn from his *Oratio*
also that he was converted to Christianity in mature life (cf. chap. 29
sq.). From the passage quoted in the present chapter from Irenæus, we
learn that Tatian, after the death of Justin (whose disciple he was; see
also chap. 16, above), fell into heresy, and the general fact is
confirmed by Tertullian, Hippolytus, Clement of Alexandria, Origen, and
others. Beyond these meager notices we have little information in regard
to Tatian’s life. Rhodo (quoted in Bk. V. chap. 13, below) mentions him,
and “confesses” that he was a pupil of Tatian’s in Rome, perhaps
implying that this was after Tatian had left the Catholic Church (though
inasmuch as the word “confesses” is Eusebius’, not Rhodo’s, we can
hardly lay the stress that Harnack does upon its use in this
connection). Epiphanius gives quite an account of Tatian in his *Hær*.
XLVI. 1, but as usual he falls into grave errors (especially in his
chronology). The only trustworthy information that can be gathered from
him is that Tatian, after becoming a Christian, returned to Mesopotamia
and taught for a while there (see Harnack, *ibid.* p. 208 sq.). We learn
from his *Oratio* that he was already in middle life at the time when he
wrote it, i.e. about 152 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> (see note 13, below), and as a
consequence it is commonly assumed that he cannot have been born much
later than 110 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p2.2"></span>a.d.</span> Eusebius in his *Chron.* (XII.
year of Marcus Aurelius, 172 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p2.3"></span>a.d.</span>) says, *Tatianus hæreticus
agnoscitur, a quo Encratitæ.* There is no reason to doubt that this
represents with reasonable accuracy the date of Tatian’s break with the
Catholic Church. We know at any rate that it did not take place until
after Justin’s death (165 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p2.4"></span>a.d.</span>). In possession of these
various facts in regard to Titian, his life has been constructed in
various ways by historians, but Harnack seems to have come nearest to
the truth in his account of him on p. 212 sq. He holds that he was
converted about 150, but soon afterward left for the Orient, and while
there wrote his *Oratio ad Græcos;* that afterward he returned to Rome
and was an honored teacher in the Church for some time but finally
becoming heretical, broke with the Church about the year 172. The
arguments which Harnack urges over against Zahn (who maintains that he
was but once in Rome, and that he became a heretic in the Orient and
spent the remainder of his life there) seem fully to establish his main
positions. Of the date, place, and circumstances of Tatian’s death, we
know nothing.

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p3"></span>Eusebius informs us in this chapter
that Titian left “a great many writings,” but he mentions the titles of
only two, the *Address to the Greeks* and the *Diatessaron* (see below,
notes 11 and 13). He seems, however, in §6, to refer to another work on
the Pauline Epistles,—a work of which we have no trace anywhere else,
though we learn from Jerome’s preface to his Commentary on Titus that
Tatian rejected some of Paul’s epistles, as Marcion did, but unlike
Marcion accepted the epistle to Titus. We know the titles of some other
works written by Tatian. He himself, in his *Oratio* 15, mentions a work
which he had written *On Animals.* The work is no longer extant, nor do
we know anything about it. Rhodo (as we are told by Eusebius in Bk. V.
chap. 13) mentioned a book of *Problems* which Titian had written. Of
this, too, all traces have perished. Clement of Alexandria (*Strom.*
III. 12) mentions an heretical work of Tatian’s, entitled <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxix-p3.1"></span>περὶ τοῦ κατὰ τὸν
σωτῆρα καταρτισμοῦ</span>, *On Perfection according to the Saviour,*
which has likewise perished. Clement (as also Origen) was evidently
acquainted with still other heretical works, especially one on Genesis
(see below, note 7), but he mentions the title only of the one referred
to. Rufinus (*H.E.* VI. 11) says that Tatian composed a *Chronicon,*
which we hear about from no other writer. Malalas calls Tatian a
chronographer, but he is evidently thinking of the chronological
passages in his *Oratio,* and in the absence of all trustworthy
testimony we must reject Rufinus’ notice as a mistake. In his *Oratio,*
chap. 40, Tatian speaks of a work *Against those who have discoursed on
Divine Things,* in which he intends to show “what the learned among the
Greeks have said concerning our polity and the history of our laws and
how many and what kind of men have written of these things.” Whether he
ever wrote the work or not we do not know; we find no other notice of
it. Upon Tatian, see especially Zahn’s *Tatian’s Diatessaron* and
Harnack’s *Ueberlieferung,* &c., p. 196; also Donaldson’s *Hist. of
Christ. Lit. and Doct.* II. p. 3 sqq., and J. M. Fuller’s article in the
*Dict. of Christ. Biog.*

<span id="fn_1323"></span>[207:1324](2010138.htm#fr_1323) <span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p5"></span> In chap. 16.

<span id="fn_1324"></span>[208:1325](2010138.htm#fr_1324) <span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p6"></span> Irenæus, *Adv. Hær.* I. 28. 1.

<span id="fn_1325"></span>[208:1326](2010138.htm#fr_1325) <span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p8.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p8.2"></span>Εγκρατεῖς</span>, a word meaning
“temperate” or “continent.” These Encratites were heretics who abstained
from flesh, from wine, and from marriage, not temporarily but
permanently, and because of a belief in the essential impurity of those
things. They are mentioned also by Hippolytus (*Phil.* VIII. 13), who
calls them <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p8.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p8.4"></span>γκρατῖται</span>; by Clement of Alexandria
(*Pæd.* II. 2, *Strom.* I. 15, &c.), who calls them <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxix-p8.5"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxix-p8.6"></span>γκρατηταί</span>; by
Epiphanius (*Hær.* 47), who agrees with Hippolytus in the form of the
name, and by others. The Encratites whom Irenæus describes seem to have
constituted a distinct sect, anti-Jewish and Gnostic in its character.
As described by Hippolytus they appear to have been mainly orthodox in
doctrine but heretical in their manner of life, and we may perhaps
gather the same thing from Clement’s references to them. It is evident,
therefore, that Irenæus and the others are not referring to the same
men. So Theodoret, *Hær. Fab.* I. 21, speaks of the Severian Encratites;
but the Severians, as we learn from this chapter of Eusebius and from
Epiphanius (*Hær.* XLV.), were Ebionitic and anti-Pauline in their
tendencies—the exact opposites, therefore, of the Encratites referred to
by Irenæus. That there was a distinct sect of Encratites of the
character described by Irenæus cannot be denied, but we must certainly
conclude that the word was used very commonly in a wider sense to denote
men of various schools who taught excessive and heretical abstinence. Of
course the later writers may have supposed that they all belonged to one
compact sect, but it is certain that they did not. As to the particular
sect which Irenæus describes, the statement made by Eusebius at the
close of the preceding chapter is incorrect, if we are to accept
Irenæus’ account. For the passage quoted in this chapter states that
they sprung from Marcion and Saturninus, evidently implying that they
were not founded by Tatian, but that he found them already in existence
when he became heretical. It is not surprising, however that his name
should become connected with them as their founder—for he was the
best-known man among them. That the Encratites as such (whether a single
sect or a general tendency) should be opposed by the Fathers, even by
those of ascetic tendencies, was natural. It was not always easy to
distinguish between orthodox and heretical asceticism, and yet there was
felt to be a difference. The fundamental distinction was held by the
Church—whenever it came to self-consciousness on the subject—to lie in
the fact that the heretics pronounced the things from which they
abstained essentially evil in themselves, thus holding a radical
dualism, while the orthodox abstained only as a matter of discipline.
The distinction, it is true, was not always preserved, but it was this
essentially dualistic principle of the Encratites which the early
Fathers combated; it is noticeable, however, that they do not expend as
much vigor in combating it as in refuting errors in doctrine. In fact,
they seem themselves to have been somewhat in doubt as to the proper
attitude to take toward these extreme ascetics.

<span id="fn_1326"></span>[208:1327](2010138.htm#fr_1326) <span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p8.7"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p9"></span> On Saturninus and on Marcion, see
chap. 7, note 6, and 11, note 15. On their asceticism, see especially
Irenæus, *Adv. Hær.* I. 24.

<span id="fn_1327"></span>[208:1328](2010138.htm#fr_1327) <span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p10.1"></span>τῶν λεγομένων ἐμψύχων</span>: i.e. animal
food in general.

<span id="fn_1328"></span>[208:1329](2010138.htm#fr_1328) <span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p11"></span> Cf. Irenæus, *Adv. Hær.* III. 23,
where this opinion of Tatian’s is refuted at considerable length. The
opinion seems a little peculiar, but was a not unnatural consequence of
Tatian’s strong dualism, and of his doctrine of a conditional
immortality for those who have been reunited with the Holy Spirit who
took his departure at the time of the fall (cf. especially his *Oratio,*
chap. 15). That Adam, who, by his fall, brought about this separation,
which has been of such direful consequence to the race, should be saved,
was naturally to Titian a very repugnant thought. He seems, moreover, to
have based his opinion, as Donaldson remarks, upon exegetical grounds
interpreting the passage in regard to Adam ([1 Cor. xv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#022)<span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p11.1"></span>) as meaning that Adam is and remains the
principle of death, and as such, of course, cannot himself enjoy life
(see Irenæus, *ibid.*). This is quite in accord with the distinction
between the psychical and physical man which he draws in his *Oratio.*
It is quite possible that he was moved in part also by the same motive
which led Marcion to deny the salvation of Abraham and the other
patriarchs (see Irenæus, *Adv. Hær.* I. 27 and IV. 8), namely, the
opposition between the God of the Old Testament and the Christ of the
New Testament, which led him to assert that those who depended on the
former were lost. We learn from Clement (*Strom.* III. 12) and from
Origen (*de Orat.* chap. 24) that among Tatian’s heretical works was one
in which he discussed the early chapters of Genesis and perhaps it was
in this work that he developed his peculiar views’ in regard to Adam.

<span id="fn_1329"></span>[208:1330](2010138.htm#fr_1329) <span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p13"></span> On Valentinus, see chap. 11, note 1.
That Tatian was Gnostic in many of his tendencies is plain enough not
only from these words of Irenæus, but also from the notices of him in
other writers (cf. especially Hippolytus, *Phil.* VIII. 9). To what
extent he carried his Gnosticism, however, and exactly in what it
consisted, we cannot tell. He can hardly have been a pronounced follower
of Valentinus and a zealous defender of the doctrine of Æons, or we
should find him connected more prominently with that school. He was, in
fact, a decided eclectic, and a follower of no one school, and doubtless
this subject, like many others, occupied but a subordinate place in his
speculations.

<span id="fn_1330"></span>[209:1331](2010138.htm#fr_1330) <span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p15"></span> That the Severians, whoever they
were, were Encratites in the wide sense, that is, strict abstainers from
flesh, wine, and marriage, cannot be denied (compare with this
description of Eusebius that of Epiphanius in *Hær.* XLV., also
Theodoret’s *Hær. Fab.* I. 21, who says that Apolinarius wrote against
the Severian Encratites,—a sign that the Severians and the Encratites
were in some way connected in tradition even though Theodoret’s
statement may be unreliable). But that they were connected with Tatian
and the Encratitic sect to which he belonged, as Eusebius states, is
quite out of the question. Tatian was a decided Paulinist (almost as
much so as Marcion himself). He cannot, therefore, have had anything to
do with this Ebionitic, anti-Pauline sect, known as the Severians.
Whether there was ever such a person as Severus, or whether the name
arose later to explain the name of the sect (possibly taken from the
Latin *severus,* “severe,” as Salmon suggests), as the name Ebion was
invented to explain the term Ebionites, we do not know. We are ignorant
also of the source from which Eusebius took his description of the
Severians, as we do not find them mentioned in any of the earlier
anti-heretical works. Eusebius must have heard, as Epiphanius did, that
they were extreme ascetics, and this must have led him, in the absence
of specific information as to their exact position, to join them with
Tatian and the Encratites,—a connection which can be justified on no
other ground.

<span id="fn_1331"></span>[209:1332](2010138.htm#fr_1331) <span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p18.1"></span>οὐκ οἰδ᾽ ὅπως</span>. Eusebius clearly
means to imply in these words that he was not acquainted with the
*Diatessaron.* Lightfoot, it is true, endeavors to show that these words
may mean simply disapproval of the work, and not ignorance in regard to
it. But his interpretation is an unnatural one, and has been accepted by
few scholars.

<span id="fn_1332"></span>[209:1333](2010138.htm#fr_1332) <span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p19.1"></span>τὸ διὰ τεσσ€ρων</span>. Eusebius is the
first one to mention this *Diatessaron,* and he had evidently not seen
it himself. After him it is not referred to again until the time of
Epiphanius, who in his *Hær.* XLVI. 1 incorrectly identifies it with the
Gospel according to the Hebrews, evidently knowing it only by hearsay.
Theodoret (*Hær. Fab.* I. 20) informs us that he found a great many
copies of it in circulation in his diocese, and that, finding that it
omitted the account of our Lord’s birth, he replaced it by the four
Gospels, fearing the mischief which must result from the use of such a
mutilated Gospel. In the *Doctrine of Addai* (ed. Syr. and Engl. by G.
Phillips, 1876), which belongs to the third century, a Diatessaron is
mentioned which is without doubt to be identified with the one under
consideration (see Zahn I. p. 90 sq.). Meanwhile we learn from the
preface to Dionysius bar Salibi’s Commentary on Mark (see Assemani,
*Bibl. Or.* I. 57), that Ephraem wrote a commentary upon the
*Diatessaron* of Tatian (*Tatianus Justini Philosophi ac Martyris
Discipulus, ex quator Evangeliis unum digessit, quod Diatessaron
nuncupavit. Hunc librum Sanctus Ephraem commentariis illustravit*).
Ephraem’s commentary still exists in an Armenian version (published at
Venice in 1836, and in Latin in 1876 by Mœsinger). There exists also a
Latin Harmony of the Gospels, which is without doubt a substantial
reproduction of Tatian’s *Diatessaron,* and which was known to Victor of
Capua (of the sixth century). From these sources Zahn has attempted to
reconstruct the text of the *Diatessaron,* and prints the reconstructed
text, with a critical commentary, in his *Tatian’s Diatessaron.* Zahn
maintains that the original work was written in Syriac, and he is
followed by Lightfoot, Hilgenfeld, Fuller, and others; but Harnack has
given very strong reasons for supposing that it was composed by Tatian
in Greek, and that the Syriac which Ephraem used was a translation of
that original, not the original itself. Both Zahn and Harnack agree, as
do most other scholars, that the work was written before Tatian became a
heretic, and with no heretical intent. Inasmuch as he later became a
heretic, however, his work was looked upon with suspicion, and of course
in later days, when so much stress was laid (as e.g. by Irenæus) upon
the fourfold Gospel, Christians would be naturally distrustful of a
single Gospel proposed as a substitute for them. It is not surprising,
therefore, that the work failed to find acceptance in the Church at
large. For further particulars, see especially Zahn’s monograph, which
is the most complete and exhaustive discussion of the whole subject. See
also Harnack’s *Ueberlieferung der Griech. Apologeten,* p. 213 ff.,
Fuller’s article referred to in note 1, the article by Lightfoot in the
*Contemporary Review* for May, 1877, and those by Wace in the
*Expositor* for 1881 and 1882.

<span id="fn_1333"></span>[209:1334](2010138.htm#fr_1333) <span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p20"></span> i.e. of Paul, who was quite commonly
called simply <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p20.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p20.2"></span>ἀπόστολος</span>. This seems to imply that
Tatian wrote a work on Paul’s epistles (see note 1, above).

<span id="fn_1334"></span>[209:1335](2010138.htm#fr_1334) <span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p22.1"></span>λόγος ὁ πρὸς ῞Ελληνας</span>: *Oratio ad
Græcos.* This work is still extant, and is one of the most interesting
of the early apologies. The standpoint of the author is quite different
from that of Justin, for he treats Greek philosophy with the greatest
contempt, and finds nothing good in it. As remarked in note 1, above,
the *Oratio* was probably written after Tatian had left Rome for the
first time, but not long after his conversion. We may follow Harnack (p.
196) in fixing upon 152 to 153 as an approximate date. The work is
printed with a Latin translation and commentary in Otto’s *Corp. Apol.*
Vol. VI.

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p23"></span>The best critical edition is that of
Schwartz, in v. Gebhardt and Harnack’s *Texte und Untersuchungen,* IV. 1
(Leipzig, 1888), though it contains only the Greek text. An English
translation is given in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* Vol. II. p. 59–83.

<span id="fn_1335"></span>[209:1336](2010138.htm#fr_1335) <span
id="iii.ix.xxix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxix-p24"></span> Tatian devotes a number of chapters
to this subject (XXXI., XXXV.–XLI). Eusebius mentions him, with Clement,
Africanus, Josephus, and Justus, in the preface to his *Chron.* (Schöne,
II. p. 4), as a witness to the antiquity of Moses, and it is probable
that Julius Africanus drew from him in the composition of his
chronological work (cf. Harnack, *ibid.* p. 224). Clement of Alexandria
likewise made large use of his chronological results (see especially his
*Strom.* I. 21), and Origen refers to them in his *Contra Cels.* I. 16.
It was largely on account of these chapters on the antiquity of Moses
that Tatian’s *Oratio* was held in such high esteem, while his other
works disappeared.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX](2010139)
