[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010343)  [Next](2010345) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.i.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i.iii-p1"></span> §3. *State of Affairs in 311.*

<span id="iv.iii.i.iii-p2"></span>In the meantime, while the extreme
west of the empire was enjoying the mild rule of Constantine, the other
corners of the now quadrangular and now hexagonal world, over which
during this time Maximinus, Galerius, Licinius, Maximian, and Maxentius
had tried to reign, had had a much less comfortable time. Every emperor
wanted a corner to himself, and, having his corner, wanted that of some
one else or feared that some one else wanted his. In order clearly to
understand Constantine, a glimpse of the state of affairs in these other
parts of the empire, together with some idea of the kind of men with
whom he had to deal is essential, and may be gotten from a brief view of
(1) The rulers, (2) Characters of the rulers, (3) Condition of the
ruled.

<span id="iv.iii.i.iii-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.iii.i.iii-p3.1"></span>I. The Rulers.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.i.iii-p4"></span>The intricate process of evolution and
devolution of emperors, mysterious to the uninitiated as a Chinese
puzzle, is briefly as follows: In 305 Diocletian and Maximian had
abdicated (Lact. c. 18; Eutrop. 9. 27; Vict. *Cæs*.), Galerius and
Constantius succeeding as Augusti and Severus, Maximinus Daza succeeding
them as Cæsars (Lact. c. 19). In 306 Constantius died, Constantine was
proclaimed Augustus by his army, Maxentius by the Pretorian Guards (cf.
above), and Severus by Galerius (Lact. c. 25), while Maximian resumed
the purple (see above)—four emperors, Galerius, Severus, Maximian, and
Maxentius, with two Cæsars, Constantine and Maximinus, one with a pretty
definite claim to the purple, and the other bound not to be left out in
the cold. In 307 Licinius was appointed Augustus by Galerius (Lact. c.
29; Vict. *Cæs.;* Zos. 2. 11; Anon. Vales.; Eutrop. 10. 4), who also
threw a sop to Cerberus by naming Constantine and Maximin “sons of
emperors” (Lact. c. 32; Coins in Eckhel 8 (1838) 52. 3). Constantine was
given title of Augustus by Maximianus (?), and Maximinus about this time
was forced, as he said, by his army to assume the title. Meantime the
growing procession of emperors was reduced by one. Severus, sent against
Maxentius, was deserted by his soldiers, captured, and slain in 307
(Lact. c. 26; Zos. 2. 10; Anon. Vales.; Eutrop. 10. 2; Vict. *Cæs*. &c.
&c.), leaving still six emperors or claimants,—Galerius, Licinius,
Maxentius, Maximian, Maximinus, and Constantine. In 308, making the best
of a bad matter, Galerius appointed Constantine and Maximin Augusti (see
above), leaving the situation unchanged, and so it remained until the
death of Maximian in 310 (see above), and of Galerius in May, 311 (Lact.
c. 33; Vict. *Cæs.,* Vict. *Epit*.; Zos. 2. 11) reduced the number to
four.

<span id="iv.iii.i.iii-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.iii.i.iii-p5.1"></span>II. Characters of the Rulers.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.i.iii-p6"></span>Constantine’s own character has been
hinted at and will be studied later. Severus was the least significant
of the others, having a brief reign and being little mentioned by
historians. Diocletian’s characterization of him was, according to
Lactantius (c. 18), as ejaculated to Galerius, “That dancing, carousing
drunkard who turns night into day and day into night.” The average
character of the other emperors was that of the prisoners for life in
our modern state prisons. Galerius, “that pernicious wild beast” (Lact.
c. 25), was uneducated, drunken (Anon. Vales. p. 472); fond of boasting
himself to be the illegitimate son of a dragon (Lact. 9; Vict. *Epit.*
p. 49), and sanguinary and ferocious to an extraordinary degree (Lact.
c. 9. 21, 22, &c.). Licinius, characterized by “ingratitude” and
“cold-blooded ferocity,” was “not only totally <span id="page_415">p.
415</span> <span id="iv.iii.i.iii-Page_415"></span>indifferent to human
life and suffering, and regardless of any principle of law or justice
which might interfere with the gratification of his passions, but he was
systematically treacherous and cruel, possessed of not one redeeming
quality save physical courage and military skill” (Ramsay, in Smith
*Dict.* 2, p. 784; compare Euseb. *H. E.* 10. 8; *V. C.* 1. 49–56), and
“in avaricious cupidity worst of all” (Vict. *Epit.* p. 51). Maximinus’
character “stands forth as pre-eminent for brutal licentiousness and
ferocious cruelty—‘lust hard by hate’” (Plumptre, in Smith & W. 3, p.
872), and according to Lactantius, c. 38, “that which distinguished his
character and in which he transcended all former emperors was his desire
of debauching women.” He was cruel, superstitious, gluttonous,
rapacious, and “so addicted to intoxication that in his drunken frolics
he was frequently deranged and deprived of his reason like a madman”
(Euseb. *H. E.* 8. 14). Maximianus has been thought to be on the whole
the least outrageous, and his somewhat defective moral sense respecting
treachery and murder has been noted (cf. above). He has been described
as “thoroughly unprincipled…base and cruel” (Ramsay, in Smith *Dict.* 2,
p. 981). He is described by Victor, (*Epit.* p. 48) as “ferus natura,
ardens libidine,” being addicted to extraordinary and unnatural lust
(Lact. c. 8). Truly a choice “best” in this rogues’ gallery. Of
Maxentius it is said (Tyrwhitt, in Smith & W. 3, p. 865): “His
wickedness seems to have transcended description, and to have been
absolutely unredeemed by any saving feature.” He “left no impurity or
licentiousness untouched” (Euseb. *H. E.* 8. 14; cf. Eutrop. 10. 4;
Lact. 9). He was marked by “impiety,” “cruelty,” “lust,” and tyranny
(*Paneg.* \[313\] c. 4). He was the most disreputable of
all,—unmitigatedly disreputable. With all due allowance for the
prejudice of Christian historians, from whom such strong statements are
mainly drawn, yet enough of the details are confirmed by Victor,
*Epit.,* the Panegyrists, Eutropius, and other non-Christian writers to
verify the substantial facts of the ferocity, drunkenness, lust,
covetousness, and oppression of this precious galaxy of rulers.

<span id="iv.iii.i.iii-p7"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.iii.i.iii-p7.1"></span>III. Condition of the Ruled.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.i.iii-p8"></span>Under such rulers there was a reign of
terror during this period which contrasted strangely with the state of
things under Constantine. Galerius was “driving the empire wild with his
taxations” (cf. Lact. c. 23 and 26), affording in this also a marked
contrast with the course of Constantine in Gaul. Maxentius led in the
unbridled exercise of passion (Euseb. *H. E.* 8. 14; cf. Lact. c. 18),
but in this he differed from the others little except in degree (compare
Euseb. *V. C.* 1. 55 on Licinius), and according to Lactantius (c. 28)
he was surpassed by Maximin. In brief, all did according to their own
sweet wills, and the people had to stand it as best they could. The
worst was that the oppression did not end with the emperors nor the
friends and officials to whom they delegated power to satisfy their
desires at the expense of the helpless. Their armies were necessary to
them. The soldiers had to be conciliated and exactions made to meet
their demands. They followed the examples of their royal leaders in all
manner of excesses and oppressions. No property or life or honor was
safe.

<span id="iv.iii.i.iii-p9"></span>The persecution of the Christians
reached a climax of horror in this period. The beginning of the tenth
persecution was, to be sure, a little before this (303), but its main
terror was in this time. Galerius and Maximian are said indeed to have
persecuted less during this period, and Maxentius not at all; but
Galerius was the real author and sanguinary promoter of the persecution
which is ascribed to Diocletian (Lact. c. 11), while Maximian was, in
304, the author of the celebrated “Fourth Edict” which made death the
penalty of Christianity, and Maxentius was only better because
impartial—he persecuted both Christian and heathen (Euseb. *V. C.* 1.
33–6; *H. E.* 8. 14; Eutrop. 10. 4). <span
id="fr_3009"></span>[3010](#fn_3009) The persecution under Maximin was
of peculiar atrocity (Euseb. *H. E.* 8. 17; 9. 6, &c.; Lact. c. 26–27),
so that the whole of this period in the East, excepting a slight
breathing space in 308, was a terror to Christians, and it is said that
“these two years were the most prolific of bloodshed of any in the whole
history of Roman persecu<span id="page_416">p. 416</span> <span
id="iv.iii.i.iii-Page_416"></span>tions” (Marriott, in Smith & W. 2, p.
594). It was not until the very end of this period <span
id="fr_3010"></span>[3011](#fn_3010) that Galerius, in terror of death,
issued the famous first edict of toleration. <span
id="fr_3011"></span>[3012](#fn_3011) Such was the condition of things in
July, 311. The deaths of Severus in 307, Maximian in 310, and Galerius
in 311, had cleared the stage so far as to leave but four Augusti,
Licinius and Maximin in the East, Constantine and Maxentius in the West.
The only well-ordered and contented section of the world was that of
Constantine. In all the others there was oppression, excess, and
discontent, the state of things at Rome being on the whole the most
outrageous.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3009"></span>[415:3010](2010344.htm#fr_3009) <span
id="iv.iii.i.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i.iii-p10"></span> “Raging against the nobles with
every kind of destruction,” Eutrop. 10. 4.

<span id="fn_3010"></span>[416:3011](2010344.htm#fr_3010) <span
id="iv.iii.i.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i.iii-p11"></span> Edict of toleration was April 30;
Constantine’s anniversary, July 24.

<span id="fn_3011"></span>[416:3012](2010344.htm#fr_3011) <span
id="iv.iii.i.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i.iii-p12"></span> This edict was signed by Constantine
and Licinius as well as by Galerius. The Latin text is found in
Lactantius, *de mort. pers.* c. 24, and the Greek translation in
Eusebius, *H. E.* 8. 17.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](2010345)
