[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010578)  [Next](2010580.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lx"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lx-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.lx-p1.1"></span>Chapter LX</span>.—*Constantine’s Letter
to the Antiochians, directing them not to withdraw Eusebius from
Cæsarea, but to seek some one else.*

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lx-p2"></span>“<span class="c13"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.lx-p2.1"></span>Victor Constantinus, Maximus
Augustus</span>, to the people of Antioch.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lx-p3"></span>“How pleasing to the wise and
intelligent portion of mankind is the concord which exists among you!
And I myself, brethren, am disposed to love you with an enduring
affection, inspired both by religion, and by your own manner of life and
zeal on my behalf. It is by the exercise of right understanding and
sound discretion, that we are enabled really to enjoy our blessings. And
what can become you so well as this discretion? No wonder, then, if I
affirm that your maintenance of the truth has tended rather to promote
your security than to draw on you the hatred of others. Indeed, amongst
brethren, whom the selfsame disposition to walk <span id="page_537">p.
537</span> <span id="iv.vi.iii.lx-Page_537"></span>in the ways of truth
and righteousness promises, through the favor of God, to register among
his pure and holy family, what can be more honorable than gladly to
acquiesce in the prosperity of all men? Especially since the precepts of
the divine law prescribe a better direction to your proposed intention,
and we ourselves desire that your judgment should be confirmed by proper
sanction. <span id="fr_3296"></span>[3297](#fn_3296.md) It may be that you
are surprised, and at a loss to understand the meaning of this
introduction to my present address. The cause of it I will not hesitate
to explain without reserve. I confess, then, that on reading your
records I perceived, by the highly eulogistic testimony which they bear
to Eusebius, bishop of Cæsarea, whom I have myself long well known and
esteemed for his learning and moderation, that you are strongly attached
to him, and desire to appropriate him as your own. What thoughts, then,
do you suppose that I entertain on this subject, desirous as I am to
seek for and act on the strict principles of right? What anxiety do you
imagine this desire of yours has caused me? O holy faith, who givest us
in our Saviour’s words and precepts a model, as it were, of what our
life should be, how hardly wouldst thou thyself resist the sins of men,
were it not that thou refusest to subserve the purposes of gain! In my
own judgment, he whose first object is the maintenance of peace, seems
to be superior to Victory herself; and where a right and honorable
course lies open to one’s choice, surely no one would hesitate to adopt
it. I ask then, brethren, why do we so decide as to inflict an injury on
others by our choice? Why do we covet those objects which will destroy
the credit of our own reputation? I myself highly esteem the individual
whom ye judge worthy of your respect and affection: notwithstanding, it
cannot be right that those principles should be entirely disregarded
which should be authoritative and binding on all alike, so that each
should not be content with his own circumstances, and all enjoy their
proper privileges: nor can it be right, in considering the claims of
rival candidates, to suppose but that not one only, but many, may appear
worthy of comparison with this person. For as long as no violence or
harshness are suffered to disturb the dignities of the church, they
continue to be on an equal footing, and worthy of the same consideration
everywhere. Nor is it reasonable that an inquiry into the qualifications
of this one should be made to the detriment of others; since the
judgment of all churches, whether reckoned of greater or less importance
in themselves, is equally capable of receiving and maintaining the
divine ordinances, so that one is in no way inferior to another, if we
will but boldly declare the truth, in regard to that standard of
practice which is common to all. If this be so, we must say that you
will be chargeable, not with retaining this prelate, but with wrongfully
removing him; your conduct will be characterized rather by violence than
justice; and whatever may be generally thought by others, I dare clearly
and boldly affirm that this measure will furnish ground of accusation
against you, and will provoke factious disturbances of the most
mischievous kind: for even timid flocks can show the use and power of
their teeth, when the watchful care of their shepherd declines, and they
find themselves bereft of his accustomed guidance. If this then be
really so, if I am not deceived in my judgment, let this, brethren, be
your first consideration, for many and important considerations will
immediately present themselves, whether, should you persist in your
intention, that mutual kindly feeling and affection which should subsist
among you will suffer no diminution? In the next place, remember that
he, who came among you for the purpose of offering disinterested
counsel, <span id="fr_3297"></span>[3298](#fn_3297.md) now enjoys the
reward which is due to him in the judgment of heaven; for he has
received no ordinary recompense in the high testimony you have borne to
his equitable conduct. Lastly, in accordance with your usual sound
judgment, do ye exhibit a becoming diligence in selecting the person of
whom you stand in need, carefully avoiding all factious and tumultuous
clamor; for such clamor is always wrong, and from the collision of
discordant elements both sparks and flame will arise. I protest, as I
desire to please God and you, and to enjoy a happiness commensurate with
your kind wishes, that I love you, and the quiet haven of your
gentleness, now that you have cast from you that which defiled, <span
id="fr_3298"></span>[3299](#fn_3298.md) and received in its place at once
sound morality and concord, firmly planting in the vessel the sacred
standard, and guided, as one may say, by a helm of iron in your course
onward to the light of heaven. Receive then on board that merchandise
which is incorruptible, since, as it were, all <span id="page_538">p.
538</span> <span id="iv.vi.iii.lx-Page_538"></span>bilge water has been
drained from the vessel; and be careful henceforth so to secure the
enjoyment of all your present blessing, that you may not seem at any
future time either to have determined any measure on the impulse of
inconsiderate or ill-directed zeal, or in the first instance rashly to
have entered on an inexpedient course. May God preserve you, beloved
brethren!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3296"></span>[537:3297](2010579.htm#fr_3296.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.lx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lx-p4"></span> To the various and controverted
translations of this passage it may be ventured to add one, “we
ourselves desire your judgment to be fortified by good counsels.”

<span id="fn_3297"></span>[537:3298](2010579.htm#fr_3297.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.lx-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lx-p5"></span> The other point of view has been
alluded to. It seems on the face of it, in this unanimous endorsement by
the church, as if Eusebius had had the right of it in his quarrel with
Eustathius; but on the other hand, it is to be remembered that this
wonderful harmony in the church had come about from the fact that
Eustathius and all who sympathized with him had withdrawn, and only the
party of Eusebius was left. It would be like a “unanimous” vote in
Parliament with all the opposition benches empty. The endorsement of his
own party does not count for much.

<span id="fn_3298"></span>[537:3299](2010579.htm#fr_3298.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.lx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lx-p6"></span> \[Alluding to the deposition of
Eustathius, who had been charged with the crime of seduction. The reader
who consults the original of this chapter, especially the latter part of
it, may judge of the difficulty of eliciting any tolerable sense from an
obscure, and possibly corrupted, text.—*Bag.*\] The translator (*Bag.*)
shows ingenuity in this extracting of the general sense from the
involved Greek of the writing of Constantine or the translation as it
supposably is. But the very fact of the obscurity shown in this and in
his oration alike is conclusive against any thought that the literary
work ascribed to Constantine was written by Eusebius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXI](2010580.md)
