[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010544)  [Next](2010546) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVI</span>.—*That the Holy
Sepulchre had been covered with Rubbish and with Idols by the Ungodly.*

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xxvi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>For</span> it had been in time past the
endeavor of impious men (or rather let me say of the whole race of evil
spirits through their means), to consign to the darkness of oblivion
that divine monument of immortality to which the radiant angel had
descended from heaven, and rolled away the stone for those who still had
stony hearts, and who supposed that the living One still lay among the
dead; and had declared glad tidings to the women also, and removed their
stony-hearted unbelief by the conviction that he whom they sought was
alive. This sacred cave, then, certain impious and godless persons had
thought to remove entirely from the eyes of men, supposing in their
folly that thus they should be able effectually to obscure the truth.
Accordingly they brought a quantity of earth from a distance with much
labor, and covered the entire spot; then, having raised this to a
moderate height, they paved it with stone, concealing the holy cave
beneath this massive mound. Then, as though their purpose had been
effectually accomplished, they prepare on this foundation a truly
dreadful sepulchre of souls, by building a gloomy shrine of lifeless
idols to the impure spirit whom they call Venus, and offering detestable
oblations therein on profane and accursed altars. For they supposed that
their object could not otherwise be fully attained, than by thus burying
the sacred cave beneath these foul pollutions. Unhappy men! they were
unable to comprehend how impossible it was that their attempt should
remain unknown to him who had been crowned with victory over death, any
more than the blazing sun, when he rises above the earth, and holds his
wonted course through the midst of heaven, is unseen by the whole race
of mankind. Indeed, his saving power, shining with still greater
brightness, and illumining, not the bodies, but the souls of men, was
already filling the world with the effulgence of its own light.
Nevertheless, these devices of impious and wicked men against the truth
had prevailed for a long time, nor had any one of the governors, or
military commanders, or even of the emperors themselves ever yet
appeared, with ability to abolish these daring impieties, save only that
one who enjoyed the favor of the King of kings. And now, acting as he
did under the guidance of the divine Spirit, he could not consent to see
the sacred spot of which we have spoken, thus buried, through the
devices of the adversaries, under every kind of impurity, and abandoned
to forgetfulness and neglect; nor would he yield to the malice of those
who had contracted this guilt, but calling on the divine aid, gave
orders that the place should be thoroughly purified, thinking that the
parts which had been most polluted by the enemy ought to receive special
tokens, through his means, of the greatness of the divine favor. As
soon, then, as his commands were issued, these engines of deceit were
cast down from their proud eminence to the very ground, and the
dwelling-places of error, with the statues and the evil spirits which
they represented, were overthrown and utterly destroyed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII](2010546)
