[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010024)  [Next](2010026.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p1"></span> <span id="page_57">p. 57</span> <span
id="iii.iv-Page_57"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iii.iv-p1.1"></span>Testimonies of the Ancients in Favor of
Eusebius. <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5.md) </span>

<span id="iii.iv-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iii.iv-p3.1"></span>\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_</span>

<span id="iii.iv-p4"></span>*From Constantine’s Letter to the
Antiochians* (in Eusebius’ *Life of Constantine,* Book III. chap. 60).

<span id="iii.iv-p5"></span>“I confess, then, that on reading your
records I perceived, by the highly eulogistic testimony which they bear
to Eusebius, bishop of Cæsarea (whom I have myself long well known and
esteemed for his learning and moderation), that you are strongly
attached to him and desire to appropriate him as your own prelate. What
thoughts then do you suppose that I entertain on this subject, desirous
as I am to seek for and act on the strict principles of right? What
anxiety do you imagine this desire of yours has caused me? O holy faith,
who givest us in our Saviour’s words and precepts a model, as it were,
of what our life should be, how hardly wouldst thou thyself resist the
course of sin were it not that thou refusest to subserve the purposes of
gain! In my own judgment, he whose first object is the maintenance of
peace seems to be superior to Victory herself; and where a right and
honorable course lies open to one’s choice, surely no one would hesitate
to adopt it. I ask then, brethren, why do we so decide as to inflict an
injury on others by our choice? Why do we covet those objects which will
destroy the credit of our own character? I myself highly esteem the
individual whom ye judge worthy of your respect and affection;
notwithstanding, it cannot be right that those principles should be
entirely disregarded which should be authoritative and binding on all
alike; for example, that each should be content with the limits assigned
them, and that all should enjoy their proper privileges; nor can it be
right in considering the claims of rival candidates to suppose but that
not one only, but many, may appear worthy of comparison with this
person. For as long as no violence or harshness are suffered to disturb
the dignities of the Church, they continue to be on an equal footing,
and worthy of the same consideration everywhere. Nor is it reasonable
that an enquiry into the qualifications of one person should be made to
the detriment of others; since the judgment of all churches, whether
reckoned of greater importance in themselves, is equally capable of
receiving and maintaining the divine ordinances, so that one is in no
way inferior to another (if we will but boldly declare the truth), in
regard to that standard of practice which is common to all. If this be
so, we must say that you will be chargeable, not with retaining this
prelate, but with wrongfully removing him; your conduct will be
characterized rather by violence than justice; and whatever may be
generally thought by others, I dare clearly and boldly affirm that this
measure will furnish ground of accusation against you, and will provoke
factious disturbances of the most mischievous kind; for even timid
flocks can show the use and power of their teeth when the watchful care
of their shepherd declines, and they find themselves bereft of his
accustomed guidance. If this then be really so, if I am not deceived in
my judgment, let this, brethren, be your first consideration (for many
and important considerations will immediately present themselves, if you
adopt my advice), whether, should you persist in your intention, that
mutual kindly feeling and affection which should subsist among you will
suffer no diminution? In the next place remember that Eusebius, who came
among you for the purpose of offering disinterested counsel, now enjoys
the reward which is due to him in the judgment of heaven; for he has
received no ordinary recompense in the high testimony you have borne to
his equitable conduct. Lastly, in accordance with your usual sound
judgment, do ye exhibit a becoming diligence in selecting the person of
whom you stand in need, carefully avoiding all factious and tumultuous
clamor: for such clamor is always wrong, and from the collision of
discordant elements both sparks and flame will arise.”

<span id="iii.iv-p6"></span><span id="page_58">p. 58</span> <span
id="iii.iv-Page_58"></span>*From the Emperor’s Letter to Eusebius*(in
Eusebius’ *Life of Constantine,* Book III. chap. 61).

<span id="iii.iv-p7"></span>“I have most carefully perused your letter,
and perceive that you have strictly conformed to the rule enjoined by
the discipline of the Church. Now to abide by that which appears at the
same time pleasing to God, and accordant with apostolic tradition, is a
proof of true piety: and you have reason to deem yourself happy on this
behalf, that you are counted worthy, in the judgment, I may say, of all
the world, to have the oversight of the whole Church. For the desire
which all feel to claim you for their own, undoubtedly enhances your
enviable fortune in this respect. Notwithstanding, your Prudence, whose
resolve it is to observe the ordinances of God and the apostolic rule of
the Church, has done excellently well in declining the bishopric of the
Church at Antioch, and desiring to continue in that Church of which you
first received the oversight by the will of God.”

<span id="iii.iv-p8"></span>*From Constantine’s Letter to the Council*
(in Eusebius’ *Life of Constantine,* Book III. chap. 62).

<span id="iii.iv-p9"></span>“I have perused the letters written by your
Prudences, and highly approve of the wise resolution of your colleague
in the ministry, Eusebius. Having, moreover, been informed of the
circumstances of the case, partly by your letters, partly by those of
our illustrious friends Acacius and Strategius, after sufficient
investigation I have written to the people at Antioch, suggesting the
course which will be at once pleasing to God and advantageous for the
Church. A copy of this I have ordered to be subjoined to this present
letter, in order that ye yourselves may know what I thought fit, as an
advocate of the cause of justice, to write to that people: since I find
in your letter this proposal, that, in consonance with the choice of the
people, sanctioned by your own desire, Eusebius the holy bishop of
Cæsarea should preside over and take the charge of the Church at
Antioch. Now the letters of Eusebius himself on this subject appeared to
be strictly accordant with the order prescribed by the Church.”

<span id="iii.iv-p10"></span>*From a Letter of Constantine to Eusebius*
(in Eusebius’ *Life of Constantine,* Book IV. chap. 35).

<span id="iii.iv-p11"></span>“It is indeed an arduous task, and beyond
the power of language itself, worthily to treat of the mysteries of
Christ, and to explain in a fitting manner the controversy respecting
the feast of Easter, its origin as well as its precious and toilsome
accomplishment. For it is not in the power even of those who are able to
apprehend them, adequately to describe the things of God. I am,
notwithstanding, filled with admiration of your learning and zeal, and
have not only myself read your work with pleasure, but have given
directions, according to your own desire, that it be communicated to
many sincere followers of our holy religion. Seeing, then, with what
pleasure we receive favors of this kind from your Sagacity, be pleased
to gladden us more frequently with those compositions, to the practice
of which, indeed, you confess yourself to have been trained from an
early period, so that I am urging a willing man (as they say), in
exhorting you to your customary pursuits. And certainly the high and
confident judgment we entertain is a proof that the person who has
translated your writings into the Latin tongue is in no respect
incompetent to the task, impossible though it be that such version
should fully equal the excellence of the works themselves.”

<span id="iii.iv-p12"></span>*From a Letter of Constantine to Eusebius*
(in Eusebius’ *Life of Constantine,* Book IV. chap. 36).

<span id="iii.iv-p13"></span>“It happens, through the favoring
providence of God our Saviour, that great numbers have united themselves
to the most holy Church in the city which is called by my name. It
seems, therefore, highly requisite, since that city is rapidly advancing
in prosperity in all other respects, that the number of Churches should
also be increased. Do you, therefore, receive with all readiness my
determination on this behalf. I have thought it expedient to instruct
your Prudence to order fifty copies of the sacred scriptures (the
provision and use of which you know to be most needful for the
instruction of the Church) to be written on prepared parchment in a
legible manner, and in a commodious and portable form, by transcribers
thoroughly practiced in their art. The procurator of the diocese has
also received instructions by letter from our Clemency to be careful to
furnish all things necessary for the preparation of such copies; and it
will be for you to take special care that they be completed with as
little delay as possible. You have authority also, in virtue of this
letter, to use two of the public carriages for their conveyance, by
which arrangement the copies when fairly written will most easily be
forwarded for my personal inspection; and one of the deacons of your
Church may be intrusted with this service, who, on his arrival here,
shall experience my liberality. God preserve you, beloved brother!”

<span id="iii.iv-p14"></span><span id="page_59">p. 59</span> <span
id="iii.iv-Page_59"></span>*From the Epistle of Eusebius of Nicomedia,
to Paulinus, Bishop of Tyre* (given by Theodoret in his *Eccles. Hist*.
I. 6).

<span id="iii.iv-p15"></span>“Neither has the zeal of my lord Eusebius
concerning the truth, nor thy silence in this matter been unknown, but
has reached even us. And, as was fitting, on the one hand we have
rejoiced on account of my lord Eusebius; but on the other, we are
grieved on thy account, since we look upon the silence of such a man as
a condemnation of our cause.”

<span id="iii.iv-p16"></span>*From the Book of Basil, to Amphilochius,
on the Holy Spirit* (chap. 29).

<span id="iii.iv-p17"></span>“If to any one Eusebius of Palestine seem
trustworthy on account of his great experience, we give his own words in
the *Difficulties concerning the Polygamy of the Ancients.*”

<span id="iii.iv-p18"></span>*From the Book of Questions on the Old and
New Testaments, which is published among the Works of Augustine* (chap.
125).

<span id="iii.iv-p19"></span>“We remember to have read in a certain
pamphlet of Eusebius, a man formerly distinguished among the rest of
men, that not even the Holy Spirit knows the mystery of the nativity of
our Lord Jesus Christ; and I wonder that a man of so great learning
should have imposed this stigma upon the Holy Spirit.”

<span id="iii.iv-p20"></span>*From Jerome’s Epistle to Pammachius and
Oceanus* (*Ep.* 65).

<span id="iii.iv-p21"></span>“Apollinarius wrote the very strongest
books against Porphyry; Eusebius has excellently composed his
*Ecclesiastical History.* Of these men, one taught an incomplete human
nature in Christ; the other was a most open defender of the heresy of
Arius.”

<span id="iii.iv-p22"></span>*From the Apology of Jerome against
Rufinus* (Book I. chap. 8).

<span id="iii.iv-p23"></span>“As I have already said, Eusebius, bishop
of Cæsarea, formerly leader of the Arian party, has written six books in
defense of Origen—a very extensive and elaborate work; with much
evidence he has proved that Origen was, from his point of view, a
Catholic, that is, from ours, an Arian.”

<span id="iii.iv-p24"></span>*From the same book* (chap. 9).

<span id="iii.iv-p25"></span>“For Eusebius himself, a friend, eulogist
and companion of Pamphilus, has written three very elegant books
comprising a life of Pamphilus. In these, after extolling other things
with wondrous praises and exalting his humility to the skies, he also
adds this in the third book,” &c.

<span id="iii.iv-p26"></span>*And a little farther on in the same book*
(chap. 11).

<span id="iii.iv-p27"></span>“I have praised Eusebius in his
*Ecclesiastical History,* in his *Chronological Canons,* in his
*Description of the Holy Land;* and turning these same little works into
Latin I have given them to those of my own tongue. Am I therefore an
Arian, because Eusebius who wrote these books is an Arian?”

<span id="iii.iv-p28"></span>*From Jerome’s second book against Rufinus*
(chap. 16).

<span id="iii.iv-p29"></span>“Eusebius, a very learned man (I have said
learned, not Catholic; lest after the usual manner, even in this thing,
thou heap calumny upon me), in six volumes does nothing else than show
Origen to be of his own faith; that is, of the Arian heresy.”

<span id="iii.iv-p30"></span>From the Preface of Jerome’s Book on Hebrew
Topography.

<span id="iii.iv-p31"></span>“Eusebius, who took his surname from the
blessed martyr Pamphilus, after the ten books of his *Ecclesiastical
History,* after his *Chronological Canons,* which we have published in
the Latin tongue, after his *Names of Various Nations,* in which he
showed how these were formerly, and are now, called among the Hebrews;
after his *Topography of the Land of Judea, with the inheritances of the
tribes;* after his *Jerusalem,* also, and his *Plan of the Temple, with
a very brief explanation,*—after all these he has finally in this little
work labored that he might collect for us from Holy Scripture the names
of almost all the cities, mountains, rivers, villages, and divers
places, which either remain the same, or have since been changed, or
else have become corrupted from some source, wherefore we also,
following the zeal of this admirable man,” &c.

<span id="iii.iv-p32"></span><span id="page_60">p. 60</span> <span
id="iii.iv-Page_60"></span>*From Jerome’s Book on Ecclesiastical
Writers* (chap. 61).

<span id="iii.iv-p33"></span>“Hippolytus, bishop of a certain church (I
have not indeed been able to find out the name of the city), wrote a
reckoning of Easter, and chronological tables up to the first year of
the Emperor Alexander, and hit upon a cycle of sixteen years which the
Greeks call <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p33.1"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p33.2"></span>κκαιδεκαετηρίδα</span>; and gave an occasion to
Eusebius, who also composed an Easter canon, with a cycle of nineteen
years, that is <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p33.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p33.4"></span>ννεαδεκαετηρίδα</span>.”

<span id="iii.iv-p34"></span>*From the same book* (chap. 81).

<span id="iii.iv-p35"></span>“Eusebius, bishop of Cæsarea in Palestine,
a man most studious in the sacred Scriptures, and along with Pamphilus
the martyr a most diligent investigator of sacred literature, has edited
an infinite number of volumes, some of which are these: of the
*Demonstratio Evangelica,* twenty books; of the *Præparatio Evangelica,*
fifteen books; of the *Theophania,* five books; of the *Ecclesiastical
History,* ten books; a *General History in Chronological Tables,* and an
*Epitome* of them; also, *On the Discrepancies of the Gospels; On
Isaiah,* ten books; and *Against Porphyry* (who at the same time was
writing in Sicily, as some think), thirty books, of which only twenty
have come to my notice; of his *Topica,* one book; of the *Apologia,* in
defense of Origen, six books; *On the Life of Pamphilus,* three books;
*Concerning the Martyrs,* other small works; also very learned
commentaries on the hundred and fifty Psalms, and many other writings.
He flourished chiefly under the emperors Constantine and Constantius;
and on account of his friendship with Pamphilus the martyr, he took from
him his surname.”

<span id="iii.iv-p36"></span>*From the same book* (chap. 96).

<span id="iii.iv-p37"></span>“Eusebius, by nation a Sardinian, and,
after being reader in Rome, bishop of Vercellæ, on account of his
confession of the faith banished by the Prince Constantius to
Scythopolis, and thence to Cappadocia, under Julian the emperor sent
back to the Church, has published the *Commentaries on the Psalms* of
Eusebius of Cæsarea, which he had translated from Greek into Latin.”

<span id="iii.iv-p38"></span>Jerome in the Preface to his Commentaries
on Daniel.

<span id="iii.iv-p39"></span>“Against the prophet Daniel Porphyry wrote
a twelfth volume, denying that that book was composed by him with whose
name it is inscribed, &c. To him Eusebius, bishop of Cæsarea, has
replied very skillfully in three volumes, that is, in volumes XVIII.,
XIX., and XX. Apollinarius also in one large volume, that is, in the
twenty-sixth volume, and before these, in part, Methodius.”

<span id="iii.iv-p40"></span>Jerome on the Twenty-fourth Chapter of
Matthew.

<span id="iii.iv-p41"></span>“Concerning this place, that is, concerning
the abomination of desolation which was spoken of by the prophet Daniel,
standing in the holy place, Porphyry has uttered many blasphemies
against us in the thirteenth volume of his work. To whom Eusebius,
bishop of Cæsarea, has replied in three volumes, that is, in volumes
XVIII., XIX., and XX.”

<span id="iii.iv-p42"></span>*The same, in his Epistle to Magnus* (*Ep.*
84).

<span id="iii.iv-p43"></span>“Celsus and Porphyry have written against
us. To the former Origen, to the latter Methodius, Eusebius, and
Apollinarius have very vigorously replied. Of whom Origen wrote eight
books, Methodius proceeded as far as ten thousand lines, Eusebius and
Apollinarius composed twenty-five and thirty volumes respectively.”

<span id="iii.iv-p44"></span>*The same, in his Epistle to Pammachius and
Oceanus* (*Ep.* 65).

<span id="iii.iv-p45"></span>“What more skillful, more learned, more
eloquent men can be found than Eusebius and Didymus, the advocates of
Origen? The former of whom, in the six volumes of his *Apologia,* proves
that he \[Origen\] was of the same opinion as himself.”

<span id="iii.iv-p46"></span>Jerome, in the Preface to his Commentaries
on Isaiah.

<span id="iii.iv-p47"></span>“Eusebius Pamphili also has published an
historical commentary in fifteen volumes.”

<span id="iii.iv-p48"></span>The same, in the Preface to the Fifth Book
of his Commentaries on Isaiah.

<span id="iii.iv-p49"></span>“Shall I take upon myself a work at which
the most learned men have labored hard? I speak of Origen and Eusebius
Pamphili. Of these the former wanders afar in the free spaces of
alle<span id="page_61">p. 61</span> <span
id="iii.iv-Page_61"></span>gory, and his genius so interprets single
names as to make out of them the sacred things of the Church. The
latter, while promising in his title an historical exposition, meanwhile
forgets his purpose, and yields himself up to the tenets of Origen.”

<span id="iii.iv-p50"></span>The same, in the fifth book of his
Commentaries on Isaiah.

<span id="iii.iv-p51"></span>“Eusebius of Cæsarea, while promising in
his title an historical exposition, strays off in divers notions: while
reading his books I found much else than what he gave promise of in his
title. For wherever history has failed him, he has crossed over into
allegory; and in such a manner does he unite things that are distinct,
that I wonder at his joining together by a new art of discourse stone
and iron into one body.”

<span id="iii.iv-p52"></span>Jerome on the first chapter of Matthew.

<span id="iii.iv-p53"></span>“This \[chapter\] also Africanus, a writer
of chronology, and Eusebius of Cæsarea, in his books on the
*Discrepancies of the Gospels,* have discussed more fully.”

<span id="iii.iv-p54"></span>Rufinus in his Epistle to the Bishop
Chromatius.

<span id="iii.iv-p55"></span>“You charge me to translate into Latin the
*Ecclesiastical History*, which the very learned Eusebius of Cæsarea
wrote in the Greek tongue.”

<span id="iii.iv-p56"></span>*Augustine, in his Book on Heresies* (chap.
83).

<span id="iii.iv-p57"></span>“When I had searched through the *History*
of Eusebius, to which Rufinus, after having himself translated it into
the Latin tongue, has also added two books of subsequent history, I did
not find any heresy which I had not read among these very ones, except
that one which Eusebius inserts in his sixth book, stating that it had
existed in Arabia. Therefore these heretics, since he assigns them no
founder, we may call Arabians, who declared that the soul dies and is
destroyed along with the body, and that at the end of the world both are
raised again. But he states that they were very quickly corrected, these
by the disputation of Origen in person, and those by his exhortation.”

<span id="iii.iv-p58"></span>Antipater, Bishop of Bostra, in his First
Book against Eusebius of Cæsarea’s Apology for Origen.

<span id="iii.iv-p59"></span>“Since now this man was very learned,
having searched out and traced back all the books and writings of the
more ancient writers, and having set forth the opinions of almost all of
them, and having left behind very many writings, some of which are
worthy of all acceptation, making use of such an estimation as this of
the man, they attempt to lead away some, saying, that Eusebius would not
have chosen to take this view, unless he had accurately ascertained that
all the opinions of the ancients required it. I, indeed, agree and admit
that the man was very learned, and that not anything of the more ancient
writings escaped his knowledge; for, taking advantage of the imperial
co-operation, he was enabled easily to collect for his use material from
whatever quarter.”

<span id="iii.iv-p60"></span>From the First Book of Extracts from the
Ecclesiastical History of Philostorgius.

<span id="iii.iv-p61"></span>“Philostorgius, while praising Eusebius
Pamphili both as to whatever of worth belongs to his histories and as to
other things, yet declares that with regard to religion he has fallen
into great error; and that he impiously sets forth this error of his in
detail, holding that the Deity is unknowable and incomprehensible.
Moreover, he holds that he has also gone astray on other such things.
But he unites with others in attesting that he brought his *History*
down to the accession of the sons of Constantine the Great.”

<span id="iii.iv-p62"></span>*Socrates in the First Book of his
Ecclesiastical History* (chap. 1).

<span id="iii.iv-p63"></span>“Eusebius, surnamed Pamphilus (i.e.
universally beloved), has composed a History of the Church in ten books,
brought down to the time of the Emperor Constantine, when the
persecution ceased which Diocletian had commenced against the
Christians. But, in writing the life of Constantine, this author has
very slightly treated of the Arian controversy, being evidently more
intent on a highly wrought eulogium of the emperor than an accurate
statement of facts.”

<span id="iii.iv-p64"></span><span id="page_62">p. 62</span> <span
id="iii.iv-Page_62"></span>*The same Socrates in the Eighth Chapter of
the same Book, speaking of Sabinus, Bishop of Macedonia, who had written
a History of the Synod, says:—*

<span id="iii.iv-p65"></span>“Yet he commends Eusebius Pamphilus as a
witness worthy of credit, and praises the Emperor as capable in stating
Christian doctrines; but he still brands the faith which was declared at
Nice as having been set forth by ignorant men, and such as had no
intelligence in the matter. Thus he voluntarily contemns the testimony
of a man whom he himself pronounces a wise and true witness; for
Eusebius declares that of the ministers of God who were present at the
Nicene Synod, some were eminent for the word of wisdom, others for the
strictness of their life; and that the Emperor himself being present,
leading all into unanimity, established unity of judgment, and
conformity of opinion among them.”

<span id="iii.iv-p66"></span>The same Socrates, in Book II. chap. 21.

<span id="iii.iv-p67"></span>“But since some have attempted to
stigmatize Eusebius Pamphilus as having favored the Arian views in his
works, it may not be irrelevant here to make a few remarks respecting
him. In the first place, then, he was present at the council of Nice,
and gave his assent to what was there determined in reference to the
consubstantiality of the Son with the Father, and in the third book of
the *Life of Constantine*, he thus expressed himself: ‘*The Emperor
incited all to unanimity, until he had rendered them united in judgment
on those points on which they were previously at variance: so that they
were quite agreed at Nice in matters of faith.*’ Since, therefore,
Eusebius, in mentioning the Nicene Synod, says that all differences were
composed, and that unanimity of sentiment prevailed, what ground is
there for assuming that he was himself an Arian? The Arians are
certainly deceived in supposing him to be a favorer of their tenets. But
some one will perhaps say that in his discourses he seems to have
adopted the opinions of Arius, because of his frequently saying *by
Christ*. Our answer is that ecclesiastical writers often use this mode
of expression, and others of a similar kind denoting the *economy* of
our Saviour’s humanity: and that before all these the apostle made use
of such expressions without ever being accounted a teacher of false
doctrine. Moreover, inasmuch as Arius has dared to say that the Son is a
creature, as one of the others, observe what Eusebius says on this
subject in his first book against Marcellus:

<span id="iii.iv-p68"></span>“‘*He alone, and no other, has been
declared to be, and is the only-begotten Son of God; whence any one
would justly censure those who have presumed to affirm that he is a
Creature made of nothing, like the rest of the creatures; for how then
would he be a Son? and how could he be God’s only-begotten, were he
assigned the same nature as the other creatures, and were he one of the
many created things, seeing that he, like them, would in that case be
partaker of a creation from nothing? The sacred Scriptures do not thus
instruct us concerning these things.*’ He again adds a little
afterwards: ‘*Whoever then determines that the Son is made of things
that are not, and that he is a creature produced from nothing
pre-existing, forgets that while he concedes the name of Son, he denies
him to be so in reality. For he that is made of nothing cannot truly be
the Son of God, any more than the other things which have been made: but
the true Son of God, forasmuch as he is begotten of the Father, is
properly denominated the only-begotten and beloved of the Father. For
this reason also, he himself is God: for what can the offspring of God
be but the perfect resemblance of him who begat him? A sovereign,
indeed, builds a city, but does not beget it; and is said to beget a
son, not to build one. An artificer may be called the framer, but not
the father of his work; while he could by no means be styled the framer
of him whom he had begotten. So also the God of the Universe is the
father of the Son; but would be fitly termed the Framer and Maker of the
world. And although it is once said in Scripture*, The Lord created me
the beginning of his ways on account of his works, *yet it becomes us to
consider the import of this phrase, which I shall hereafter explain; and
not, as Marcellus has done, from a single passage to subvert one of the
most important doctrines of the Church.*’

<span id="iii.iv-p69"></span>“These and many other such expressions are
found in the first book of Eusebius Pamphilus against Marcellus; and in
his third book, declaring in what sense the term creature is to be
taken, he says: ‘*Accordingly these things being established, it follows
that in the same sense as that which preceded, these words also are to
be understood*, The Lord created me in the beginning of his ways on
account of his works. *For although he says that he was created, it is
not as if he should say that he had arrived at existence from what was
not, nor that he himself also was made of nothing like the rest of the
creatures, which some have erroneously supposed: but as subsisting,
living, pre-existing, and being before the constitution of the whole
world; and having been appointed to rule the universe by his Lord and
Father: the word created being here used instead of* ordained *or*
constituted. *Certainly the apostle expressly called the rulers and
governors among men* creature, *when he said*, Submit yourselves to
every human *creature* for the Lord’s sake; <span id="page_63">p.
63</span> <span id="iii.iv-Page_63"></span>whether to the king as
supreme, or to governors as those sent by him. *The prophet also does
not use the word* <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p69.1"></span>ž</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p69.2"></span>κτισεν</span>created *in the sense of* made of
that which had no previous existence, *when he says*, Prepare, Israel,
to invoke thy God. For behold he who confirms the thunder, creates the
Spirit, and announces his Christ unto men. *For God did not then create
the Spirit when he declared his Christ to all men, since* There is
nothing new under the sun; *but the Spirit was, and subsisted before:
but he was sent at what time the apostles were gathered together, when
like thunder*, There came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty
wind: and they were filled with the Holy Spirit. *And thus they declared
unto all men the Christ of God in accordance with that prophecy which
says*, Behold he who confirms the thunder, creates the spirit, and
announces his Christ unto men: *the word* creates *being used instead
of* sends down, *or* appoints; *and* thunder *in a similar way implying*
the preaching of the Gospel. *Again he that says*, Create in me a clean
heart, O God, *said not this as if he had no heart; but prayed that his
mind might be purified. Thus also it is said*, That he might create the
two into one new man, *instead of* unite. *Consider also whether this
passage is not of the same kind*, Clothe yourselves with the new man,
which is created according to God; *and this*, if, therefore, any one be
in Christ, he is a new creature, *and Whatever other expressions of a
similar nature any one may find who shall carefully search the
divinely-inspired Scripture. Wherefore one should not be surprised if in
this passage*, The Lord created me the beginning of his ways, *the term*
created *is used metaphorically, instead of* appointed, *or*
constituted.’

<span id="iii.iv-p70"></span>“These quotations from the books of
Eusebius against Marcellus have been adduced to confute those who have
slanderously attempted to traduce and criminate him. Neither can they
prove that Eusebius attributes a beginning of subsistence to the Son of
God, although they may find him often using the expressions of
dispensation: and especially so, because he was an emulator and admirer
of the works of Origen, in which those who are able to comprehend that
author’s writings, will perceive it to be everywhere stated that the Son
was begotten of the Father. These remarks have been made in passing, in
order to refute those who have misrepresented Eusebius.”

<span id="iii.iv-p71"></span>*Sozomen in the First Book of his
Ecclesiastical History* (chap. 1.).

<span id="iii.iv-p72"></span>“I at first felt strongly inclined to trace
the course of events from the very commencement; but on reflecting that
similar records of the past, up to their own time, had been compiled by
the learned Clemens and Hegesippus, successors of the apostles, by
Africanus the historian and Eusebius surnamed Pamphilus, a man
intimately acquainted with the sacred Scriptures and the writings of the
Greek poets and historians, I merely drew up an epitome in two books of
all that is recorded to have happened to the churches, from the
ascension of Christ to the deposition of Licinius.”

<span id="iii.iv-p73"></span>*Victorius in the Paschal Canon*.

<span id="iii.iv-p74"></span>“Reviewing therefore the trustworthy
histories of the ancients, namely the *Chronicles* and prologue of the
blessed Eusebius, bishop of Cæsarea, a city in Palestine, a man
pre-eminently accomplished and learned; and likewise those things which
have been added to these same *Chronicles* by Jerome of sacred memory.”

<span id="iii.iv-p75"></span>*Jerome, in his Epistle to Chromatius and
Heliodorus, prefixed to the Martyrology which bears Jerome’s Name*.

<span id="iii.iv-p76"></span>“It is evident that our Lord Jesus Christ
obtains triumphs at every martyrdom of his saints, whose sufferings we
find described by the saintly Eusebius, bishop of Cæsarea. For when
Constantine Augustus came to Cæsarea and told the celebrated bishop to
ask some favors which should benefit the church at Cæsarea, it is said
that Eusebius answered: That a church enriched by its own resources was
under no necessity of asking favors, yet that he himself had an
unalterable desire, that whatever had been done in the Roman republic
against God’s saints by successive judges in the whole Roman world they
should search out by a careful examination of the public records; and
that they should draw from the archives themselves and send to Eusebius
himself, by royal command, the names of the martyrs: under what judge,
in what province or city, upon what day, and with what steadfastness,
they had obtained the reward of their suffering. Whence it has come
about that, being an able narrator and a diligent historiographer, he
has both composed an *Ecclesiastical History* and has set forth the
triumphs of nearly all of the martyrs of all the Roman provinces.”

<span id="iii.iv-p77"></span><span id="page_64">p. 64</span> <span
id="iii.iv-Page_64"></span>*Pope Gelasius in his Decree concerning the
Apocryphal Books*.

<span id="iii.iv-p78"></span>“Likewise as to the *Chronicles* of
Eusebius and the books of his *Ecclesiastical History*, although in the
first book of his narration he has grown cold, and has afterwards
written one book in praise and in defense of Origen the schismatic, yet
on account of his singular knowledge of things which pertain to
instruction, we do not say that they ought to be rejected.”

<span id="iii.iv-p79"></span>*The same in his book On the Two Natures*.

<span id="iii.iv-p80"></span>“That saying the same thing with one heart
and one mouth we may also believe what we have received from our
forefathers, and, God giving them to us, that we may hand them down to
posterity to be believed in, with which things the adduced testimony of
the Catholic masters, being summed up, bear witness that a united faith
in a gracious God endures.”

<span id="iii.iv-p81"></span>*And a little farther on*.

<span id="iii.iv-p82"></span>“From the exposition of the seventh psalm,
by Eusebius, bishop in Palestine, by surname Pamphili, etc. Likewise
from his *Præparatio Evangelica*, Book VII.”

<span id="iii.iv-p83"></span>*Pope Pelagius II. in his Third Epistle to
Elias of Aquileia and other Bishops of Istria*.

<span id="iii.iv-p84"></span>“For, indeed, among hæresiarchs who can be
found worse than Origen, and among historiographers who more honorable
than Eusebius? And who of us does not know with how great praises
Eusebius extols Origen in his books? But because the holy Church deals
more kindly with the hearts of her faithful ones than she does severely
with their words, neither could the testimony of Eusebius remove him
from his proper place among heretics, nor on the other hand has she
condemned Eusebius for the fault of praising Origen.”

<span id="iii.iv-p85"></span>*Evagrius, in the First Book of his
Ecclesiastical History* (chap. 1).

<span id="iii.iv-p86"></span>“Eusebius Pamphili—an especially able
writer, to the extent, in particular, of inducing his readers to embrace
our religion, though failing to perfect them in the faith—and Sozomen,
Theodoret, and Socrates have produced a most excellent record of the
advent of our compassionate God, and his ascension into heaven, and of
all that has been achieved in the endurance of the divine Apostles, as
well as of the other martyrs,” etc.

<span id="iii.iv-p87"></span>*Gregory the Great in his Epistle to
Eulogius, Bishop of Alexandria*.

<span id="iii.iv-p88"></span>“I have now become one of the number of
hearers, to whom your Holiness has taken the pains to write, that we
ought to transmit the deeds of all the martyrs which have been collected
by Eusebius of Cæsarea in the age of Constantine of holy memory. But I
was not aware before receiving your Holiness’ letter whether these
things had been collected or not. I therefore am thankful that being
informed by the writings of your most holy learning, I have begun to
know what I did not know before. For excepting these things which are
contained in the books of this same Eusebius *On the deeds of the holy
martyrs*, I have met with nothing else in the archives of this our
church, nor in the libraries of Rome, except some few collected in a
single volume.”

<span id="iii.iv-p89"></span>*Gelasius of Cyzicus in his Second Book On
the Council of Nicæa* (chap. 1).

<span id="iii.iv-p90"></span>“Let us hear now what says this the most
illustrious husbandman in ecclesiastical farming, the most truth-loving
Eusebius, surnamed after the celebrated Pamphilus. Licinius, indeed, he
says, having followed the same path of impiety with the ungodly tyrants,
has justly been brought to the same precipice with them, etc. (which may
be found at the end of the tenth book of the *Ecclesiastical History*).
As to Eusebius Pamphili, the most trustworthy of ancient ecclesiastical
historians, who has investigated and set forth so many struggles, having
made a choice from among his simply written works, we say that in all
ten books of his *Ecclesiastical History* he has left behind an
accurately written work. Beginning with the advent of our Lord he has,
not without much labor, proceeded as far as those times. For how else
could it be with him who took so great care to preserve for us the
harmony of this collection? But as I have just said, he brought to bear
upon it much study and an untold amount of labor. But let no one
suppose, from those things which have been alleged with regard to him,
that this man ever adopted the heresy of Arius; but let him be sure,
that even if he did speak somewhat of, and did write briefly concerning
the conjectures of Arius, he certainly did not do it on account of his
entertaining the impious notion of that man, but from artless
simplicity, as indeed he himself fully assures us in his Apology, which
he distributed generally among orthodox bishops.”

<span id="iii.iv-p91"></span><span id="page_65">p. 65</span> <span
id="iii.iv-Page_65"></span>*The author of the Alexandrian Chronicle* (p.
582).

<span id="iii.iv-p92"></span>“The very learned Eusebius Pamphili has
written thus: As the Jews crucified Christ at the feast, so they all
perished at their own feast.”

<span id="iii.iv-p93"></span>*Nicephorus in the Sixth Book of his
History* (chap. 37).

<span id="iii.iv-p94"></span>“Upon whose authority also we know of the
divine Pamphilus as both living the life of a philosopher and wearing
the dignity of presbyter in that place. His life and every event in it,
also his establishing in that place the study of sacred and profane
philosophy, also his confession of his religion in divers persecutions,
his struggles, and at last his wearing the martyr’s crown, Eusebius his
nephew, who had such a regard for him as to take from him his surname,
has comprehended in detail in one separate book; to this we refer those
who may wish to find out accurately concerning him. This Eusebius,
indeed, although having prosecuted many studies, especially excels in
the study of sacred literature. His life extended until the time of
Constantius. Being a man pre-eminently Christian, and endowed with great
zeal for Christ, he has written the *Præparatio Evangelica* in fifteen
books, and in ten more the *Demonstratio Evangelica*. He was also the
first one to take in hand this subject, having been the first to call
his book an *Ecclesiastical History*; this work is contained in ten
volumes. There is also another book of his extant which he entitled
*Canons*, in which he accurately investigates chronological matters. He
has also composed five books *On the Life of Constantine*, and another
addressed to him which he calls <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p94.1"></span>τριακονταετήρικον</span>. To Stephanus he also
dedicates another concerning those things in the sacred Gospels which
have been called in question; and he has also left behind divers other
works which are of great benefit to the Church. Apart from being such a
man as this, he in many ways seems to uphold the opinions of Arius,”
etc.

<span id="iii.iv-p95"></span>*From the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iv-p95.1"></span>ms.</span> Acts of Pope Silvester*.

<span id="iii.iv-p96"></span>“Eusebius Pamphili, in writing his
*Ecclesiastical History*, has in every case omitted to mention those
things which he has pointed out in other works; for he has put into
eleven books the sufferings of the martyrs, bishops, and confessors, who
have suffered in almost all the provinces. But indeed as to the
sufferings of women and maidens, such as with manly fortitude suffered
for the sake of Christ the Lord, he records nothing. He is, moreover,
the only one who has set forth in their order the sufferings of the
bishops, from the Apostle Peter down. Moreover, he drew up for the
benefit of the public a catalogue of the pontiffs of those cities and
apostolic seats; that is, of the great city of Rome, and the cities of
Alexandria and Antioch. Of the number then of those of whom, up to his
own times, the above-mentioned author wrote in the Greek tongue, this
man’s life he was unable to paraphrase; that is, the life of the saint
Silvester,” etc.

<span id="iii.iv-p97"></span>*An ancient author in the Passion of the
Holy Valerian*.

<span id="iii.iv-p98"></span>“The glorious struggles of the most blessed
martyrs, for the honor of Christ the Lord and of our God, are celebrated
by perpetual services and an annual solemnity, that while our faithful
people know the faith of the martyrs, they may also rejoice in their
triumphs, and may rest assured that it is by the protection of these
that they themselves are to be protected. For it is held in repute that
Eusebius the historian, of sacred memory, bishop of the city of Cæsarea,
a most blessed priest of excellent life, very learned also in
ecclesiastical matters, and to be venerated for his extraordinary
carefulness, set forth for every city, in so far as the truth was able
to be ascertained, the Holy Spirit announcing the deeds that had been
done,—inasmuch as the cities of single provinces and localities or towns
have merited being made famous by the heavenly triumphs of martyrs,—set
forth, I say, in the time of what rulers the innumerable persecutions
were inflicted at the command of officials. Who, although he has not
described entire the sufferings of individual martyrs, yet has truly
intimated why they ought to be described or celebrated by faithful and
devoted Christians. Thus this faithful husbandman has cultivated the
grace of God, which has been scattered abroad in all the earth, while,
as it were, from a single grain of wheat, plenteous harvests are
produced on account of the fertility of the field, and go on in
multiplied abundance. So through the narration of the above-mentioned
man, diffused from the fountain of a single book, with the
ever-spreading writings of the faithful, the celebrating of the
sufferings of the martyrs has watered all the earth.”

<span id="iii.iv-p99"></span>*Usuardus in his Martyrology*.

<span id="iii.iv-p100"></span>“On the twenty-first day of June, in
Palestine, the holy Eusebius, bishop and confessor, a man of most
excellent genius, and a historiographer.”

<span id="iii.iv-p101"></span><span id="page_66">p. 66</span> <span
id="iii.iv-Page_66"></span>*Notker in his Martyrology*.

<span id="iii.iv-p102"></span>“On the twenty-first day of June, the
deposition in Cæsarea of the holy bishop Eusebius.”

<span id="iii.iv-p103"></span>*Manecharius in his Epistle to Ceraunius,
Bishop of Paris*.

<span id="iii.iv-p104"></span>“Unceasing in thy continual efforts to
equal in merit the very excellent persons of the most blessed bishops in
all the conversation of the priesthood, zealous to adorn thyself every
day with holy religion, by thy zeal for reading thou hast searched
through the whole of the doctrines of the sacred Scriptures. Now as an
addition to thy praiseworthiness thou dost faithfully purpose, in the
city of Paris, to gather together for the love of religion, the deeds of
the holy martyrs. Wherefore thou art worthy of being compared in zeal
with Eusebius of Cæsarea, and art worthy of being remembered perpetually
with an equal share of glory.”

<span id="iii.iv-p105"></span>*From an old Manuscript Breviary of the
Lemovicensian Church*.

<span id="iii.iv-p106"></span>“Of the holy Eusebius, bishop and
confessor.

<span id="iii.iv-p107"></span>“Lesson 1. Eusebius, bishop of Cæsarea in
Palestine, on account of his friendship with Pamphilus the martyr, took
from him the surname of Pamphili; inasmuch as along with this same
Pamphilus he was a most diligent investigator of sacred literature. The
man indeed is very worthy of being remembered in these times, both for
his skill in many things, and for his wonderful genius, and by both
Gentiles and Christians he was held distinguished and most noble among
philosophers. This man, after having for a time labored in behalf of the
Arian heresy, coming to the council of Nicæa, inspired by the Holy
Spirit, followed the decision of the Fathers, and thereafter up to the
time of his death lived in a most holy manner in the orthodox faith.

<span id="iii.iv-p108"></span>“Lesson 2. He was, moreover, very zealous
in the study of the sacred Scriptures, and along with Pamphilus the
martyr was a most diligent investigator of sacred literature. At the
same time he has written many things, but especially the following
books: The *Præparatio Evangelica*, the *Ecclesiastical History*,
*Against Porphyry*, a very bitter enemy of the Christians; he has also
composed *Six Apologies in Behalf of Origen*, a *Life of Pamphilus the
Martyr*, from whom on account of friendship he took his surname, in
three books; likewise very learned *Commentaries on the hundred and
fifty Psalms*.

<span id="iii.iv-p109"></span>“Lesson 3. Moreover, as we read, after
having ascertained the sufferings of many holy martyrs in all the
provinces, and the lives of confessors and virgins, he has written
concerning these saints twenty books; while on account of these books
therefore, and especially on account of his *Præparatio Evangelica*, he
was held most distinguished among the Gentiles, because of his love of
truth he contemned the ancestral worship of the gods. He has written
also a *Chronicle*, extending from the first year of Abraham up to the
year 300 <span class="c13"><span id="iii.iv-p109.1"></span>a.d.</span>,
which the divine Hieronymus has continued. Finally this Eusebius, after
the conversion of Constantine the Great, was united to him by strong
friendship as long as he lived.”

<span id="iii.iv-p110"></span>*In the Breviary of the same church, June
twenty-first*.

<span id="iii.iv-p111"></span>“Omnipotent, eternal God, who dost permit
us to take part in the festivities in honor of Eusebius, thy holy
confessor and priest, bring us, we pray thee, through his prayers, into
the society of heavenly joys, through our Lord Jesus Christ,” etc. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6.md)

<span id="iii.iv-p113"></span>*From the book On the Lights of the
Church*.

<span id="iii.iv-p114"></span>“Eusebius of Cæsarea, the key of the
Scriptures and custodian of the New Testament, is proved by the Greeks
to be greater than many in his treatises. There are three celebrated
works of his which truly testify to this: the *Canons of the Four
Gospels*, which set forth and defend the New Testament, ten books of
*Ecclesiastical History*, and the *Chronicon*, that is, a chronological
summary. We have never found any one who has been able to follow in all
his foot-prints.”

<span id="iii.iv-p115"></span>*From the Miscellanies of Theodore
Metochita* (chap. 19)

<span id="iii.iv-p116"></span>“Eusebius Pamphili was also a Palestinian
by birth, but as he himself says, he sojourned for quite a long time in
Egypt. He was a very learned man, and it is evident indeed that he
published many books, and that he used language thus.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[57:6](2010025.htm#fr_5.md) <span
id="iii.iv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p2"></span> The following *Testimonies of the Ancients*
were collected by Valesius, and are printed in the original languages in
his edition of Eusebius’ *Historia Ecclesiastica,* at the close of his
*Vita Eusebii.* The order of Valesius has been preserved in the
following pages, but occasionally a passage, for the sake of greater
clearness, has been given more fully than by him. A few extracts have
been omitted (as noted below), and one or two, overlooked by him, have
been added. The extracts have all been translated from the original for
this edition, with the exception of the quotations from the *Life of
Constantine,* and from the Greek Ecclesiastical Historians,—Socrates,
Sozomen, Theodoret, and Evagrius,—which have been copied, with a few
necessary corrections, from the version found in Bagster’s edition of
the *Greek Ecclesiastical Historians.* The translation has been made at
my request by Mr. James McDonald, of Shelbyville, Ky., a member of the
senior class (1890) of Lane Theological Seminary.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[66:7](2010025.htm#fr_6.md) <span
id="iii.iv-p111.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p112"></span> Valesius adds brief extracts from other
missals of the same church, which it is not necessary to quote here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Testimonies of the Ancients Against Eusebius.](2010026.md)
