[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010281)  [Next](2010283.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiv.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiv.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI.</span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiv.xii-p2.1"></span>It</span> is time to describe the great and
celebrated spectacle of Pamphilus, <span
id="fr_2679"></span>[2680](#fn_2679.md) a man thrice dear to me, and of
those who finished their course with him. They were twelve in all; being
counted worthy of apostolic grace and number.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p4"></span>2. Of these the leader and the only one
honored with the position of presbyter at Cæsarea, was Pamphilus; a man
who through <span id="page_352">p. 352</span> <span
id="iii.xiv.xii-Page_352"></span>his entire life was celebrated for
every virtue, for renouncing and despising the world, for sharing his
possessions with the needy, for contempt of earthly hopes, and for
philosophic deportment and exercise. He especially excelled all in our
time in most sincere devotion to the Divine Scriptures and indefatigable
industry in whatever he undertook, and in his helpfulness to his
relatives and associates.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p5"></span>3. In a separate treatise on his
life, <span id="fr_2680"></span>[2681](#fn_2680.md) consisting of three
books, we have already described the excellence of his virtue. Referring
to this work those who delight in such things and desire to know them,
let us now consider the martyrs in order.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p7"></span>4. Second after Pamphilus, Vales, who
was honored for his venerable gray hair, entered the contest. He was a
deacon from Ælia, <span id="fr_2681"></span>[2682](#fn_2681.md) an old man
of gravest appearance, and versed in the Divine Scriptures, if any one
ever was. He had so laid up the memory of them in his heart that he did
not need to look at the books if he undertook to repeat any passage of
Scripture.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p9"></span>5. The third was Paul from the city of
Jamna, <span id="fr_2682"></span>[2683](#fn_2682.md) who was known among
them as most zealous and fervent in spirit. Previous to his martyrdom,
he had endured the conflict of confession by cauterization.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p11"></span>After these persons had continued in
prison for two entire years, the occasion of their martyrdom was a
second arrival of Egyptian brethren who suffered with them.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p12"></span>6. They had accompanied the confessors
in Cilicia to the mines there and were returning to their homes. At the
entrance of the gates of Cæsarea, the guards, who were men of barbarous
character, questioned them as to who they were and whence they came.
They kept back nothing of the truth, and were seized as malefactors
taken in the very act. They were five in number.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p13"></span>7. When brought before the tyrant,
being very bold in his presence, they were immediately thrown into
prison. On the next day, which was the nineteenth of the month
Peritius, <span id="fr_2683"></span>[2684](#fn_2683.md) according to the
Roman reckoning the fourteenth before the Kalends of March, they were
brought, according to command, before the judge, with Pamphilus and his
associates whom we have mentioned. First, by all kinds of torture,
through the invention of strange and various machines, he tested the
invincible constancy of the Egyptians.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p15"></span>8. Having practised these cruelties
upon the leader <span id="fr_2684"></span>[2685](#fn_2684.md) of all, he
asked him first who he was. He heard in reply the name of some prophet
instead of his proper name. For it was their custom, in place of the
names of idols given them by their fathers, if they had such, to take
other names; so that you would hear them calling themselves Elijah or
Jeremiah or Isaiah or Samuel or Daniel, thus showing themselves inwardly
true Jews, and the genuine Israel of God, not only in deeds, but in the
names which they bore. When Firmilianus had heard some such name from
the martyr, and did not understand the force of the word, he asked next
the name of his country.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p17"></span>9. But he gave a second answer similar
to the former, saying that Jerusalem was his country, meaning that of
which Paul says, “Jerusalem which is above is free, which is our
mother,” <span id="fr_2685"></span>[2686](#fn_2685.md) and, “Ye are come
unto Mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem.” <span id="fr_2686"></span>[2687](#fn_2686.md)

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p20"></span>10. This was what he meant; but the
judge thinking only of the earth, sought diligently to discover what
that city was, and in what part of the world it was situated. And
therefore he applied tortures that the truth might be acknowledged. But
the man, with his hands twisted behind his back, and his feet crushed by
strange machines, asserted firmly that he had spoken the truth.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p21"></span>11. And being questioned again
repeatedly what and where the city was of which he spoke, he said that
it was the country of the pious alone, for no others should have a place
in it, and that it lay toward the far East and the rising sun.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p22"></span>12. He philosophized about these
things according to his own understanding, and was in nowise turned from
them by the tortures with which he was afflicted on every side. And as
if he were without flesh or body he seemed insensible of his sufferings.
But the judge being perplexed, was impatient, thinking that the
Christians were about to establish a city somewhere, inimical and
hostile to the Romans. And he inquired much about this, and investigated
where that country toward the East was located.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p23"></span>13. But when he had for a long time
lacerated the young man with scourgings, and punished him with all sorts
of torments, he perceived that his persistence in what he had said could
not be changed, and passed against him sentence of death. Such a scene
was exhibited by what was done to this man. And having inflicted similar
tortures on the others, he sent them away in the same manner.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p24"></span>14. Then being wearied and perceiving
that <span id="page_353">p. 353</span> <span
id="iii.xiv.xii-Page_353"></span>he punished the men in vain, having
satiated his desire, he proceeded against Pamphilus and his companions.
And having learned that already under former tortures they had
manifested an unchangeable zeal for the faith, he asked them if they
would now obey. And receiving from every one of them only this one
answer, as their last word of confession in martyrdom, he inflicted on
them punishment similar to the others.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p25"></span>15. When this had been done, a young
man, one of the household servants of Pamphilus, who had been educated
in the noble life and instruction of such a man, learning the sentence
passed upon his master, cried out from the midst of the crowd asking
that their bodies might be buried.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p26"></span>16. Thereupon the judge, not a man,
but a wild beast, or if anything more savage than a wild beast, giving
no consideration to the young man’s age, asked him only the same
question. When he learned that he confessed himself a Christian, as if
he had been wounded by a dart, swelling with rage, he ordered the
tormentors to use their utmost power against him.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p27"></span>17. And when he saw that he refused to
sacrifice as commanded, he ordered them to scrape him continually to his
very bones and to the inmost recesses of his bowels, not as if he were
human flesh but as if he were stones or wood or any lifeless thing. But
after long persistence he saw that this was in vain, as the man was
speechless and insensible and almost lifeless, his body being worn out
by the tortures.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p28"></span>18. But being inflexibly merciless and
inhuman, he ordered him to be committed straightway, as he was, to a
slow fire. And before the death of his earthly master, though he had
entered later on the conflict, he received release from the body, while
those who had been zealous about the others were yet delaying.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p29"></span>19. One could then see Porphyry, <span
id="fr_2687"></span>[2688](#fn_2687.md) like one who had come off
victorious in every conflict, his body covered with dust, but his
countenance cheerful, after such sufferings, with courageous and
exulting mind, advancing to death. And as if truly filled with the
Divine Spirit, covered only with his philosophic robe thrown about him
as a cloak, soberly and intelligently he directed his friends as to what
he wished, and beckoned to them, preserving still a cheerful countenance
even at the stake. But when the fire was kindled at some distance around
him in a circle, having inhaled the flame into his mouth, he continued
most nobly in silence from that time till his death, after the single
word which he uttered when the flame first touched him, and he cried out
for the help of Jesus the Son of God. Such was the contest of Porphyry.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p31"></span>20. His death was reported to
Pamphilus by a messenger, Seleucus. He was one of the confessors from
the army. As the bearer of such a message, he was forthwith deemed
worthy of a similar lot. For as soon as he related the death of
Porphyry, and had saluted one of the martyrs with a kiss, some of the
soldiers seized him and led him to the governor. And he, as if he would
hasten him on to be a companion of the former on the way to heaven,
commanded that he be put to death immediately.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p32"></span>21. This man was from Cappadocia, and
belonged to the select band of soldiers, and had obtained no small honor
in those things which are esteemed among the Romans. For in stature and
bodily strength, and size and vigor, he far excelled his
fellow-soldiers, so that his appearance was matter of common talk, and
his whole form was admired on account of its size and symmetrical
proportions.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p33"></span>22. At the beginning of the
persecution he was prominent in the conflicts of confession, through his
patience under scourging. After he left the army he set himself to
imitate zealously the religious ascetics, and as if he were their father
and guardian he showed himself a bishop and patron of destitute orphans
and defenceless widows and of those who were distressed with penury or
sickness. It is likely that on this account he was deemed worthy of an
extraordinary call to martyrdom by God, who rejoices in such things more
than in the smoke and blood of sacrifices.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p34"></span>23. He was the tenth athlete among
those whom we have mentioned as meeting their end on one and the same
day. On this day, as was fitting, the chief gate was opened, and a ready
way of entrance into the kingdom of heaven was given to the martyr
Pamphilus and to the others with him.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p35"></span>24. In the footsteps of Seleucus came
Theodulus, a grave and pious old man, who belonged to the governor’s
household, and had been honored by Firmilianus himself more than all the
others in his house on account of his age, and because he was a father
of the third generation, and also on account of the kindness and most
faithful conscientiousness which he had manifested toward him. <span
id="fr_2688"></span>[2689](#fn_2688.md) As he pursued the course of
Seleucus when brought before his master, the latter was more angry at
him than at those who had preceded him, and condemned him to endure the
martyrdom of the Saviour on the cross. <span
id="fr_2689"></span>[2690](#fn_2689.md)

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p38"></span>25. As there lacked yet one to fill up
the number of the twelve martyrs of <span id="page_354">p. 354</span>
<span id="iii.xiv.xii-Page_354"></span>whom we have spoken, Julian came
to complete it. He had just arrived from abroad, and had not yet entered
the gate of the city, when having learned about the martyrs while still
on the way, he rushed at once, just as he was, to see them. When he
beheld the tabernacles of the saints prone on the ground, being filled
with joy, he embraced and kissed them all.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p39"></span>26. The ministers of slaughter
straightway seized him as he was doing this and led him to Firmilianus.
Acting as was his custom, he condemned him to a slow fire. Thereupon
Julian, leaping and exulting, in a loud voice gave thanks to the Lord
who had judged him worthy of such things, and was honored with the crown
of martyrdom.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p40"></span>27. He was a Cappadocian by birth, and
in his manner of life he was most circumspect, faithful and sincere,
zealous in all other respects, and animated by the Holy Spirit himself.
Such was the company which was thought worthy to enter into martyrdom
with Pamphilus.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p41"></span>28. By the command of the impious
governor their sacred and truly holy bodies were kept as food for the
wild beasts for four days and as many nights. But since, strange to say,
through the providential care of God, nothing approached them,—neither
beast of prey, nor bird, nor dog,—they were taken up uninjured, and
after suitable preparation were buried in the customary manner.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p42"></span>29. When the report of what had been
done to these men was spread in all directions, Adrianus and Eubulus,
having come from the so-called country of Manganaea <span
id="fr_2690"></span>[2691](#fn_2690.md) to Cæsarea, to see the remaining
confessors, were also asked at the gate the reason for their coming; and
having acknowledged the truth, were brought to Firmilianus. But he, as
was his custom, without delay inflicted many tortures in their sides,
and condemned them to be devoured by wild beasts.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p44"></span>30. After two days, on the fifth of
the month Dystrus, <span id="fr_2691"></span>[2692](#fn_2691.md) the third
before the Nones of March, which was regarded as the birthday of the
tutelary divinity of Cæsarea, <span id="fr_2692"></span>[2693](#fn_2692.md)
Adrianus was thrown to a lion, and afterwards slain with the sword. But
Eubulus, two days later, on the Nones of March, that is, on the seventh
of the month Dystrus, when the judge had earnestly entreated him to
enjoy by sacrificing that which was considered freedom among them,
preferring a glorious death for religion to transitory life, was made
like the other an offering to wild beasts, and as the last of the
martyrs in Cæsarea, sealed the list of athletes.

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p47"></span>31. It is proper also to relate here,
how in a short time the heavenly Providence came upon the impious
rulers, together with the tyrants themselves. For that very Firmilianus,
who had thus abused the martyrs of Christ, after suffering with the
others the severest punishment, was put to death by the sword. Such were
the martyrdoms which took place at Cæsarea during the entire period of
the persecution.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2679"></span>[351:2680](2010282.htm#fr_2679.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p3"></span> On Pamphilus, see above, Bk. VII.
chap. 32, note 40.

<span id="fn_2680"></span>[352:2681](2010282.htm#fr_2680.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p6"></span> On Eusebius’ *Life of Pamphilus,* see
above, p. 28 sq.

<span id="fn_2681"></span>[352:2682](2010282.htm#fr_2681.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p8"></span> i.e. Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_2682"></span>[352:2683](2010282.htm#fr_2682.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.xii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiv.xii-p10.1"></span>τῆς ᾽Ιαμνιτῶν πόλεως</span>. Jamna, or
Jamnia, was a town of Judea, lying west of Jerusalem, near the sea.

<span id="fn_2683"></span>[352:2684](2010282.htm#fr_2683.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.xii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p14"></span> i.e. Feb. 19 (see the table on p.
403, below). We learn from chap. 7, §§3–5, that Pamphilus was thrown
into prison in the fifth year of the persecution and as late as November
of that year, i.e. between November, 307, and April, 308. Since he had
lain two whole years in prison (according to §5, above), the date
referred to in the present passage must be February of the year 310. The
martyrdom of Pamphilus is commonly, for aught I know to the contrary,
uniformly put in the year 309, as the seventh year of the persecution is
nearly synchronous with that year. But that the common date is a mistake
is plain enough from the present chapter.

<span id="fn_2684"></span>[352:2685](2010282.htm#fr_2684.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.xii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiv.xii-p16.1"></span>προήγορος</span>, literally “advocate,” or
“defender.”

<span id="fn_2685"></span>[352:2686](2010282.htm#fr_2685.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.xii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p18"></span> [Gal. iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026.md)<span
id="iii.xiv.xii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2686"></span>[352:2687](2010282.htm#fr_2686.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.xii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p19"></span> [Heb. xii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022.md)<span
id="iii.xiv.xii-p19.1"></span>. Upon Eusebius’ view of the authorship of
the Epistle to the Hebrews, see above, Bk. III. chap. 25, note 1.

<span id="fn_2687"></span>[353:2688](2010282.htm#fr_2687.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.xii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p30"></span> The reference is still to the same
slave of Pamphilus whose tortures Eusebius has just been describing, as
we learn from the Syriac version, where the slave’s name is given at the
beginning of the account.

<span id="fn_2688"></span>[353:2689](2010282.htm#fr_2688.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.xii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p36"></span> I read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiv.xii-p36.1"></span>περὶ αὐτὸν</span> with Zimmermann,
Heinichen, Burton, and Migne. The <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiv.xii-p36.2"></span>mss.</span> all have <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiv.xii-p36.3"></span>περὶ αὐτοὺς</span>,
which can hardly have stood in the original.

<span id="fn_2689"></span>[353:2690](2010282.htm#fr_2689.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.xii-p36.4"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p37"></span> The common mode of punishment
inflicted on slaves.

<span id="fn_2690"></span>[354:2691](2010282.htm#fr_2690.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.xii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p43"></span> Of the so-called country of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiv.xii-p43.1"></span>Μαγγαναία</span> I
know nothing. The Syriac version reads Batanea, which was a district of
country lying to the northeast of Palestine, and it may be that Manganea
was another name for the same region.

<span id="fn_2691"></span>[354:2692](2010282.htm#fr_2691.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.xii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p45"></span> i.e. March 5, 310.

<span id="fn_2692"></span>[354:2693](2010282.htm#fr_2692.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.xii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xii-p46"></span> It was the universal custom in
ancient times for a city to have its special tutelary divinity, to which
it looked for protection and to which it paid especial honor. The name
of the Cæsarean deity is unknown to us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](2010283.md)
