[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010283)  [Next](2010285) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiv.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII.</span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiv.xiv-p2.1"></span>The</span> seventh year of our conflict was
completed; and the hostile measures which <span id="page_355">p.
355</span> <span id="iii.xiv.xiv-Page_355"></span>had continued into the
eighth year were gradually and quietly becoming less severe. A large
number of confessors were collected at the copper mines in Palestine,
and were acting with considerable boldness, so far as even to build
places of worship. But the ruler of the province, a cruel and wicked
man, as his acts against the martyrs showed, having come there and
learned the state of affairs, communicated it to the emperor, writing in
accusation whatever he thought best.

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p3"></span>2. Thereupon, being appointed
superintendent of the mines, he divided the band of confessors as if by
a royal decree, and sent some to dwell in Cyprus and others in Lebanon,
and he scattered others in different parts of Palestine and ordered them
to labor in various works.

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p4"></span>3. And, selecting the four who seemed
to him to be the leaders, he sent them to the commander of the armies in
that section. These were Peleus and Nilus, <span
id="fr_2698"></span>[2699](#fn_2698) Egyptian bishops, also a
presbyter, <span id="fr_2699"></span>[2700](#fn_2699) and Patermuthius,
who was well known among them all for his zeal toward all. The commander
of the army demanded of them a denial of religion, and not obtaining
this, he condemned them to death by fire.

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p7"></span>4. There were others there who had been
allotted to dwell in a separate place by themselves,—such of the
confessors as on account of age or mutilations, or for other bodily
infirmities, had been released from service. Silvanus, <span
id="fr_2700"></span>[2701](#fn_2700) a bishop from Gaza, presided over
them, and set a worthy and genuine example of Christianity.

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p9"></span>5. This man having from the first day
of the persecution, and throughout its entire continuance, been eminent
for his confessions in all sorts of conflicts, had been kept all that
time that he might, so to speak, set the final seal upon the whole
conflict in Palestine.

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p10"></span>6. There were with him many from
Egypt, among whom was John, who surpassed all in our time in the
excellence of his memory. He had formerly been deprived of his sight.
Nevertheless, on account of his eminence in confession he had with the
others suffered the destruction of his foot by cauterization. And
although his sight had been destroyed he was subjected to the same
burning with fire, the executioners aiming after everything that was
merciless and pitiless and cruel and inhuman.

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p11"></span>7. Since he was such a man, one would
not be so much astonished at his habits and his philosophic life, nor
would he seem so wonderful for them, as for the strength of his memory.
For he had written whole books of the Divine Scriptures, “not in tables
of stone” <span id="fr_2701"></span>[2702](#fn_2701) as the divine
apostle says, neither on skins of animals, nor on paper which moths and
time destroy, but truly “in fleshy tables of the heart,” <span
id="fr_2702"></span>[2703](#fn_2702) in a transparent soul and most pure
eye of the mind, so that whenever he wished he could repeat, as if from
a treasury of words, any portion of the Scripture, whether in the law,
or the prophets, or the historical books, or the gospels, or the
writings of the apostles.

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p14"></span>8. I confess that I was astonished
when I first saw the man as he was standing in the midst of a large
congregation and repeating portions of the Divine Scripture. While I
only heard his voice, I thought that, according to the custom in the
meetings, he was reading. But when I came near and perceived what he was
doing, and observed all the others standing around him with sound eyes
while he was using only the eyes of his mind, and yet was speaking
naturally like some prophet, and far excelling those who were sound in
body, it was impossible for me not to glorify God and wonder. And I
seemed to see in these deeds evident and strong confirmation of the fact
that true manhood consists not in excellence of bodily appearance, but
in the soul and understanding alone. For he, with his body mutilated,
manifested the superior excellence of the power that was within him.

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p15"></span>9. But as to those whom we have
mentioned as abiding in a separate place, and attending to their
customary duties in fasting and prayer and other exercises, God himself
saw fit to give them a salutary issue by extending his right hand in
answer to them. The bitter foe, as they were armed against him zealously
through their prayers to God, could no longer endure them, and
determined to slay and destroy them from off the earth because they
troubled him.

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p16"></span>10. And God permitted him to
accomplish this, that he might not be restrained from the wickedness he
desired, and that at the same time they might receive the prizes of
their manifold conflicts. Therefore at the command of the most accursed
Maximinus, forty, lacking one, <span
id="fr_2703"></span>[2704](#fn_2703) were beheaded in one day.

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p18"></span>11. These martyrdoms were accomplished
in Palestine during eight complete years; and of this description was
the persecution in our time. Beginning with the demolition of the
churches, it increased greatly as the rulers rose up from time to time
against us. In these assaults the multiform and various conflicts of
those who wrestled in behalf of religion produced an innumerable
multitude of martyrs in every province,—in the regions extending from
Libya and throughout all Egypt, and Syria, and <span id="page_356">p.
356</span> <span id="iii.xiv.xiv-Page_356"></span>from the East round
about to the district of Illyricum.

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p19"></span>12. But the countries beyond these,
all Italy and Sicily and Gaul, and the regions toward the setting sun,
in Spain, Mauritania, and Africa, suffered the war of persecution during
less than two years, <span id="fr_2704"></span>[2705](#fn_2704) and were
deemed worthy of a speedier divine visitation and peace; the heavenly
Providence sparing the singleness of purpose and faith of those men.

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p21"></span>13. For what had never before been
recorded in the annals of the Roman government, first took place in our
day, contrary to all expectation; for during the persecution in our time
the empire was divided into two parts. <span
id="fr_2705"></span>[2706](#fn_2705) The brethren dwelling in the part
of which we have just spoken enjoyed peace; but those in the other part
endured trials without number.

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p23"></span>14. But when the divine grace kindly
and compassionately manifested its care for us too, then truly our
rulers also, those very ones through whom the wars against us had been
formerly carried on, changed their minds in a most wonderful manner, and
published a recantation; <span id="fr_2706"></span>[2707](#fn_2706) and
by favorable edicts and mild decrees concerning us, extinguished the
conflagration against us. This recantation also must be recorded. <span
id="fr_2707"></span>[2708](#fn_2707)

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p26"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiv.xiv-p26.1"></span>The End of the Book of Eusebius Pamphili
concerning those who suffered Martyrdom in Palestine</span>. <span
id="fr_2708"></span>[2709](#fn_2708)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2698"></span>[355:2699](2010284.htm#fr_2698) <span
id="iii.xiv.xiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p5"></span> On Peleus and Nilus, see above, Bk.
VIII. chap. 13, note 8. Paleus is called Paul in the Syriac version.

<span id="fn_2699"></span>[355:2700](2010284.htm#fr_2699) <span
id="iii.xiv.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p6"></span> The name of this man is given as Elias
in the Syriac version; but both he and Patermuthius are called laymen.

<span id="fn_2700"></span>[355:2701](2010284.htm#fr_2700) <span
id="iii.xiv.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p8"></span> On Silvanus, bishop of Gaza, see
above, Bk. VIII. chap. 13, note 6.

<span id="fn_2701"></span>[355:2702](2010284.htm#fr_2701) <span
id="iii.xiv.xiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p12"></span> [2 Cor. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#003)<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2702"></span>[355:2703](2010284.htm#fr_2702) <span
id="iii.xiv.xiv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p13"></span> *Ibid.*

<span id="fn_2703"></span>[355:2704](2010284.htm#fr_2703) <span
id="iii.xiv.xiv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p17"></span> The Syriac version says forty.

<span id="fn_2704"></span>[356:2705](2010284.htm#fr_2704) <span
id="iii.xiv.xiv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p20"></span> On the cessation of the persecution
in the West at the accession of Maxentius, see Bk. VIII. chap. 14, note
1.

<span id="fn_2705"></span>[356:2706](2010284.htm#fr_2705) <span
id="iii.xiv.xiv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p22"></span> On the division of the empire to
which Eusebius here refers, see above, Bk. VIII. chap. 13, note 17.

<span id="fn_2706"></span>[356:2707](2010284.htm#fr_2706) <span
id="iii.xiv.xiv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p24"></span> i.e. the toleration edict of
Galerius, published in the spring of 311. See above, Bk. VIII. chap. 17,
note 1.

<span id="fn_2707"></span>[356:2708](2010284.htm#fr_2707) <span
id="iii.xiv.xiv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p25"></span> It would seem that the edict was
originally appended to this shorter recension of the martyrs (the longer
recension is complete in its present form, and contains no hint of such
an addition). Very likely it was dropped with the second half of the
work (see above, p. 29) as unnecessary, when the first half was inserted
in the *History.* The edict is given in full in Bk. VIII. chap. 17,
above.

<span id="fn_2708"></span>[356:2709](2010284.htm#fr_2708) <span
id="iii.xiv.xiv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiv.xiv-p27.1"></span>περὶ τῶν ἐν Παλαιστίνῃ μαρτυρησ€ντων
τέλος</span>. On the title of the work, see above, p. 342, note 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IX](2010285)
