[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010241)  [Next](2010243.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.xxv"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.—</span>*Nepos and his
Schism.* <span id="fr_2331"></span>[2332](#fn_2331.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xxv-p3"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xii.xxv-p3.1"></span>Besides</span> all these the two books on
the Promises <span id="fr_2332"></span>[2333](#fn_2332.md) were prepared by
him. The occasion of these was Nepos, a bishop in Egypt, who taught that
the promises to the holy men in the Divine Scriptures should be
understood in a more Jewish manner, and that there would be a certain
millennium of bodily luxury upon this earth.

<span id="iii.xii.xxv-p5"></span>2. As he thought that he could
establish his private opinion by the Revelation of John, he wrote a book
on this subject, entitled Refutation of Allegorists. <span
id="fr_2333"></span>[2334](#fn_2333.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xxv-p7"></span>3. Dionysius opposes this in his books
on the Promises. In the first he gives his own opinion of the dogma; and
in the second he treats of the Revelation of John, and mentioning Nepos
at the beginning, writes of him in this manner:

<span id="iii.xii.xxv-p8"></span>4. “But since they bring forward a
certain work of Nepos, on which they rely confidently, as if it proved
beyond dispute that there will be a reign of Christ upon earth, I
confess that <span id="fr_2334"></span>[2335](#fn_2334.md) in many other
respects I approve and love Nepos, for his faith and industry and
diligence in the Scriptures, and for his extensive psalmody, <span
id="fr_2335"></span>[2336](#fn_2335.md) with which many of the brethren are
still delighted; and I hold him in the more reverence because he has
gone to rest before us. But the truth should be loved and honored most
of all. And while we should praise and approve ungrudgingly what is said
aright, we ought to examine and correct what does not seem to have been
written soundly.

<span id="iii.xii.xxv-p11"></span>5. Were he present to state his
opinion orally, mere unwritten discussion, persuading and reconciling
those who are opposed by question and answer, would be sufficient. But
as some think his work very plausible, and as certain teachers regard
the law and prophets as of no consequence, and do not follow the
Gospels, and treat lightly the apostolic epistles, while they make
promises <span id="fr_2336"></span>[2337](#fn_2336.md) as to the teaching
of this work as if it were some great hidden mystery, and do not permit
our simpler brethren to have any sublime and lofty thoughts concerning
the glorious and truly divine appearing of our Lord, and our
resurrection from the dead, and our being gathered together unto him,
and made like him, but on the contrary lead them to hope for small and
mortal things in the kingdom of God, and for things such as exist
now,—since this is the case, it is necessary that we should dispute with
our brother <span id="page_309">p. 309</span> <span
id="iii.xii.xxv-Page_309"></span>Nepos as if he were present.” Farther
on he says:

<span id="iii.xii.xxv-p13"></span>6. “When I was in the district of
Arsinoë, <span id="fr_2337"></span>[2338](#fn_2337.md) where, as you know,
this doctrine has prevailed for a long time, so that schisms and
apostasies of entire churches have resulted, I called together the
presbyters and teachers of the brethren in the villages,—such brethren
as wished being also present,—and I exhorted them to make a public
examination of this question.

<span id="iii.xii.xxv-p15"></span>7. Accordingly when they brought me
this book, as if it were a weapon and fortress impregnable, sitting with
them from morning till evening for three successive days, I endeavored
to correct what was written in it.

<span id="iii.xii.xxv-p16"></span>8. And I rejoiced over the constancy,
sincerity, docility, and intelligence of the brethren, as we considered
in order and with moderation the questions and the difficulties and the
points of agreement. And we abstained from defending in every manner and
contentiously the opinions which we had once held, unless they appeared
to be correct. Nor did we evade objections, but we endeavored as far as
possible to hold to and confirm the things which lay before us, and if
the reason given satisfied us, we were not ashamed to change our
opinions and agree with others; but on the contrary, conscientiously and
sincerely, and with hearts laid open before God, we accepted whatever
was established by the proofs and teachings of the Holy Scriptures.

<span id="iii.xii.xxv-p17"></span>9. And finally the author and mover of
this teaching, who was called Coracion, <span
id="fr_2338"></span>[2339](#fn_2338.md) in the hearing of all the brethren
that were present, acknowledged and testified to us that he would no
longer hold this opinion, nor discuss it, nor mention nor teach it, as
he was fully convinced by the arguments against it. And some of the
other brethren expressed their gratification at the conference, and at
the spirit of conciliation and harmony which all had manifested.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2331"></span>[308:2332](2010242.htm#fr_2331.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxv-p2"></span> Of this Egyptian bishop Nepos, we know
only what is told us in this chapter. Upon chiliasm in the early Church,
see above, Bk. III. chap. 39, note 19. It is interesting to note, that
although chiliasm had long lost its hold wherever the philosophical
theology of the third century had made itself felt, it still continued
to maintain its sway in other parts of the Church, especially in
outlying districts in the East, which were largely isolated from the
great centers of thought, and in the greater part of the West. By such
Christians it was looked upon, in fact, as the very kernel of
Christianity,—they lived as most Christians of the second century had,
in the constant hope of a speedy return of Christ to reign in power upon
the earth. The gradual exclusion of this remnant of early Christian
belief involved the same kind of consequences as the disappearance of
the belief in the continued possession by the Church of the spirit of
prophecy (see Bk. V. chap. 16, note 1), and marks another step in the
progress of the Church from the peculiarly enthusiastic spirit of the
first and second, to the more formal spirit of the third and following
centuries. Compare the remarks of Harnack in his *Dogmengeschichte,* I.
p. 482 sq. It seems, from §6, below, that Dionysius had engaged in an
oral discussion of the doctrines taught in the book of Nepos, which had
prevailed for a long time in Arsinoë, where the disputation was held.
The best spirit was exhibited by both parties in the discussion, and the
result was a decided victory for Dionysius. He was evidently afraid,
however, that the book of Nepos, which was widely circulated, would
still continue to do damage, and therefore he undertook to refute it in
a work of his own, entitled *On the Promises* (see the next note). His
work, like his disputation, undoubtedly had considerable effect, but
chiliasm still prevailed in some of the outlying districts of Egypt for
a number of generations.

<span id="fn_2332"></span>[308:2333](2010242.htm#fr_2332.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxv-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xxv-p4.1"></span>περὶ ἐπαγγελιῶν</span>. This work, as we
learn from §3, below, contained in the first book Dionysius’ own views
on the subject under dispute, in the second a detailed discussion of the
Apocalypse upon which Nepos based his chiliastic opinions. The work is
no longer extant, though Eusebius gives extracts from the second book in
this and in the next chapter; and three brief fragments have been
preserved in a Vatican <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xii.xxv-p4.2"></span>ms.</span>, and are published in the
various editions of Dionysius’ works. The Eusebian extracts are
translated in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* Vol. VI. p. 81–84. We have no
means of ascertaining the date of Dionysius work. Hefele
(*Conciliengesch.* I. p. 134), Dittrich (p. 69), and others, put the
disputation at Arsinoë, in 254 or 255, and the composition of the work
of Dionysius of course soon thereafter; but we have no authority for
fixing the date of the disputation with such exactness, and must be
content to leave it quite undetermined, though it is not improbable that
it took place, as Dittrich maintains, between the persecutions of Decius
and Valerian. In the preface to the eighteenth book of his commentary on
Isaiah, Jerome speaks of a work of Dionysius, *On the Promises*
(evidently referring to this same work), directed against Irenæus. In
his *de vir ill.* 69, however, he follows Eusebius in stating that the
work was written against Nepos. There can be no doubt on this score, and
Jerome’s statement in his commentary seems to be a direct error. It is
possible, however, that Irenæus, as the most illustrious representative
of chiliastic views, may have been mentioned, and his positions refuted
in the work, and thus Jerome have had some justification for his report.

<span id="fn_2333"></span>[308:2334](2010242.htm#fr_2333.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxv-p6"></span> Evidently directed against Origen and
other allegorical interpreters like him, who avoided the materialistic
conceptions deduced by so many from the Apocalypse, by spiritualizing
and allegorizing its language. This work of Nepos has entirely perished.

<span id="fn_2334"></span>[308:2335](2010242.htm#fr_2334.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxv-p9"></span> The words “I confess that” are not in
the original, but the insertion of some clause of the kind is necessary
to complete the sentence.

<span id="fn_2335"></span>[308:2336](2010242.htm#fr_2335.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxv-p10"></span> On early Christian hymnody, see
above, Bk. V. chap. 28, note 14.

<span id="fn_2336"></span>[308:2337](2010242.htm#fr_2336.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxv-p12"></span> “i.e. *dire ante promittunt quam
tradunt.* The metaphor is taken from the mysteries of the Greeks, who
were wont to promise great and marvelous discoveries to the initiated,
and then kept them on the rack by daily expectation in order to confirm
their judgment and reverence by suspense of knowledge, as Tertullian
says in his book *Against the Valentinians* \[chap. 1\].” Valesius.

<span id="fn_2337"></span>[309:2338](2010242.htm#fr_2337.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxv-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xxv-p14.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xxv-p14.2"></span>ν τῷ ᾽Αρσινοείτῃ</span>. The Arsinoite
nome or district (on the nomes of Egypt, see above, Bk. II. chap. 17,
note 10) was situated on the western bank of the Nile, between the river
and Lake Mœris, southwest of Memphis.

<span id="fn_2338"></span>[309:2339](2010242.htm#fr_2338.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxv-p18"></span> Of this Coracion, we know only what
is told us here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV](2010243.md)
