[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010022)  [Next](2010024.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p1"></span> §4. *Editions and Versions*.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p2"></span>The original Greek of Eusebius’
*History* has been published in many editions.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p3"></span>1. The *editio princeps* is that of
Robert Stephanus, which appeared at Paris in 1544, and again, with a few
changes, and with the Latin translation of Christophorsonus and the
notes of Suffridus Petrus, at Geneva in 1612.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p4"></span>2. Henr. Valesius (de Valois)
published his first edition of the Greek text, with a new Latin
translation and with copious critical and explanatory notes, at Paris in
1659. His edition was reprinted at Mainz in 1672, but the reprint is
full of errors. In 1677, after Valesius’ death, a revised edition was
issued at Paris, which in 1695 was reprinted with some corrections at
Amsterdam. In 1720 Valesius’ edition of Eusebius, together with his
edition of Socrates, Sozomen, and the other Greek historians, was
republished at Cambridge by William Reading, in three folio volumes.
This is the best edition of Valesius, the commentary being supplemented
by <span class="c13"><span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p4.1"></span>ms.</span>
notes which he had left among his papers, and increased by large
additions from other writers under the head of *Variorum*. A reprint of
Reading’s edition was issued in 1746–1748, but according to Heinichen it
is not as accurate as that of 1720. For the elucidation of Eusebius’
*History* we owe more to Valesius than to any other man. His edition of
the text was an immense advance upon that of Stephanus, and has formed
the basis of all subsequent editions, while his notes are a perfect
storehouse of information from which all annotators of Eusebius have
extensively drawn. Migne’s edition (*Opera*, II. 45–906) is a reprint of
Valesius’ edition of 1659.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p5"></span>3. F. A. Stroth (Halle, 1779). A new
edition of the Greek text, of which, however, only the first volume
appeared, comprising Books I.-VII.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p6"></span>4. E. Zimmermann
(Frankfort-on-the-Main, 1822). A new edition of the Greek text,
containing also the Latin translation of Valesius, and a few critical
notes.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p7"></span>5. F. A. Heinichen (Leipzig, 1827
and 1828). An edition of the Greek text in three volumes, with a reprint
of the entire commentary of Valesius, and with the addition of
*Variorum* notes. The critical apparatus, printed in the third volume,
is very meager. A few valuable excursuses close the work. Forty years
later Heinichen published a second edition of the *History* in his
*Eusebii Pamphili Scripta Historica* (Lips. 1868–1870, 3 vols.). The
first volume contains the Greek text of the *History*, with valuable
prolegomena, copious critical apparatus and very useful indices; the
second volume contains the *Vita Constantini*, the *Panegyricus* or *De
laudibus Constantini*, and Constantine’s *Oratio ad Sanctorum coetum*,
also accompanied with critical apparatus and indices; the third volume
contains an extensive commentary upon the works included in the first
two volumes, together with twenty-nine valuable excursuses. This
entirely supersedes the first, and is on the whole the most complete and
useful edition of the *History* which we have. The editor made diligent
use of the labors of his predecessors, especially of Laemmer’s. He did
no independent work, however, in the way of collecting material for the
criticism of the text, and was deficient in critical judgment. As a
consequence his text has often to be amended on the basis of the variant
readings, which he gives with great fullness. His commentary is made up
largely of quotations from Valesius and other writers, and is valuable
for the material it thus contains as well as for its references to other
works. It labors under the same incompleteness, however, that mars
Valesius’ commentary, and, moreover, contains almost nothing of
independent value.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p8"></span>6. E. Burton (Oxford, 1838). The
Greek text in two volumes, with the translation of Valesius and with
critical apparatus; and again in 1845, with the critical apparatus
omitted, but with the notes of Valesius, Heinichen and others added.
Burton made large contributions to the criticism of the text, and had he
lived to superintend the issue of the second edition, would perhaps have
succeeded in giving us a better text than any which we now possess, for
he was a far more <span id="page_53">p. 53</span> <span
id="iii.iii.iii.iv-Page_53"></span>sagacious critic than Heinichen. As
it is, his edition is marred by numerous imperfections, largely caused
by the inaccuracy of those who collated <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p8.1"></span>mss.</span> for him. His text, with the
translation, notes, and critical apparatus omitted, was reprinted by
Bright at Oxford in 1872, and again in 1881, in a single volume. This is
a very handy edition, and for school use is unsurpassed. The typography
is superb, and the admirable plan is followed of discarding quotation
marks and printing all citations in smaller type, thus making plain to
the eye at a glance what is Eusebius’ own and what is another’s. The
text is preceded by a very interesting and graphic life of the
historian.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p9"></span>7. Schwegler (Tübingen, 1852, in one
volume). The Greek text with critical apparatus, but without translation
and notes. An accurate and useful edition.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p10"></span>8. Laemmer (Schaffhausen,
1859–1862). The Greek text in one volume, with extensive critical
apparatus, but without explanatory notes. Laemmer had unusual
opportunities for collecting material, and has made larger additions to
the critical apparatus than any one else. His edition was issued,
however, in a most slovenly manner, and swarms with mistakes. Great care
should therefore be exercised in the use of it.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p11"></span>9. Finally must be mentioned the
text of Dindorf (Lips. 1871), which is published in the Teubner series,
and like most of the volumes of that series is handy and convenient, but
of little value to the critical student.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p12"></span>There are few writings of the
Fathers which more sadly need and more richly deserve a new critical
edition than the *History* of Eusebius. The material for the formation
of a reliable text is extensive and accessible, but editors have
contented themselves too much in the past with the results of their
predecessors’ labors, and unfortunately those labors have not always
been accurate and thorough. As a consequence a new and more careful
collation of most of the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p12.1"></span>mss.</span> of the original, together
with those of Rufinus’ translation, must lie at the foundation of any
new work which is to be done in this line. The publication of the Syriac
version will doubtless furnish much valuable material which the next
editor of the *History* will be able to use to advantage. Anything less
than such a thorough work as I have indicated will be of little worth.
Unless the new edition be based upon extensive and independent labors,
it will be little if any improvement upon that of Heinichen. It is to be
hoped that a critical text, up to the standard of those of some other
patristic works which we already possess, may yet be issued, which shall
give us this, one of the noblest productions of the ancient Church, in a
fitting and satisfactory form.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p13"></span>Translations of Eusebius’ *History*
are very numerous. Probably the earliest of all is the ancient Syriac
version which is preserved in great part in two <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p13.1"></span>mss.</span>, one of which is at St.
Petersburg and contains the entire *History* with the exception of Book
VI. and large portions of Books V. and VII. The <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p13.2"></span>ms.</span> is dated 462 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p13.3"></span>a.d.</span> (see
Wright’s description of it in his *Catalogue of the Syriac <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p13.4"></span>mss.</span> in the
British Museum acquired since the year 1838*, Part III. p. xv. sq.). The
second <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p13.5"></span>ms.</span> is in the British Museum,
and contains Books I.–V., with some mutilations at the beginning of the
first book. The <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p13.6"></span>ms.</span> dates from the sixth century
(see Wright’s description of it in his *Catalogue*, p. 1039). From these
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p13.7"></span>mss.</span>
Wright was engaged in preparing an edition of the Syriac, which remained
unfinished at the time of his death. Whether he left his work in such
shape that it can soon be issued by some one else I have not yet
learned. The version was probably made at a very early date, possibly
within the lifetime of Eusebius himself, though of that we can have no
assurance. I understand that it confirms in the main the Greek text as
now printed in our best editions.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p14"></span>The original Latin version was made
by Rufinus in the early years of the fifth century. He translated only
nine books, and added to them two of his own, in which he brought the
history down to the death of Theodosius the Great. He allowed himself
his customary license in translating, and yet, although his version is
by no means exact, it is one of our best sources for a knowledge of the
true text of Eusebius, for it is possible, in many doubtful cases where
our <span class="c13"><span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p14.1"></span>mss.</span>
are hopelessly divided, to ascertain from his rendering what stood in
the original Greek. <span id="page_54">p. 54</span> <span
id="iii.iii.iii.iv-Page_54"></span>The version of Rufinus had a large
circulation, and became in the Western Church a substitute for the
original throughout the Middle Ages. It was first printed, according to
Fabricius (*ib*. p. 59), in 1476 at Rome, afterward a great many times
there and elsewhere. The first critical edition, which still remains the
best, is that of Cacciari (Rome, 1740), which has become rare, and is
very difficult to find. A new edition is a great desideratum. An
important work upon Rufinus’ version is Kimmel’s *De Rufino Eusebii
Interprete*, Geræ, 1838.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p15"></span>A new Latin translation, by
Wolfgang Musculus, was published in Basle, in 1549, and again in 1557,
1562, and 1611, according to Fabricius (*Bibl. Gr*. VI. p. 60). I have
myself seen only the edition of 1562.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p16"></span>Still another Latin version, from
the hand of Christophorsonus, was published at Louvain in 1570. This is
the only edition of Christophorsonus which I have seen, but I have
notices of Cologne editions of 1570, 1581 and 1612, and of a Paris
edition of 1571. According to Fabricius the Paris edition, and according
to Brunnet the Cologne edition of 1581, contain the notes of Suffridus
Petrus. A revision of Christophorsonus’ version is said by Crusè to have
been published by Curterius, but I have not seen it, nor am I aware of
its date.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p17"></span>Another translation, by Grynæus,
was published at Basle in 1611. This is the only edition of Grynæus’
version which I have seen, and I find in it no reference to an earlier
one. I have been informed, however, that an edition appeared in 1591.
Hanmer seems to imply, in his preface, that Grynæus’ version is only a
revision of that of Musculus, and if that were so we should have to
identify the 1611 edition with the 1611 edition of Musculus mentioned by
Fabricius (see above). I am able, however, to find no hint in Grynæus’
edition itself that his version is a revision of that of Musculus.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p18"></span>The translation of Valesius, which
was first published in 1659 (see above), was a great improvement upon
all that had preceded it, and has been many times reprinted in other
editions of Eusebius, as well as in his own.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p19"></span>The first German translation was
published by Caspar Hedio. The date of publication is given by Fabricius
as 1545, but the copy which I have seen is dated 1582, and contains no
reference to an earlier edition. It comprises only nine books of
Eusebius, supplemented by the two of Rufinus. The title runs as follows:
*Chronica, das ist: wahrhaftige Beschreibunge aller alten Christlichen
Kirchen;* zum ersten, die *hist. eccles*. Eusebii Pamphili Cæsariensis,
Eilff Bücher; zum andern, die *hist. eccles. tripartita* Sozomeni,
Socratis und Theodoreti, Zwölff Bücher; zum dritten die *hist. eccles*.
sampt andern treffenlichen Geschichten, die zuvor in Teutschef Sprache
wenig gelesen sind, auch Zwölff Bücher. Von der Zeit an da die *hist.
eccles. tripartita* aufhöret: das ist, von der jarzal an, vierhundert
nach Christi geburt, biss auff das jar <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p19.1"></span>MDXLV</span>, durch D. Caspar Hedion zu
Strassburg verteutscht und zusamen getragen. Getruckt zu Franckfurt am
Mayn, im jar 1582.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p20"></span>A second German translation of the
entire *History* (with the exception of the *Martyrs of Palestine*, and
the *Oration on the Building of the Churches*, X. 4), together with the
*Life of Constantine*, was published by F. A. Stroth in Quedlinburg in
1777, in two volumes. Stroth prefaced the translation with a very
valuable Life of Eusebius, and added a number of excellent notes of his
own. The translation is reasonably accurate.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p21"></span>A much more elegant German version
(including the *Oration*, but omitting the *Martyrs of Palestine*) was
published by Closs in Stuttgart in 1839, in one volume. This is in my
opinion the best translation of the *History* that exists. Its style is
admirable, but pure German idiom is sometimes secured at the expense of
faithfulness. In fact the author has aimed to produce a free, rather
than a literal translation, and has occasionally allowed himself to
depart too far from the original. A few brief notes, most of them taken
from Valesius or Stroth, accompany the translation.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p22"></span>More recently a German translation
has been published by Stigloher (Kempten, 1880) in the Kempten
*Bibliothek der Kirchenväter*. It purports to be a new translation, but
is practically <span id="page_55">p. 55</span> <span
id="iii.iii.iii.iv-Page_55"></span>nothing more than a poorly revised
edition of Closs’ version. The changes which are made are seldom
improvements.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p23"></span>Fabricius mentions a French
translation by Claudius Seysselius, but does not give the date of it,
and I have not myself seen it. Dr. Richardson, however, informs me that
he has a copy of this translation (which is from the Latin, not from the
Greek) bearing the following title: *L’Histoire ecclesiastique
translatie de Latin au Français, par M. Claude de Seyssel, evesque lors
de Marseille, et depuis archevesque de Thurin*. Paris, 1532 \[or ’33\],
fº. He informs me also that there exist editions of the years 1537 and
1567.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p24"></span>More than a century later appeared
a new French translation by Louis Cousin, bearing the following title:
*Histoire de l’Eglise écrité par Eusèbe Césarée, Socrate, Sozomène,
Theodoret et Evagre, avec l’abrégé de Philostorge par Photius, et de
Théodore par Nicephore Calliste*. Paris, 1675–1676. 4 vol. 4º. Another
edition appeared in Holland in 1686, 5 vol. 12º.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p25"></span>The first English translation was
made by Hanmer, and was issued in 1584, and, according to Crusè, passed
through five editions. The fourth edition, which lies before me, was
published in London in 1636. The volume contains the *Histories* of
Eusebius, of Socrates, and of Evagrius; Dorotheus’ *Lives*, and
Eusebius’ *Life of Constantine*.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p26"></span>Another translation is said by
Crusè to have been published about a century later by T. Shorting, and
to be a decided improvement upon that of Hanmer. I have seen no copy
bearing Shorting’s name, but have examined an anonymous translation
which bears the following title: *The Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius
Pamphilus in ten books*. Made into English from that edition set forth
by Valesius, and printed at Paris in the year 1659; together with
Valesius’ notes on the said historian, which are done into English and
set at their proper place in the margin. Hereto also is annexed an
account of the life and writings of the aforesaid historian, collected
by Valesius and rendered into English. Cambridge: John Hayes, 1683. This
is evidently the translation of Shorting referred to by Crusè, for it
answers perfectly the description which he gives of it.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p27"></span>An abridgment of this version, made
by Parker, is mentioned both by Fabricius (*ib*. p. 62) and by Crusè,
but I have not myself seen it. Fabricius gives its date as 1703, and Dr.
Richardson informs me that he has seen an edition bearing the date 1729,
and that he has a note of another published in 1703 or 1720.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iv-p28"></span>The latest English translation was
made by the Rev. C. F. Crusè, an American Episcopalian of German
descent, and was published first in Philadelphia in 1833, with a
translation, by Parker, of Valesius’ *Life of Eusebius* prefixed. It has
been reprinted a great many times both in England and America, and is
included in Bohn’s Ecclesiastical Library. In Bohn’s edition are printed
a few scattered notes from Valesius’ commentary, and in some other
editions an historical account of the Council of Nicæa, by Isaac Boyle,
is added. The translation is an improvement upon its predecessors, but
is nevertheless very faulty and unsatisfactory. The translator is not
thoroughly at home in the English, and, moreover, his version is marred
by many serious omissions and interpolations which reveal an inexcusable
degree of carelessness on his part.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](2010024.md)
