[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010694)  [Next](2010696.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.viii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.viii.vi-p2.1"></span>And</span> in this hope our divinely-favored
emperor partakes even in this present life, gifted as he is by God with
native virtues, and having received into his soul the out-flowings of
his favor. His reason he derives from the great Source of all reason: he
is wise, and good, and just, as having fellowship with perfect Wisdom,
Goodness, and Righteousness: virtuous, as following the pattern of
perfect virtue: valiant, as partaking of heavenly strength.

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p3"></span>2. And truly may he deserve the imperial
title, who has formed his soul to royal virtues, according to the
standard of that celestial kingdom. But he who is a stranger to these
blessings, who denies the Sovereign of the universe, and owns no
allegiance to the heavenly Father of spirits; who invests not himself
with the virtues which become an emperor, but overlays his soul with
moral deformity and baseness; who for royal clemency substitutes the
fury of a savage beast; for a generous temper, the incurable venom of
malicious wickedness; for prudence, folly; for reason and wisdom, that
recklessness which is the most odious of all vices, for from it, as from
a spring of bitterness, proceed the most pernicious fruits; such as
inveterate profligacy of life, covetousness, murder, impiety and
defiance of God; surely one abandoned to such vices as these, however he
may be deemed powerful through despotic violence, has no true title to
the name of Emperor.

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p4"></span>3. For how should he whose soul is
impressed with a thousand absurd images of <span id="page_586">p.
586</span> <span id="iv.viii.vi-Page_586"></span>false deities, <span
id="fr_3512"></span>[3513](#fn_3512.md) be able to exhibit a counterpart of
the true and heavenly sovereignty? Or how can he be absolute lord of
others, who has subjected himself to the dominion of a thousand cruel
masters? a slave of low delights and ungoverned lust, a slave of
wrongfully-extorted wealth, of rage and passion, as well as of cowardice
and terror; a slave of ruthless demons, and soul-destroying spirits?

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p7"></span>4. Let, then, our emperor, on the
testimony of truth itself, be declared alone worthy of the title; who is
dear to the Supreme Sovereign himself; who alone is free, nay, who is
truly lord: above the thirst of wealth, superior to sexual desire;
victorious even over natural pleasures; controlling, not controlled by,
anger and passion. <span id="fr_3513"></span>[3514](#fn_3513.md) He is
indeed an emperor, and bears a title corresponding to his deeds; a <span
class="c13"><span id="iv.viii.vi-p8.1"></span>Victor</span> in truth,
who has gained the victory over those passions which overmaster the rest
of men: whose character is formed after the Divine original <span
id="fr_3514"></span>[3515](#fn_3514.md) of the Supreme Sovereign, and whose
mind reflects, as in a mirror, the radiance of his virtues. Hence is our
emperor perfect in discretion, in goodness, in justice, in courage, in
piety, in devotion to God: he truly and only is a philosopher, since he
knows himself, and is fully aware that supplies of every blessing are
showered on him from a source quite external to himself, even from
heaven itself. Declaring the august title of supreme authority by the
splendor of his vesture, he alone worthily wears that imperial purple
which so well becomes him.

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p10"></span>5. He is indeed an emperor, who calls
on and implores in prayer the favor of his heavenly Father night and
day, and whose ardent desires are fixed on his celestial kingdom. For he
knows that present things, subject as they are to decay and death,
flowing on and disappearing like a river’s stream, are not worthy to be
compared with him who is sovereign of all; therefore it is that he longs
for the incorruptible and incorporeal kingdom of God. And this kingdom
he trusts he shall obtain, elevating his mind as he does in sublimity of
thought above the vault of heaven, and filled with inexpressible longing
for the glories which shine there, in comparison with which he deems the
precious things of this present world but darkness. For he sees earthly
sovereignty to be but a petty and fleeting dominion over a mortal and
temporary life, and rates it not much higher than the goatherd’s, or
shepherd’s, or herdsman’s power: nay, as more burdensome than theirs,
and exercised over more stubborn subjects. The acclamations of the
people, and the voice of flattery, he reckons rather troublesome than
pleasing, because of the steady constancy of his character, and genuine
discipline of his mind.

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p11"></span>6. Again, when he beholds the military
service of his subjects, the vast array of his armies, the multitudes of
horse and foot, entirely devoted to his command, he feels no
astonishment, no pride at the possession of such mighty power; but turns
his thoughts inward on himself, and recognizes the same common nature
there. He smiles at his vesture, embroidered with gold and flowers, and
at the imperial purple and diadem itself, when he sees the multitude
gaze in wonder, like children at a bugbear, on the splendid
spectacle. <span id="fr_3515"></span>[3516](#fn_3515.md) Himself superior
to such feelings, he clothes his soul with the knowledge of God, that
vesture, the broidery of which is temperance, righteousness, piety, and
all other virtues; a vesture such as truly becomes a sovereign.

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p13"></span>7. The wealth which others so much
desire, as gold, silver, or precious gems, he regards to be, as they
really are, in themselves mere stones and worthless matter, of no avail
to preserve or defend from evil. For what power have these things to
free from disease, or repel the approach of death? And knowing as he
does this truth by personal experience in the use of these things, he
regards the splendid attire of his subjects with calm indifference, and
smiles at the childishness of those to whom they prove attractive.
Lastly, he abstains from all excess in food and wine, and leaves
superfluous dainties to gluttons, judging that such indulgences, however
suitable to others, are not so to him, and deeply convinced of their
pernicious tendency, and their effect in darkening the intellectual
powers of the soul.

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p14"></span>8. For all these reasons, <span
id="page_587">p. 587</span> <span id="iv.viii.vi-Page_587"></span>our
divinely taught and noble-minded emperor, aspiring to higher objects
than this life affords, calls upon his heavenly Father as one who longs
for his kingdom; exhibits a pious spirit in each action of his life; and
finally, as a wise and good instructor, imparts to his subjects the
knowledge of him who is the Sovereign Lord of all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3512"></span>[586:3513](2010695.htm#fr_3512.md) <span
id="iv.viii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p5"></span> There seems to be a clear hint of
Philonism here, or Philonism as developed by the Neo-Platonists and the
Christian Theologians. The history of the thought seems to begin in the
Platonic ideas. These self-existing forms which impress themselves on
the soul naturally become personalities to which the soul submits, and
whose images are impressed on the soul. These personalized ideas are in
the thought of Philo the thoughts or ideas of God, “powers” who do his
will, like the Valkyr of the Northern mythology,—the personified
thoughts or will of Odin. These objective ideas in organized whole were
the Word.

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p6"></span>The objectivity of ideas, placed in
relation with “mind reading,” “thought transference,” and the like, and
with the modern conceptions of the conservation of energy and
transmission of force by vibrations, give an interesting suggestion of a
material basis for the conception. If thought is accompanied by
vibration of brain molecules, it is of course quite conceivable that
that vibration be projected through any medium which can transmit
vibration, whether the nerves of another person or the air. A person of
supreme energy of will would make these vibrations more intense, and an
Infinite personality would make tangible even perhaps to the point of
that resistance which we call matter. The conception of one great
central Personality issuing an organized related system of thoughts in
various stages of embodiment, in one massive, constant forth-streaming
of will, is most interesting. According to it, all will forms of the
individual are true as they are in harmony with these norms. Where,
however, the lesser wills project incongruous will forms, they are in
conflict with the greater. According to it, the human soul is beaten
upon by all ideas which have ever been projected, either in individual
or in some combined total of force, and is formed according to what it
submits itself to, whether to the lesser and mal-organized or to the
Great Norm.

<span id="fn_3513"></span>[586:3514](2010695.htm#fr_3513.md) <span
id="iv.viii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p8"></span> Compare Prolegomena, *Character.* This
peculiar self-control, it is to be remembered, was characteristic also
of his father, and in a measure the product of the Neo-Platonic
philosophy.

<span id="fn_3514"></span>[586:3515](2010695.htm#fr_3514.md) <span
id="iv.viii.vi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p9"></span> Literally, the “archetypal idea,”—the
same phrase as that used by Philo, 1. 4 (ed. Lips., 1828, I. p. 7); i.e.
that incorporeal model or image of God on which the corporeal world was
formed.

<span id="fn_3515"></span>[586:3516](2010695.htm#fr_3515.md) <span
id="iv.viii.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p12"></span> This may be true; but compare
Prolegomena, *Character,* for his practice, at least.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](2010696.md)
