[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010270)  [Next](2010272.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiv.i"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_342">p. 342</span> <span
id="iii.xiv.i-Page_342"></span><span class="c20"><span
id="iii.xiv.i-p1.1"></span>Martyrs of Palestine.</span><span
class="c1"><span id="iii.xiv.i-p1.2"></span> <span
id="fr_2612"></span>[2613](#fn_2612.md) </span>

<span id="iii.xiv.i-p3"></span>————————————

<span id="iii.xiv.i-p4"></span>*The Following also we found in a Certain
Copy in the Eighth Book*<span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiv.i-p4.1"></span>. <span id="fr_2613"></span>[2614](#fn_2613.md)
</span>

<span id="iii.xiv.i-p6"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiv.i-p6.1"></span>It</span> was in the nineteenth year of the
reign of Diocletian, in the month Xanthicus, <span
id="fr_2614"></span>[2615](#fn_2614.md) which is called April by the
Romans, about the time of the feast of our Saviour’s passion, while
Flavianus <span id="fr_2615"></span>[2616](#fn_2615.md) was governor of the
province of Palestine, that letters were published everywhere,
commanding that the churches be leveled to the ground and the Scriptures
be destroyed by fire, and ordering that those who held places of honor
be degraded, and that the household servants, if they persisted in the
profession of Christianity, be deprived of freedom.

<span id="iii.xiv.i-p9"></span>Such was the force of the first edict
against us. But not long after other letters were issued, commanding
that all the bishops of the churches everywhere be first thrown into
prison, and afterward, by every artifice, be compelled to sacrifice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2612"></span>[342:2613](2010271.htm#fr_2612.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.i-p1.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.i-p2"></span> On this work, see above, p. 29 sq. As
remarked there, the shorter form of the work, the translation of which
follows, is found in most, but not all, of the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiv.i-p2.1"></span>mss.</span> of Eusebius’ *Church History,* in
some of them at the close of the tenth book, in one of them in the
middle of Bk. VIII. chap. 13, in the majority of them between Bks. VIII.
and IX. It is found neither in the Syraic version of the *History,* nor
in Rufinus. Musculus omits it in his Latin version, but a translation of
it is given both by Christophorsonus and Valesius. The Germans Stroth
and Closs omit it; but Stigloher gives it at the close of his
translation of the *History.* The English translators insert it at the
close of the eighth book. The work is undoubtedly genuine, in this, its
shorter, as well as in its longer form, but was in all probability
attached to the *History,* not by Eusebius himself, but by some copyist,
and therefore is not strictly entitled to a place in a translation of
the *History.* At the same time it has seemed best in the present case
to include it and to follow the majority of the editors in inserting it
at this point. In all the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiv.i-p2.2"></span>mss.</span> except one the work begins
abruptly without a title, introduced only by the words <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiv.i-p2.3"></span>καὶ ταῦτα žν τινι
ἀντιγρ€φῳ ἐν τῷ ὀγδό& 251· τόμῳ εὕρομεν</span>: “The following also we
found in a certain copy in the eighth book.” In the Codex Castellanus,
however, according to Reading (in his edition of Valesius, Vol. I. p.
796, col. 2), the following title is inserted immediately after the
words just quoted: <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiv.i-p2.4"></span>Εὐσεβίου σύγγραμμα περὶ τῶν κατ᾽ αὐτὸν
μαρτυρησ€ντων ἐν τῷ ὀκταέτει Διοκλητιανοῦ καὶ ἐφεξῆς Γαλερίου τοῦ
Μαξιμίνου διωγμῷ</span>. Heinichen consequently prints the first part of
this title (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiv.i-p2.5"></span>Εὐσεβίου</span>…<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiv.i-p2.6"></span>μαρτυρησ€ντων</span>) at the head of the work
in his edition, and is followed by Burton and Migne. This title,
however, can hardly be looked upon as original, and I have preferred to
employ rather the name by which the work is described at its close,
where we read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiv.i-p2.7"></span>Εὐσεβίου τοῦ Παμφιλου περί τῶν ἐν Παλαιστίνῃ
μαρτυρησ€ντων τέλος</span>. This agrees with the title of the Syriac
version, and must represent very closely the original title; and so the
work is commonly known in English as the *Martyrs of Palestine,* in
Latin as *de Martyribus Palestinæ.* The work is much more systematic
than the eighth book of the *Church History;* in fact, it is excellently
arranged, and takes up the persecution year by year in chronological
order. The ground covered, however, is very limited, and we can
consequently gather from the work little idea of the state of the Church
at large during these years. All the martyrs mentioned in the following
pages are commemorated in the various martyrologies under particular
days, but in regard to most of them we know only what Eusebius tells us.
I shall not attempt to give references to the martyrologies. Further
details gleaned from them and from various Acts of martyrdom may be
found in Ruinart, Tillemont, &c. I shall endeavor to give full
particulars in regard to the few martyrs about whom we have any reliable
information beyond that given in the present work, but shall pass over
the others without mention.

<span id="fn_2613"></span>[342:2614](2010271.htm#fr_2613.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.i-p5"></span> The *Martyrs of Palestine,* in all the
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.xiv.i-p5.1"></span>mss.</span> that
contain it, is introduced with these words. The passage which follows,
down to the beginning of Chap. 1, is a transcript, with a few slight
variations, of Bk. VIII. chap. 2, §§4 and 5. For notes upon it, see that
chapter.

<span id="fn_2614"></span>[342:2615](2010271.htm#fr_2614.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.i-p7"></span> The month Xanthicus was the eighth month
of the Macedonian year, and corresponded to our April (see the table on
p. 403, below). In Bk. VIII. chap. 2, Eusebius puts the beginning of the
prosecution in the seventh month, Dystrus. But the persecution really
began, or at least the first edict was issued, and the destruction of
the churches in Nicomedia took place, in February. See Bk. VIII. chap.
2, note 3.

<span id="fn_2615"></span>[342:2616](2010271.htm#fr_2615.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.i-p8"></span> Flavianus is not mentioned in Bk. VIII.
chap. 2. In the Syriac version he is named as the judge by whom
Procopius was condemned (Cureton, p. 4). Nothing further is known of
him, so far as I am aware.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](2010272.md)
