[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010157)  [Next](2010159) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII.—</span>*Miltiades and His
Works.*

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xviii-p2.1"></span>In</span> this work he mentions a writer,
Miltiades, <span id="fr_1602"></span>[1603](#fn_1602) stating that he
also wrote a certain <span id="page_234">p. 234</span> <span
id="iii.x.xviii-Page_234"></span>book against the above-mentioned
heresy. After quoting some of their words, he adds:

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p5"></span>“Having found these things in a certain
work of theirs in opposition to the work of the brother
Alcibiades, <span id="fr_1603"></span>[1604](#fn_1603) in which he shows
that a prophet ought not to speak in ecstasy, <span
id="fr_1604"></span>[1605](#fn_1604) I made an abridgment.”

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p8"></span>2. A little further on in the same work
he gives a list of those who prophesied under the new covenant, among
whom he enumerates a certain Ammia <span
id="fr_1605"></span>[1606](#fn_1605) and Quadratus, <span
id="fr_1606"></span>[1607](#fn_1606) saying:

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p11"></span>“But the false prophet falls into an
ecstasy, in which he is without shame or fear. Beginning with purposed
ignorance, he passes on, as has been stated, to involuntary madness of
soul.

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p12"></span>3. They cannot show that one of the
old or one of the new prophets was thus carried away in spirit. Neither
can they boast of Agabus, <span id="fr_1607"></span>[1608](#fn_1607) or
Judas, <span id="fr_1608"></span>[1609](#fn_1608) or Silas, <span
id="fr_1609"></span>[1610](#fn_1609) or the daughters of Philip, <span
id="fr_1610"></span>[1611](#fn_1610) or Ammia in Philadelphia, or
Quadratus, or any others not belonging to them.”

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p17"></span>4. And again after a little he says:
“For if after Quadratus and Ammia in Philadelphia, as they assert, the
women with Montanus received the prophetic gift, let them show who among
them received it from Montanus and the women. For the apostle thought it
necessary that the prophetic gift should continue in all the Church
until the final coming. But they cannot show it, though this is the
fourteenth year since the death of Maximilla.” <span
id="fr_1611"></span>[1612](#fn_1611)

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p19"></span>5. He writes thus. But the Miltiades
to whom he refers has left other monuments of his own zeal for the
Divine Scriptures, <span id="fr_1612"></span>[1613](#fn_1612) in the
discourses which he composed against the Greeks and against the
Jews, <span id="fr_1613"></span>[1614](#fn_1613) answering each of them
separately in two books. <span id="fr_1614"></span>[1615](#fn_1614) And
in addition he addresses an apology to the earthly rulers, <span
id="fr_1615"></span>[1616](#fn_1615) in behalf of the philosophy which
he embraced.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1602"></span>[233:1603](2010158.htm#fr_1602) <span
id="iii.x.xviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p3"></span> This Miltiades is known to us from
three sources: from the present chapter, from the Roman work quoted by
Eusebius in chap. 28, and from Tertullian (*adv. Val.* chap. 5). Jerome
also mentions him in two places (*de vir. ill.* 39 and *Ep. ad Magnum;*
Migne’s ed. *Ep.* 70, §3), but it is evident that he derived his
knowledge solely from Eusebius. That Miltiades was widely known at the
end of the second century is clear from the notices of him by an
Asiatic, a Roman, and a Carthaginian writer. The position in which he is
mentioned by Tertullian and by the anonymous Roman writer would seem to
indicate that he flourished during the reign of Marcus Aurelius. His
*Apology* was addressed to the emperors, as we learn from §5, below, by
which might be meant either Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus (161–169),
or Marcus Aurelius and Commodus (177–180). Jerome states that he
flourished during the reign of Commodus (*Floruit autem M. Antonini
Commodi temporibus;* Vallarsi adds a *que* after *Commodi,* thus making
him flourish in the times of M. Antoninus *and* Commodus, but there is
no authority for such an addition). It is quite possible that he was
still alive in the time of Commodus (though Jerome’s statement is of no
weight, for it rests upon no independent authority), but he must at any
rate have written his *Apology* before the death of Marcus Aurelius. The
only works of Miltiades named by our authorities are the
anti-Montanistic work referred to here, and the three mentioned by
Eusebius at the close of this chapter (two books *Against the Greeks,*
two books *Against the Jews,* and an *Apology*). Tertullian speaks of
him as an anti-Gnostic writer, so that it is clear that he must have
written another work not mentioned by Eusebius, and it was perhaps that
work that won for him the commendation of the anonymous writer quoted in
chap. 28, who ranks him with Justin, Tatian, Irenæus, Melito, and
Clement as one who had asserted the divinity of Christ. Eusebius appears
to have seen the three works which he mentions at the close of this
chapter, but he does not quote from them, and no fragments of any of
Miltiades’ writings have been preserved to us; he seems indeed to have
passed early out of the memory of the Church.

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p4"></span>A very perplexing question is his
relation to Montanism. According to Eusebius, he was the author of an
anti-Montanistic work, but this report is beset with serious
difficulties. The extract which Eusebius quotes just below as his
authority has “Alcibiades,” not “Miltiades,” according to the unanimous
testimony of the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xviii-p4.1"></span>mss.</span> and versions. It is very
difficult to understand how Miltiades, if it stood originally in the
text, could have been changed to Alcibiades. Nevertheless, most editors
have thought it necessary to make the change in the present case, and
most historians (including even Harnack) accept the alteration, and
regard Miltiades as the author of a lost anti-Montanistic work. I
confess that, imperative as this charge at first sight seems to be, I am
unable to believe that we are justified in making it. I should be
inclined to think rather that Eusebius had misread his authority, and
that, finding Miltiades referred to in the immediate context (perhaps
the Montanist Miltiades mentioned in chap. 16), he had, in a hasty
perusal of the work, overlooked the less familiar name Alcibiades, and
had confounded Miltiades with the author of the anti-Montanistic work
referred to here by our Anonymous. He would then naturally identify him
at once with the Miltiades known to him through other works. If we
suppose, as Salmon suggests, that Eusebius did not copy his own
extracts, but employed a scribe to do that work (as we should expect so
busy a man to do), it may well be that he simply marked this extract in
regard to the anti-Montanistic work without noticing his blunder, and
that the scribe, copying the sentence just as it stood, correctly wrote
Alcibiades instead of Miltiades. In confirmation of the supposition that
Eusebius was mistaken in making Miltiades the author of an
anti-Montanistic work may be urged the fact that Tertullian speaks of
Miltiades with respect, and ranks him with the greatest Fathers of the
second century. It is true that the term by which he describes him
(*ecclesiarum sophista*) may not (as Harnack maintains) imply as much
praise as is given to Proculus in the same connection; nevertheless
Tertullian does treat Miltiades with respect, and does accord him a high
position among ecclesiastical writers. But it is certainly difficult to
suppose that Tertullian can thus have honored a man who was known to
have written against Montanism. Still further, it must be noticed that
Eusebius himself had not seen Miltiades’ anti-Montanistic work; he knew
it only from the supposed mention of it in this anonymous work from
which he was quoting. Certainly it is not, on the whole, difficult to
suppose him mistaken and our <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xviii-p4.2"></span>mss.</span> and versions correct. I
therefore prefer to retain the traditional reading Alcibiades, and have
so translated. Of the Alcibiades who wrote the anti-Montanistic treatise
referred to, we know nothing. Upon Miltiades, see especially Harnack’s
*Texte und Untersuchungen,* I. I, p. 278 sqq., Otto’s *Corpus Apol.
Christ.* IX. 364 sqq., and Salmon’s article in the *Dict. of Christ.
Biog.* III. 916.

<span id="fn_1603"></span>[234:1604](2010158.htm#fr_1603) <span
id="iii.x.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xviii-p6.1"></span>῎</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xviii-p6.2"></span>Α</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xviii-p6.3"></span>λκιβι€δου</span>, with all the <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.x.xviii-p6.4"></span>mss.</span> and versions,
followed by Valesius (in his text), by Burton, Laemmer, and Crusè;
Nicephorus, followed by Valesius in his notes, and by all the other
editors, and by the translations of Stroth, Closs, and Stigloher, read
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xviii-p6.5"></span>Μιλτι€δου</span>.
See the previous note.

<span id="fn_1604"></span>[234:1605](2010158.htm#fr_1604) <span
id="iii.x.xviii-p6.6"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p7"></span> This was the first work, so far as we
know, to denounce the practice of prophesying in ecstasy. The practice,
which had doubtless fallen almost wholly into disuse, was brought into
decided disrepute on account of the excesses of the Montanists, and the
position taken by this Alcibiades became very soon the position of the
whole Church (see the previous chapter, note 14).

<span id="fn_1605"></span>[234:1606](2010158.htm#fr_1605) <span
id="iii.x.xviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p9"></span> Of this prophetess Ammia of
Philadelphia, we know only what we can gather from this chapter. She
would seem to have lived early in the second century, possibly in the
latter part of the first, and to have been a prophetess of considerable
prominence. That the Montanists had good ground for appealing to her, as
well as to the other prophets mentioned as their models, cannot be
denied. These early prophets were doubtless in their enthusiasm far more
like the Montanistic prophets than like those whom the Church of the
latter part of the second century alone wished to recognize.

<span id="fn_1606"></span>[234:1607](2010158.htm#fr_1606) <span
id="iii.x.xviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p10"></span> This Quadratus is to be identified
with the Quadratus mentioned in Bk. III. chap. 37, and was evidently a
man of prominence in the East. He seems to have been a contemporary of
Ammia, or to have belonged at any rate to the succession of the earliest
prophets. He is to be distinguished from the bishop of Athens, mentioned
in Bk. IV. chap. 23, and also in all probability from the apologist,
mentioned in Bk. IV. chap. 3. Cf. Harnack, *Texte und Unters.* I. I. p.
102 and 104; and see Bk. III. chap. 37, note 1, above.

<span id="fn_1607"></span>[234:1608](2010158.htm#fr_1607) <span
id="iii.x.xviii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p13"></span> On Agabus, see <span
id="iii.x.xviii-p13.1"></span>[Acts xi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028)<span
id="iii.x.xviii-p13.2"></span>, xxi. 10.

<span id="fn_1608"></span>[234:1609](2010158.htm#fr_1608) <span
id="iii.x.xviii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p14"></span> On Judas, see [Acts
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#022),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#027),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#032)<span
id="iii.x.xviii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1609"></span>[234:1610](2010158.htm#fr_1609) <span
id="iii.x.xviii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p15"></span> On Silas, see [Acts
xv.-xviii](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#000)<span
id="iii.x.xviii-p15.1"></span>. *passim;* also [2 Cor.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#019), [1 Thess.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001), [2 Thess.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001), [1 Pet.
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#012)<span
id="iii.x.xviii-p15.2"></span>[2 Cor.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#019),
[1](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)<span id="iii.x.xviii-p15.3"></span>
Thess. i. 1, [2 Thess. i. 1](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001)<span
id="iii.x.xviii-p15.4"></span>, and [1 Pet. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#012)<span
id="iii.x.xviii-p15.5"></span>, where Silvanus (who is probably the same
man) is mentioned.

<span id="fn_1610"></span>[234:1611](2010158.htm#fr_1610) <span
id="iii.x.xviii-p15.6"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p16"></span> On the daughters of Philip, see [Acts
xxi. 9](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#009)<span
id="iii.x.xviii-p16.1"></span>; also Bk. III. chap. 31, note 8, above.

<span id="fn_1611"></span>[234:1612](2010158.htm#fr_1611) <span
id="iii.x.xviii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p18"></span> On the date of Maximilla’s death, see
the previous chapter, note 32. To what utterance of “the apostle”
(ὁἀπόστολος, which commonly means Paul) our author is referring, I am
not able to discover. I can find nothing in his writings, nor indeed in
the New Testament, which would seem to have suggested the idea which he
here attributes to the apostle. The argument is a little obscure, but
the writer apparently means to prove that the Montanists are not a part
of the true Church, because the gift of prophecy is a mark of that
Church, and the Montanists no longer possess that gift. This seems a
strange accusation to bring against the Montanists,—we might expect them
to use such an argument against the Catholics. In fact, we know that the
accusation is not true, at least not entirely so; for we know that there
were Montanistic prophetesses in Tertullian’s church in Carthage later
than this time, and also that there was still a prophetess at the time
Apollonius wrote (see chap. 18, §6), which was some years later than
this (see chap. 18, note 3).

<span id="fn_1612"></span>[234:1613](2010158.htm#fr_1612) <span
id="iii.x.xviii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xviii-p20.1"></span>περὶ τὰ θεῖα λόγια</span>. These words are
used to indicate the Scriptures in Bk. VI. chap. 23, §2, IX. 9. 7, X. 4.
28, and in the *Martyrs of Palestine*, XI. 2.

<span id="fn_1613"></span>[234:1614](2010158.htm#fr_1613) <span
id="iii.x.xviii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xviii-p21.1"></span>ž</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xviii-p21.2"></span>ν τε οἷς πρὸς ῞Ελληνας συνέταξε λόγοις,
καὶ τοῖς πρὸς ᾽Ιουδαίους</span>. Eusebius is the only one to mention
these works, and no fragments of either of them are now extant. See
above, note 1.

<span id="fn_1614"></span>[234:1615](2010158.htm#fr_1614) <span
id="iii.x.xviii-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xviii-p22.1"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xviii-p22.2"></span>κατέρᾳ& 184·δίως ὑποθέσει ἐν δυσὶν
ὑπαντησας συγγρ€μμασιν</span>

<span id="fn_1615"></span>[234:1616](2010158.htm#fr_1615) <span
id="iii.x.xviii-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p23"></span> Or, “to the rulers of the world”
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xviii-p23.1"></span>πρὸς τοὺς
κοσμικοὺς ἄρχοντας</span>.) Valesius supposed these words to refer to
the provincial governors, but it is far more natural to refer them to
the reigning emperors, both on account of the form of the phrase itself
and also because of the fact that it was customary with all the
apologists to address their apologies to the emperors themselves. In
regard to the particular emperors addressed, see above, note 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII](2010159)
