[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010008)  [Next](2010010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.i.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i.iii-p1"></span> §3. *The Persecution of Diocletian.*

<span id="iii.iii.i.iii-p2"></span>In this delightful circle and engaged
in such congenial tasks, the time must have passed very happily for
Eusebius, until, in 303, the terrible persecution of Diocletian broke
upon the Church almost like a thunderbolt out of a clear sky. The causes
of the sudden change of policy on Diocletian’s part, and the terrible
havoc wrought in the Church, it is not my intention to discuss here (see
below, Bk. VIII. chap. 2, note 3 sq.). We are concerned with the
persecution only in so far as it bears upon the present subject. In the
first year of the persecution Procopius, the first martyr of Palestine,
was put to death at Cæsarea (Eusebius’ *Martyrs of Palestine,* Cureton’s
ed. p. 4), and from that time on that city, which was an important
Christian center, was the scene of a tempest which raged with greater or
less violence, and with occasional cessations, for seven years. Eusebius
himself was an eyewitness of many martyrdoms there, of which he gives us
an account in his *Martyrs of Palestine*. The little circle which
surrounded Pamphilus did not escape. In the third year of the
persecution (*Mart. of Pal*. p. 12 sq.) a youth named Apphianus, or
Epiphanius (the former is given in the Greek text, the latter in the
Syriac), who “resided in the same house with us, confirming himself in
godly doctrine, and being instructed by that perfect martyr, Pamphilus”
(as Eusebius says), committed an act of fanatical daring which caused
his arrest and martyrdom. It seems that without the knowledge of his
friends, concealing his design even from those who dwelt in the same
house with him, he laid hold of the hand of the governor, Arbanus, who
was upon the point of sacrificing, and endeavored to dissuade him from
offering to “lifeless idols and wicked devils.” His arrest was of course
the natural consequence, and he had the glory of witnessing a good
profession and suffering a triumphant death. Although Eusebius speaks
with such admiration of his conduct, it is quite significant of the
attitude of himself, and of most of the circle of which he was one, that
Apphianus felt obliged to conceal his purpose from them. He doubtless
feared that they would not permit him to perform the rash act which he
meditated, and we may conclude from that, that the circle in the main
was governed by the precepts of good common sense, and avoided that
fanaticism which so frequently led men, as in the present case it led
Apphianus, to expose themselves needlessly, and even to court martyrdom.
It is plain enough from what we know of Eusebius’ general character that
he himself was too sensible to act in that way. It is true that he
speaks with admiration of Apphianus’ conduct, and in *H. E*. VIII. 5, of
the equally rash procedure of a Nicomedian Christian; but that does not
imply that he considered their course the wisest one, and that he would
not rather recommend the employment of all proper and honorable
precautions for the preservation of life. Indeed, in *H. E.* IV. 15, he
speaks with evident approval of the prudent course pursued by Polycarp
in preserving his life so long as he could without violating his
Christian profession, and with manifest disapproval of the rash act of
the Phrygian Quintus, who presumptuously courted martyrdom, only to fail
when the test itself came. Pamphilus also possessed too much sound
Christian sense to advocate any such fanaticism, or to practice it
himself, as is plain enough from the fact that he was not arrested until
the fifth year of the persecution. This unhealthy temper of mind in the
midst of persecution was indeed almost universally condemned by the
wisest men of the Church, and yet the boldness and the very rashness of
those who thus voluntarily and needlessly threw their lives away excited
widespread admiration and too often a degree <span id="page_9">p.
9</span> <span id="iii.iii.i.iii-Page_9"></span>of commendation which
served only to promote a wider growth of the same unhealthy sentiment.

<span id="iii.iii.i.iii-p3"></span>In the fifth year of the persecution
Pamphilus was arrested and thrown into prison, where he remained for two
years, when he finally, in the seventh year of the persecution, suffered
martyrdom with eleven others, some of whom were his disciples and
members of his own household. (*Pal. Mart.* Cureton’s ed. p. 36 sq.; *H.
E.* App. chap. 11.) During the two years of Pamphilus’ imprisonment
Eusebius spent a great deal of time with him, and the two together
composed five books of an *Apology for Origen*, to which Eusebius
afterward added a sixth (see below, p. 36). Danz (p. 37) assumes that
Eusebius was imprisoned with Pamphilus, which is not an unnatural
supposition when we consider how much they must have been together to
compose the *Apology* as they did. There is, however, no other evidence
that he was thus imprisoned, and in the face of Eusebius’ own silence it
is safer perhaps to assume (with most historians) that he simply visited
Pamphilus in his prison. How it happened that Pamphilus and so many of
his followers were imprisoned and martyred, while Eusebius escaped, we
cannot tell. In his *Martyrs of Palestine*, chap. 11, he states that
Pamphilus was the only one of the company of twelve martyrs that was a
presbyter of the Cæsarean church; and from the fact that he nowhere
mentions the martyrdom of others of the presbyters, we may conclude that
they all escaped. It is not surprising, therefore, that Eusebius should
have done the same. Nevertheless, it is somewhat difficult to understand
how he could come and go so frequently without being arrested and
condemned to a like fate with the others. It is possible that he
possessed friends among the authorities whose influence procured his
safety. This supposition finds some support in the fact that he had made
the acquaintance of Constantine (the Greek in *Vita Const*. I. 19 has
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.i.iii-p3.1"></span>žγνωμεν</span>,
which implies, as Danz remarks, that he not only saw, but that he became
acquainted with Constantine) some years before in Cæsarea. He could
hardly have made his acquaintance unless he had some friend among the
high officials of the city. Influential family connections may account
in part also for the position of prominence which he later acquired at
the imperial court of Constantine. If he had friends in authority in
Cæsarea during the persecution his exemption from arrest is
satisfactorily accounted for. It has been supposed by some that Eusebius
denied the faith during the terrible persecution, or that he committed
some other questionable and compromising act of concession, and thus
escaped martyrdom. In support of this is urged the fact that in 335, at
the council of Tyre, Potamo, bishop of Heraclea, in Egypt, addressed
Eusebius in the following words: “Dost thou sit as judge, O Eusebius;
and is Athanasius, innocent as he is, judged by thee? Who can bear such
things? Pray tell me, wast thou not with me in prison during the
persecution? And I lost an eye in behalf of the truth, but thou
appearest to have received no bodily injury, neither hast thou suffered
martyrdom, but thou hast remained alive with no mutilation. How wast
thou released from prison unless thou didst promise those that put upon
us the pressure of persecution to do that which is unlawful, or didst
actually do it?” Eusebius, it seems, did not deny the charge, but simply
rose in anger and dismissed the council with the words, “If ye come
hither and make such accusations against us, then do your accusers speak
the truth. For if ye tyrannize here, much more do ye in your own
country” (Epiphan. *Hær*. LXVIII. 8). It must be noticed, however, that
Potamo does not directly charge Eusebius with dishonorable conduct, he
simply conjectures that he must have acted dishonorably in order to
escape punishment; as if every one who was imprisoned with Potamo must
have suffered as he did! As Stroth suggests, it is quite possible that
his peculiarly excitable and violent temperament was one of the causes
of his own loss. He evidently in any case had no knowledge of unworthy
conduct on Eusebius’ part, nor had any one else so far as we can judge.
For in that age of bitter controversy, when men’s characters were drawn
by their opponents in the blackest lines, Eusebius must have suffered at
the hands of the Athanasian party if it had been known that he had acted
a cowardly part in the persecution. Athanasius himself refers to this
incident (*Contra Arian.* VIII. 1), but he only says that Eusebius was
“accused of sacrificing,” he does <span id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span
id="iii.iii.i.iii-Page_10"></span>not venture to affirm that he did
sacrifice; and thus it is evident that he knew nothing of such an act.
Moreover, he never calls Eusebius “the sacrificer,” as he does Asterius,
and as he would have been sure to do had he possessed evidence which
warranted him in making the accusation (cf. Lightfoot, p. 311). Still
further, Eusebius’ subsequent election to the episcopate of Cæsarea,
where his character and his conduct during the persecution must have
been well known, and his appointment in later life to the important see
of Antioch, forbid the supposition that he had ever acted a cowardly
part in time of persecution. And finally, it is psychologically
impossible that Eusebius could have written works so full of comfort
for, and sympathy with, the suffering confessors, and could have spoken
so openly and in such strong terms of condemnation of the numerous
defections that occurred during the persecution, if he was conscious of
his own guilt. It is quite possible, as remarked above, that influential
friends protected him without any act of compromise on his part; or,
supposing him to have been imprisoned with Potamo, it may be, as
Lightfoot suggests, that the close of the persecution brought him his
release as it did so many others. For it would seem natural to refer
that imprisonment to the latter part of the persecution, when in all
probability he visited Egypt, which was the home of Potamo. We must in
any case vindicate Eusebius from the unfounded charge of cowardice and
apostasy; and we ask, with Cave, “If every accusation against any man at
any time were to be believed, who would be guiltless?”

<span id="iii.iii.i.iii-p4"></span>From his *History* and his *Martyrs
in Palestine* we learn that Eusebius was for much of the time in the
very thick of the fight, and was an eyewitness of numerous martyrdoms
not only in Palestine, but also in Tyre and in Egypt.

<span id="iii.iii.i.iii-p5"></span>The date of his visits to the latter
places (*H. E.* VIII. 7, 9) cannot be determined with exactness. They
are described in connection with what seem to be the earlier events of
the persecution, and yet it is by no means certain that chronological
order has been observed in the narratives. The mutilation of
prisoners—such as Potamo suffered—seems to have become common only in
the year 308 and thereafter (see Mason’s *Persecution of Diocletian,* p.
281), and hence if Eusebius was imprisoned with Potamo during his visit
to Egypt, as seems most probable, there would be some reason for
assigning that visit to the later years of the persecution. In
confirmation of this might be urged the improbability that he would
leave Cæsarea while Pamphilus was still alive, either before or after
the latter’s imprisonment, and still further his own statement in *H.
E.* VII. 32, that he had observed Meletius escaping the fury of the
persecution for seven years in Palestine. It is therefore likely that
Eusebius did not make his journey to Egypt, which must have occupied
some time, until toward the very end of the persecution, when it raged
there with exceeding fierceness during the brief outburst of the
infamous Maximin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](2010010)
