[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010304)  [Next](2010306.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xvi.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p1"></span> <span id="page_384">p. 384</span>
<span id="iii.xvi.viii-Page_384"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xvi.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—</span>*The Subsequent
Wickedness of Licinius, and his Death.*

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xvi.viii-p2.1"></span>Such</span> blessings did divine and
heavenly grace confer upon us through the appearance of our Saviour, and
such was the abundance of benefits which prevailed among all men in
consequence of the peace which we enjoyed. And thus were our affairs
crowned with rejoicings and festivities.

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p3"></span>2. But malignant envy, and the demon
who loves that which is evil, were not able to bear the sight of these
things; and moreover the events that befell the tyrants whom we have
already mentioned were not sufficient to bring Licinius to sound reason.

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p4"></span>3. For the latter, although his
government was prosperous and he was honored with the second rank after
the great Emperor Constantine, and was connected with him by the closest
ties of marriage, abandoned the imitation of good deeds, and emulated
the wickedness of the impious tyrants whose end he had seen with his own
eyes, and chose rather to follow their principles than to continue in
friendly relations with him who was better than they. Being envious of
the common benefactor he waged an impious and most terrible war against
him, paying regard neither to laws of nature, nor treaties, nor blood,
and giving no thought to covenants. <span
id="fr_2969"></span>[2970](#fn_2969.md)

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p6"></span>4. For Constantine, like an
all-gracious emperor, giving him evidences of true favor, did not refuse
alliance with him, and did not refuse him the illustrious marriage with
his sister, but honored him by making him a partaker of the ancestral
nobility and the ancient imperial blood, <span
id="fr_2970"></span>[2971](#fn_2970.md) and granted him the right of
sharing in the dominion over all as a brother-in-law and co-regent,
conferring upon him the government and administration of no less a
portion of the Roman provinces than he himself possessed. <span
id="fr_2971"></span>[2972](#fn_2971.md)

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p9"></span>5. But Licinius, on the contrary,
pursued a course directly opposite to this; forming daily all kinds of
plots against his superior, and devising all sorts of mischief, that he
might repay his benefactor with evils. At first he attempted to conceal
his preparations, and pretended to be a friend, and practiced frequently
fraud and deceit, in the hope that he might easily accomplish the
desired end. <span id="fr_2972"></span>[2973](#fn_2972.md)

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p11"></span>6. But God was the friend, protector,
and guardian of Constantine, and bringing the plots which had been
formed in secrecy and darkness to the light, he foiled them. So much
virtue does the great armor of piety possess for the warding off of
enemies and for the preservation of our own safety. Protected by this,
our most divinely favored emperor escaped the multitudinous plots of the
abominable man.

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p12"></span>7. But when Licinius perceived that
his secret preparations by no means progressed according to his
mind,—for God revealed every plot and wickedness to the God-favored
emperor,—being no longer able to conceal himself, he undertook an open
war. <span id="fr_2973"></span>[2974](#fn_2973.md)

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p14"></span>8. And at the same time that he
determined to wage war with Constantine, he also proceeded to join
battle with the God of the universe, whom he knew that Constantine
worshiped, and began, gently for a time and quietly, to attack his pious
subjects, who had never done his government any harm. <span
id="fr_2974"></span>[2975](#fn_2974.md) This he did under <span
id="page_385">p. 385</span> <span id="iii.xvi.viii-Page_385"></span>the
compulsion of his innate wickedness which drove him into terrible
blindness.

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p16"></span>9. He did not therefore keep before
his eyes the memory of those who had persecuted the Christians before
him, nor of those whose destroyer and executioner he had been appointed,
on account of the impieties which they had committed. But departing from
sound reason, being seized, in a word, with insanity, he determined to
war against God himself as the ally of Constantine, instead of against
the one who was assisted by him.

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p17"></span>10. And in the first place, he drove
from his house every Christian, thus depriving himself, wretched man, of
the prayers which they offered to God in his behalf, which they are
accustomed, according to the teaching of their fathers, to offer for all
men. Then he commanded that the soldiers in the cities should be
cashiered and stripped of their rank unless they chose to sacrifice to
the demons. And yet these were small matters when compared with the
greater things that followed.

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p18"></span>11. Why is it necessary to relate
minutely and in detail all that was done by the hater of God, and to
recount how this most lawless man invented unlawful laws? <span
id="fr_2975"></span>[2976](#fn_2975.md) He passed an ordinance that no one
should exercise humanity toward the sufferers in prison by giving them
food, and that none should show mercy to those that were perishing of
hunger in bonds; that no one should in any way be kind, or do any good
act, even though moved by Nature herself to sympathize with one’s
neighbors. And this was indeed an openly shameful and most cruel law,
calculated to expel all natural kindliness. And in addition to this it
was also decreed, as a punishment, that those who showed compassion
should suffer the same things with those whom they compassionated; and
that those who kindly ministered to the suffering should be thrown into
bonds and into prison, and should endure the same punishment with the
sufferers. Such were the decrees of Licinius.

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p20"></span>12. Why should we recount his
innovations in regard to marriage or in regard to the dying—innovations
by which he ventured to annul the ancient laws of the Romans which had
been well and wisely formed, and to introduce certain barbarous and
cruel laws, which were truly unlawful and lawless? <span
id="fr_2976"></span>[2977](#fn_2976.md) He invented, to the detriment of
the provinces which were subject to him, innumerable prosecutions, <span
id="fr_2977"></span>[2978](#fn_2977.md) and all sorts of methods of
extorting gold and silver, new measurements of land <span
id="fr_2978"></span>[2979](#fn_2978.md) and injurious exactions from men in
the country, who were no longer living, but long since dead.

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p24"></span>13. Why is it necessary to speak at
length of the banishments which, in addition to these things, this enemy
of mankind inflicted upon those who had done no wrong, the expatriations
of men of noble birth and high reputation whose young wives he snatched
from them and consigned to certain baser fellows of his own, to be
shamefully abused by them, and the many married women and virgins upon
whom he gratified his passions, although he was in advanced age <span
id="fr_2979"></span>[2980](#fn_2979.md) —why, I say, is it necessary to
speak at length of these things, when the excessive wickedness of his
last deeds makes the first appear small and of no account?

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p26"></span>14. For, finally, he reached such a
pitch of madness that he attacked the bishops, supposing that they—as
servants of the God over all—would be hostile to his measures. He did
not yet proceed against them openly, on account of his fear of his
superior, but as before, secretly and craftily, employing the treachery
of the governors for the destruction of the most distinguished of them.
And the manner of their murder was strange, and such as had never before
been heard of.

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p27"></span>15. The deeds which he performed
<span id="page_386">p. 386</span> <span
id="iii.xvi.viii-Page_386"></span>at Amaseia <span
id="fr_2980"></span>[2981](#fn_2980.md) and in the other cities of Pontus
surpassed every excess of cruelty. Some of the churches of God were
again razed to the ground, others were closed, so that none of those
accustomed to frequent them could enter them and render the worship due
to God.

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p29"></span>16. For his evil conscience led him
to suppose that prayers were not offered in his behalf; but he was
persuaded that we did everything in the interest of the God-beloved
emperor, and that we supplicated God for him. <span
id="fr_2981"></span>[2982](#fn_2981.md) Therefore he hastened to turn his
fury against us.

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p31"></span>17. And then those among the
governors who wished to flatter him, perceiving that in doing such
things they pleased the impious tyrant, <span
id="fr_2982"></span>[2983](#fn_2982.md) made some of the bishops suffer the
penalties customarily inflicted upon criminals, and led away and without
any pretext punished like murderers those who had done no wrong. Some
now endured a new form of death: having their bodies cut into many
pieces with the sword, and after this savage and most horrible
spectacle, being thrown into the depths of the sea as food for fishes.

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p33"></span>18. Thereupon the worshipers of God
again fled, and fields and deserts, forests and mountains, again
received the servants of Christ. And when the impious tyrant had thus
met with success in these measures, he finally planned to renew the
persecution against all.

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p34"></span>19. And he would have succeeded in
his design, and there would have been nothing to hinder him in the work,
had not God, the defender of the lives of his own people, most quickly
anticipated that which was about to happen, and caused a great light to
shine forth as in the midst of a dark and gloomy night, and raised up a
deliverer for all, leading into those regions with a lofty arm, his
servant, Constantine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2969"></span>[384:2970](2010305.htm#fr_2969.md) <span
id="iii.xvi.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p5"></span> To speak of Licinius as alone
responsible for the civil war between himself and Constantine, which
ended in his own downfall, is quite unjustifiable; indeed, this entire
chapter is a painful example of the way in which prejudice distorts
facts. The positions of the two emperors was such that a final struggle
between them for the sole supremacy was inevitable. Already, in 314, a
war broke out, which seems to have resulted from Licinius’ refusal to
deliver up a relative of his own, who had in some way been concerned in
a conspiracy against Constantine. The occasion of the war is not
perfectly plain, but it is certain that Constantine, not Licinius, was
the aggressor. Constantine came off victorious, but was not able to
overthrow his rival, and a treaty was concluded by which Illyricum, one
of Licinius’ most important provinces, was ceded to Constantine. The two
emperors remained at peace, each waiting for a time when he could with
advantage attack the other, until 323, when a second and greater war
broke out, to which Eusebius, who omits all reference to the former,
refers in these two chapters. The immediate occasion of this war, as of
the former, is obscure, but it was certainly not due to Constantine’s
pity for the oppressed Christian subjects of Licinius, and his pious
desire to avenge their sufferings, as Eusebius, who in his *Vita Const*.
II. 3, in contradiction to this present passage, claims for his prince
the honor of beginning the war without any other provocation, would have
us believe. Doubtless the fact that Licinius was persecuting his
Christian subjects had much to do with the outbreak of the war; for
Constantine saw clearly that Licinius had weakened his hold upon his
subjects by his conduct, and that therefore a good time had arrived to
strike the decisive blow. A pretext—for of course Constantine could not
go to war without some more material and plausible pretext than sympathy
with oppressed Christian brethren—was furnished by some sort of a
misunderstanding in regard to the respective rights of the two
sovereigns in the border territory along the Danube frontier, and the
war began by Constantine taking the initiative, and invading his rival’s
territory. Two battles were fought,—one at Adrianople in July, and the
other at Chrysopolis in September, 323,—in both of which Constantine was
victorious, and the latter of which resulted in the surrender of
Licinius, and the accession of Constantine to the supreme sovereignty of
both East and West. Cf. Gibbon, Harper’s ed., I. p. 490 sq., and
Burckhardt’s *Zeit Constantins*, 2d ed., p. 328 sq.

<span id="fn_2970"></span>[384:2971](2010305.htm#fr_2970.md) <span
id="iii.xvi.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p7"></span> See below, p. 400.

<span id="fn_2971"></span>[384:2972](2010305.htm#fr_2971.md) <span
id="iii.xvi.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p8"></span> A more flagrant misrepresentation of
facts could hardly be imagined. Licinius received his appointment
directly from Galerius and owed nothing whatever to Constantine; in
fact, was an Augustus before the latter was, and held his half of the
empire quite independently of the latter, and indeed by a far clearer
title than Constantine held his. See above, Bk. VIII. chap. 13, notes 18
and 21.

<span id="fn_2972"></span>[384:2973](2010305.htm#fr_2972.md) <span
id="iii.xvi.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p10"></span> There is no reason to suppose that
Licinius was any more guilty than Constantine in these respects.

<span id="fn_2973"></span>[384:2974](2010305.htm#fr_2973.md) <span
id="iii.xvi.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p13"></span> This is in direct contradiction to
Eusebius’ own statement in his *Vita Const*. II. 3 (see above, note 1),
and is almost certainly incorrect.

<span id="fn_2974"></span>[384:2975](2010305.htm#fr_2974.md) <span
id="iii.xvi.viii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p15"></span> Licinius, as Görres has shown in his
able essay *Die Licinianische Christenverfolgung*, p. 5 sq., did not
begin to persecute the Christians until the year 319 (the persecution
was formerly commonly supposed to have begun some three or four years
earlier). The causes of his change of policy in this matter it is
impossible to state with certainty, but the exceedingly foolish step
seems to have been chiefly due to his growing hatred and suspicion of
the Christians as the friends of Constantine. Though he had not hitherto
been hostile to them, he had yet never taken any pains to win their
friendship and to secure their enthusiastic support as Constantine had,
and as a consequence they naturally looked with envy upon their brethren
in the west, who were enjoying such signal marks of imperial favor.
Licinius could not but be conscious of this; and as the relations
between himself and Constantine became more and more strained, it was
not unnatural for him to acquire a peculiar enmity toward them, and
finally to suspect them of a conspiracy in favor of his rival. Whether
he had any grounds for such a suspicion we do not know, but at any rate
he began to show his changed attitude in 319 by clearing his palace of
Christians (see § 10). No more foolish step can be imagined than the
opening of a persecution at this critical juncture. Just at a time when
he needed the most loyal support of all his subjects, he wantonly
alienated the affections of a large and influential portion of them, and
in the very act gave them good reason to become devoted adherents of his
enemy. The persecution of Licinius, as Görres has clearly shown (*ibid*.
p. 29 sq.) was limited in its extent and mild in its character. It
began, as Eusebius informs us, with the expulsion of Christians from the
palace, but even here it was not universal; at least, Eusebius of
Nicomedia and other prominent clergymen still remained Licinius’
friends, and were treated as such by him. In fact, he evidently punished
only those whom he thought to be his enemies and to be interested in the
success of Constantine, if not directly conspiring in his behalf. No
general edicts of persecution were issued by him, and the sufferings of
the Christians seem to have been confined almost wholly to occasional
loss of property or banishment, or, still less frequently, imprisonment.
A few bishops appear to have been put to death, but there is no reason
to suppose that they suffered at the command of Licinius himself. Of
course, when it was known that he was hostile to the Christians,
fanatical heathen officials might venture, occasionally at least, to
violate the existing laws and bring hated bishops to death on one
pretext or another. But such cases were certainly rare, and there seem
to have been no instances of execution on the simple ground of
Christianity, as indeed there could not be while the Edict of Milan
remained unrepealed. Eusebius’ statement that Licinius was about to
proceed to severer measures, when the war with Constantine broke out and
put a stop to his plans, is very likely true; but otherwise his report
is rather highly colored, as many other sources fully warrant us in
saying. For a careful and very satisfactory discussion of this whole
subject, see Görres, *ibid*. p. 32 sq.

<span id="fn_2975"></span>[385:2976](2010305.htm#fr_2975.md) <span
id="iii.xvi.viii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p19"></span> Note the play on the word νόμος.
νόμους ἀνόμους ὁ πανανομώτατος

<span id="fn_2976"></span>[385:2977](2010305.htm#fr_2976.md) <span
id="iii.xvi.viii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p21"></span> Another play upon the same word:
νόμους, ἀνόμους ὡς ἀληθῶς καὶ παρανόμους

<span id="fn_2977"></span>[385:2978](2010305.htm#fr_2977.md) <span
id="iii.xvi.viii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p22"></span> ἐπισκήψεις. The same word is used in
connection with Maximinus in Bk. VIII. chap. 14, § 10, above. Valesius
cites passages from Aurelius Victor, and Libanius, in which it is said
that Licinius was very kindly disposed toward the rural population of
his realm, and that the cities flourished greatly under him. Moreover,
Zosimus gives just such an account of Constantine as Eusebius gives of
Licinius. Allowance must undoubtedly be made on the one side for
Eusebius’ prejudice against Licinius, as on the other for Zosimus’
well-known hatred of Constantine. Doubtless both accounts are greatly
exaggerated, though they probably contain considerable truth, for there
were few Roman emperors that did not practice severe exactions upon
their subjects, at times at least, if not continually, and it is always
easy in a case of this kind to notice the dark and to overlook the
bright features of a reign. Licinius was certainly a cruel man in many
respects, and one hardly cares to enter the lists in his defense, but it
should be observed that, until he became the enemy of Constantine and
the persecutor of the Christians, Eusebius uniformly spoke of him in the
highest terms. Compare Stroth’s note *ad locum* (quoted also by Closs).

<span id="fn_2978"></span>[385:2979](2010305.htm#fr_2978.md) <span
id="iii.xvi.viii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p23"></span> i.e. for the purpose of making new
assessments, which is always apt to be looked upon as an oppressive act,
whether unjust or not.

<span id="fn_2979"></span>[385:2980](2010305.htm#fr_2979.md) <span
id="iii.xvi.viii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p25"></span> ἐσχατόγηρως. Valesius remarks that,
according to the epitomist of Victor, Licinius died in the sixtieth year
of his age, so that at the time of which Eusebius was speaking he was
little more than fifty years of age.

<span id="fn_2980"></span>[386:2981](2010305.htm#fr_2980.md) <span
id="iii.xvi.viii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p28"></span> Amaseia, or Amasia, as it is more
commonly called, was an important city of Pontus, situated on the river
Iris.

<span id="fn_2981"></span>[386:2982](2010305.htm#fr_2981.md) <span
id="iii.xvi.viii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p30"></span> Eusebius makes it clear enough in
this sentence that Licinius suspected a treasonable conspiracy on the
part of the Christians. See above, note 1.

<span id="fn_2982"></span>[386:2983](2010305.htm#fr_2982.md) <span
id="iii.xvi.viii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.viii-p32"></span> See *ibid*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](2010306.md)
