[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010126)  [Next](2010128) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII.—</span>*The Works of Justin
which have come down to us.*

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p2.1"></span>This</span> writer has left us a great
many monuments of a mind educated and practiced in divine things, which
are replete with profitable matter of every kind. To them we shall refer
the studious, noting as we proceed those that have come to our
knowledge. <span id="fr_1191"></span>[1192](#fn_1191)

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p4"></span>2. There is a certain discourse <span
id="fr_1192"></span>[1193](#fn_1192) of his in defense of our doctrine
addressed to Antoninus surnamed the Pious, and to his sons, and to the
Roman senate. Another work contains his second Apology <span
id="fr_1193"></span>[1194](#fn_1193) in behalf of our faith, which he
offered to him who was the successor of the emperor mentioned and who
bore the same name, Antoninus Verus, the one whose times we are now
recording.

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p7"></span>3. Also another work against the
Greeks, <span id="fr_1194"></span>[1195](#fn_1194) in which he
discourses at length upon most of the questions at issue between us and
the Greek philosophers, and discusses the nature of demons. It is not
necessary for me to add any of these things here.

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p9"></span>4. And still another work of his
against the Greeks has come down to us, to which he gave the title
Refutation. And besides these another, On the Sovereignty of God, <span
id="fr_1195"></span>[1196](#fn_1195) which he establishes not only from
our Scriptures, but also from the books of the Greeks.

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p11"></span>5. Still further, a work entitled
Psaltes, <span id="fr_1196"></span>[1197](#fn_1196) and another
disputation On the Soul, in which, after propounding various questions
concerning the problem under discussion, he gives the opinions of the
Greek philosophers, promising to refute it, and to present his own view
in another work.

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p13"></span>6. He composed also a dialogue
against the Jews, <span id="fr_1197"></span>[1198](#fn_1197) which he
held in the city of Ephesus with Trypho, a most distinguished man among
the Hebrews of that day. In it he shows how the divine grace urged him
on to the doctrine of the faith, and with what earnestness he had
formerly pursued philosophical studies, and how ardent a search he had
made for the truth. <span id="fr_1198"></span>[1199](#fn_1198)

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p17"></span>7. And he records of the Jews in the
same work, that they were plotting against the teaching of Christ,
asserting the <span id="page_197">p. 197</span> <span
id="iii.ix.xviii-Page_197"></span>same things against Trypho: “Not only
did you not repent of the wickedness which you had committed, but you
selected at that time chosen men, and you sent them out from Jerusalem
through all the land, to announce that the godless heresy of the
Christians had made its appearance, and to accuse them of those things
which all that are ignorant of us say against us, so that you become the
causes not only of your own injustice, but also of all other
men’s.” <span id="fr_1199"></span>[1200](#fn_1199)

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p19"></span>8. He writes also that even down to
his time prophetic gifts shone in the Church. <span
id="fr_1200"></span>[1201](#fn_1200) And he mentions the Apocalypse of
John, saying distinctly that it was the apostle’s. <span
id="fr_1201"></span>[1202](#fn_1201) He also refers to certain prophetic
declarations, and accuses Trypho on the ground that the Jews had cut
them out of the Scripture. <span id="fr_1202"></span>[1203](#fn_1202) A
great many other works of his are still in the hands of many of the
brethren. <span id="fr_1203"></span>[1204](#fn_1203)

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p24"></span>9. And the discourses of the man were
thought so worthy of study even by the ancients, that Irenæus quotes his
words: for instance, in the fourth book of his work Against Heresies,
where he writes as follows: <span id="fr_1204"></span>[1205](#fn_1204)
“And Justin well says in his work against Marcion, that he would not
have believed the Lord himself if he had preached another God besides
the Creator”; and again in the fifth book of the same work he
says: <span id="fr_1205"></span>[1206](#fn_1205) “And Justin well said
that before the coming of the Lord Satan never dared to blaspheme
God, <span id="fr_1206"></span>[1207](#fn_1206) because he did not yet
know his condemnation.”

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p28"></span>10. These things I have deemed it
necessary to say for the sake of stimulating the studious to peruse his
works with diligence. So much concerning him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1191"></span>[196:1192](2010127.htm#fr_1191) <span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p3"></span> Eusebius apparently cites here only
the works which he had himself seen, which accounts for his omission of
the work against Marcion mentioned above, in chap. 11.

<span id="fn_1192"></span>[196:1193](2010127.htm#fr_1192) <span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p5"></span> This *Apology* is the genuine work of
Justin, and is still extant in two late and very faulty <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xviii-p5.1"></span>mss.</span>, in which it
is divided into two, and the parts are commonly known as Justin’s First
and Second Apologies, though they were originally one. The best edition
of the original is that of Otto in his *Corpus Apologetarum
Christianorum;* English translation in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* Vol.
I. p. 163 ff. Eusebius, in his *Chronicle,* places the date of its
composition as 141, but most critics are now agreed in putting it ten or
more years later; it must, however, have been written before the death
of Antoninus Pius (161). See Schaff, *Ch. Hist.* II. p. 716.

<span id="fn_1193"></span>[196:1194](2010127.htm#fr_1193) <span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p6"></span> Eusebius here, as in chap. 16 above,
ascribes to Justin a second Apology, from which, however, he nowhere
quotes. From Eusebius the tradition has come down through history that
Justin wrote two apologies, and the tradition seems to be confirmed by
the existing <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p6.1"></span>mss.</span> of Justin, which give two. But
Eusebius’ two cannot have corresponded to the present two; for, from
chap. 8, §§16 and 17, it is plain that to Eusebius our two formed one
complete work. And it is plain, too, from internal evidence (as is now
very generally admitted; Wieseler’s arguments against this, in his
*Christenverfolgungen,* p. 104 ff., are not sound), that the two were
originally one, our second forming simply a supplement to the first.
What, then, has become of the second Apology mentioned by Eusebius?
There is much difference of opinion upon this point. But the explanation
given by Harnack (p. 171 ff.) seems the most probable one. According to
his theory, the Apology of Athenagoras (of whom none of the Fathers,
except Methodius and Philip of Side, seem to have had any knowledge) was
attributed to Justin by a copyist of the third century,—who altered the
address so as to throw it into Justin’s time,—and as such it came into
the hands of Eusebius, who mentions it among the works of Justin. That
he does not quote from it may be due to the fact that it contained
nothing suited to his purpose, or it is possible that he had some
suspicions about it; the last, however, is not probable, as he nowhere
hints at them. That some uncertainty, however, seemed to hang about the
work is evident. The erasure of the name of Athenagoras and the
substitution of Justin’s name accounts for the almost total
disappearance of the former from history. This Apology and his treatise
on the resurrection first appear again under his name in the eleventh
century, and exist now in seventeen <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p6.2"></span>mss.</span> (see Schaff, II. 731). The
traditional second Apology of Justin having thus after the eleventh
century disappeared, his one genuine Apology was divided by later
copyists, so that we still have apparently two separate apologies.

<span id="fn_1194"></span>[196:1195](2010127.htm#fr_1194) <span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p8"></span> This and the following were possibly
genuine works of Justin; but, as they are no longer extant, it is
impossible to speak with certainty. The two extant works, *Discourse to
the Greeks (Oratio ad Græcos)* and *Hortatory Address to the Greeks
(Cohortatio ad Græcos),* which are translated in the *Ante-Nicene
Fathers,* I. p. 271–289, are to be regarded as the productions of later
writers, and are not to be identified with the two mentioned here
(although Otto defends them both, and Semisch defends the latter).

<span id="fn_1195"></span>[196:1196](2010127.htm#fr_1195) <span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p10"></span> We have no reason to think that this
work was not genuine, but it is no longer extant, and therefore
certainty in the matter is impossible. It is not to be identified with
the extant work upon the same subject (translated in the *Ante-Nicene
Fathers,* I. p. 290–293), which is the production of a later writer.

<span id="fn_1196"></span>[196:1197](2010127.htm#fr_1196) <span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p12"></span> This work and the following have
entirely disappeared, but were genuine productions of Justin, for all
that we know to the contrary.

<span id="fn_1197"></span>[196:1198](2010127.htm#fr_1197) <span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p14"></span> This is a genuine work of Justin,
and is still extant (translated in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* I. p.
194–270). Its exact date is uncertain, but it was written after the
*Apology* (to which it refers in chap. 120), and during the reign of
Antoninus Pius (137–161).

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p15"></span>Of Trypho, whom Eusebius
characterizes as “a most distinguished man among the Hebrews,” we know
nothing beyond what we can gather from the dialogue itself.

<span id="fn_1198"></span>[196:1199](2010127.htm#fr_1198) <span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p16"></span> See *Dial.* chap. 2 sq.

<span id="fn_1199"></span>[197:1200](2010127.htm#fr_1199) <span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p18"></span> *ibid.* chap. 17.

<span id="fn_1200"></span>[197:1201](2010127.htm#fr_1200) <span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p20"></span> *ibid.*chap. 82.

<span id="fn_1201"></span>[197:1202](2010127.htm#fr_1201) <span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p21"></span> *ibid.*chap. 81.

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[197:1203](2010127.htm#fr_1202) <span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p22"></span> *ibid.*chap. 71.

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[197:1204](2010127.htm#fr_1203) <span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p23"></span> Of the many extant and non-extant
works attributed to Justin by tradition, all, or the most of them
(except the seven mentioned by Eusebius, and the work *Against Marcion,*
quoted by Irenæus,—see just below,—and the *Syntagma Contra omnes
Hær.*), are the productions of later writers.

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[197:1205](2010127.htm#fr_1204) <span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p25"></span> Irenæus, *Adv. Hær.* IV. 6. 2.

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[197:1206](2010127.htm#fr_1205) <span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p26"></span> Irenæus, V. 26. 2. Irenæus does not
name the work which he quotes here, and the quotation occurs in none of
Justin’s extant works, but the context and the sense of the quotation
itself seem to point to the same work, *Against Marcion.*

<span id="fn_1206"></span>[197:1207](2010127.htm#fr_1206) <span
id="iii.ix.xviii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p27"></span> Epiphanius expresses the same
thought in his *Hær*. XXXIX. 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX](2010128)
