[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010691)  [Next](2010693.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.viii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.viii.iii-p2.1"></span>This</span> only begotten Word of God
reigns, from ages which had no beginning, to infinite and endless ages,
the partner of his Father’s kingdom. And \[our emperor\] ever beloved by
him, who derives the source of imperial authority from above, and is
strong in the power of his sacred title, <span
id="fr_3503"></span>[3504](#fn_3503.md) has controlled the empire of the
world for a long period of years.

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p4"></span>2. Again, that Preserver of the
universe orders these heavens and earth, and the celestial kingdom,
consistently with his Father’s will. Even so our emperor whom he loves,
by bringing those whom he rules on earth to the only begotten Word and
Saviour renders them fit subjects of his kingdom.

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p5"></span>3. And as he who is the common Saviour
of mankind, by his invisible and Divine power as the good shepherd,
drives far away from his flock, like savage beasts, those apostate
spirits which once flew through the airy tracts above this earth, and
fastened on the souls of men; <span id="fr_3504"></span>[3505](#fn_3504.md)
so this his friend, graced by his heavenly favor with victory over all
his foes, subdues and chastens the open adversaries of the truth in
accordance with the usages of war.

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p7"></span>4. He who is the pre-existent Word, the
Preserver of all things, imparts to his disciples the seeds of true
wisdom and salvation, and at once enlightens and gives them
understanding in the knowledge of his Father’s kingdom. Our emperor, his
friend, acting as interpreter to the Word of God, aims at recalling the
whole human race to the knowledge of God; proclaiming clearly in the
ears of all, and declaring with powerful voice the laws of truth and
godliness to all who dwell on the earth.

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p8"></span>5. Once more, the universal Saviour
opens the heavenly gates of his Father’s kingdom to those whose course
is thitherward from this world. Our emperor, emulous of his Divine
example, having purged his earthly dominion from every stain of impious
error, invites each holy and pious worshiper within his imperial
mansions, earnestly desiring to save with all its crew that mighty
vessel of which he is the appointed pilot. And he alone of all who have
wielded the imperial power of Rome, being honored by the Supreme
Sovereign with a reign of three decennial periods, now celebrates this
festival, not, as his ancestors might have done, in honor of infernal
demons, or the apparitions of seducing spirits, or of the fraud and
deceitful arts of impious men; but as an act of thanksgiving to him by
whom he has thus been honored, and in acknowledgment of the blessings he
has received at his hands. He does not, in imitation of ancient usage,
defile his imperial mansions with blood and gore, nor propitiate the
infernal deities with fire and smoke, and sacrificial offerings; but
dedicates to the universal Sovereign a pleasant and acceptable
sacrifice, even his own imperial soul, and a mind truly fitted for the
service of God.

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p9"></span>6. For this sacrifice alone is grateful
to him: and this sacrifice our emperor has learned, with purified mind
and thoughts, to present as an offering without the intervention of fire
and blood, while his own piety, strengthened by the truthful doctrines
with which his soul is stored, he sets forth in magnificent language the
praises of God, and <span id="page_584">p. 584</span> <span
id="iv.viii.iii-Page_584"></span>imitates his Divine philanthropy by his
own imperial acts. Wholly devoted to him, he dedicates himself as a
noble offering, a first-fruit of that world, the government of which is
intrusted to his charge. This first and greatest sacrifice our emperor
first dedicates to God; and then, as a faithful shepherd, he offers, not
“famous hecatombs of firstling lambs,” but the souls of that flock which
is the object of his care, those rational beings whom he leads to the
knowledge and pious worship of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3503"></span>[583:3504](2010692.htm#fr_3503.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p3"></span> \[It is difficult to know precisely
what is meant here. Possibly the name of Christian.—*Bag.*\]

<span id="fn_3504"></span>[583:3505](2010692.htm#fr_3504.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p6"></span> This is an allusion to what was
afterwards known as Vampireism,—a belief of unknown antiquity and
especially prevalent in various forms in the East. Rydberg (*Magic of
the Middle Ages,* p. 207) describes the mediæval form thus: “The
vampires, according to the belief of the Middle Ages, are disembodied
souls which clothe themselves again in their buried bodies, steal at
night into houses, and suck from the nipple of the sleeping all their
blood.” (Cf. Perty, *d. myst. Ersch.* 1 \[1872\], 383. 91; Görres’ *Chr.
myst.* Vol. 3, etc.) Similar in nature was that notion of the spirits
who sucked away the breath of sleeping persons, which has left its trace
in the modern superstition that cats suck away the breath of sleeping
children.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](2010693.md)
