[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010107)  [Next](2010109.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIX.—</span>*The Writings of
Papias.*

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p2.1"></span>There</span> are extant five books of
Papias, which bear the title Expositions of Oracles of the Lord. <span
id="fr_938"></span>[939](#fn_938.md) Irenæus makes mention of these as the
only works written by him, <span id="fr_939"></span>[940](#fn_939.md) in
the following words: <span id="fr_940"></span>[941](#fn_940.md) “These
things are attested by Papias, an ancient man who was a hearer of John
and a companion of Polycarp, in his fourth book. For five books have
been written by him.” These are the words of Irenæus.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p6"></span>2. But Papias himself in the preface
to his discourses by no means declares that he was himself a hearer and
eye-witness of the holy apostles, but he shows by the words which he
uses that he received the doctrines of the faith from those who were
their friends. <span id="fr_941"></span>[942](#fn_941.md)

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p8"></span>3. He says: “But I shall not
hesitate also to put down for you along with my interpreta<span
id="page_171">p. 171</span> <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-Page_171"></span>tions <span
id="fr_942"></span>[943](#fn_942.md) whatsoever things I have at any time
learned carefully from the elders <span
id="fr_943"></span>[944](#fn_943.md) and carefully remembered, guaranteeing
their truth. For I did not, like the multitude, take pleasure in those
that speak much, but in those that teach the truth; not in those that
relate strange commandments, but in those that deliver <span
id="fr_944"></span>[945](#fn_944.md) the commandments given by the Lord to
faith, <span id="fr_945"></span>[946](#fn_945.md) and springing from the
truth itself.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p13"></span>4. If, then, any one came, who had
been a follower of the elders, I questioned him in regard to the words
of the elders,—what Andrew or what Peter said, or what was said by
Philip, or by Thomas, or by James, or by John, or by Matthew, or by any
other of the disciples of the Lord, and what things Aristion <span
id="fr_946"></span>[947](#fn_946.md) and the presbyter John, <span
id="fr_947"></span>[948](#fn_947.md) the disciples of the Lord, say. For I
did not think that what was to be gotten from the books <span
id="fr_948"></span>[949](#fn_948.md) would profit me as much as what came
from the living and abiding voice.”

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p17"></span>5. It is worth while observing here
that the name John is twice enumerated by him. <span
id="fr_949"></span>[950](#fn_949.md) The first one he mentions in
connection with Peter and James and Matthew and the rest of the
apostles, clearly meaning the evangelist; but the other John he mentions
after an interval, and places him among others outside of the number of
the apostles, putting Aristion before him, and he distinctly calls him a
presbyter.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p19"></span>6. This shows that the statement of
those is true, who say that there were two persons in Asia that bore the
same name, and that there were two tombs in Ephesus, each of which, even
to the present day, is called John’s. <span
id="fr_950"></span>[951](#fn_950.md) It is important to notice this. For it
is probable that it was the second, if one is not willing to admit that
it was the first that saw the Revelation, which is ascribed by name to
John. <span id="fr_951"></span>[952](#fn_951.md)

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p22"></span>7. And Papias, of whom we are now
speaking, confesses that he received the words of the apostles from
those that followed them, but says that he was himself a hearer of
Aristion <span id="page_172">p. 172</span> <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-Page_172"></span>and the presbyter John. At least he
mentions them frequently by name, and gives their traditions in his
writings. These things we hope, have not been uselessly adduced by us.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p23"></span>8. But it is fitting to subjoin to
the words of Papias which have been quoted, other passages from his
works in which he relates some other wonderful events which he claims to
have received from tradition.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p24"></span>9. That Philip the apostle dwelt at
Hierapolis with his daughters has been already stated. <span
id="fr_952"></span>[953](#fn_952.md) But it must be noted here that Papias,
their contemporary, says that he heard a wonderful tale from the
daughters of Philip. For he relates that in his time <span
id="fr_953"></span>[954](#fn_953.md) one rose from the dead. And he tells
another wonderful story of Justus, surnamed Barsabbas: that he drank a
deadly poison, and yet, by the grace of the Lord, suffered no harm.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p27"></span>10. The Book of Acts records that
the holy apostles after the ascension of the Saviour, put forward this
Justus, together with Matthias, and prayed that one might be chosen in
place of the traitor Judas, to fill up their number. The account is as
follows: “And they put forward two, Joseph, called Barsabbas, who was
surnamed Justus, and Matthias; and they prayed and said.” <span
id="fr_954"></span>[955](#fn_954.md)

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p29"></span>11. The same writer gives also
other accounts which he says came to him through unwritten tradition,
certain strange parables and teachings of the Saviour, and some other
more mythical things. <span id="fr_955"></span>[956](#fn_955.md)

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p31"></span>12. To these belong his statement
that there will be a period of some thousand years after the
resurrection of the dead, and that the kingdom of Christ will be set up
in material form on this very earth. <span
id="fr_956"></span>[957](#fn_956.md) I suppose he got these ideas through a
misunderstanding of the apostolic accounts, not perceiving that the
things said by them were spoken mystically in figures.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p33"></span>13. For he appears to have been of
very limited understanding, <span id="fr_957"></span>[958](#fn_957.md) as
one can see from his discourses. But it was due to him that so many of
the Church Fathers after him adopted a like opinion, urging in their own
support the antiquity of the man; as for instance Irenæus and any one
else that may have proclaimed similar views. <span
id="fr_958"></span>[959](#fn_958.md)

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p36"></span>14. Papias gives also in his own
work other accounts of the words of the Lord on the authority of
Aristion who was mentioned above, and traditions as handed down by the
presbyter John; to which we refer those who are fond of learning. But
now we must add to the words of his which we have already quoted the
tradition which he gives in regard to Mark, the author of the Gospel.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p37"></span>15. “This also the presbyter <span
id="fr_959"></span>[960](#fn_959.md) said: Mark, having become the
interpreter of Peter, wrote down accurately, though not in order,
whatsoever he remembered of the things said or done by Christ. <span
id="fr_960"></span>[961](#fn_960.md) <span id="page_173">p. 173</span>
<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-Page_173"></span>For he neither heard the Lord
nor followed him, but afterward, as I said, he followed Peter, who
adapted his teaching to the needs of his hearers, but with no intention
of giving a connected account of the Lord’s discourses, <span
id="fr_961"></span>[962](#fn_961.md) so that Mark committed no error while
he thus wrote some things as he remembered them. For he was careful of
one thing, not to omit any of the things which he had heard, and not to
state any of them falsely.” These things are related by Papias
concerning Mark.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p41"></span>16. But concerning Matthew he
writes as follows: “So then <span id="fr_962"></span>[963](#fn_962.md)
Matthew wrote the oracles in the Hebrew language, and every one
interpreted them as he was able.” <span
id="fr_963"></span>[964](#fn_963.md) And the same writer uses testimonies
from the first Epistle of John <span id="fr_964"></span>[965](#fn_964.md)
and from that of Peter likewise. <span id="fr_965"></span>[966](#fn_965.md)
And he relates another story of a woman, who was accused of many sins
before the Lord, which is contained in the Gospel according to the
Hebrews. <span id="fr_966"></span>[967](#fn_966.md) These things we have
thought it necessary to observe in addition to what has been already
stated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_938"></span>[170:939](2010108.htm#fr_938.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p3.1"></span>λογίων κυριακῶν ἐξηγήσεις</span>. This
work is no longer extant, but a number of fragments of it have been
preserved by Irenæus, Eusebius, and others, which are published in the
various editions of the Apostolic Fathers (see especially Gebhardt,
Harnack and Zahn’s edition, Vol. I. Appendix), and by Routh in his *Rel.
Sacræ,* I. p. 3–16. English translation in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers*
(Am. ed.), Vol. I. p. 151 sq. The exact character of the work has been
long and sharply disputed. Some contend that it was a record of oral
traditions in regard to the Lord which Papias had gathered, together
with a commentary upon these traditions, others that it was a complete
Gospel, others that it was a commentary upon an already existing Gospel
or Gospels. The last is the view which accords best with the language of
Eusebius, and it is widely accepted, though there is controversy among
those who accept it as to whether the Gospel or Gospels which he used
are to be identified with either of our canonical Gospels. But upon this
question we cannot dwell at this point. Lightfoot, who believes that a
written text lay at the base of Papias’ work, concludes that the work
contained, first, the text; secondly, “the interpretations which
explained the text, and which were the main object of the work”; and
thirdly, the oral traditions, which “were subordinate to the
interpretation” (*Contemporary Review,* 1875, II. p. 389). This is
probably as good a description of the plan of Papias’ work as can be
given, whatever decision may be reached as to the identity of the text
which he used with any one of our Gospels. Lightfoot has adduced strong
arguments for his view, and has discussed at length various other views
which it is not necessary to repeat here. On the significance of the
word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p3.2"></span>λόγια</span>, see below, note 26. As
remarked there, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p3.3"></span>λόγια</span> cannot be confined to words
or discourses only, and therefore the “oracles” which Papias expounded
in his work may well have included, so far as the title is concerned, a
complete Gospel or Gospels. In the absence of the work itself, however,
we are left entirely to conjecture, though it must be remarked that in
the time of Papias at least some of our Gospels were certainly in
existence and already widely accepted. It is difficult, therefore, to
suppose that if written documents lay at the basis of Papias’ work, as
we have concluded that they did, that they can have been other than one
or more of the commonly accepted Gospels. But see Lightfoot’s article
already referred to for a discussion of this question. The date of the
composition of Papias’ work is now commonly fixed at about the middle of
the second century, probably nearer 130 than 150 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p3.4"></span>a.d.</span> The books and articles that
have been written upon this work are far too numerous to mention.
Besides the article by Lightfoot in the *Contemporary Review,* which has
been already referred to, we should mention also Salmon’s article in the
*Dict. of Christian Biography,* Schleiermacher’s essay in the *Studien
und Kritiken,* 1832, p. 735 sq.,—the first critical discussion of
Papias’ testimony in regard to the Gospels of Matthew and Mark, and
still valuable,—dissertations by Weiffenbach, 1874 and 1878, and by
Leimbach, 1875, with reviews of the last two in various periodicals,
notably the articles by Hilgenfeld in his *Zeitschrift für wiss. Theol.*
1875, 1877, 1879. See also p. 389, note, below. On the life of Papias,
see above, chap. 36, note 2.

<span id="fn_939"></span>[170:940](2010108.htm#fr_939.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p3.5"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p4.1"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p4.2"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p4.3"></span>μόνων αὐτῷ γραφέντων</span>. Irenæus
does not expressly say that these were the only works written by Papias.
He simply says, “For five books have been written by him” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p4.4"></span>ž</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p4.5"></span>στι γὰρ αὐτῷ πέντε
βιβλία συντεταγμένα</span>). Eusebius’ interpretation of Irenæus’ words
is not, however, at all unnatural, and probably expresses Irenæus’
meaning.

<span id="fn_940"></span>[170:941](2010108.htm#fr_940.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p4.6"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p5"></span> Irenæus, *Adv. Hær.* V. 33. 4.

<span id="fn_941"></span>[170:942](2010108.htm#fr_941.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p7"></span> The justice of this criticism,
passed by Eusebius upon the statement of Irenæus, has been questioned by
many, who have held that, in the passage quoted just below from Papias,
the same John is meant in both cases. See the note of Schaff in his
*Church History,* II. p. 697 sq. A careful exegesis of the passage from
Papias quoted by Eusebius seems, however, to lead necessarily to the
conclusion which Eusebius draws, that Papias refers to two different
persons bearing the same name,—John. In fact, no other conclusion can be
reached, unless we accuse Papias of the most stupid and illogical method
of writing. Certainly, if he knew of but one John, there is no possible
excuse for mentioning him twice in the one passage. On the other hand,
if we accept Eusebius’ interpretation, we are met by a serious
difficulty in the fact that we are obliged to assume that there lived in
Asia Minor, early in the second century a man to whom Papias appeals as
possessing exceptional authority, but who is mentioned by no other
Father; who is, in fact, otherwise an entirely unknown personage. And
still further, no reader of Papias’ work, before the time of Eusebius,
gathered from that work, so far as we know, a single hint that the John
with whom he was acquainted was any other than the apostle John. These
difficulties are so serious that they have led many to deny that Papias
meant to refer to a second John, in spite of his apparently clear
reference to such a person. Among those who deny this second John’s
existence are such scholars as Zahn and Salmon. (Compare, for instance,
the latter’s able article on *Joannes the Presbyter*, in the *Dict. of
Christian Biography.*) In reply to their arguments, it may be said that
the silence of all other early writers does not necessarily disprove the
existence of a second John; for it is quite conceivable that all trace
of him should be swallowed up in the reputation of his greater namesake
who lived in the same place. Moreover, it is quite conceivable that
Papias, writing for those who were well acquainted with both Johns, may
have had no suspicion that any one would confound the presbyter with the
apostle, and would imagine that he was referring to the latter when he
was speaking of his personal friend John; and therefore he would have no
reason for stating expressly that there were two Johns, and for
expressly distinguishing the one from the other. It was, then, quite
natural that Irenæus, a whole generation later, knowing that Polycarp
was a disciple of the apostle John, and finding constant mention of a
John in Papias’ works, should simply take for granted that the same John
was meant; for by his time the lesser John may easily, in the minds of
most people, have become lost in the tradition of his greater namesake.
In view of these possibilities, it cannot be said that the silence of
other Fathers in regard to this John is fatal to his existence; and if
this is so, we are hardly justified in doing such violence to Papias’
language as is required to identify the two Johns mentioned by him in
the passage quoted below. Among those who accept Eusebius’ conclusion,
that Papias refers to two different persons, are such scholars as
Tischendorf, Donaldson, Westcott and Lightfoot. If Eusebius has
recovered for us from the ancient history of the Church an otherwise
unknown personage, it will not be the only time that he has corrected an
error committed by all his predecessors. In this case, as in a number of
other cases, I believe Eusebius’ wide information, sharp-sightedness,
and superiority to the trammels of traditionalism receive triumphant
vindication and we may accept his conclusion that Papias was personally
acquainted with a second John, who was familiarly known as “the
Presbyter,” and thus distinguished from the apostle John, who could be
called a presbyter or elder only in the general sense in which all the
leading men of his generation were elders (see below, note 6), and could
not be designated emphatically as “*the* presbyter.” In regard to the
connection of this “presbyter John” with the Apocalypse, see below, note
14. But although Papias distinguishes, as we may conclude, between two
Johns in the passage referred to, and elsewhere, according to Eusebius,
pronounces himself a hearer of the second John, it does not necessarily
follow that Irenæus was mistaken in saying that he was a hearer of the
apostle John; for Irenæus may have based his statement upon information
received from his teacher, Polycarp, the friend of Papias, and not upon
the passage quoted by Eusebius, and hence Papias may have been a hearer
of both Johns. At the same time, it must be said that if Papias had been
a disciple of the apostle John, he could scarcely have failed to state
the fact expressly somewhere in his works; and if he had stated it
anywhere, Eusebius could hardly have overlooked it. The conclusion,
therefore, seems most probable that Eusebius is right in correcting
Irenæus’ statement, and that the latter based his report upon a
misinterpretation of Papias’ own words. In that case, we have no
authority for speaking of Papias as a disciple of John the apostle.

<span id="fn_942"></span>[171:943](2010108.htm#fr_942.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p9"></span> This sentence gives strong support
to the view that oral traditions did not form the basis of Papias’ work,
but that the basis consisted of written documents, which he interpreted,
and to which he then added the oral traditions which he refers to here.
See *Contemporary Review,* 1885, II. p. 388 sq. The words <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p9.1"></span>ταῖς
ἑρμηνείαις</span> have been translated by some scholars, “the
interpretations of them,” thus making the book consist only of these
oral traditions with interpretations of them. But this translation is
not warranted by the Greek, and the *also* at the beginning of the
sentence shows that the work must have contained other matter which
preceded these oral traditions and to which the “interpretations”
belong.

<span id="fn_943"></span>[171:944](2010108.htm#fr_943.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p10"></span> As Lightfoot points out (*Contemp.
Rev. ibid.* p. 379 sq.), Papias uses the term “elders” in a general
sense to denote the Fathers of the Church in the generations preceding
his own. It thus includes both the apostles and their immediate
disciples. The term was thus used in a general sense by later Fathers to
denote all earlier Fathers of the Church; that is, those leaders of the
Church belonging to generations earlier than the writers themselves. The
term, therefore, cannot be confined to the apostles alone, nor can it be
confined, as some have thought (e.g. Weiffenbach in his *Das Papias
Fragment*), to ecclesiastical officers, presbyters in the official
sense. Where the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p10.1"></span>πρεσβύτερος</span> is used in
connection with the second John (at the close of this extract from
Papias), it is apparently employed in its official sense. At least we
cannot otherwise easily understand how it could be used as a peculiar
designation of this John, which should distinguish him from the other
John. For in the general sense of the word, in which Papias commonly
uses it, both Johns were elders. Compare Lightfoot’s words in the
passage referred to above.

<span id="fn_944"></span>[171:945](2010108.htm#fr_944.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p11.1"></span>παραγινομένοις</span>, instead of <span
class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p11.2"></span>παραγινομένας</span>, agreeing with
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p11.3"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p11.4"></span>ντολ€ς</span>. The
latter is the common reading, but is not so well supported by manuscript
authority, and, as the easier reading, is to be rejected in favor of the
former. See the note of Heinichen in *loco.*

<span id="fn_945"></span>[171:946](2010108.htm#fr_945.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p11.5"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p12"></span> That is, “to those that believe,
to those that are possessed of faith.”

<span id="fn_946"></span>[171:947](2010108.htm#fr_946.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p14"></span> Of this Aristion we know only what
we can gather from this mention of him by Papias.

<span id="fn_947"></span>[171:948](2010108.htm#fr_947.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p15"></span> See above, note 6.

<span id="fn_948"></span>[171:949](2010108.htm#fr_948.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p16.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p16.2"></span>κ τῶν βιβλίων</span>. These words have
been interpreted by many critics as implying that Papias considered the
written Gospel accounts, which were extant in his time, of small value,
and preferred to them the oral traditions which he picked up from “the
elders.” But as Lightfoot has shown (*ibid.* p. 390 sq.), this is not
the natural interpretation of Papias’ words, and makes him practically
stultify and contradict himself. He cannot have considered the written
documents which he laid at the base of his work as of little value, nor
can he have regarded the writings of Matthew and Mark, which he refers
to in this chapter as extant in his time, and the latter of which he
praises for its accuracy, as inferior to the oral traditions, which came
to him at best only at second hand. It is necessary to refer the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p16.3"></span>τῶν βιβλίων</span>,
as Lightfoot does, to “interpretations” of the Gospel accounts, which
had been made by others, and to which Papias prefers the interpretations
or expositions which he has received from the disciples of the apostles.
This interpretation of the word alone saves us from difficulties and
Papias from self-stultification.

<span id="fn_949"></span>[171:950](2010108.htm#fr_949.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p18"></span> See above, note 4.

<span id="fn_950"></span>[171:951](2010108.htm#fr_950.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p20"></span> The existence of two tombs in
Ephesus bearing the name of John is attested also by Dionysius of
Alexandria (quoted in Bk. VII. chap. 25, below) and by Jerome (*de vir.
ill.* c. 9). The latter, however, says that some regard them both as
memorials of the one John, the apostle; and Zahn, in his *Acta Joannis,*
p. cliv. sq., endeavors to prove that a church stood outside of the
walls of Ephesus, on the spot where John was buried, and another inside
of the walls, on the site of the house in which he had resided, and that
thus two spots were consecrated to the memory of a single John. The
proof which he brings in support of this may not lead many persons to
adopt his conclusions, and yet after reading his discussion of the
matter one must admit that the existence of two memorials in Ephesus,
such as Dionysius, Eusebius, and Jerome refer to, by no means proves
that more than one John was buried there.

<span id="fn_951"></span>[171:952](2010108.htm#fr_951.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p21"></span> A similar suggestion had been
already made by Dionysius in the passage quoted by Eusebius in Bk. VII.
chap. 25, and Eusebius was undoubtedly thinking of it when he wrote
these words. The suggestion is a very clever one, and yet it is only a
guess, and does not pretend to be more. Dionysius concludes that the
Apocalypse must have been written by some person named John, because it
testifies to that fact itself; but the style, and other internal
indications, lead him to think that it cannot have been written by the
author of the fourth Gospel, whom he assumes to be John the apostle. He
is therefore led to suppose that the Apocalypse was written by some
other John. He does not pretend to say who that John was, but thinks it
must have been some John that resided in Asia; and he then adds that
there were said to be two tombs in Ephesus bearing the name of
John,—evidently implying, though he does not say it, that he is inclined
to think that this second John thus commemorated was the author of the
Apocalypse. It is plain from this that he had no tradition whatever in
favor of this theory, that it was solely an hypothesis arising from
critical difficulties standing in the way of the ascription of the book
to the apostle John. Eusebius sees in this suggestion a very welcome
solution of the difficulties with which he feels the acceptance of the
book to be beset, and at once states it as a possibility that this
“presbyter John,” whom he has discovered in the writings of Papias, may
have been the author of the book. But the authenticity of the Apocalypse
was too firmly established to be shaken by such critical and theological
difficulties as influenced Dionysius, Eusebius, and a few others, and in
consequence nothing came of the suggestion made here by Eusebius. In the
present century, however, the “presbyter John” has again played an
important part among some critics as the possible author of certain of
the Johannine writings, though the authenticity of the Apocalypse has
(until very recently) been so commonly accepted even by the most
negative critics that the “presbyter John” has not figured at all as the
author of it; nor indeed is he likely to in the future.

<span id="fn_952"></span>[172:953](2010108.htm#fr_952.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p25"></span> In chap. 31, above. On the
confusion of the evangelist with the apostle Philip, see that chapter,
note 6.

<span id="fn_953"></span>[172:954](2010108.htm#fr_953.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p26"></span> That is, in the time of Philip.

<span id="fn_954"></span>[172:955](2010108.htm#fr_954.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p28"></span> [Acts i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#023.md)<span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_955"></span>[172:956](2010108.htm#fr_955.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p30"></span> Compare the extract from Papias
given by Irenæus (*Adv. Hær.* V. 32), in which is contained a famous
parable in regard to the fertility of the millennium, which is
exceedingly materialistic in its nature, and evidently apocryphal. “The
days will come when vines shall grow, each having ten thousand branches,
and in each branch ten thousand twigs, and in each twig ten thousand
shoots, and in every one of the shoots ten thousand grapes, and every
grape when pressed will give five and twenty measures of wine,” &c.

<span id="fn_956"></span>[172:957](2010108.htm#fr_956.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p32"></span> Chiliasm, or millennarianism,—that
is, the belief in a visible reign of Christ on earth for a thousand
years before the general judgment,—was very widespread in the early
Church. Jewish chiliasm was very common at about the beginning of the
Christian era, and is represented in the voluminous apocalyptic
literature of that day. Christian chiliasm was an outgrowth of the
Jewish, but spiritualized it, and fixed it upon the second, instead of
the first, coming of Christ. The chief Biblical support for this
doctrine is found in [Rev. xx.
1-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p32.1"></span>, and the fact that this book was
appealed to so constantly by chiliasts in support of their views was the
reason why Dionysius, Eusebius, and others were anxious to disprove its
apostolic authorship. Chief among the chiliasts of the ante-Nicene age
were the author of the epistle of Barnabas, Papias, Justin Martyr,
Irenæus, and Tertullian; while the principal opponents of the doctrine
were Caius, Origen, Dionysius of Alexandria, and Eusebius. After the
time of Constantine, chiliasm was more and more widely regarded as a
heresy, and received its worst blow from Augustine, who framed in its
stead the doctrine, which from his time on was commonly accepted in the
Church, that the millennium is the present reign of Christ, which began
with his resurrection. See Schaff’s *Church History,* II. p. 613 sq.,
for the history of the doctrine in the ante-Nicene Church and for the
literature of the subject.

<span id="fn_957"></span>[172:958](2010108.htm#fr_957.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p34.1"></span>σφόδρα σμικρὸς τὸν νοῦν</span>.
Eusebius’ judgment of Papias may have been unfavorably influenced by his
hostility to the strong chiliasm of the latter; and yet a perusal of the
extant fragments of Papias’ writings will lead any one to think that
Eusebius was not far wrong in his estimate of the man. On the
genuineness of the words in his praise, given by some <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p34.2"></span>mss.</span>, in chap.
36, §2, see note 3 on that chapter.

<span id="fn_958"></span>[172:959](2010108.htm#fr_958.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p34.3"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p35"></span> See above, note 19.

<span id="fn_959"></span>[172:960](2010108.htm#fr_959.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p38"></span> We cannot, in the absence of the
context, say with certainty that the presbyter here referred to is the
“presbyter John,” of whom Papias has so much to say, and who is
mentioned in the previous paragraph, and yet this seems quite probable.
Compare Weiffenbach’s *Die Papias Fragmente über Marcus und Matthaeus,*
p. 26 sq.

<span id="fn_960"></span>[172:961](2010108.htm#fr_960.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p39"></span> Papias is the first one to connect
the Gospel of Mark with Peter, but the tradition recorded by him was
universally accepted by those who came after him (see above, Bk. II.
chap. 15, note 4). The relation of this Gospel of Mark to our canonical
gospel has been a very sharply disputed point, but there is no good
reason for distinguishing the Gospel referred to here from our second
Gospel which corresponds excellently to the description given by Papias.
Compare the remarks of Lightfoot, *ibid.* p. 393 sq. We know from other
sources (e.g. Justin Martyr’s *Dial.* c. 106) that our second Gospel was
in existence in any case before the middle of the second century, and
therefore there is no reason to suppose that Papias was thinking of any
other Gospel when he spoke of the Gospel written by Mark as the
interpreter of Peter. Of course it does not follow from this that it was
actually our second Gospel which Mark wrote, and of whose composition
Papias here speaks. He may have written a Gospel which afterward formed
the basis of our present Gospel, or was one of the sources of the
synoptic tradition as a whole; that is, he may have written what is
commonly known as the “Ur-Marcus” (see above, Bk. II. chap. 15, note 4).
As to that, we cannot decide with absolute certainty, but we may say
that Papias certainly understood the tradition which he gives to refer
to our Gospel of Mark. The exact significance of the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p39.1"></span>ἑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p39.2"></span>ρμηνευτής</span> as
used in this sentence has been much disputed. It seems best to give it
its usual significance,—the significance which we attach to the English
word “interpreter.” See Weiffenbach, *ibid.* p. 37 sq. It may be,
supposing the report to be correct, that Peter found it advantageous to
have some one more familiar than himself with the language of the people
among whom he labored to assist him in his preaching. What language it
was for which he needed an interpreter we cannot say. We might think
naturally of Latin, but it is not impossible that Greek or that both
languages were meant; for Peter, although of course possessed of some
acquaintance with Greek, might not have been familiar enough with it to
preach in it with perfect ease. The words “though not indeed in order”
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p39.3"></span>οὐ μέντοι
τ€ξει</span>) have also caused considerable controversy. But they seem
to refer chiefly to a lack of chronological arrangement, perhaps to a
lack of logical arrangement also. The implication is that Mark wrote
down without regard to order of any kind the words and deeds of Christ
which he remembered. Lightfoot and most other critics have supposed that
this accusation of a “lack of order” implies the existence of another
written Gospel, exhibiting a different order, with which Papias compares
it (e.g. with the Gospel of Matthew, as Weiss, Bleck, Holtzmann, and
others think; or with John, as Lightfoot, Zahn, Renan, and others
suppose). This is a natural supposition, but it is quite possible that
Papias in speaking of this lack of order is not thinking at all of
another written Gospel, but merely of the order of events which he had
received from tradition as the true one.

<span id="fn_961"></span>[173:962](2010108.htm#fr_961.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p39.4"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p40"></span> λόγων, “discourses,” or λογίων,
“oracles.” The two words are about equally supported by <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p40.1"></span>ms</span>. authority.
The latter is adopted by the majority of the editors; but it is more
likely that it arose from λόγων under the influence of the λογίων, which
occurred in the title of Papias’ work, than that it was changed into
λόγων. The matter, however, cannot be decided, and the alternative
reading must in either case be allowed to stand. See the notes of Burton
and Heinichen, *in loco*.

<span id="fn_962"></span>[173:963](2010108.htm#fr_962.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p42"></span> μὲν οὖν. These words show plainly
enough that this sentence in regard to Matthew did not in the work of
Papias immediately follow the passage in regard to Mark, quoted above.
Both passages are evidently torn out of their context; and the latter
apparently stood at the close of a description of the origin of
Matthew’s Gospel. That this statement in regard to Matthew rests upon
the authority of “the presbyter” we are consequently not at liberty to
assert.

<span id="fn_963"></span>[173:964](2010108.htm#fr_963.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p43"></span> On the tradition that Matthew
wrote a Hebrew gospel, see above, chap. 24, note 5. Our Greek Gospel of
Matthew was certainly in existence at the time Papias wrote, for it is
quoted in the epistle of Barnabas, which was written not later than the
first quarter of the second century. There is, therefore, no reason for
assuming that the Gospel of Matthew which Papias was acquainted with was
a different Gospel from our own. This, however, does not prove that the
λόγια which Matthew wrote (supposing Papias’ report to be correct) were
identical with, or even of the same nature as our Gospel of Matthew. It
is urged by many that the word λόγια could be used only to describe a
collection of the words or discourses of the Lord, and hence it is
assumed that Matthew wrote a work of this kind, which of course is quite
a different thing from our first Gospel. But Lightfoot has shown
(*ibid*. p. 399 sq.) that the word λόγια, “oracles,” is not necessarily
confined to a collection of discourses merely, but that it may be used
to describe a work containing also a narrative of events. This being the
case, it cannot be said that Matthew’s λόγια must necessarily have been
something different from our present Gospel. Still our Greek Matthew is
certainly not a translation of a Hebrew original, and hence there may be
a long step between Matthew’s Hebrew λόγια and our Greek Gospel. But if
our Greek Matthew was known to Papias, and if it is not a translation of
a Hebrews original, then one of two alternatives follows: either he
could not accept the Greek Matthew, which was in current use (that is,
our canonical Matthew), or else he was not acquainted with the Hebrew
Matthew. Of the former alternative we have no hint in the fragments
preserved to us, while the latter, from the way in which Papias speaks
of these Hebrew λόγια, seems highly probable. It may, therefore, be said
to be probable that Papias, the first one that mentions a Hebrew
Matthew, speaks not from personal knowledge, but upon the authority of
tradition only.

<span id="fn_964"></span>[173:965](2010108.htm#fr_964.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p44"></span> Since the first Epistle of John
and the fourth Gospel are indisputably from the same hand (see above,
chap. 24, note 18), Papias’ testimony to the apostolic authorship of the
Epistle, which is what his use of it implies, is indirect testimony to
the apostolic authorship of the Gospel also.

<span id="fn_965"></span>[173:966](2010108.htm#fr_965.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p45"></span> On the authenticity of the first
Epistle of Peter, see above, chap. 3, note 1.

<span id="fn_966"></span>[173:967](2010108.htm#fr_966.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxix-p46"></span> It is very likely that the story
referred to here is identical with the story of the woman taken in
adultery, given in some <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxix-p46.1"></span>mss</span>., at the close of the eighth
chapter of John’s Gospel. The story was clearly not contained in the
original Gospel of John, but we do not know from what source it crept
into that Gospel, possibly from the Gospel according to the Hebrews,
where Eusebius says the story related by Papias was found. It must be
noticed that Eusebius does not say that Papias took the story from the
Gospel according to the Hebrews, but only that it was contained in that
Gospel. We are consequently not justified in claiming this statement of
Eusebius as proving that Papias himself was acquainted with the Gospel
according to the Hebrews (see above, chap. 25, note 24). He may have
taken it thence, or he may, on the other hand, have taken it simply from
oral tradition, the source whence he derived so many of his accounts,
or, possibly, from the lost original Gospel, the “Ur-Matthæus.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IV](2010109.md)
