[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010681)  [Next](2010683.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.xx"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XX</span>.—*A Farther Quotation from
Virgilius Maro respecting Christ, with its Interpretation, showing that
the Mystery was indicated therein darkly, as might be expected from a
Poet.*

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p2"></span>A life immortal he shall lead, and be

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p3"></span>By heroes seen, himself shall heroes see;

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p4"></span>evidently meaning the righteous.

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p5"></span>The jarring nations he in peace shall
bind,

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p6"></span>And with paternal virtues rule mankind.

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p7"></span>Unbidden earth her earliest fruits shall
bring,

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p8"></span>And fragrant herbs, to greet her infant
king.

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p9"></span>Well indeed was this admirably wise and
accomplished man acquainted with the cruel character of the times. He
proceeds:

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p10"></span>The goats, uncall’d, full udders home
shall bear;

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p11"></span>The lowing herds no more fierce lions
fear.

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p12"></span>Truly said: for faith will not stand in
awe of the mighty in the imperial palace.

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p13"></span>His cradle shall with rising flowers be
crown’d:

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p14"></span>The serpent’s brood shall die; the
sacred ground

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p15"></span>Shall weeds and poisonous plants refuse
to bear;

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p16"></span>Each common bush th’ Assyrian rose <span
id="fr_3467"></span>[3468](#fn_3467.md) shall wear.

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p18"></span>Nothing could be said more true or more
consistent with the Saviour’s excellency than this. For the power of the
Divine Spirit presents the very cradle of God, like fragrant flowers, to
the new-born race. <span id="fr_3468"></span>[3469](#fn_3468.md) The
serpent, too, and the venom of that serpent, perishes, who originally
beguiled our first parents, and drew their thoughts from their native
innocence <span id="fr_3469"></span>[3470](#fn_3469.md) to the enjoyment of
pleasures, that they might experience <span
id="fr_3470"></span>[3471](#fn_3470.md) that threatened death. For before
the Saviour’s advent, the serpent’s power was shown in subverting the
souls of those who were sustained by no well-grounded hope, and ignorant
of that immortality which awaits the righteous. But after that he had
suffered, and was separated for a season from the body which he had
assumed, the power of the resurrection was revealed to man through the
communication of the Holy Spirit: and whatever stain of human guilt
might yet remain was removed by the washing of sacred lustrations.

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p22"></span>Then indeed could the Saviour bid his
followers be of good cheer, and, remembering his adorable and glorious
resurrection, expect the like for themselves. Truly, then, the poisonous
race may be said to be extinct. Death himself is extinct, and the truth
of the resurrection sealed. Again, the Assyrian race is gone, which
first led the way to faith in God. <span
id="fr_3471"></span>[3472](#fn_3471.md) But when he speaks of the growth of
amomum every where, he alludes to the multitude of the true worshipers
of God. <span id="fr_3472"></span>[3473](#fn_3472.md) For it is as though a
multitude of branches, crowned with fragrant flowers, and fitly watered,
sprung from the self-same root. Most justly said, Maro, thou wisest of
poets! and with this all that follows is consistent.

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p25"></span>But when heroic worth his youth shall
hear,

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p26"></span>And learn his father’s virtues to
revere.

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p27"></span>By the praises of heroes, he indicates
the works of righteous men: by the virtues of his Father he speaks of
the creation and everlasting structure of the world: and, it may be, of
those laws by which God’s beloved Church is guided, and ordered in a
course of righteousness and virtue. Admirable, again, is the advance to
higher <span id="page_577">p. 577</span> <span
id="iv.vii.xx-Page_577"></span>things of that state of life which is
intermediate, as it were, between good and evil, and which seldom admits
a sudden change:

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p28"></span>Unlabored harvests shall the fields
adorn, <span id="fr_3473"></span>[3474](#fn_3473.md)

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p30"></span>that is, the fruit of the Divine law
springs up for the service of men.

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p31"></span>And clustered gropes shall blush on
every thorn.

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p32"></span>Far otherwise has it been during the
corrupt and lawless period of human life.

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p33"></span>The knotted oaks shall showers of honey
weep. <span id="fr_3474"></span>[3475](#fn_3474.md)

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p41"></span>He here describes the folly and obduracy
of the men of that age; and perhaps he also intimates that they who
suffer hardships in the cause of God, shall reap sweet fruits of their
own endurance.

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p42"></span>Yet, of old fraud some footsteps shall
remain;

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p43"></span>The merchant still shall plough the deep
for gain:

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p44"></span>Great cities shall with walls be
compassed round,

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p45"></span>And sharpened shares shall vex the
fruitful ground:

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p46"></span>Another Tiphys shall new seas explore;

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p47"></span>Another Argo land the chiefs upon the
Iberian shore;

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p48"></span>Another Helen other wars create,

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p49"></span>And great Achilles urge the Trojan fate.

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p50"></span>Well said, wisest of bards! Thou hast
carried the license of a poet precisely to the proper point. For it was
not thy purpose to assume the functions of a prophet, to which thou
hadst no claim. I suppose also he was restrained by a sense of the
danger which threatened one who should assail the credit of ancient
religious practice. Cautiously, therefore, and securely, as far as
possible, he presents the truth to those who have faculties to
understand it; and while he denounces the munitions and conflicts of
war <span id="fr_3475"></span>[3476](#fn_3475.md) (which indeed are still
to be found in the course of human life), he describes our Saviour as
proceeding to the war against Troy, understanding by Troy the world
itself. <span id="fr_3476"></span>[3477](#fn_3476.md) And surely he did
maintain the struggle against the opposing powers of evil, sent on that
mission both by the designs of his own providence and the commandment of
his Almighty Father. How, then, does the poet proceed?

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p53"></span>But when to ripen’d manhood he shall
grow,

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p54"></span>that is, when, having arrived at the age
of manhood, he shall utterly remove the evils which encompass the path
of human life, and tranquilize the world by the blessings of peace:

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p55"></span>The greedy sailor shall the seas forego;

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p56"></span>No keel shall cut the waves for foreign
ware,

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p57"></span>For every soil shall every product bear.

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p58"></span>The laboring hind his oxen shall
disjoin;

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p59"></span>No plough shall hurt the glebe, no
pruning-hook the vine;

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p60"></span>Nor wool shall in dissembled colors
shine:

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p61"></span>But the luxurious father of the fold,

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p62"></span>With native purple, and unborrow’d gold,

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p63"></span>Beneath his pompous fleece shall proudly
sweat;

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p64"></span>And under Tyrian robes the lamb shall
bleat.

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p65"></span>Mature in years, to ready honors move,

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p66"></span>O of celestial seed, O foster son of
Jove!

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p67"></span>See, laboring nature calls thee to
sustain

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p68"></span>The nodding flame of heaven, and earth,
and main!

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p69"></span>See to their base restored, earth, seas,
and air;

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p70"></span>And joyful ages, from behind, in crowing
ranks appear.

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p71"></span>To sing thy praise, would heaven my
breath prolong.

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p72"></span>Infusing spirits worthy such a song,

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p73"></span>Not Thracian Orpheus should transcend my
lays,

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p74"></span>Nor Linus, crown’d with never-fading
bays;

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p75"></span>Though each his heavenly parent should
inspire;

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p76"></span>The Muse instruct the voice, and Phœbus
tune the lyre.

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p77"></span>Should Pan contend in verse, and thou my
theme,

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p78"></span>Arcadian judges should their God
condemn. <span id="fr_3477"></span>[3478](#fn_3477.md)

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p80"></span>Behold (says he) how the mighty world
and the elements together manifest their joy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3467"></span>[576:3468](2010682.htm#fr_3467.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xx-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p17"></span> \[Amomum.—*Bag.*\] “Assyrian cinnamon,”
Kennedy, p. 28; “the cardamon’s spice shall grow, That from Assyria’s
gardens,” Wilstach, 1, p. 157; “Syrian spices,” Trapp, 1, p. 92;
“Assyria’s rich perfume,” Warton, 1, p. 78; “Assyrian roses,” Ogilby, p.
42.

<span id="fn_3468"></span>[576:3469](2010682.htm#fr_3468.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xx-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p19"></span> \[i.e. the Christians.—*Bag.*\]

<span id="fn_3469"></span>[576:3470](2010682.htm#fr_3469.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xx-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p20"></span> Self-control.

<span id="fn_3470"></span>[576:3471](2010682.htm#fr_3470.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xx-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p21"></span> “Might *not* experience,” according to
some, including Heinichen, who rejects in first, but accepts in text of
his *second* edition.

<span id="fn_3471"></span>[576:3472](2010682.htm#fr_3471.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xx-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p23"></span> \[Referring, apparently, to Abraham.
This passage is founded on a misconstruction of Virgil’s line by
Constantine. which is followed by the Greek verse itself according to
one edition.—*Bag.*\]

<span id="fn_3472"></span>[576:3473](2010682.htm#fr_3472.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xx-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p24"></span> \[By a kind of play on the word amomum,
he alludes to the Christians as <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.xx-p24.1"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.xx-p24.2"></span>μωμοι</span>, or blameless persons.—*Bag.*\]

<span id="fn_3473"></span>[577:3474](2010682.htm#fr_3473.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xx-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p29"></span> “The fields shall mellow wax with
golden grain.”

<span id="fn_3474"></span>[577:3475](2010682.htm#fr_3474.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xx-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p34"></span> *Bag.*adds:

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p35"></span>“And through the matted grass the liquid
gold shall creep.”

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p36"></span>*1709*translates:

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p37"></span>“And th’ hardened oaks with dewy honey
sweat.”

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p38"></span>While *Molz.* has

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p39"></span>“Forth from the hard oak stems the
lovely honey flows.”

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p40"></span>These all approach Virgil closer than
they do Constantine. With all allowance for poetic license, “pine”
should hardly be translated “oak.”

<span id="fn_3475"></span>[577:3476](2010682.htm#fr_3475.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xx-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p51"></span> Literally, “times and wars.”—*1709.*

<span id="fn_3476"></span>[577:3477](2010682.htm#fr_3476.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xx-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p52"></span> This, bad as it is, is hardly worse
than the subjective interpretation of scripture by modern allegorizers,
and certainly no worse than some of the Scripture interpretations of
Eusebius.

<span id="fn_3477"></span>[577:3478](2010682.htm#fr_3477.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xx-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xx-p79"></span> \[The reader will perceive that the
foregoing verses, with but little exception, and very slight alteration,
are taken from Dryden’s translation of the fourth eclogue of
Virgil.—*Bag.*\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI](2010683.md)
