[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010322)  [Next](2010324.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xvii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii.xvi-p1"></span> On Bk. VI. chap. 8, § 5 (note 4).
*Origen and Demetrius*.

<span id="iii.xvii.xvi-p2"></span>The friendship of Demetrius for Origen
began early and continued, apparently without interruption, for many
years. In 203 he committed to him the charge of the catechetical school
(chap. 3); in the present chapter we find him encouraging him after
learning of his rash deed; some years afterward, upon Origen’s return
from a visit to Rome, where his fame as a teacher had already become
very great, Demetrius still showed the very best spirit toward him
(chap. 14); and a little later sent him into Arabia to give instruction
to an officer in that country (chap. 19). It is soon after this that the
first sign of a difference between the two men appears, upon the
occasion of Origen’s preaching in Cæsarea (*ibid*.). There seems,
however, to have been no lasting quarrel, if there was any quarrel at
all; for in 231 we find Demetrius giving Origen letters of
recommendation upon the occasion of his visit to Achaia (see below, p.
396). The fact that he gives him these letters, thus recognizing him as
a member of his church in good standing, and sending him upon his
important mission with his official approval, shows that no open break
between himself and Origen can as yet have taken place. But in his
commentary on John (Tom. VI. *præf*.) Origen shows us that his last
years in Alexandria were by no means pleasant ones. He compares his
troubles there to the waves of a stormy sea, and his final departure to
the exodus of the children of Israel. We know that he had been engaged
for some time in writing commentaries, and that the first five books of
his commentary on John—epoch-making in their significance, and sure to
cause a sensation in orthodox, conservative circles—had recently
appeared. We know that his reputation for heterodoxy was already quite
widespread and that the majority of the Egyptian clergy were by no means
upon his side. The trials to which he refers, therefore, may well have
been a result of this hostility to his teachings existing among the
clergy about him, and Demetrius may have shared to an extent in the
common feeling. At the same time his disapproval cannot have been very
pronounced, or he could not have given his official sanction to Origen’s
important visit to Achaia. But now, things being in this condition,
Origen set out upon his mission, leaving Heraclas in charge of his
school, and undoubtedly with the expectation of returning again, for he
left the unfinished sixth book of his commentary on John behind him (see
preface to the sixth book). He stopped in Palestine on his way to
Athens, and there was ordained a presbyter by the bishops of that
country (upon the motives which prompted him in the matter, see below,
p. 397). The result was a complete break between Demetrius and himself,
and his condemnation by an Alexandrian synod. To understand Demetrius’
action in the matter, we must remember that both Eusebius and Jerome
attribute the change in his attitude to jealousy of <span
id="page_395">p. 395</span> <span
id="iii.xvii.xvi-Page_395"></span>Origen. They may be too harsh in their
judgment, and yet it is certainly not at all unnatural that the growing
power and fame of his young catechumen should in time affect, all
unconsciously, his attitude toward him. But we must not do Demetrius an
injustice. There is no sign that his jealousy led him to attack Origen,
or to seek to undermine his influence, and we have no right to accuse
him, without ground, of such unchristian conduct. At the same time,
while he remained, as he supposed, an honest friend of Origen’s, the
least feeling of jealousy (and it would have been remarkable had he
never felt the least) would make him more suspicious of the latter’s
conduct, and more prone to notice in his actions anything which might be
interpreted as an infringement of his own prerogatives, or a disregard
of the full respect due him. We seem to see a sign of this
over-sensitiveness (most natural under the circumstances) in his severe
disapproval of Origen’s preaching in Cæsarea, which surprised the
Palestinian bishops, but which is not surprising when we realize that
Demetrius might so easily construe it as a token of growing disrespect
for his authority on the part of his rising young school principal. It
is plain enough, if he was in this state of mind, that he might in all
sincerity have given letters of recommendation to Origen and have wished
him God speed upon his mission, and yet that the news of his ordination
to the presbyterate by foreign bishops, without his own approval or
consent, and indeed in opposition to his own principles and to
ecclesiastical law, should at once arouse his ire, and, by giving
occasion for what seemed righteous indignation, open the floodgates for
all the smothered jealousy of years. In such a temper of mind he could
not do otherwise than listen willingly to all the accusations of heresy
against Origen, which were no doubt busily circulated in his absence,
and it was inevitable that he should believe it his duty to take decided
steps against a man who was a heretic, and at the same time showed
complete disregard of the rules and customs of the Church, and of the
rights of his bishop. The result was the definitive and final exclusion
of Origen from communion with the Alexandrian church, and his
degradation from the office of presbyter by decree of the Alexandrian
synods described above, p. 392 sq. The two grounds of the sentence
passed by these synods were plainly his irregular ordination to the
priesthood when constitutionally unfit for it (cf. what Eusebius says in
this chapter), and his heterodoxy (cf. e.g. the synodical epistle of the
Egyptian bishops given in Mansi’s *Collect. Concil*. IX. col. 524, and
also Jerome’s epistle *ad Pammachium et Oceanum*, § 10, and Rufinus’
*Apologi in Hieron*. II. 21). That the ordination to the priesthood of
one who had mutilated himself was not universally considered uncanonical
in the time of Origen is proved by the fact that the Palestinian bishops
(whom Origen cannot have allowed to remain ignorant of his condition)
all united in ordaining him. But the very fact that they all united
(which has perplexed some scholars) leads us to think that they realized
that their action was somewhat irregular, and hence wished to give it
sanction by the participation of a number of bishops. The first canon of
the Council of Nicæa forbids such ordination, and the canon is doubtless
but the repetition of an older one (cf. *Apost. Canons*, 21 to 24, and
see Hefele, *<span id="iii.xvii.xvi-p2.1"></span>Conciliengesch*. I. p.
377), and yet Origen’s consent to his ordination makes it improbable
that there was in force in his time, even in Alexandria, a canon placing
absolute and unconditional clerical disabilities upon such as he. That
the action, however, was considered at least irregular in Alexandria, is
proved by the position taken in the matter by Demetrius; and the fact
that he made so much of it leads us to believe that the synod, called by
him, may now have made canon law of what was before only custom, and may
have condemned Origen for violating that custom which they considered as
binding as law. Certainly had there been no such custom, and had it not
seemed to Demetrius absolutely binding, he would have ordained Origen to
the priesthood long before. His ordination in Palestine was in violation
of what was known to be Demetrius’ own principle, and the principle of
the Alexandrian church, even if the principle was not, until this time
or later, formulated into a canon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note 17](2010324.md)
