[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010676)  [Next](2010678.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XV</span>.—*Of the Saviour’s
Doctrines and Miracles; and the Benefits he confers on those who own
Subjection to him.*

<span id="iv.vii.xv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.xv-p2.1"></span>The</span> Son of God invites all men to the
practice of virtue, and presents himself to all who have understanding
hearts, as the teacher of his saving precepts. <span
id="fr_3442"></span>[3443](#fn_3442.md) Unless, indeed, we will deceive
ourselves; and remain in wretched ignorance of the fact, that for our
advantage, that is, to secure the blessing of the human race, he went
about upon earth; and, having called around him the best men of their
age, committed to them instructions full of profit, and of power to
preserve them in the path of a virtuous life; teaching them the faith
and righteousness which are the true remedy against the adverse power of
that malignant spirit whose delight it is to ensnare and delude the
inexperienced. Accordingly he visited the sick, relieved the infirm from
the ills which afflicted them, and consoled those who felt the extremity
of penury and want. He commended also sound and rational sobriety of
character, enjoining his followers to endure, with dignity and patience,
every kind of injury and contempt: teaching them to regard such as
visitations permitted by their Father, and the victory is ever theirs
who nobly bear the evils which befall them. For he assured them that the
highest strength of all consisted in this steadfastness of soul,
combined with that philosophy which is nothing else than the knowledge
of truth and goodness, producing in men the generous habit of sharing
with their poorer brethren those riches which they have themselves
acquired by honorable means. At the same time he utterly forbade all
proud oppression, declaring that, as he had come to associate with the
lowly, so those who despised the lowly would be excluded from his favor.
Such and so great was the test whereby he proved the faith of those who
owned allegiance to his authority, and thus he not only prepared them
for the contempt of danger and terror, but taught them at the same time
the most genuine confidence in himself. Once, too, his rebuke was
uttered to restrain the zeal of one of his companions, who yielded too
easily to the impulse of passion, when he assaulted with the sword, and,
eager to protect his Saviour’s life, exposed his own. Then it was that
he bade him desist, and returned his sword to its sheath, reproving him
for his distrust of refuge and safety in himself, and declaring solemnly
that all who should essay to retaliate an injury by like aggression, or
use the sword, should perish by a violent death. <span
id="fr_3443"></span>[3444](#fn_3443.md) This is indeed heavenly wisdom, to
choose rather to endure than to inflict injury, and to be ready, should
necessity so require, to suffer, but not to do, wrong. For since
injurious conduct is in itself a most serious evil, it is not the
injured party, but the injuring, on whom the heaviest punishment must
fall. It is indeed possible for one who is subject to the will of God to
avoid the evil both of committing and of suffering injury, provided his
confidence be firm in the protection of that God whose aid is ever
present to shield his servants from harm. For how should that man who
trusts in God attempt to seek for resources in himself? In such a case
he must abide the conflict with uncertainty of victory: and no man of
understanding could prefer a doubtful to a certain issue. Again, how can
that man doubt the presence and aid of God, who has had experience of
manifold dangers, and has at all times been easily delivered, at his
simple nod, from all terrors: who has passed, as it were, through the
sea which was leveled by the Saviour’s word, and afforded a solid road
for the passage of the people? This is, I believe, the sure basis of
faith, the true foundation of confidence, that we find such miracles as
these performed and perfected at the command of the God of Providence.
Hence it is that even in the midst of trial we find no cause to repent
of our faith, but retain an unshaken hope in God; and when this habit of
confidence is established in the soul, God himself dwells in the inmost
thoughts. But he is of invincible power: the soul, therefore, which has
within it him who is thus invincible, will not be overcome by the perils
which may surround it. Likewise, <span
id="fr_3444"></span>[3445](#fn_3444.md) we learn this truth from the
victory of God himself, who, while intent on providing for the blessing
of mankind, though grievously insulted by the malice of the ungodly, yet
passed unharmed through the sufferings of his passion, and gained a
mighty conquest, an everlasting crown of triumph, over all <span
id="page_573">p. 573</span> <span
id="iv.vii.xv-Page_573"></span>iniquity; thus accomplishing the purpose
of his own providence and love as regards the just, and destroying the
cruelty of the impious and unjust.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3442"></span>[572:3443](2010677.htm#fr_3442.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xv-p3"></span> This accords with the “margin of the
Geneva Edition,” and mentioned by Valesius, who gives also “in the
Saviour’s commands” and “in the Father’s commands,” which latter is
adopted by Heinichen.

<span id="fn_3443"></span>[572:3444](2010677.htm#fr_3443.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xv-p4"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
52](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#052.md)<span id="iv.vii.xv-p4.1"></span>;
for “all they that take the sword shall perish by the sword.” Note the
characteristic inflation of style. Matthew takes eight words, the
English translators twelve, Constantine sixteen, and his translator
twenty-two ponderous words.

<span id="fn_3444"></span>[572:3445](2010677.htm#fr_3444.md) <span
id="iv.vii.xv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xv-p5"></span> Val. prefers <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.xv-p5.1"></span>πρὸς</span> (“besides”) to <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii.xv-p5.2"></span>παρὰ</span> (“likewise,
at the same time”), and is followed by *Bag.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI](2010678.md)
