[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010646)  [Next](2010648.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iv.lxi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv.lxi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iv.lxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXI</span>.—*His Sickness at
Helenopolis, and Prayers respecting his Baptism.*

<span id="iv.vi.iv.lxi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iv.lxi-p2.1"></span>At</span> first he experienced some slight
bodily indisposition, which was soon followed by positive disease. In
consequence of this he visited the hot baths of his own city; and thence
proceeded to that which bore the name of his mother. Here he passed some
time in the church of the <span id="page_556">p. 556</span> <span
id="iv.vi.iv.lxi-Page_556"></span>martyrs, and offered up supplications
and prayers to God. Being at length convinced that his life was drawing
to a close, he felt the time was come at which he should seek
purification from sins of his past career, firmly believing that
whatever errors he had committed as a mortal man, his soul would be
purified from them through the efficacy of the mystical words and the
salutary waters of baptism. <span id="fr_3356"></span>[3357](#fn_3356.md)
Impressed with these thoughts, he poured forth his supplications and
confessions to God, kneeling on the pavement in the church itself, in
which he also now for the first time received the imposition of hands
with prayer. <span id="fr_3357"></span>[3358](#fn_3357.md) After this he
proceeded as far as the suburbs of Nicomedia, and there, having summoned
the bishops to meet him, addressed them in the following words.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3356"></span>[556:3357](2010647.htm#fr_3356.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iv.lxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv.lxi-p3"></span> Literally “salutary word of
cleansing,” but the paraphrase of *Bag.* will stand well whichever of
the readings, “salutary cleansing,” or “salutary word of cleansing,” is
adopted.

<span id="fn_3357"></span>[556:3358](2010647.htm#fr_3357.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iv.lxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv.lxi-p4"></span> \[These words seem to prove that the
emperor now first became a catechumen. His postponement of baptism until
his last illness (after having stood forward so long as the public
advocate and protector of the Christian religion), and the superstitious
reliance which he was encouraged to place on the late performance of
this “mysterious” rite, afford an evidence of the melancholy obscuration
of Christian truth at the very time when Christianity was ostensibly
becoming the religion of the Roman Empire. There is probably too much
truth in the following remarks of Gibbon: “The pride of Constantine, who
refused the privileges of a catechumen, cannot easily be explained or
excused: but the delay of his baptism maybe justified by the maxims and
practice of ecclesiastical antiquity. The sacrament of baptism was
supposed to contain a full and absolute expiation of sin; and the soul
was instantly restored to its original purity, and entitled to the
promise of eternal salvation. Among the proselytes of Christianity,
there were many who judged it imprudent to precipitate a salutary rite,
which could not be repeated; to throw away an inestimable privilege,
which could never be recovered,” &c. (*Decline and Fall,* ch.
20).—*Bag.*\] On the forms of admission to the catechumenate, compare
Marriott, *Baptism,* in Smith and Cheetham, *Dict.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXII](2010648.md)
