[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010324)  [Next](2010326.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xvii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii.xviii-p1"></span> On Bk. VI. chap. 23, § 4 (note 6).
*Origen’s Visit to Achaia*.

<span id="iii.xvii.xviii-p2"></span>Eusebius gives as the cause of
Origen’s visit to Greece simply “a pressing necessity in connection with
ecclesiastical affairs,” but Jerome (*de vir. ill*. c. 54) tells us that
it was on account of heresies which were troubling the churches of
Achaia (*propter ecclesias Achaiæ, quæ pluribus hæresibus vexabantur*).
Photius (*Cod*. 118) reports that Origen went to Athens without the
<span id="page_396">p. 396</span> <span
id="iii.xvii.xviii-Page_396"></span>consent of Demetrius (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xvii.xviii-p2.1"></span>χωρὶς τῆς τοῦ
οἰκείου γνώμης ἐπισκόπου</span>), but this must be regarded as a mistake
(caused perhaps by his knowledge that it was Origen’s ordination, which
took place during this trip, that caused Demetrius’ anger; for Photius
does not say that this statement rests upon the authority of Pamphilus,
but prefaces his whole account with the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xvii.xviii-p2.2"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xvii.xviii-p2.3"></span>τε Π€μφιλος μ€ρτυς καὶ ἕτεροι
πλεῖστοι</span>), for Jerome (*de vir. ill.* c. 54) says that Origen
went to Athens by way of Palestine *sub testimonio ecclesiasticæ
epistolæ*, and in chap. 62 he says that Alexander, bishop of Jerusalem
wrote an epistle in which he stated that he had ordained Origen *juxta
testimonium Demetrii*. We must therefore assume that Origen left
Alexandria for Athens with Demetrius’ approval, and with letters of
recommendation from him. It is the common opinion that Origen left
Alexandria this time about 228 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xvii.xviii-p2.4"></span>a.d.</span>, and after his visit in
Achaia returned to Alexandria, where he remained until excommunicated by
the council called by Demetrius. Upon searching the sources, however, I
can find absolutely no authority for the statement that he returned to
Alexandria after his visit to Achaia; in fact, that he did seems by most
scholars simply to be taken for granted without further investigation.
The opinion apparently rests upon the interpretation of two passages,
one in a report of the proceedings of the Alexandrian synod taken by
Photius from Pamphilus’ *Apology*, the other in the preface to the sixth
book of Origen’s commentary on the Gospel of John. In the former it is
said that the synod voted to exile Origen from Alexandria, and forbade
him to reside or to teach there (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xvii.xviii-p2.5"></span>ψηφίζεται μεταστῆναι μὲν ἀπὸ
᾽Αλεξανδρείας τὸν ᾽Ωριγένην, καὶ μήτε διατρίβειν ἐν αὐτῇ, μήτε
διδ€σκειν</span>). But certainly such a decree is far from proving that
Origen, at the time it was passed, was actually in Alexandria. It simply
shows that he still regarded that city as his residence, and was
supposed to be expecting to return to it after his visit was completed.
In the preface to the sixth book of his commentary on John’s Gospel, he
speaks of the troubles and trials which he had been enduring in
Alexandria before he finally left the city, and compares that departure
to the exodus of the children of Israel. But certainly it is just as
easy to refer these troubles to the time before his visit to Achaia, a
time when in all probability the early books of his commentary on John,
as well as others of his writings, had begun to excite the hostility of
the Alexandrian clergy, and thus made his residence there uncomfortable.
It is almost necessary to assume that this hostility had arisen some
time before the synods were held, in order to account both for the
hostility of the majority of the clergy, which cannot have been so
seriously aroused in an instant, and also for the change in Demetrius’
attitude, which must have found a partial cause in the already existing
hostility of the clergy to Origen, hostility which led them to urge him
on to take decisive steps against Origen when the fitting occasion for
action came in the ordination of the latter (see above, p. 395). The
only arguments which, so far as I am able to learn, have been or can be
urged for Origen’s return to Alexandria are thus shown to prove nothing.
On the other hand, it is a fact that Origen was ordained on his way to
Achaia, and then went on and did his business there, and it is difficult
to imagine that Demetrius and the Alexandrian church would have waited
so long before taking action in regard to this step, which appeared to
them so serious. More than that, Origen reports that he had begun the
sixth book of his commentary on John in Alexandria, but had left it
there, and therefore began it anew in Palestine. It is difficult to
imagine that his departure was so hasty that he could not take even his
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.xvii.xviii-p2.6"></span>mss.</span> with
him; but if he left only for his visit to Achaia, expecting to return
again, he would of course leave his <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xvii.xviii-p2.7"></span>mss.</span> behind him, and when his
temporary absence was changed by the synod into permanent exile, he
might not have been in a position, or might not have cared, to send back
for the unfinished work. Still further, it does not seem probable that,
if he were leaving Alexandria an exile under the condemnation of the
church, and in such haste as the leaving of his unfinished commentary
would imply, he should be in a position to entrust the care of his
catechetical school to his assistant Heraclas (as he is said in chap. 26
to have done). That matter would rather have been taken out of his hands
by Demetrius and the rest of the clergy. But going away merely on a
visit, he would of course leave the school in Heraclas’ charge, and
after his condemnation the clergy might see that Heraclas was the man
for the place, and leave him undisturbed in it. After having, upon the
grounds mentioned, reached the conclusion, shared so far as I knew by no
one else, that it is at least unlikely that Origen returned to
Alexandria after his visit to Greece, I was pleased to find my position
strengthened by some chronological considerations urged by Lipsius
(*<span id="iii.xvii.xviii-p2.8"></span>Chronologie d. röm. Bischöfe*,
p. 195, note), who says that “we do not know whether Origen ever
returned to Alexandria after his ordination,” and who seems to think it
probable that he did not. He shows that Pontianus did not become bishop
of Rome until 230, and therefore, if Eusebius is correct in putting
Origen’s visit to Achaia in the time of Pontianus’ episcopate, as he
does in this passage, that visit cannot have taken place before 230 (the
commonly accepted date, which rests upon a false chronology of
Pontianus’ episcopate, is 228); while <span id="page_397">p. 397</span>
<span id="iii.xvii.xviii-Page_397"></span>on the other hand, according
to chap. 26, Origen’s final departure from Alexandria took place in the
tenth year of Alexander’s reign (231 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xvii.xviii-p2.9"></span>a.d.</span>), shortly before Demetrius’
death, which occurred not later than 232 (see Bk. V. chap. 22, note 4).
Supposing, then, that Origen returned to Alexandria, we must assume his
journey to Palestine, his ordination there, his visit to Achaia and
settlement of the disputes there, his return to Alexandria, the
composition of at least some part of his commentary on John, the calling
of a synod, his condemnation and exile,—all within the space of about a
year. These chronological considerations certainly increase the
improbability of Origen’s return to Alexandria. (It may be remarked that
Redepenning, who accepts the commonly received chronology, assigns two
years to the Cæsarean and Achaian visit.) Assuming, then, that this
departure for Achaia is identical with that mentioned in chap. 26, we
put it in the year 231. It must have been (as of course we should
expect, for he stopped in Palestine only on his way to Achaia) very soon
after his departure that Origen’s ordination took place; and the synod
must have been called very soon after that event (as we should likewise
expect), for Demetrius died the following year.

<span id="iii.xvii.xviii-p3"></span>As to the cause of Origen’s
ordination, it is quite possible, as Redepenning suggests, that when he
went a second time to Palestine, his old friends, the bishops of
Cæsarea, of Jerusalem, and of other cities, wished to hear him preach
again, but that remembering the reproof of the bishop Demetrius, called
forth by his preaching on the former occasion (see chap. 19), he
refused, and that then the Palestinian bishops, in order to obviate that
difficulty, insisted on ordaining him. It is not impossible that Origen,
who seems never to have been a stickler for the exact observance of
minor ecclesiastical rules and formalities, supposed that Demetrius, who
had shown himself friendly in the past, and not hostile to him because
of his youthful imprudence (see chap. 8), would concur willingly in an
ordination performed by such eminent bishops, and an ordination which
would prove of such assistance to Origen in the accomplishment of the
work in Achaia which he was undertaking with the approval of Demetrius
himself, even though the latter could not bring himself to violate what
he considered an ecclesiastical canon against the ordination of eunuchs.
We can thus best explain Origen’s consent to the step which, when we
consider his general character, it is difficult to suppose he would have
taken in conscious opposition to the will of his bishop. (On Demetrius’
view of the matter, see above, p. 394 sq.) He was ordained, according to
Jerome’s *de vir. ill*. c. 54 (cf. also chap. 8, above), by Theoctistus,
bishop of Cæsarea, and Alexander, bishop of Jerusalem, together with
“the most distinguished bishops of Palestine” (as Eusebius says in chap.
8).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note 19](2010326.md)
