[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010200)  [Next](2010202) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xxxi"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXI.—</span>*Africanus.*

<span id="iii.xi.xxxi-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxi-p2.1"></span>At</span> this time also Africanus, <span
id="fr_2021"></span>[2022](#fn_2021) the writer of the books entitled
Cesti, was well known. There is extant an epistle of his to Origen,
expressing doubts <span id="fr_2022"></span>[2023](#fn_2022) of the
story of Susannah in Daniel, as being spurious and fictitious. Origen
answered this very fully.

<span id="iii.xi.xxxi-p5"></span>2. Other works of the same Africanus
which have reached us are his five books on Chronology, a work
accurately and laboriously prepared. He says in this that he went to
Alexandria on account of the great fame of Heraclas, <span
id="fr_2023"></span>[2024](#fn_2023) who excelled especially in
philosophic studies and other Greek learning, and whose appointment to
the bishopric of the church there we have <span id="page_277">p.
277</span> <span id="iii.xi.xxxi-Page_277"></span>already mentioned.

<span id="iii.xi.xxxi-p7"></span>3. There is extant also another epistle
from the same Africanus to Aristides on the supposed discrepancy between
Matthew and Luke in the Genealogies of Christ. In this he shows clearly
the agreement of the evangelists, from an account which had come down to
him, which we have already given in its proper place in the first book
of this work. <span id="fr_2024"></span>[2025](#fn_2024)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2021"></span>[276:2022](2010201.htm#fr_2021) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxi-p3"></span> Julius Africanus (as he is called by
Jerome) was one of the most learned men of the Ante-Nicene age. Not much
is known of his life, though he seems to have resided, at least for a
time, in Emmaus, a town of Palestine, something over twenty miles from
Jerusalem (not the Emmaus of [Luke xxiv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#013)<span id="iii.xi.xxxi-p3.1"></span>,
which was but seven or eight miles from the city), for we hear in the
*Chron.,* and in Jerome’s *de vir. ill.* c. 63, of his going on an
embassy to the Emperor Heliogabalus, and securing the rebuilding of the
ruined city Emmaus under the name of Nicopolis, which it henceforth
bore. He does not appear to have been a clergyman, or at any rate not a
bishop; for he is spoken of as such by no early authority, and he is
addressed by Origen in an extant epistle, which must have been written
toward the close of his life, simply as “brother.” His dates cannot be
fixed with any exactness. He must have been already a prominent man when
he went on an embassy to the emperor (between 218 and 222). He must have
been considerably older than Origen, for in his epistle to him he calls
him “son,” and that although Origen was at the time beyond middle life
himself. Unless Eusebius is mistaken, he was still alive and active in
the time of Gordian (238–244). But if he was enough older than Origen to
address him as “son,” he can hardly have lived much beyond that reign.
He seems to have been a Christian philosopher and scholar rather than an
ecclesiastic, and took no such part in the church affairs of the time as
to leave mention of his name in the accounts of the synods of his day.
He was quite a traveler, as we learn from his own writings, and had the
well-deserved reputation of being one of the greatest scholars of the
age. Eusebius mentions four works left by him, the *Cesti,* the
*Chronicon,* and the epistles to Origen and to Aristides. Jerome
(*l.c.*) mentions only the last three, but Photius (*Cod.* 34) refers to
all four. The *Cesti* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxi-p3.2"></span>κεστοί</span> “embroidered girdles”) seems
to have derived its name from the miscellaneous character of its
contents, which included notes on geography, the art of war, medicine,
agriculture, &c. It is said by Syncellus to have been composed of nine
books: Photius mentions fourteen, Suidas twenty-four. It is no longer
extant, but numerous scattered fragments have been preserved. Its
authenticity has been doubted, chiefly because of its purely secular
character, and the nature of some of the notes, which do not seem worthy
of the clear-headed and at the same time Christian scholar. But the
external evidence, which is not unsupported by the internal, is too
strong to be set aside, and we must conclude that the work is genuine.
The extant fragments of it are given in various works on mathematics,
agriculture, etc. (see Richardson’s *Bibliographical Synopsis,* p. 68).
The epistle of Africanus to Origen is the only one of his writings
preserved in a complete form. It seems that Origen, in a discussion with
a certain Bassus (see Origen’s epistle to Africanus, §2), at which
Africanus was present, had quoted from that part of the Book of Daniel
which contains the apocryphal story of Susannah. Africanus afterward
wrote a brief epistle to Origen, in which he contended that the story is
not authentic, urging among other arguments differences in style between
it and the rest of the book, and the fact that the story is not found in
Hebrew, and that certain phrases show that it was composed originally in
Greek. Origen replied at considerable length, maintaining the
authenticity of the passage, and thereby showing himself inferior to
Africanus in critical judgment. Origen’s reply was written from
Nicomedia (see §1), where he was staying with Ambrose (see §15). It
seems probable that this visit to Nicomedia was made on his way to or
from his second visit to Athens (see next chapter, note 4). Africanus’
greatest work, and the one which brought him most fame, was his
*Chronicon,* in five books. The work is no longer extant, but
considerable fragments of it have been preserved (e.g. in Eusebius’
*Præp. Evang.* X. 10, and *Dem. Evang.* VIII., and especially in the
*Chronographia* of Syncellus), and the *Chronicon* of Eusebius which is
really based upon it, so that we are enabled to gain a very fair idea of
its original form. As described by Photius, it was concise, but omitted
nothing worthy of mention, beginning with the creation and coming down
to the reign of Macrinus. It actually extended to the fourth year of
Heliogabalus (221), as we see from a quotation made by Syncellus. The
work seems to have been caused by the common desire of the Christians
(exhibited by Tatian, Clement of Alexander, and others) to prove in
their defense of Christianity the antiquity of the Jewish religion, and
thus take away the accusation of novelty brought against Christianity by
its opponents. Africanus apparently aimed to produce a universal
chronicle and history which should exhibit the synchronism of events in
the history of the leading nations of the world, and thus furnish solid
ground for Christian apologists to build upon. It was the first attempt
of the kind, and became the foundation of Christian chronicles for many
centuries. The time at which it was written is determined with
sufficient accuracy by the date at which the chronological table closes.
Salmon (in the *Dict. of Christ. Biog.*) remarks that it must have been
completed early in the year 221, for it did not contain the names of the
victors in the Olympic games of the 250th Olympiad, which took place in
that year (as we learn from the list of victors copied by Eusebius from
Africanus). It is said by Eusebius, just below, that Africanus reports
in this work that he had visited Alexandria on account of the great
celebrity of Heraclas. This is very surprising, for we should hardly
have expected Heraclas’ fame to have attracted such a man to Alexandria
until after Origen had left, and he had himself become the head of the
school. On the fourth writing mentioned by Eusebius, the epistle to
Aristides, see above, Bk. I. chap. 7, note 2. The fragments of
Africanus’ works, with the exception of the *Cesti,* have been printed,
with copious and valuable notes, by Routh, *Rel. Sac.* II. 221–509;
English translation in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* Am. ed. VI. 125–140.

<span id="fn_2022"></span>[276:2023](2010201.htm#fr_2022) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxi-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxi-p4.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxi-p4.2"></span>ποροῦντος</span>. A very mild way of
putting his complete rejection of the story!

<span id="fn_2023"></span>[276:2024](2010201.htm#fr_2023) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxi-p6"></span> On Heraclas, see chap. 3, note 2.

<span id="fn_2024"></span>[277:2025](2010201.htm#fr_2024) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxi-p8"></span> In Bk. I. chap. 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII](2010202)
