[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010209)  [Next](2010211) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xl"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xl-p1.1"></span>Chapter XL.—</span>*The Events which happened
to Dionysius.* <span id="fr_2068"></span>[2069](#fn_2068)

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p3"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xl-p3.1"></span>I shall</span> quote from the epistle of
Dionysius to Germanus <span id="fr_2069"></span>[2070](#fn_2069) an
account of what befell the former. Speaking of himself, he writes as
follows: <span id="page_282">p. 282</span> <span
id="iii.xi.xl-Page_282"></span>“I speak before God, and he knows that I
do not lie. I did not flee on my own impulse nor without divine
direction.

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p5"></span>2. But even before this, at the very hour
when the Decian persecution was commanded, Sabinus <span
id="fr_2070"></span>[2071](#fn_2070) sent a frumentarius <span
id="fr_2071"></span>[2072](#fn_2071) to search for me, and I remained at
home four days awaiting his arrival.

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p8"></span>3. But he went about examining all
places,—roads, rivers, and fields,—where he thought I might be concealed
or on the way. But he was smitten with blindness, and did not find the
house, <span id="fr_2072"></span>[2073](#fn_2072) for he did not
suppose, that being pursued, I would remain at home. And after the
fourth day God commanded me to depart, and made a way for me in a
wonderful manner; and I and my attendants <span
id="fr_2073"></span>[2074](#fn_2073) and many of the brethren went away
together. And that this occurred through the providence of God was made
manifest by what followed, in which perhaps we were useful to some.”

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p11"></span>4. Farther on he relates in this manner
what happened to him after his flight:

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p12"></span>“For about sunset, having been seized
with those that were with me, I was taken by the soldiers to
Taposiris, <span id="fr_2074"></span>[2075](#fn_2074) but in the
providence of God, Timothy <span id="fr_2075"></span>[2076](#fn_2075)
was not present and was not captured. But coming later, he found the
house deserted and guarded by soldiers, and ourselves reduced to
slavery.” <span id="fr_2076"></span>[2077](#fn_2076)

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p16"></span>5. After a little he says:

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p17"></span>“And what was the manner of his
admirable management? for the truth shall be told. One of the country
people met Timothy fleeing and disturbed, and inquired the cause of his
haste. And he told him the truth.

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p18"></span>6. And when the man heard it (he was on
his way to a marriage feast, for it was customary to spend the entire
night in such gatherings), he entered and announced it to those at the
table. And they, as if on a preconcerted signal, arose with one impulse,
and rushed out quickly and came and burst in upon us with a shout.
Immediately the soldiers who were guarding us fled, and they came to us
lying as we were upon the bare couches.

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p19"></span>7. But I, God knows, thought at first
that they were robbers who had come for spoil and plunder. So I remained
upon the bed on which I was, clothed only in a linen garment, and
offered them the rest of my clothing which was lying beside me. But they
directed me to rise and come away quickly.

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p20"></span>8. Then I understood why they were come,
and I cried out, beseeching and entreating them to depart and leave us
alone. And I requested them, if they desired to benefit me in any way,
to anticipate those who were carrying me off, and cut off my head
themselves. And when I had cried out in this manner, as my companions
and partners in everything know, they raised me by force. But I threw
myself on my back on the ground; and they seized me by the hands and
feet and dragged me away.

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p21"></span>9. And the witnesses of all these
occurrences followed: Gaius, Faustus, Peter, and Paul. <span
id="fr_2077"></span>[2078](#fn_2077) But they who had seized me carried
me out of the village hastily, and placing me on an ass without a
saddle, bore me away.” <span id="fr_2078"></span>[2079](#fn_2078)

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p24"></span>Dionysius relates these things
respecting himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2068"></span>[281:2069](2010210.htm#fr_2068) <span
id="iii.xi.xl-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p2"></span> Dionysius the Great (Eusebius in the
preface to Bk. VII. calls him <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xl-p2.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xl-p2.2"></span>μέγας ᾽Αλεξανδρέων ἐπίσκοπος</span>) was born
toward the close of the second century (he was an aged man, between 260
and 265, as we learn from Bk. VII. chap 27), studied under Origen, and
succeeded Heraclas as principal of the catechetical school in Alexandria
(see above, chap. 29) in the year 231 or 231 (see chap. 3, note 2). In
the third year of Philip’s reign (246–247) he succeeded Heraclas as
bishop of Alexandria, according to chap. 35, above. Whether he continued
to preside over the catechetical school after he became bishop we do not
know. Dittrich (p. 4 sq.) gives reasons for thinking that he did, which
render it at least probable. He was still living when the earlier
synods, in which the case of Paul of Samosata was considered, were held
(i.e. between 260 and 264; see Bk. VII. chap. 27, note 4), but he was
dead before the last one met, i.e. before 265 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xl-p2.3"></span>a.d.</span> (see Bk. VII. chap. 29, note 1).
Dionysius is one of the most prominent, and at the same time pleasing,
figures of his age. He seems to have been interested less in speculative
than in practical questions, and yet he wrote an important work *On
Nature,* which shows that he possessed philosophical ability, and one of
his epistles contains a discussion of the authorship of the Apocalypse,
which is unsurpassed in the early centuries as an example of keen and
yet judicious and well-balanced literary criticism (see Bk. VII. chap.
25). His intellectual abilities must, therefore, not be underrated, but
it is as a practical theologian that he is best known. He took an active
part in all the controversies of his time, in the Novatian difficulty in
which the re-admission of the lapsed was the burning question; in the
controversy as to the re-baptism of heretics; and in the case of Paul of
Samosata. In all he played a prominent part, and in all he seems to have
acted with great wisdom and moderation (see chaps. 44 sq., Bk. VII.
chaps. 5, 7 sq., chap. 27). He was taken prisoner during the persecution
of Decius, but made his escape (see the present chapter). In the
persecution of Valerian he was banished (see Bk. VII. chap. 11), but
returned to Alexandria after the accession of Gallienus (see Bk. VII.
chap. 21). His conduct during the persecutions exposed him to adverse
criticism, and he defended himself warmly against the accusations of a
bishop Germanus, in an epistle, portions of which are quoted in this
chapter and in Bk. VII. chap. 11. The writings of Dionysius were chiefly
in the form of epistles, written for some practical purpose. Of such
epistles he wrote a great many, and numerous fragments are extant,
preserved chiefly by Eusebius. Being called forth by particular
circumstances, they contain much information in regard to contemporary
events, and are thus an important historical source, as Eusebius wisely
perceived. Such epistles are quoted, or mentioned, in chaps. 41, 44, 45,
and 46 of this book, and in Bk. VII. chaps. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11,
20, 21, 22, 23, 26. For particulars in regard to them, see the notes on
those chapters. In addition to his epistles a work, *On Promises*, is
referred to by Eusebius in Bk. VII. chap. 28, and in Bk. VII. chaps. 24
and 25, where extracts from it are quoted (see Bk. VII. chap. 24, note
1); also a commentary on the beginning of Ecclesiastes in Bk. VII. chap.
26, and in the same chapter a work in four books against Sabellius,
addressed to Dionysius, bishop of Rome, in which he defends himself
against the charge of tritheism, brought by some Sabellian adversaries.
He was able to clear himself of all suspicion of heresy in the matter,
though it is quite clear that he had carried the subordinationism of
Origen to a dangerous extreme. The attack upon him led him to be more
careful in his statements, some of which were such as in part to justify
the suspicions of his adversaries. Athanasius defended his orthodoxy in
a special work, *De Sententiis Dionysii,* and there can be no doubt that
Dionysius was honestly concerned to preserve the divinity of the Son;
but as in the case of Eusebius of Cæsarea, and of all those who were
called upon to face Sabellianism, his tendency was to lay an
over-emphasis upon the subordination of the Son (see above, p. 11 sq.).
For further particulars in regard to this work, see the chapter referred
to, note 4. Upon Dionysius’ views of the Trinity, see Dittrich, p. 91
sq. Besides the writings referred to, or quoted by Eusebius, there
should be mentioned an important canonical epistle addressed to
Basilides, in which the exact time of the expiration of the lenten fast
is the chief subject of discussion (still extant, and printed by Pitra,
Routh, and others, and translated in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers;* see
Dittrich, p. 46 sq.). There are yet a few other fragments of Dionysius’
writings, extant in various <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xl-p2.4"></span>mss.</span>, which it is not necessary to
mention here. See Dittrich, p. 130. The most complete collection of the
extant fragments of his writings is that of Migne, *Patr. Gr.* X. 1233
sq., to which must be added Pitra’s *Spic. Solesm.* I. 15 sq. English
translation in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* VI. p. 87–120. The most
complete work upon Dionysius is the monograph of Dietrich, *Dionysius
der Grosse,* Freiburg, i. Br. 1867.

<span id="fn_2069"></span>[281:2070](2010210.htm#fr_2069) <span
id="iii.xi.xl-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p4"></span> This Germanus, as we learn from Bk. VII.
chap. 11, was a bishop of some see, unknown to us, who had accused
Dionysius of cowardice in the face of persecution. In the present
instance Dionysius undertakes to refute his calumnies, by recounting
accurately his conduct during the persecutions. It must be remembered
that the letter is a defense against accusations actually made, or we
shall misunderstand it, and misinterpret Dionysius’ motives in dwelling
at such length upon the details of his own sufferings. The epistle, a
part of which is quoted in this chapter, and a part in Bk. VII. chap.
11, was written, as we learn from the latter chapter, §18, while the
persecution of Valerian was still in progress, and recounts his
experiences during the persecutions of Decius and of Valerian. The
fragment quoted in the present chapter is devoted to the persecution of
Decius, the other fragment to the persecution of Valerian. The letter is
said to have been written <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xl-p4.1"></span>πρὸς Γερμανόν</span>. This might be
translated either *to* or *against Germanus.* Analogy would lead us to
think the former translation correct, for all the epistles mentioned are
said to have been written <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xl-p4.2"></span>πρὸς</span> one or another person, and it is
natural, of course, to expect the name of the person addressed to be
given. I have therefore translated the word thus, as is done in all the
versions. At the same time it must be noticed that Germanus is spoken of
in the epistle (especially in §18 sq. of the other chapter) not as if he
were the person addressed, but as he were the person complained of to
others; and, moreover, a letter of defense sent to him alone would
probably have little effect, and would fail to put an end to the
calumnies which must have found many ready ears. It seems, in fact,
quite probable that the epistle was rather a public than a private one,
and that while it was nominally addressed to Germanus, it was yet
intended for a larger public, and was written with that public in view.
This will explain the peculiar manner in which Germanus is referred to.
Certainly it is hard to think he would have been thus mentioned in a
personal letter.

<span id="fn_2070"></span>[282:2071](2010210.htm#fr_2070) <span
id="iii.xi.xl-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p6"></span> Sabinus, an otherwise unknown personage,
seems to have been prefect of Egypt at this time, as Æmilianus was
during the persecution of Valerian, according to Bk. VII. chap. 11.

<span id="fn_2071"></span>[282:2072](2010210.htm#fr_2071) <span
id="iii.xi.xl-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p7"></span> One of the *frumentarii milites,* or
military commissaries, who were employed for various kinds of business,
and under the emperors especially as detectives or secret spies.

<span id="fn_2072"></span>[282:2073](2010210.htm#fr_2072) <span
id="iii.xi.xl-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xl-p9.1"></span>μὴ εὑρίσκων</span>. It is not meant that the
frumentarius could not find the house, but that he did not think to go
to the house at all, through an error of judgment (“being smitten with
blindness”), supposing that Dionysius would certainly be elsewhere.

<span id="fn_2073"></span>[282:2074](2010210.htm#fr_2073) <span
id="iii.xi.xl-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xl-p10.1"></span>οἱ παῖδες</span>. This is taken by many
scholars to mean “children,” and the conclusion is drawn by them that
Dionysius was a married man. Dittrich translates it “pupils,” supposing
that Dionysius was still at the head of the catechetical school, and
that some of his scholars lived with him, as was quite common. Others
translate “servants,” or “domestics.” I have used the indefinite word“
attendants” simply, because the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xl-p10.2"></span>παῖδες</span> may well have included
children, scholars, servants, and others who made up his family and
constituted, any or all of them, his attendants. As shown in note 8, the
word at any rate cannot be confined in the present case to servants.

<span id="fn_2074"></span>[282:2075](2010210.htm#fr_2074) <span
id="iii.xi.xl-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p13"></span> Strabo (Bk. XVII. chap. 1) mentions a
small town called Taposiris, situated in the neighborhood of Alexandria.

<span id="fn_2075"></span>[282:2076](2010210.htm#fr_2075) <span
id="iii.xi.xl-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p14"></span> We know nothing about this Timothy,
except that Dionysius addressed to him his work *On Nature,* as reported
by Eusebius in VII. 26. He is there called Τ<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xl-p14.1"></span>ιμώθεος ὁ παῖς</span>. Dionysius can hardly
have addressed a book to one of his servants, and hence we may conclude
that Timothy was either Dionysius’ son (as Westcott holds) or scholar
(as Dittrich believes). It is reasonable to think him one of the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xl-p14.2"></span>παῖδες</span>, with
others of whom Dionysius was arrested, as recorded just above. It is in
that case of course necessary to give the word as used there some other,
or at least some broader sense than “servants.”

<span id="fn_2076"></span>[282:2077](2010210.htm#fr_2076) <span
id="iii.xi.xl-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p15"></span> Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xl-p15.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xl-p15.2"></span>ξηνδραποδισμένους</span>, meaning literally
“reduced to slavery.” The context, however, does not seem to justify
such a rendering, for the reference is apparently only to the fact that
they were captured. Their capture, had they not been released, would
have resulted probably in death rather than in slavery.

<span id="fn_2077"></span>[282:2078](2010210.htm#fr_2077) <span
id="iii.xi.xl-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p22"></span> These four men are known to us only as
companions of Dionysius during the persecution of Decius, as recorded
here and in Bk. VII. chap. 11. From that chapter, §23, we learn that
Caius and Peter were alone with Dionysius in a desert place in Libya,
after being carried away by the rescuing party mentioned here. From §3
of the same chapter we learn that Faustus was a deacon, and that he was
with Dionysius also during the persecution of Valerian, and from §26
that he suffered martyrdom at a great age in the Diocletian persecution.
See also Bk. VIII. chap. 13, note 11.

<span id="fn_2078"></span>[282:2079](2010210.htm#fr_2078) <span
id="iii.xi.xl-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p23"></span> As we learn from Bk. VII. chap. 11,
§23, this rescuing party carried Dionysius to a desert place in Libya,
where he was left with only two companions until the persecution ceased.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLI](2010211)
