[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010248)  [Next](2010250) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.xxxii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXI.—</span>*The Perversive
Heresy of the Manicheans which began at this Time.*

<span id="iii.xii.xxxii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xii.xxxii-p2.1"></span>At</span> this time, the madman, <span
id="fr_2432"></span>[2433](#fn_2432) named from his demoniacal heresy,
armed himself in the perversion of his reason, as the devil, Satan,
<span id="page_317">p. 317</span> <span
id="iii.xii.xxxii-Page_317"></span>who himself fights against God, put
him forward to the destruction of many. He was a barbarian in life, both
in word and deed; and in his nature demoniacal and insane. In
consequence of this he sought to pose as Christ, and being puffed up in
his madness, he proclaimed himself the Paraclete and the very Holy
Spirit; <span id="fr_2433"></span>[2434](#fn_2433) and afterwards, like
Christ, he chose twelve disciples as partners of his new doctrine.

<span id="iii.xii.xxxii-p6"></span>2. And he patched together false and
godless doctrines collected from a multitude of long-extinct impieties,
and swept them, like a deadly poison, from Persia to our part of the
world. From him the impious name of the Manicheans is still prevalent
among many. Such was the foundation of this “knowledge falsely
so-called,” <span id="fr_2434"></span>[2435](#fn_2434) which sprang up
in those times.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2432"></span>[316:2433](2010249.htm#fr_2432) <span
id="iii.xii.xxxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxxii-p3"></span> The name Manes, or Mani, is not of
Greek, but of Persian or Semitic origin. It has not yet been
satisfactorily explained. The Greek form is <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xxxii-p3.1"></span>Μ€νης</span> or <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xxxii-p3.2"></span>Μανιχαῖος</span>; the Latin form, *Manes*
or *Manichæus.* In this place Eusebius instead of giving him his true
name makes a play upon it, calling him <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xxxii-p3.3"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xxxii-p3.4"></span>μανεὶς τὰς φρένας</span>, “the madman.”
This does not imply that Eusebius supposed his name was originally
Greek. He perhaps—as others of the Fathers did—regarded it as a sign of
divine providence that the Persian name chosen by himself (Mani was not
his original name) should when reproduced in Greek bear such a
significant meaning. See Stroth’s note on this passage.

<span id="iii.xii.xxxii-p4"></span>Eusebius’ brief account is the first
authentic description we have of Manes and Manichæism. It is difficult
to get at the exact truth in regard to the life of Manes himself. We
have it reported in two conflicting forms, an Oriental and an
Occidental. The former, however,—though our sources for it are much
later than for the latter—is undoubtedly the more reliable of the two.
The differences between the two accounts cannot be discussed here. We
know that Mani was a well-educated Persian philosopher of the third
century (according to Kessler, 205–276 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xii.xxxii-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span>; according to the Oriental
source used by Beausobre, about 240–276), who attempted to supersede
Zoroastrianism, the old religion of Persia, by a syncretistic system
made up of elements taken from Parsism, Buddhism, and Christianity. He
was at first well received by the Persian king, Sapor I., but aroused
the hatred of the Magian priests, and was compelled to flee from the
country. Returning after some time, he gained a large following, but was
put to death by King Varanes I, about 276 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xii.xxxii-p4.2"></span>a.d.</span> His sect spread rapidly
throughout Christendom, and in spite of repeated persecutions flourished
for many centuries. The mysteriousness of its doctrine, its compact
organization, its apparent solution of the terrible problem of evil, and
its show of ascetic holiness combined to make it very attractive to
thoughtful minds, as, e.g. to Augustine. The fundamental principle of
the system is a radical dualism between good and evil, light and
darkness. This dualism runs through its morals as well as through its
theology, and the result is a rigid asceticism. Christianity furnished
some ideas, but its influence is chiefly seen in the organization of the
sect, which had apostles, bishops, presbyters, deacons, and traveling
missionaries. Manichæism cannot be called a heresy,—it was rather an
independent religion as Mohammedanism was. The system cannot be further
discussed here. The chief works upon the subject are Beausobre’s *Hist.
Crit. de Manichée et du Manichéisme,* Amst. 1734 and 1739, 2 vols.;
Baur’s *Das Manichäische Religionssystem,* Tüb. 1831; Flügel’s *Mani,
Seine Lehre und seine Schriften, aus den Fihrist des Abî Jakub
an-Nadûn,* Leipzig, 1882; and two works by Kessler (Leipzig, 1876 and
1882). See also the discussions of the system in the various Church
histories, and especially the respective articles by Stokes and Kessler
in Smith and Wace’s *Dict. of Christ. Biog.* and in Herzog.

<span id="fn_2433"></span>[317:2434](2010249.htm#fr_2433) <span
id="iii.xii.xxxii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxxii-p5"></span> Beausobre maintains that Mani did
not pretend to be the Paraclete, but merely a man, the messenger of the
Paraclete. The Fathers generally, however agree with Eusebius in
asserting that his claims were of the very highest sort. The point
cannot be satisfactorily settled.

<span id="fn_2434"></span>[317:2435](2010249.htm#fr_2434) <span
id="iii.xii.xxxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxxii-p7"></span> See [1 Tim. vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020)<span
id="iii.xii.xxxii-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII](2010250)
