[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010172)  [Next](2010174) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.—</span>*While still very Young,
he taught diligently the Word of Christ.*

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.iii-p2.1"></span>But</span> while he was lecturing in the
school, as he tells us himself, and there was no one at Alexandria to
give instruction in the faith, as all were driven away by the threat of
persecution, some of the heathen came to him to hear the word of God.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p3"></span>2. The first of them, he says, was
Plutarch, <span id="fr_1781"></span>[1782](#fn_1781) who after living
well, was honored with divine martyrdom. The second was Heraclas, <span
id="fr_1782"></span>[1783](#fn_1782) a brother of Plutarch; who after he
too had given with him abundant evidence of a philosophic and ascetic
life, was esteemed worthy to succeed Demetrius in the bishopric of
Alexandria.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p6"></span>3. He was in his eighteenth year when he
took charge of the catechetical school. <span
id="fr_1783"></span>[1784](#fn_1783) He was prominent also at this time,
during the persecution under Aquila, <span
id="fr_1784"></span>[1785](#fn_1784) the governor of Alexandria, when
his name became celebrated among the leaders in the faith, through the
kindness and goodwill which he manifested toward all the holy martyrs,
whether known to him or strangers.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p9"></span>4. For not only was he with them while
in bonds, and until their final condemnation, but when the holy martyrs
were led to death, he was very bold and went with them into danger. So
that as he acted bravely, and with great boldness saluted the martyrs
with a kiss, oftentimes the heathen multitude round about them became
infuriated, and were on the point of rushing upon him.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p10"></span>5. But through the helping hand of God,
he escaped absolutely and marvelously. And this same divine and heavenly
power, again and again, it is impossible to say how often, on account of
his great zeal and boldness for the words of Christ, guarded him when
thus endangered. <span id="fr_1785"></span>[1786](#fn_1785) So great was
the enmity of the unbelievers toward him, on account of the multitude
that were instructed by him in the sacred faith, that they placed bands
of soldiers around the house where he abode.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p12"></span>6. Thus day by day the persecution
burned against him, so that the whole city could no longer contain him;
but he removed from house to house and was driven in every direction
because of the multitude who attended upon the divine instruction which
he gave. For his life also exhibited right and admirable conduct
according to the practice of genuine philosophy.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p13"></span>7. For they say that his manner of life
was as his doctrine, and his doctrine as his life. <span
id="fr_1786"></span>[1787](#fn_1786) Therefore, by the divine Power
working with him he aroused a great many to his own zeal.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p15"></span>8. But when he saw yet more coming to
him for instruction, and the catechetical school <span id="page_252">p.
252</span> <span id="iii.xi.iii-Page_252"></span>had been entrusted to
him alone by Demetrius, who presided over the church, he considered the
teaching of grammatical science inconsistent with training in divine
subjects, <span id="fr_1787"></span>[1788](#fn_1787) and forthwith he
gave up his grammatical school as unprofitable and a hindrance to sacred
learning.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p17"></span>9. Then, with becoming consideration,
that he might not need aid from others, he disposed of whatever valuable
books of ancient literature he possessed, being satisfied with receiving
from the purchaser four oboli a day. <span
id="fr_1788"></span>[1789](#fn_1788) For many years he lived
philosophically <span id="fr_1789"></span>[1790](#fn_1789) in this
manner, putting away all the incentives of youthful desires. Through the
entire day he endured no small amount of discipline; and for the greater
part of the night he gave himself to the study of the Divine Scriptures.
He restrained himself as much as possible by a most philosophic life;
sometimes by the discipline of fasting, again by limited time for sleep.
And in his zeal he never lay upon a bed, but upon the ground.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p20"></span>10. Most of all, he thought that the
words of the Saviour in the Gospel should be observed, in which he
exhorts not to have two coats nor to use shoes <span
id="fr_1790"></span>[1791](#fn_1790) nor to occupy oneself with cares
for the future. <span id="fr_1791"></span>[1792](#fn_1791)

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p23"></span>11. With a zeal beyond his age he
continued in cold and nakedness; and, going to the very extreme of
poverty, he greatly astonished those about him. And indeed he grieved
many of his friends who desired to share their possessions with him, on
account of the wearisome toil which they saw him enduring in the
teaching of divine things.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p24"></span>12. But he did not relax his
perseverance. He is said to have walked for a number of years never
wearing a shoe, and, for a great many years, to have abstained from the
use of wine, and of all other things beyond his necessary food; so that
he was in danger of breaking down and destroying his constitution. <span
id="fr_1792"></span>[1793](#fn_1792)

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p26"></span>13. By giving such evidences of a
philosophic life to those who saw him, he aroused many of his pupils to
similar zeal; so that prominent men even of the unbelieving heathen and
men that followed learning and philosophy were led to his instruction.
Some of them having received from him into the depth of their souls
faith in the Divine Word, became prominent in the persecution then
prevailing; and some of them were seized and suffered martyrdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1781"></span>[251:1782](2010173.htm#fr_1781) <span
id="iii.xi.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p4"></span> Of this Plutarch we know only what
Eusebius tells us here, and in chap. 4, where he says that he was the
first of Origen’s pupils to suffer martyrdom. (On the date of the
persecution in which he suffered, see note 4).

<span id="fn_1782"></span>[251:1783](2010173.htm#fr_1782) <span
id="iii.xi.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p5"></span> Heraclas, brother of Plutarch, proved
himself so good a pupil that, when Origen later found the work of
teaching too great for him to manage alone, he made him his assistant,
and committed the elementary instruction to him (chap. 15). From chap.
19 we learn that he was for years a diligent student of Greek philosophy
(chap. 15 implies his proficiency in it), and that he even went so far
as to wear the philosopher’s cloak all the time, although he was a
presbyter in the Alexandrian church. His reputation for learning became
so great, as we learn from chap. 31, that Julius Africanus went to
Alexandria to see him. In 231, when Origen took his departure from
Alexandria, he left the catechetical school in the charge of Heraclas
(chap. 26), and in 231 or 232, upon the death of Demetrius (see Bk. V.
chap. 22, note 4), Heraclas became the latter’s successor as bishop of
Alexandria (chaps. 26 and 29), and was succeeded in the presidency of
the catechetical school by Dionysius (chap. 29). According to chap. 35
he was bishop for sixteen years and with this both versions of the
*Chron.* agree, though Jerome puts his accession two years too
early—into the ninth year of Alexander Severus instead of the
eleventh—while giving at the same time, quite inconsistently, the proper
date for his death. Heraclas’ later relations to Origen are not quite
clear. He was evidently, in earlier years, one of his best friends, and
there is no adequate ground for the assumption, which is quite common,
that he was one of those who united with Bishop Demetrius in condemning
him. It is true, no attempt seems to have been made after he became
bishop to reverse the sentence against Origen, and to invite him back to
Alexandria; but this does not prove that Heraclas did not remain
friendly to him; for even when Dionysius (who kept up his relations with
Origen, as we know from chap. 46) became bishop (<span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.iii-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> 248), no such attempt seems to
have been made, although Origen was still alive and at the height of his
power. The fact that the greater part of the clergy of Alexandria and
Egypt were unfavorable to Origen, as shown by their condemnation of him,
does not imply that Heraclas could not have been elected unless he too
showed hostility to Origen; for Dionysius, who we know was not hostile,
was appointed at that time head of the catechetical school, and sixteen
years later bishop. It is true that Heraclas may not have sympathized
with all of Origen’s views, and may have thought some of them heretical
(his strict judgment of heretics is seen from Bk. VII. chap. 7), but
many even of the best of Origen’s friends and followers did likewise, so
that among his most devoted adherents were some of the most orthodox
Fathers of the Church (e.g. the two Gregories and Basil). That Heraclas
did not agree with Origen in all his opinions (if he did not, he may not
have cared to *press* his return to Alexandria) does not prove therefore
that he took part in the condemnatory action of the synod, and that he
was himself in later life hostile to Origen.

<span id="fn_1783"></span>[251:1784](2010173.htm#fr_1783) <span
id="iii.xi.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p7"></span> See below, p. 392.

<span id="fn_1784"></span>[251:1785](2010173.htm#fr_1784) <span
id="iii.xi.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p8"></span> It is not clear from Eusebius’ language
whether Aquila was successor of Lætus as viceroy of Egypt (as
Redepenning assumes apparently quite without misgiving), or simply
governor of Alexandria. He calls Lætus (in chap. 2) governor of
Alexandria and of all Egypt, while Aquila is called simply governor of
Alexandria. If this difference were insisted on as marking a real
distinction, then Aquila would have to be regarded as the chief officer
of Alexandria only, and hence subordinate in dignity to the viceroy of
Egypt. The term used to describe his position (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.iii-p8.1"></span>ἡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.iii-p8.2"></span>γούμενον</span>) is not, however the
technical one for the chief officer of Alexandria (see Mommsen,
*Provinces of the Roman Empire;* Scribner’s ed., II. p. 267 ff.), and
hence his position cannot be decided with certainty. In any case,
whether he succeeded Lætus, or was his subordinate, the dates of his
accession to and retirement from office are unknown, and hence the time
at which the persecutions mentioned took place cannot be determined with
exactness. We simply know that they occurred after 203 (for Origen had
already taken charge of the catechetical school, and some of his pupils
perished in the persecutions) and before 211, the date of Severus’
death.

<span id="fn_1785"></span>[251:1786](2010173.htm#fr_1785) <span
id="iii.xi.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p11"></span> How it happened that Origen escaped
the persecution, when, according to Eusebius, he exposed himself so
continually, and was so hated by the heathen populace, we cannot tell.
Eusebius ascribes it solely to the grace of God here, and in chap. 4.

<span id="fn_1786"></span>[251:1787](2010173.htm#fr_1786) <span
id="iii.xi.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.iii-p14.1"></span>οἷος ὁ λόγος τοῖος ὁ βίος</span> was a
Greek proverb. Compare the words of Seneca, in *Ep*. 114 *ad Lucilium,*
“Apud Græcos in proverbium cessit *talis hominibus fuit oratio, qualis
vita*” (quoted by Redepenning, p. 196).

<span id="fn_1787"></span>[252:1788](2010173.htm#fr_1787) <span
id="iii.xi.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p16"></span> This does not mean that he considered
the study of grammar and literature injurious to the Christian, or
detrimental to his theological studies. His opinion on that subject is
clear enough from all his writings and from his conduct as pictured in
chaps. 18 and 19. Nor does it on the other hand imply, as Crusè
supposes, that up to this time he had been teaching secular branches
*exclusively;* but it means simply that the demands upon him for
instruction in the faith were so great, now that the catechetical school
had been officially entrusted to him by Demetrius, that he felt that he
could no longer continue to teach secular literature as he had been
doing, but must give up that part of his work, and devote himself
exclusively to instruction in sacred things.

<span id="fn_1788"></span>[252:1789](2010173.htm#fr_1788) <span
id="iii.xi.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p18"></span> The obolus was a small Greek coin,
equivalent to about three and a half cents of our money. Four oboli a
day could have been sufficient, even in that age, only for the barest
necessities of life. But with his ascetic tendencies, these were all
that Origen wished.

<span id="fn_1789"></span>[252:1790](2010173.htm#fr_1789) <span
id="iii.xi.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p19"></span> It was very common from the fourth
century on (the writer knows of no instances earlier than Eusebius) to
call an ascetic mode of life “philosophical,” or “the life of a
philosopher” (see §2 of this chapter, and compare Chrysostom’s works,
where the word occurs very frequently in this sense). Origen, in his
ascetic practices, was quite in accord with the prevailing Christian
sentiment of his own and subsequent centuries, which looked upon bodily
discipline of an ascetic kind, not indeed as required, but as commended
by Christ. The growing sentiment had its roots partly in the prevailing
ideas of contemporary philosophy, which instinctively emphasized
strongly the dualism of spirit and matter, and the necessity of subduing
the latter to the former, and partly in the increasing moral corruptness
of society, which caused those who wished to lead holy lives to feel
that only by eschewing the things of sense could the soul attain purity.
Under pressure from without and within, it became very easy to
misinterpret various sayings of Christ, and thus to find in the Gospels
ringing exhortations to a life of the most rigid asceticism. Clement of
Alexandria was almost the only one of the great Christian writers after
the middle of the second century who distinguished between the true and
the false in this matter. Compare his admirable tract, *Quis dives
salvetur,* and contrast the position taken there with the foolish
extreme pursued by Origen, as recorded in this chapter.

<span id="fn_1790"></span>[252:1791](2010173.htm#fr_1790) <span
id="iii.xi.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p21"></span> See [Matt. x.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010)<span id="iii.xi.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1791"></span>[252:1792](2010173.htm#fr_1791) <span
id="iii.xi.iii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p22"></span> See [Matt. vi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#034)<span id="iii.xi.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1792"></span>[252:1793](2010173.htm#fr_1792) <span
id="iii.xi.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p25"></span> Greek: <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.iii-p25.1"></span>θώραξ</span>, properly “chest.” Rufinus and
Christophorsonus translate *stomachum,* and Valesius approves; but there
is no authority for such a use of the term <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.iii-p25.2"></span>θώραξ</span>, so far as I can ascertain.
The proper Greek term for stomach is <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.iii-p25.3"></span>στόμαχος</span>, which is uniformly
employed by Galen and other medical writers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](2010174)
