[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010021)  [Next](2010023.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iii-p1"></span> §3. *Eusebius as a Historian. The
Merits and Defects of his History*.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iii-p2"></span>The whole Christian world has
reason to be thankful that there lived at the opening of the fourth
century a man who, with his life spanning one of the greatest epochs
that has occurred in the history of the Church, with an intimate
experimental knowledge of the old and of the new condition of things,
was able to conceive so grand a plan and possessed the means and the
ability to carry it out. Had he written nothing else, Eusebius’ *Church
History* would have made him immortal; for if immortality be a fitting
reward for large and lasting services, few possess a clearer title to it
than the author of that work. The value of the *History* to us lies not
in its literary merit, but in the wealth of the materials which it
furnishes for a knowledge of the early Church. How many prominent
figures of the first three centuries are known to us only from the pages
of Eusebius; how many fragments, priceless on account of the light which
they shed upon movements of momentous and far-reaching consequence, have
been preserved by him alone; how often a hint dropped, a casual
statement made in passing, or the mention of some apparently trifling
event, gives the clue which enables us to unravel some perplexing
labyrinth, or to fit into one whole various disconnected and apparently
unrelated elements, and thus to trace the steps in the development of
some important historical movement whose rise and whose bearing must
<span id="page_47">p. 47</span> <span
id="iii.iii.iii.iii-Page_47"></span>otherwise remain an unsolved riddle.
The work reveals no sympathy with Ebionism, Gnosticism, and Montanism,
and little appreciation of their real nature, and yet our knowledge of
their true significance and of their place in history is due in
considerable part to facts respecting the movements or their leaders
which Eusebius alone has recorded or preserved. To understand the
development of the Logos Christology we must comprehend the significance
of the teaching of Paul of Samosata, and how inadequate would our
knowledge of the nature of that teaching be without the epistle quoted
in Book VII. chap. 30. How momentous were the consequences of the
paschal controversies, and how dark would they be were it not for the
light shed upon them by our author. How important, in spite of their
tantalizing brevity and obscurity, the fragments of Papias’ writings;
how interesting the extracts from the memoirs of Hegesippus; how
suggestive the meager notices from Dionysius of Corinth, from Victor of
Rome, from Melito, from Caius; how instructive the long and numerous
quotations from the epistles of Dionysius of Alexandria! He may often
fail to appreciate the significance of the events which he records, he
may in many cases draw unwarranted conclusions from the premises which
he states, he may sometimes misinterpret his documents and misunderstand
men and movements, but in the majority of cases he presents us with the
material upon which to form our own judgments, and if we differ with him
we must at the same time thank him for the data which have enabled us
independently to reach other results.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iii-p3"></span>But the value of Eusebius’ *Church
History* does not lie solely in the fact that it contains so many
original sources which would be otherwise unknown to us. It is not
merely a thesaurus, it is a history in the truest sense, and it
possesses an intrinsic value of its own, independent of its quotations
from other works. Eusebius possessed extensive sources of knowledge no
longer accessible to us. His *History* contains the results of his
extended perusal of many works which are now irrecoverably lost, of his
wide acquaintance with the current traditions of his day, of his
familiar intercourse with many of the chief men of the age. If we cut
out all the documents which he quotes, there still remains an extensive
history whose loss would leave an irreparable blank in our knowledge of
the early Church. How invaluable, for instance, to mention but one
matter, are the researches of our author in regard to the circulation of
the books of the New Testament: his testimony to the condition of the
canon in his own time, and to the more or less widespread use of
particular writings by the Fathers of preceding centuries. Great as is
the value of the sources which Eusebius quotes, those that he does not
give are still more extensive, and it is the knowledge gained from them
which he has transmitted to us.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iii-p4"></span>The worth of these portions of his
*History* must depend in the first place upon the extent and reliability
of his sources, and in the second place upon the use which he made of
them.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iii-p5"></span>A glance at the list of his
authorities given in the index, reveals at once the immense range of his
materials. The number of books which he either quotes or refers to as
read is enormous. When to these are added the works employed by him in
the composition of his *Præp. Evang*., as well as the great number which
he must have perused, but does not mention, we are amazed at the extent
of his reading. He must have been a voracious reader from his earliest
years, and he must have possessed extraordinary acquisitive powers. It
is safe to say that there was among the Fathers, with the possible
exception of Origen, no more learned man than he. He thus possessed one
of the primary qualifications of the historian. And yet even in this
respect he had his limitations. He seems to have taken no pains to
acquaint himself with the works of heretics, but to have been content to
take his knowledge of them at second hand. And still further, he was
sadly ignorant of Latin literature and of the Latin Church in general
(see below, p. 106); in fact, we must not expect to glean from his
*History* a very thorough or extended knowledge of western Christendom.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iii-p6"></span>But his sources were not confined
to literary productions. He had a wide acquaintance with the world, and
he was enabled to pick up much from his intercourse with other men and
with different peoples that he could not have found upon the shelves of
the Cæsarean or of any other <span id="page_48">p. 48</span> <span
id="iii.iii.iii.iii-Page_48"></span>library. Moreover, he had access to
the archives of state and gathered from them much information quite
inaccessible to most men. He was thus peculiarly fitted, both by nature
and by circumstances, for the task of acquiring material, the first task
of the genuine historian.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iii-p7"></span>But the value of his work must
depend in the second place upon the wisdom and honesty with which he
used his sources, and upon the faithfulness and accuracy with which he
reproduced the results thus reached. We are therefore led to enquire as
to his qualifications for this part of his work.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iii-p8"></span>We notice, in the first place, that
he was very diligent in the use of his sources. Nothing seems to have
escaped him that might in any way bear upon the particular subject in
hand. When he informs us that a certain author nowhere mentions a book
or an event, he is, so far as I am aware, never mistaken. When we
realize how many works he read entirely through for the sake of securing
a single historical notice, and how many more he must have read without
finding anything to his purpose, we are impressed with his untiring
diligence. To-day, with our convenient indexes, and with the references
at hand which have been made by many other men who have studied the
writings of the ancients, we hardly comprehend what an amount of labor
the production of a *History* like Eusebius’ must have cost him, a
pioneer in that kind of work.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iii-p9"></span>In the second place, we are
compelled to admire the sagacity which our author displays in the
selection of his materials. He possessed the true instinct of the
historian, which enabled him to pick out the salient points and to
present to the reader just that information which he most desires. We
shall be surprised upon examining his work to see how little it contains
which it is not of the utmost importance for the student of early Church
history to know, and how shrewdly the author has anticipated most of the
questions which such a student must ask. He saw what it was in the
history of the first three centuries of the Church which posterity would
most desire to know, and he told them. His wisdom in this respect is all
the more remarkable when compared with the unwisdom of most of his
successors, who filled their works with legends of saints and martyrs,
which, however fascinating they may have been to the readers of that
age, possess little either of interest or of value for us. When he
wishes to give us a glimpse of the persecutions of those early days, his
historical and literary instinct leads him to dwell especially upon two
thoroughly representative cases,—the martyrdom of Polycarp and the
sufferings of the churches of Lyons and Vienne,—and to preserve for
posterity two of the noblest specimens of martyrological literature
which the ancient Church produced. It is true that he sometimes erred in
his judgment as to the wants of future readers; we could wish that he
had been somewhat fuller and clearer on many points, and that he had not
so entirely neglected some others; but on the whole I am of the opinion
that few historical works, ancient or modern, have in the same compass
better fulfilled their mission in this respect.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iii-p10"></span>In the third place, we can hardly
fail to be impressed by the wisdom with which Eusebius discriminated
between reliable and unreliable sources. Judged by the modern standard
he may fall short as a literary critic, but judged by the standard of
antiquity he must be given a very high rank. Few indeed are the
historians of ancient times, secular or ecclesiastical, who can compare
with Eusebius for sound judgment in this matter. The general freedom of
his work from the fables and prodigies, and other improbable or
impossible tales which disfigure the pages of the great majority even of
the soberest of ancient historians, is one of its most marked features.
He shows himself uncommonly particular in demanding good evidence for
the circumstances which he records, and uncommonly shrewd in detecting
spurious and unreliable sources. When we remember the great number of
pseudonymous works which were current in his day we are compelled to
admire his care and his discrimination. Not that he always succeeded in
detecting the false. More than once he was sadly at fault (as for
instance in regard to the Abgarus correspondence and Josephus’ testimony
to Christ), and has in consequence been severely denounced or held up to
unsparing ridicule by many modern writers. But the wonder certainly is
not that he erred as often as he did, but that he did not err oftener;
not that he was sometimes careless in <span id="page_49">p. 49</span>
<span id="iii.iii.iii.iii-Page_49"></span>regard to the reliability of
his sources, but that he was ever as careful as, in the majority of
cases, he has proved himself to be. In fact, comparing him with other
writers of antiquity, we cannot commend too highly the care and the
skill with which he usually discriminated between the true and the
false.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iii-p11"></span>In the fourth place, he deserves
all praise for his constant sincerity and unfailing honesty. I believe
that emphasis should be laid upon this point for the reason that
Eusebius’ reputation has often suffered sadly in consequence of the
unjust imputations, and the violent accusations, which it was for a long
time the fashion to make against him, and which lead many still to treat
his statements with distrust, and his character with contempt. Gibbon’s
estimate of his honesty is well known and has been unquestioningly
accepted in many quarters, but it is none the less unjust, and in its
implications quite untrue to the facts. Eusebius does dwell with greater
fullness upon the virtues than upon the vices of the early Church, upon
its glory than upon its shame, and he tells us directly that it is his
intention so to do (*H. E*. VIII. 2), but he never undertakes to conceal
the sins of the Christians, and the chapter immediately preceding
contains a denunciation of their corruptness and wickedness uttered in
no faint terms. In fact, in the face of these and other candid passages
in his work, it is the sheerest injustice to charge him with dishonesty
and unfairness because he prefers, as almost any Christian historian
must, to dwell with greater fullness of detail upon the bright than upon
the dark side of the picture. Scientific, Eusebius’ method, in this
respect, doubtless is not; but dishonest, no one has a right to call it.
The most severe attack which has been made upon Eusebius in recent years
is found in an article by Jachmann (see below, p. 55). The evident
animus which runs through his entire paper is very unpleasant; the
conclusions which he draws are, to say the least, strained. I cannot
enter here into a consideration of his positions; most of them are
examined below in the notes upon the various passages which he
discusses. The whole article, like most similar attacks, proceeds upon
the supposition that our author is guilty, and then undertakes simply to
find evidence of that which is already presupposed. I submit that few
writers could endure such an ordeal. If Eusebius is tried according to
the principles of common justice, and of sound literary criticism, I am
convinced, after long and careful study, that his sincerity and honesty
of purpose cannot be impeached. The particular instances which have been
urged as proving his dishonesty will be discussed below in the notes
upon the respective passages, and to those the reader is referred
(compare especially pp. 88, 98, 100, 111, 112, 114, 127, 194).

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iii-p12"></span>Eusebius’ critics are wont to
condemn him severely for what they are pleased to call the dishonesty
displayed by him in his *Vita Constantini*. Such critics forget,
apparently, that that work pretends to be, not a history, but a
panegyric. Judging it as such, I am unable to find anything in it which
leads me to entertain for a moment a suspicion of the author’s honesty.
It is true that Eusebius emphasizes the Emperor’s good qualities, and
fails to mention the darker spots in his character; but so far as I am
aware he misstates no facts, and does only what those who eulogize
deceased friends are accustomed to do the world over. For a discussion
of this matter the reader is referred to the prolegomena of Dr.
Richardson, pp. 467 sq. of this volume. I am pleased to learn from him
that his study of the *Vita* has shown him nothing which justifies the
charge of dishonesty brought against Eusebius.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iii-p13"></span>One of the most decisive marks of
veracity upon the part of our author is the frankness with which he
confesses his lack of knowledge upon any subject (cf. IV. 5), and the
care with which he distinguishes between the different kinds of evidence
upon which he bases his statements. How frequently the phrases <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.iii.iii-p13.1"></span>λόγος žχει</span>,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.iii.iii-p13.2"></span>φασί</span>,
<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.iii.iii-p13.3"></span>λέγεται</span>, &c., occur in
connection with accounts which a less scrupulous historian would not
hesitate to record as undoubted fact. How particular he is to mention
his sources for any unusual or startling event. If the authorities seem
to him quite inadequate, he simply omits all reference to an occurrence
which most of his contemporaries and successors would have related with
the greatest gusto; if the testimony seems to him strong, he records the
circumstance and expressly mentions his authority, whether oral <span
id="page_50">p. 50</span> <span
id="iii.iii.iii.iii-Page_50"></span>tradition, the testimony of
eye-witnesses, or written accounts, and we are thus furnished the
material from which to form our own judgments.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iii-p14"></span>He is often blamed by modern
writers for what they are pleased to call his excessive credulity. Those
who accuse him thus seem to forget that he lived in the fourth, not in
the nineteenth century. That he believed many things which we now
declare to be incredible is perfectly true, but that he believed things
that other Christians of his day pronounced incredible is not true.
Judged, in fact, according to the standard of his age—and indeed of
eleven succeeding centuries—he must be pronounced remarkably free from
the fault of over-credulity, in truth uncommonly skeptical in his
attitude toward the marvelous. Not that he denies the occurrence of
prodigies and wonders in his own and other ages, but that he always
demands the strongest testimony before he allows himself to be convinced
of their truth. Compare, e.g., the care with which he gives his
authorities for the anecdote in regard to the Thundering Legion (V. 5),
and his final suspension of judgment in the matter; compare also the
emphasis which he lays upon the personal testimony of the Emperor in the
matter of the appearance of the sign of the cross in the sky (*Vita
Const*. I. 28 sq.), a phenomenon which he himself tells us that he would
have believed upon no ordinary evidence. His conduct in this matter is a
sign rather of a skepticism uncommon in his age than of an excessive and
unusual credulity. Gibbon himself gives our author due credit in this
respect, when he speaks of his character as “less tinctured with
credulity, and more practiced in the arts of courts, than that of almost
any of his contemporaries” (*Decline and Fall*, chap. XVI.).

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iii-p15"></span>On the other hand, Eusebius as an
historian had many very grave faults which it is not my wish in the
least to palliate or conceal. One of the most noticeable of these is his
complete lack of any conception of historiography as a fine art. His
work is interesting and instructive because of the facts which it
records, but that interest is seldom if ever enhanced by his mode of
presentation. There is little effective grouping, almost no sense of
perspective, utter ignorance of the art of suggesting by a single line
or phrase a finished picture of a man or of a movement. He was not, in
other words, a Thucydides or a Tacitus; but the world has seen not many
such as they.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iii-p16"></span>A second and still more serious
fault is our author’s want of depth, if I may so express myself, his
failure to look beneath the surface and to grasp the real significance
of things, to trace the influence of opinions and events. We feel this
defect upon every page. We read the annals, but we are conscious of no
masterful mind behind them, digesting and comprehending them into one
organic and imposing whole. This radical weakness in our author’s method
is revealed perhaps most clearly in his superficial and transcendental
treatment of heretics and heresies, his failure to appreciate their
origin and their bearing upon the progress of Christian thought. Of a
development in theology, in fact, he knows nothing, and hence his work
lacks utterly that which we now look upon as the most instructive part
of Church history,—the history of doctrine.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iii-p17"></span>In the third place, severe censure
must be passed upon our author for his carelessness and inaccuracy in
matters of chronology. We should expect that one who had produced the
most extensive chronological work that had ever been given to the world,
would be thoroughly at home in that province, but in truth his
chronology is the most defective feature of his work. The difficulty is
chiefly due to his inexcusable carelessness, we might almost say
slovenliness, in the use of different and often contradictory sources of
information. Instead of applying himself to the discrepancies, and
endeavoring to reach the truth by carefully weighing the respective
merits of the sources, or by testing their conclusions in so far as
tests are possible, he adopts in many cases the results of both,
apparently quite unsuspicious of the confusion consequent upon such a
course. In fact, the critical spirit which actuates him in dealing with
many other matters seems to leave him entirely when he is concerned with
chronology; and instead of proceeding with the care and circumspection
of an historian, he accepts what he finds with the unquestioning faith
<span id="page_51">p. 51</span> <span
id="iii.iii.iii.iii-Page_51"></span>of a child. There is no case in
which he can be convicted of disingenuousness, but at times his
obtuseness is almost beyond belief. An identity of names, or a
resemblance between events recorded by different authors, will often be
enough to lead him all unconsciously to himself into the most absurd and
contradictory conclusions. Instances of this may be seen in Book I.
chap. 5, and in II. 11. His confusion in regard to the various Antonines
(see especially the note on the preface to Book V.) is not at all
unusual among the writers of his day, and in view of the frequent and
perplexing use of the same names by the different emperors, might be
quite excusable in a less scholarly man than Eusebius, but in his case
it is evidence of unpardonable want of care. This serious defect in our
author’s method is not peculiar to him. Many historians, critical almost
to a fault in most matters, accept the received chronology without
question, and build upon it as if it were the surest of foundations.
Such a consideration does not excuse Eusebius; it relieves him, however,
of the stigma of peculiarity.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iii-p18"></span>Finally, the character of the
*History* is greatly impaired by our author’s desultory method. This is
a characteristic of his literary work in general, and was referred to in
the previous chapter. All his works are marred by it, but few suffer
more noticeably than the *History*. The author does not confine himself
as strictly as he should to the logical limits of the subject which he
is treating, but allows himself to be led away from the main point by
the suggestions that pour in upon him from all sides. As Lightfoot
remarks, “We have not unfrequently to pick out from various parts of his
work the notices bearing on one definite and limited subject. He relates
a fact, or quotes an authority bearing upon it, in season or out of
season, according as it is recalled to his memory by some accidental
connexion.” This unfortunate habit of Eusebius’ is one into which men of
wide learning are very apt to fall. The richness of their acquisitions
embarrasses them, and the immense number of facts in their possession
renders a comprehension of them all into one logical whole very
difficult; and yet unless the facts be thus comprehended, unless they be
thoroughly digested and arranged, the result is confusion and obscurity.
To exclude is as necessary as to include, if one would write history
with the highest measure of success; to exclude rigidly at one time what
it is just as necessary to include at another. To men like Eusebius
there is perhaps nothing more difficult than this. Only a mind as
intensive as it is extensive, with a grasp as strong as its reach is
wide, can accomplish it, and few are the minds that are blessed with
both qualities. Few are the writers whose histories stand upon our
shelves that fail not sadly in the one or in the other; and in few
perhaps does the failure seem more marked than in our author.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.iii-p19"></span>And yet, though it is apparent
that the value of Eusebius’ work is greatly impaired by its desultory
method of treatment, I am confident that the defect is commonly
exaggerated. The paragraph which Lightfoot quotes from Westcott on this
subject leaves a false impression. Altogether too often our author
introduces irrelevant matters, and repeats himself when repetition “mars
the symmetry of his work”; and yet on the whole he follows a fairly well
ordered plan with fairly good success. He endeavors to preserve a
strictly chronological sequence in his arrangement of the books, and he
adheres for the most part to his purpose. Though there may be disorder
and confusion within the various periods, for instance within the
apostolic age, the age of Trajan, of Hadrian, of the Antonines, &c., yet
the periods themselves are kept reasonably distinct from one another,
and having finished his account of one of them the author seldom returns
to it. Even in his treatment of the New Testament canon, which is
especially desultory, he says most of what he has to say about it in
connection with the apostles themselves, and before passing on to the
second century. I would not overlook the exceeding flagrancy of his
desultoriness and repetitiousness in his accounts of the writings of
many of the Fathers, especially of the two Clements, and yet I would
emphasize the fact that he certainly had an outline plan which he
designed to follow, and for which due credit should be given him. He
compares favorably in this respect with at least most of the writers of
antiquity. Only with our modern method of dividing history into periods,
separated by natural boundary lines, and of handling it <span
id="page_52">p. 52</span> <span
id="iii.iii.iii.iii-Page_52"></span>under clearly defined rubrics, have
we become able wholly to avoid the confused and illogical treatment of
Eusebius and of others like him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](2010023.md)
