[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010205)  [Next](2010207) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVI.—</span>*Other Works of
Origen.*

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p2.1"></span>At</span> this time, as the faith extended
and our doctrine was proclaimed boldly before all, <span
id="fr_2044"></span>[2045](#fn_2044) Origen, being, as they say, over
sixty years old, <span id="fr_2045"></span>[2046](#fn_2045) and having
gained great facility by his long practice, very properly permitted his
public discourses to be taken down by stenographers, a thing which he
had never before allowed.

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p5"></span>2. He also at this time composed a
work of eight books in answer to that entitled True Discourse, which had
been written against us by Celsus <span
id="fr_2046"></span>[2047](#fn_2046) <span id="page_279">p. 279</span>
<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-Page_279"></span>the Epicurean, and the
twenty-five books on the Gospel of Matthew, <span
id="fr_2047"></span>[2048](#fn_2047) besides those on the Twelve
Prophets, of which we have found only twenty-five. <span
id="fr_2048"></span>[2049](#fn_2048)

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p9"></span>3. There is extant also an
epistle <span id="fr_2049"></span>[2050](#fn_2049) of his to the Emperor
Philip, and another to Severa his wife, with several others to different
persons. We have arranged in distinct books to the number of one
hundred, so that they might be no longer scattered, as many of these as
we have been able to collect, <span id="fr_2050"></span>[2051](#fn_2050)
which have been preserved here and there by different persons.

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p12"></span>4. He wrote also to Fabianus, <span
id="fr_2051"></span>[2052](#fn_2051) bishop of Rome, and to many other
rulers of the churches concerning his orthodoxy. You have examples of
these in the eighth book of the Apology <span
id="fr_2052"></span>[2053](#fn_2052) which we have written in his
behalf.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2044"></span>[278:2045](2010206.htm#fr_2044) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p3.1"></span>τοῦ καθ᾽ ἡμας παρὰ πᾶσι λόγου</span>

<span id="fn_2045"></span>[278:2046](2010206.htm#fr_2045) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p4"></span> Since Origen was born in the year 185
or 186, this must have been as late as 245. Most if not all of the
homilies of Origen, which are now preserved, were probably delivered
after this time, and reported, as Eusebius says, by stenographers. The
increasing boldness of the Christians referred to here was apparently
due to their uncommonly comfortable condition under Philip.

<span id="fn_2046"></span>[278:2047](2010206.htm#fr_2046) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p6"></span> Of the personal history of Celsus,
the first great literary opponent of Christianity, we know nothing with
certainty, nor did Origen know any more. He had heard that there were
two persons of the same name, the one living in the time of Nero, the
other, whom he identifies with his opponent, in the time of Hadrian and
later, and both of them Epicurean philosophers (see *contra Cels.* I.
8). The work of Celsus, however, was clearly the work, not of an
Epicurean, but of a Platonist, or at least of an eclectic philosopher,
with a strong leaning toward Platonism. The author wrote about the
middle of the second century, probably in the reign of Marcus Aurelius
(Keim fixes the date of the work at 178 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span>). The *True Discourse* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p6.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p6.3"></span>ληθὴς λόγος</span>) is
no longer extant, but it can be reconstructed in great part from
Origen’s reply to it. It is seen to have been one of the ablest and most
philosophical attacks of ancient times, and to have anticipated a great
many arguments urged against Christianity by modern unbelievers. Celsus
was well acquainted with Christianity in its various forms and with its
literature, and he set himself to work with all his learning and skill
to compose a complete refutation of the whole thing. He writes
apparently less from a religious than from a political motive. He was an
ardent patriot, and considered paganism essential to the life of the
State, and Christianity its necessary antagonist. He undertakes first to
show that Christianity is historically untenable, and then that it is
false from the standpoint of philosophy and ethics. It is noticeable
that it is not his desire to exterminate Christianity completely, but to
make peace with it; to induce the Christians to give up their claim to
possess the only true religion, and, with all their high ethics and
lofty ideals, to join hands with the upholders of the ancient religion
in elevating the religious ideas of the people, and thus benefiting the
state. When we look at his work in this light (and much misunderstanding
has been caused by a failure to do this), we must admire his ability,
and respect his motives. He was, however, by no means free from the
superstitions and prejudices of his age. The most important book upon
the work of Celsus is Keim’s *Celsus’ Wahres Wort,* Zürich, 1873, which
reconstructs, from Origen’s reply, Celsus’ work, and translates and
explains it. Origen’s reply is philosophical and in parts very able, but
it must be acknowledged that in many places he does not succeed in
answering his opponent. His honesty, however, must be admired in letting
his adversary always speak for himself. He attempts to answer every
argument urged by Celsus, and gives the argument usually in Celsus’ own
words. The result is that the work is quite desultory in its treatment,
and often weighted with unimportant details and tiresome repetitions. At
the same time, it is full of rich and suggestive thought, well worthy of
Origen’s genius, and shows a deep appreciation of the true spiritual
nature of Christianity. The entire work of eight books is extant in the
original Greek, and is printed in all editions of Origen’s works
(Lommatzsch, Vol. XX. p. 1–226), and is translated in the *Ante-Nicene
Fathers,* Am. ed. Vol. IV. 395–669. It was one of Origen’s latest works,
as we are told here by Eusebius, and was composed (as we learn from its
preface) at the urgent request of Ambrose, to whom also it was
dedicated.

<span id="fn_2047"></span>[279:2048](2010206.htm#fr_2047) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p6.4"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p7"></span> The commentary on Matthew was written
toward the close of Origen’s life, as Eusebius informs us here, a fact
which is confirmed by references in the work itself to many of his
earlier commentaries. There are extant a single fragment from the first
book (quoted in chap. 25, above), one from the second book (quoted in
the *Philocalia,* chap. 6), and Books X.–XVII. entire in the original
Greek, covering <span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p7.1"></span>Matt. xiii. 36–xxii.
33. There are also extant numerous notes, which may have been taken,
some of them from the commentary, and others from the homilies; and a
Latin version of the commentary covering [Matt. xvi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#013)<span
id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p7.2"></span>–xxvii. (See Lommatzsch, Vols. III.–V.).
The catalogue of Jerome mentions twenty-five books and twenty-five
homilies, and in the preface to his commentary on Matthew, Jerome states
that he had read the twenty-five books, but elsewhere (in the prologue
to his translation of Origen’s homilies on Luke; Migne, VII. 219) he
speaks of thirty-six (or twenty-six) books of the commentary, but this
is doubtless a mistake (and so Vallarsi reads *viginti quinque* in the
text). There is no reason to think that Origen wrote more than
twenty-five books, which must have covered the whole Gospel (to judge
from the portions extant). The books which are preserved contain much
that is interesting and suggestive.

<span id="fn_2048"></span>[279:2049](2010206.htm#fr_2048) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p8"></span> Jerome also mentions twenty-five
books upon the twelve prophets (*in duodecim Prophetas viginti quinque*
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p8.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p8.2"></span>ξηγήσεων</span>
*Origenis volumina*), of which he had found a copy in the library of
Cæsarea, transcribed by the hand of Pamphilus (*de vir. ill.* 75). The
catalogue of Jerome enumerates two books on Hosea, two on Joel, six on
Amos, one on Jonah, two on Micah, two on Mahum, three on Habakkuk, two
on Zephaniah, one on Haggai, two on Zechariah, two on Malachi; but in
the preface to his commentary on Malachi, Jerome mentions three books on
that prophecy. Of all these books only one fragment of the commentary on
Hosea is extant, being preserved in the *Philocalia,* c. 8.

<span id="fn_2049"></span>[279:2050](2010206.htm#fr_2049) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p10"></span> These epistles to Philip and his
wife Severa are no longer extant, nor can we form an accurate idea of
their contents. We are reminded of Origen’s interview with Mammæa, the
mother of Alexander Severus, mentioned in chap. 21. Whether he wrote in
response to a request from Philip is uncertain, but is not likely in
view of the silence of Eusebius. It is possible that the favor shown by
the emperor and his wife had led Origen to believe that they might be
won for the faith, and there is nothing surprising in his addressing
epistles to them with this idea. On Philip’s relations to Christianity,
see chap. 34, note 2.

<span id="fn_2050"></span>[279:2051](2010206.htm#fr_2050) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p11"></span> This collection of Origen’s epistles
made by Eusebius is no longer extant. The catalogue of Jerome mentions
“eleven books of letters in all; two books in defense of his works.”
Only two epistles are preserved entire,—the one to Julius Africanus (see
chap. 31, note 1); the other to Gregory Thaumaturgus, written,
apparently, soon after the departure of the latter from Cæsarea (see
chap. 30, note 1), for Gregory was, at the time it was written, still
undecided as to the profession which he should follow. In addition to
these two complete epistles, there are extant a sentence from a letter
to his father (quoted in chap. 2); also a fragment of an epistle to some
unknown person, describing the great zeal of his friend Ambrose (see
chap. 18 note 1. The fragment is preserved by Suidas *s. v.* <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p11.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p11.2"></span>Ω</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p11.3"></span>ριγένης</span>); also
a fragment defending his study of heathen philosophy (quoted in chap.
19, above); and two fragments in Latin, from a letter addressed to some
Alexandrian friends, complaining of the alterations made by certain
persons in the reports of disputations which he had held with them (see
chap. 32, note 4. The one fragment is preserved by Jerome, in his *Apol.
adv. Ruf.* II. 18; the other by Rufinus, in his apology for Origen). Of
his epistles to Fabian and others no trace remains.

<span id="fn_2051"></span>[279:2052](2010206.htm#fr_2051) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p13"></span> On Fabian, see chap. 29, note 4. We
do not know when this letter to Fabian was written; but it cannot have
been written in consequence of Origen’s condemnation by the Alexandrian
synods called by Demetrius, for they were held in 231 or 232, and Fabian
did not become bishop until 236. There must have been some later
cause,—perhaps a condemnation by a later synod of Alexandria, perhaps
only the prevalence of a report that Origen was heterodox, which was
causing serious suspicions in Rome and elsewhere. We know that the
controversies which raged so fiercely about his memory began even before
his death.

<span id="fn_2052"></span>[279:2053](2010206.htm#fr_2052) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p14"></span> On this *Defense,* see above, p. 36.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVII](2010207)
