[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010121)  [Next](2010123.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p1"></span> <span id="page_186">p. 186</span>
<span id="iii.ix.xiii-Page_186"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter</span> <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xiii-p1.2"></span>XIII.—</span>*The Epistle of Antoninus to
the Common Assembly of Asia in Regard to our Doctrine*. <span
id="fr_1102"></span>[1103](#fn_1102.md)

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p3"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xiii-p3.1"></span>The</span> Emperor Cæsar Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus Augustus, <span id="fr_1103"></span>[1104](#fn_1103.md)
Armenicus, Pontifex Maximus, for the fifteenth time Tribune, for the
third time Consul, to the Common Assembly of Asia, Greeting.

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p5"></span>2. I know that the gods also take care
that such persons do not escape detection. For they would much rather
punish those who will not worship them than you would.

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p6"></span>3. But you throw them into confusion,
and while you accuse them of atheism you only confirm them in the
opinion which they hold. It would indeed be more desirable for them,
when accused, to appear to die for their God, than to live. Wherefore
also they come off victorious when they give up their lives rather than
yield obedience to your commands.

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p7"></span>4. And in regard to the earthquakes
which have been and are still taking place, <span
id="fr_1104"></span>[1105](#fn_1104.md) it is not improper to admonish you
who lose heart whenever they occur, and nevertheless are accustomed to
compare your conduct with theirs. <span
id="fr_1105"></span>[1106](#fn_1105.md)

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p10"></span>5. They indeed become the more
confident in God, while you, during the whole time, neglect, in apparent
ignorance, the other gods and the worship of the Immortal, and oppress
and persecute even unto death the Christians who worship him. <span
id="fr_1106"></span>[1107](#fn_1106.md)

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p12"></span>6. But in regard to these persons,
many of the governors of the provinces wrote also to our most divine
father, to whom he wrote in reply that they should not trouble these
people unless it should appear that they were attempting something
affecting the Roman government. <span
id="fr_1107"></span>[1108](#fn_1107.md) And to me also many have sent
communications concerning these men, but I have replied to them in the
same way that my father did.

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p14"></span>7. But if any one still persists in
bringing accusations against any of these people as such, the person who
is accused shall be acquitted of the charge, even if it appear that he
is one of them, but the accuser shall be punished. <span
id="fr_1108"></span>[1109](#fn_1108.md) Published in Ephesus in the Common
Assembly of Asia.”

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p16"></span>8. To these things Melito, <span
id="fr_1109"></span>[1110](#fn_1109.md) bishop of the church of Sardis, and
a man well known at that time, is a witness, <span
id="fr_1110"></span>[1111](#fn_1110.md) as is clear from his words in the
Apology which he addressed to the Emperor Verus in behalf of our
doctrine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1102"></span>[186:1103](2010122.htm#fr_1102.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xiii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p2"></span> This edict is undoubtedly spurious. It
contradicts all that we know in regard to the relation of Christianity
to the State during this century, and both the language and the
sentiments make it impossible to call it genuine. It is probably a
forgery of the second century. It is found in our two (or more properly
one, as one is simply a slavish copy of the other) <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xiii-p2.1"></span>mss</span>. of Justin;
but this is simply accidental, as it does not belong there, but was
appended to the edict of Hadrian by some late copyist. The edict is now
almost universally acknowledged to be a forgery; compare Overbeck,
*Studien zur Gesch. der alt. Kirche*, p. 93 sq. Wieseler contends for
its genuineness, but no good critic follows him.

<span id="fn_1103"></span>[186:1104](2010122.htm#fr_1103.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p4"></span> Eusebius gives this as an edict of
Antoninus Pius, and yet its inscription assigns it to Marcus Aurelius.
Overbeck concludes that Eusebius was led by internal evidence to assign
the rescript to Antoninus Pius, but that he did not venture to change
the inscription of the original which lay before him. This seems the
only possible explanation, and as Eusebius at any rate was badly
confused in regard to the names of the Antonines, the glaring
discrepancy may not have meant very much to him. In our <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xiii-p4.1"></span>mss</span>. of Justin
Martyr, where this edict is appended to the first Apology, the
superscription and text are quite different from the form given by
Eusebius. The rescript is in fact assigned there by its superscription
to Antoninus Pius, instead of to Marcus Aurelius. But if that was its
original form, we cannot understand the later change to Marcus Aurelius,
for certainly his authorship is precluded on the very face of the
document; but it is easier to see how it could have been later assigned
to Antonius Pius under the influence of Eusebius’ direct statement. We
have no knowledge of the original Latin of this pretended edict. Rufinus
evidently did not know it, for he translates the document from the Greek
of Eusebius. The text of the edict as given by Eusebius differs
considerably at many points from the text found in the <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xiii-p4.2"></span>mss</span>. of Justin,
and the variations are such as can hardly be explained as due merely to
copyists’ errors or alterations. At the same time the two texts are
plainly not independent of each other, and cannot be looked upon as
independent translations of one Latin original. We may perhaps suppose
that one text represents the original translation, the other a revision
of it. Whether the revision was made by a comparison with the original,
and thus more accurately represents it, we cannot tell. If, then, one is
a revision of the other, the form given in the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xiii-p4.3"></span>mss</span>. of Justin is evidently the
later, for its statements in more places than one are an improvement
upon those of the other text in point of clearness and decisiveness.
Moreover, as remarked just above, the ascription of the edict to
Antoninus Pius must be later than its ascription to Marcus Aurelius.

<span id="fn_1104"></span>[186:1105](2010122.htm#fr_1104.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p8"></span> Numerous earthquakes took place in
Asia Minor and in Rhodes during the reign of Antoninus Pius, and these,
as well as famines and other occurrences of the kind which were
uncomfortably frequent at this time, were always made the signal for
renewed attacks upon the Christians, who were held by the people in
general responsible for these misfortunes. See Julius Capitolinus’ *Vita
Antonini Pii*, chap. 9.

<span id="fn_1105"></span>[186:1106](2010122.htm#fr_1105.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p9"></span> This sentence has caused great
difficulty. Crusè translates, “But as to those earthquakes which have
taken place and still continue, it is not out of place to admonish you
who are cast down whenever these happen, that you compare your own
deportment with theirs.” Most of the older translators and, among the
moderns, Stigloher, have translated in the same way; but the Greek of
the last clause will not warrant this construction. The original runs as
follows:…ὑπομνῆσαι ἀθυμοῦντας μὲν ὅταν περ᾽ ὦσι, παραβ€λλοντας δὲ τὰ
ὑμέτερα πρὸς τὰ ἐκείνων. Stroth inserts μή before ἀθυμοῦντας, and
translates, “Was die Erdbeben betrift, die sich ereignet haben, und noch
ereignen, halte ich nicht für undienlich euch zu erinnern dass ihr den
vorkommenden Fall den Muth nicht sinken lasst, sondern euer Betragen
einmal mit jener ihrem vergleicht.” The insertion, however, is quite
unwarranted and must be rejected. Valesius renders: *Cæterum de terræ
motibus, qui vel facti sunt vel etiamnum fiunt, non absurdum videtur vos
commonere, qui et animos abjicitis, quoties hujusmodi casus contingunt,
et vestra cum illorum institutis comparatis*; which makes excellent
sense and might be accepted, were it not for the fact that it fails to
bring out adequately the force of μέν and δέ. Heinichen discusses the
passage at length (in his edition of Eusebius, Vol. III. pp. 670–674),
and translates as follows: *Non alienum videtur vos admonere (corripere)
de terræ motibus qui vel fuerunt vel adhuc sunt, vos qui estis quidem
animo abjecto, quoties illi eveniunt, nihilo autem minus vestram agendi
rationem conferre soletis cum illorum*. Overbeck follows Heinichen in
his German Translation of the edit (*ibid*. p. 127 sqq.), and the
translation of Closs is similar. It seems to be the only rendering which
the Greek will properly admit, and I have therefore felt compelled to
adopt it, though I should have preferred to interpret as Valesius does,
had the original permitted.

<span id="fn_1106"></span>[186:1107](2010122.htm#fr_1106.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xiii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p11"></span> An orthodox worshiper of the Roman
gods, like Antoninus Pius, can hardly have called the God of the
Christians “The Immortal,” in distinction from the gods of the Romans.

<span id="fn_1107"></span>[186:1108](2010122.htm#fr_1107.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p13"></span> Among these epistles the writer of
this edict undoubtedly meant to include the rescript ostensibly
addressed by Hadrian to Minucius Fundanus. See chap. 9, above.

<span id="fn_1108"></span>[186:1109](2010122.htm#fr_1108.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xiii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p15"></span> This is the climax of the whole. Not
only is the accused to be set free, but the accuser is to be held as
guilty! This really goes further than Constantine. See above, chap. 9,
note 4.

<span id="fn_1109"></span>[186:1110](2010122.htm#fr_1109.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xiii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p17"></span> On Melito and his writings, see chap.
26, note 1.

<span id="fn_1110"></span>[186:1111](2010122.htm#fr_1110.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xiii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p18"></span> Eusebius evidently draws this
conclusion from the passage from Melito’s *Apology*, quoted below, in
chap. 26, where Melito refers to edicts of Antoninus Pius; for had
Eusebius referred to another passage, he would undoubtedly have quoted
it. But according to Melito, the edicts of Antoninus were to prevent any
new methods of procedure against the Christians, i.e. tumultuous
proceedings in opposition to the custom established by Trajan. The
edicts of which he speaks were intended, then, to perpetuate the
principles of Trajan, which had been, since his time, the silent law of
the empire upon the subject. The edicts cannot have been edicts of
toleration (even Melito himself does not regard them so), but edicts
against illegal, tumultuous proceedings, and the accusations of
informers, and therefore quite in the spirit of Trajan. But as the
significance of Trajan’s rescript was entirely misunderstood in the
early Church (see above, Bk. III. chap. 33, note 6), so it was the
common opinion that the attitude of the State toward the Church was at
bottom friendly to Christianity, and therefore all edicts forbidding the
introduction of new methods were regarded as favorable edicts, as in the
present case by Eusebius. Again, had Melito known of such a favorable
edict as this of Antoninus, he would certainly have called special and
particular attention to it. Melito’s testimony, therefore, instead of
being in favor of the genuineness of this edict, is really against it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](2010123.md)
