[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010571)  [Next](2010573) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.liii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.liii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.liii-p1.1"></span>Chapter LIII</span>.—*That the Saviour
appeared in this Place to Abraham.*

<span id="iv.vi.iii.liii-p2"></span>“<span class="c13"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.liii-p2.1"></span>She</span> assures me, then, that the
place which takes its name from the oak of Mambre, where we find that
Abraham dwelt, is defiled by certain of the slaves of superstition in
every possible way. She declares that idols <span
id="fr_3287"></span>[3288](#fn_3287) which should be utterly destroyed
have been erected on the site of that tree; that an altar is near the
spot; and that impure sacrifices are continually performed. Now since it
is evident that these practices are equally inconsistent with the
character of our times, and unworthy the sanctity of the place itself, I
wish your Gravities <span id="fr_3288"></span>[3289](#fn_3288) to be
informed that the illustrious Count Acacius, our friend, has received
instructions by letter from me, to the effect that every idol which
shall be found in the place above-mentioned shall immediately be
consigned to the flames; that the altar be utterly demolished; and that
if any one, after this our mandate, shall be guilty of impiety of any
kind in this place, he shall be visited with condign punishment. The
place itself we have directed to be adorned with an unpolluted
structure, I mean a church; in order that it may become a fitting place
of assembly for holy men. Meantime, should any breach of these our
commands occur, it should be made known to our clemency without the
least delay by letters from you, that we may direct the person detected
to be dealt with, as a transgressor of the law, in the severest manner.
For you are not ignorant that the Supreme God first appeared to Abraham,
and conversed with him, in that place. There it was that the observance
of the Divine law first began; there first the Saviour himself, with the
two angels, vouchsafed to Abraham a manifestation of his presence; there
God first appeared to men; there he gave promise to Abraham concerning
his future seed, and straightway fulfilled that promise; there he
foretold that he should be the father of a multitude of nations. <span
id="page_534">p. 534</span> <span
id="iv.vi.iii.liii-Page_534"></span>For these reasons, it seems to me
right that this place should not only be kept pure through your
diligence from all defilement, but restored also to its pristine
sanctity; that nothing hereafter may be done there except the
performance of fitting service to him who is the Almighty God, and our
Saviour, and Lord of all. And this service it is incumbent on you to
care for with due attention, if your Gravities be willing (and of this I
feel confident) to gratify my wishes, which are especially interested in
the worship of God. May he preserve you, beloved brethren!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3287"></span>[533:3288](2010572.htm#fr_3287) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.liii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.liii-p3"></span> \[These objects of idolatrous
worship were probably figures intended to represent the angels who had
appeared to Abraham.—*Bag.*\] More probably they were some form of
images obscenely worshiped.

<span id="fn_3288"></span>[533:3289](2010572.htm#fr_3288) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.liii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.liii-p4"></span> Better “Reverences,” and so
throughout.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LIV](2010573)
