[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010258)  [Next](2010260.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII.—</span>*The Egyptians in
Phœnicia.*

<span id="iii.xiii.viii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiii.viii-p2.1"></span>Those</span> of them that were
conspicuous in Palestine we know, as also those that were at Tyre in
Phœnicia. <span id="fr_2533"></span>[2534](#fn_2533.md) Who that saw them
was <span id="page_329">p. 329</span> <span
id="iii.xiii.viii-Page_329"></span>not astonished at the numberless
stripes, and at the firmness which these truly wonderful athletes of
religion exhibited under them? and at their contest, immediately after
the scourging, with bloodthirsty wild beasts, as they were cast before
leopards and different kinds of bears and wild boars and bulls goaded
with fire and red-hot iron? and at the marvelous endurance of these
noble men in the face of all sorts of wild beasts?

<span id="iii.xiii.viii-p4"></span>2. We were present ourselves when
these things occurred, and have put on record the divine power of our
martyred Saviour Jesus Christ, which was present and manifested itself
mightily in the martyrs. For a long time the man-devouring beasts did
not dare to touch or draw near the bodies of those dear to God, but
rushed upon the others who from the outside irritated and urged them on.
And they would not in the least touch the holy athletes, as they stood
alone and naked and shook their hands at them to draw them toward
themselves,—for they were commanded to do this. But whenever they rushed
at them, they were restrained as if by some divine power and retreated
again.

<span id="iii.xiii.viii-p5"></span>3. This continued for a long time,
and occasioned no little wonder to the spectators. And as the first wild
beast did nothing, a second and a third were let loose against one and
the same martyr.

<span id="iii.xiii.viii-p6"></span>4. One could not but be astonished at
the invincible firmness of these holy men, and the enduring and
immovable constancy of those whose bodies were young. You could have
seen a youth not twenty years of age standing unbound and stretching out
his hands in the form of a cross, with unterrified and untrembling mind,
engaged earnestly in prayer to God, and not in the least going back or
retreating from the place where he stood, while bears and leopards,
breathing rage and death, almost touched his flesh. And yet their mouths
were restrained, I know not how, by a divine and incomprehensible power,
and they ran back again to their place. Such an one was he.

<span id="iii.xiii.viii-p7"></span>5. Again you might have seen others,
for they were five in all, cast before a wild bull, who tossed into the
air with his horns those who approached from the outside, and mangled
them, leaving them to be token up half dead; but when he rushed with
rage and threatening upon the holy martyrs, who were standing alone, he
was unable to come near them; but though he stamped with his feet, and
pushed in all directions with his horns, and breathed rage and
threatening on account of the irritation of the burning irons, he was,
nevertheless, held back by the sacred Providence. And as he in nowise
harmed them, they let loose other wild beasts upon them.

<span id="iii.xiii.viii-p8"></span>6. Finally, after these terrible and
various attacks upon them, they were all slain with the sword; and
instead of being buried in the earth they were committed to the waves of
the sea.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2533"></span>[328:2534](2010259.htm#fr_2533.md) <span
id="iii.xiii.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.viii-p3"></span> From the *Martyrs of Palestine,*
chap. 8 sq. (more fully in the Syriac; Cureton’s English translation p.
26 sq.), we learn that in the sixth and following years of the
persecution, many Egyptian Christians were sent to Palestine to labor in
the mines there, and that they underwent the severest tortures in that
country. No mention is made of such persons in the *Martyrs of
Palestine* previous to the sixth year. Those in Tyre to whom Eusebius
refers very likely suffered during the same period; not under
Diocletian, but under Maximinus, when the persecution was at its height.
Since in his *Martyrs of Palestine* Eusebius confines himself to those
who suffered in that country (or were natives of it), he has nothing to
say about those referred to in this chapter, who seem, from the opening
of the next chapter, to have suffered, all of them, in Tyre.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](2010260.md)
