[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010671)  [Next](2010673.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.x"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X</span>.—*Of those who reject the
Doctrines of Philosophers, as well as those of Scripture: and that we
ought to believe the Poets in All Things, or disbelieve them in All.*

<span id="iv.vii.x-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.x-p2.1"></span>There</span> are, however, some persons so
infatuated, that when they meet with such sentiments as these, they are
neither converted or alarmed: nay, they even treat them with contempt
and scorn, as if they listened to the inventions of fable; applauding,
perhaps, the beauty of the eloquence, but abhorring the severity of the
precepts. And yet they give credence to the fictions of the poets, and
make both civilized and barbarous <span
id="fr_3409"></span>[3410](#fn_3409.md) countries ring with exploded and
false tales. For the poets assert that the judgment of souls after death
is committed to men whose parentage they ascribe to the gods, <span
id="fr_3410"></span>[3411](#fn_3410.md) extolling their righteousness and
impartiality and represent them as guardians of the dead. The same poets
describe the battles of the gods and certain usages of war among them,
and speak of them as subject to the power of fate. Some of these deities
they picture to us as cruel, others as strangers to all care for the
human race, and others again as hateful in their character. They
introduce them also as mourning the slaughter of their own children,
thus implying their inability to succor, not strangers merely, but those
most dear to them. They describe them, too, as subject to human
passions, and sing of their battles and wounds, their joys and sorrows.
And in all this they appear worthy of belief. <span
id="fr_3411"></span>[3412](#fn_3411.md) For if we suppose them to be moved
by a divine impulse to attempt the poetic art, we are bound to believe
them and to be persuaded of what they utter under this inspiration. They
speak, then, of the calamities to which their divinities are subject;
calamities which of course are altogether true! But it will be objected
that it is the privilege of poets to lie, since the peculiar province of
poetry is to charm <span id="fr_3412"></span>[3413](#fn_3412.md) the
spirits of the hearers, while the very essence of truth is that things
told be in reality exactly what they are said to be. <span
id="fr_3413"></span>[3414](#fn_3413.md) Let us grant that it is a
characteristic of poetry occasionally to conceal the truth. But they who
speak falsehood do it not without an object; being influenced either by
a desire of personal gain or advantage, or possibly, being conscious of
some evil conduct, they are induced to disguise the truth by dread of
the threatening vengeance of the laws. But surely it were possible for
them (in my judgment), by adhering faithfully to truth at least while
treating of the nature of the Supreme Being, to avoid the guilt at once
of falsehood and impiety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3409"></span>[567:3410](2010672.htm#fr_3409.md) <span
id="iv.vii.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.x-p3"></span> “All the Greek-speaking world, and
foreign lands as well.”

<span id="fn_3410"></span>[567:3411](2010672.htm#fr_3410.md) <span
id="iv.vii.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.x-p4"></span> Rhadamanthus was a son of Jove (or
Vulcan) and Europa. Cf. Hom. *Il.* 14. 322; *Od.* 4. 564, 7. 323.

<span id="fn_3411"></span>[567:3412](2010672.htm#fr_3411.md) <span
id="iv.vii.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.x-p5"></span> \[There can be no doubt (though the fact
is not immediately apparent from the wording of the text), that the
spirit of this passage is ironical.—*Bag.*\]

<span id="fn_3412"></span>[567:3413](2010672.htm#fr_3412.md) <span
id="iv.vii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.x-p6"></span> Rather “cheat,” or “delude.” Mr. Charles
Dudley Warner, essayist and novelist, says in an interesting essay on
the relation of fiction to life, that the object of fiction is to
produce illusions, and the test of its art is its power to produce such
illusion.

<span id="fn_3413"></span>[567:3414](2010672.htm#fr_3413.md) <span
id="iv.vii.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.x-p7"></span> There is a temptation here to adopt the
translation of *Molz.* “Truth lies in the fiction, however, when what is
told corresponds to reality.” Mr. Warner, in his lecture, goes on to say
that the object of fiction is to reveal what is,—not the base and sordid
things only or peculiarly, but the best possibilities, and gives an
exquisite exposition of the fact that the idealism of true fiction is
simply the realism of the nobler characteristics and truths. The truth
is, that the object of fiction or poetry as art is to produce the
image,—fill the whole personality with a picture. This is only gained in
its highest form when every detail exactly corresponds to truth or
reality. The function of fiction is not illusion, but realization. Its
object is the reproduction of truth. *Molz.* makes Constantine say that
fiction is true when it corresponds to reality, though the forms be not
historical or actual. This is a true observation, but not what
Constantine says. He says in substance, with Mr. Warner, that the object
is to produce illusion or deceive, while the idea of truth is just the
reverse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](2010673.md)
