[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010303)  [Next](2010305.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xvi.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xvi.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII.—</span>*The Exemption of the
Clergy.*

<span id="iii.xvi.vii-p2"></span>*Copy of an Epistle in which the
emperor commands that the rulers of the churches be exempted from all
political duties.* <span id="fr_2965"></span>[2966](#fn_2965.md)

<span id="iii.xvi.vii-p4"></span>1. “<span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xvi.vii-p4.1"></span>Greeting</span> to thee, our most esteemed
Anulinus. Since it appears from many circumstances that when that
religion is despised, in which is preserved the chief reverence for the
most holy celestial Power, great dangers are brought upon public
affairs; but that when legally adopted and observed <span
id="fr_2966"></span>[2967](#fn_2966.md) it affords the most signal
prosperity to the Roman name and remarkable felicity to all the affairs
of men, through the divine beneficence,—it has seemed good to me, most
esteemed Anulinus, that those men who give their services with due
sanctity and with constant observance of this law, to the worship of the
divine religion, should receive recompense for their labors.

<span id="iii.xvi.vii-p6"></span>2. Wherefore it is my will that those
within the province entrusted to thee, <span
id="fr_2967"></span>[2968](#fn_2967.md) in the catholic Church, over which
Cæcilianus presides, <span id="fr_2968"></span>[2969](#fn_2968.md) who give
their services to this holy religion, and who are commonly called
clergymen, be entirely exempted from all public duties, that they may
not by any error or sacrilegious negligence be drawn away from the
service due to the Deity, but may devote themselves without any
hindrance to their own law. For it seems that when they show greatest
reverence to the Deity, the greatest benefits accrue to the state.
Farewell, our most esteemed and beloved Anulinus.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2965"></span>[383:2966](2010304.htm#fr_2965.md) <span
id="iii.xvi.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.vii-p3"></span> Municipal offices and magistracies
were a great burden under the later Roman empire. They entailed heavy
expenses for those who filled them, and consequently, unless a man’s
wealth was large, and his desire for distinction very great, he was glad
to be exempted, if possible, from the necessity of supporting such
expensive honors, which he was not at liberty to refuse. The same was
true of almost all the offices, municipal and provincial offices, high
and low. Discharging the duties of an office was in fact practically
paying a heavy tax to government, and of course the fewer there were
that were compelled to pay this tax, the greater the burden upon the
few. As a consequence, the exemption of any class of persons always
aroused opposition from those who were not exempted. In granting this
immunity to the clergy, however, Constantine was granting them only what
had long been enjoyed by the heathen priesthood, and also by some of the
learned professions. The privilege bestowed here upon the African clergy
was afterward extended to those of other provinces, as we learn from the
Theodosian Code, 16. 2. 2 (<span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xvi.vii-p3.1"></span>a.d</span>. 319). The direct result of the
exemption was that many persons of means secured admission to the ranks
of the clergy, in order to escape the burden of office-holding; and this
practice increased so rapidly that within a few years the emperor was
obliged to enact various laws restricting the privilege. See Hatch’s
*Constitution of the Early Christ. Churches*, p. 144 sq.

<span id="fn_2966"></span>[383:2967](2010304.htm#fr_2966.md) <span
id="iii.xvi.vii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.vii-p5"></span> ἐνθέσμως ἀναληφθεῖσαν καὶ φυλαττομενην

<span id="fn_2967"></span>[383:2968](2010304.htm#fr_2967.md) <span
id="iii.xvi.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.vii-p7"></span> i.e. the proconsular province of
Africa (see above, chap. 5, § 18).

<span id="fn_2968"></span>[383:2969](2010304.htm#fr_2968.md) <span
id="iii.xvi.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.vii-p8"></span> i.e. the Church of the entire
province; for the bishop of Carthage was the metropolitan of the
province, and indeed was the leading bishop of North Africa, and thus
recognized as in some sense at the head of the church of that entire
section of country.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](2010305.md)
