[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010037)  [Next](2010039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI.—</span>*Testimonies in Regard to
John the Baptist and Christ.*

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.xi-p2.1"></span>Not</span> long after this John the Baptist
was beheaded by the younger Herod, <span
id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) as is stated in the Gospels. <span
id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) Josephus also records the same
fact, <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) making mention of
Herodias <span id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) by name, and stating
that, although she was the wife of his brother, Herod made her his own
wife after divorcing his former lawful wife, who was the daughter of
Aretas, <span id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) king of Petra, and
separating Herodias from her husband while he was still alive.

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p8"></span>2. It was on her account also that he
slew John, and waged war with Aretas, because of the disgrace inflicted
on the daughter of the latter. Josephus relates that in this war, when
they came to battle, Herod’s entire army was destroyed, <span
id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191) and that he suffered this calamity on
account of his crime against John.

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p10"></span>3. The same Josephus confesses in this
account that John the Baptist was an exceedingly righteous man, and thus
agrees with the things written of him in the Gospels. He records also
that Herod lost his kingdom on account of <span id="page_98">p.
98</span> <span id="iii.vi.xi-Page_98"></span>the same Herodias, and
that he was driven into banishment with her, and condemned to live at
Vienne in Gaul. <span id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192)

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p12"></span>4. He relates these things in the
eighteenth book of the Antiquities, where he writes of John in the
following words: <span id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193) “It seemed to
some of the Jews that the army of Herod was destroyed by God, who most
justly avenged John called the Baptist.

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p14"></span>5. For Herod slew him, a good man and
one who exhorted the Jews to come and receive baptism, practicing virtue
and exercising righteousness toward each other and toward God; for
baptism would appear acceptable unto Him when they employed it, not for
the remission of certain sins, but for the purification of the body, as
the soul had been already purified in righteousness.

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p15"></span>6. And when others gathered about him
(for they found much pleasure in listening to his words), Herod feared
that his great influence might lead to some sedition, for they appeared
ready to do whatever he might advise. He therefore considered it much
better, before any new thing should be done under John’s influence, to
anticipate it by slaying him, than to repent after revolution had come,
and when he found himself in the midst of difficulties. <span
id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194) On account of Herod’s suspicion John
was sent in bonds to the above-mentioned citadel of Machæra, <span
id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195) and there slain.”

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p18"></span>7. After relating these things
concerning John, he makes mention of our Saviour in the same work, in
the following words: <span id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) “And there
lived at that time Jesus, a wise man, if indeed it be proper to call him
a man. For he was a doer of wonderful works, and a teacher of such men
as receive the truth in gladness. And he attached to himself many of the
Jews, and many also of the Greeks. He was the Christ.

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p21"></span>8. When Pilate, on the accusation of our
principal men, condemned him to the cross, those who had loved him in
the beginning did not cease loving him. For he appeared unto them again
alive on the third day, the divine prophets having told these and
countless other wonderful things concerning him. Moreover, the race of
Christians, named after him, continues down to the present day.”

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p22"></span>9. Since an historian, who is one of the
Hebrews themselves, has recorded in his work these things concerning
John the Baptist and our Saviour, what excuse is there left for not
convicting them of being destitute of all shame, who have forged the
acts against them? <span id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) But let this
suffice here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_186"></span>[97:187](2010038.htm#fr_186) <span
id="iii.vi.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p3"></span> Herod Antipas.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[97:188](2010038.htm#fr_187) <span
id="iii.vi.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p4"></span> <span id="iii.vi.xi-p4.1"></span>Matt.
xiv. 1–12; [Mark vi. 17](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#017)<span
id="iii.vi.xi-p4.2"></span> sq.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[97:189](2010038.htm#fr_188) <span
id="iii.vi.xi-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p5"></span> Josephus, *Ant.* XVIII. 5. 2.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[97:190](2010038.htm#fr_189) <span
id="iii.vi.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p6"></span> Herodias, a daughter of Aristobulus and
grand-daughter of Herod the Great, first married Herod Philip (whom
Josephus calls Herod, and whom the Gospels call Philip), a son of Herod
the Great, and therefore her uncle, who seems to have occupied a private
station. Afterwards, leaving him during his lifetime, she married
another uncle, Herod Antipas the Tetrarch. When her husband, Antipas,
was banished to Gaul she voluntarily shared his banishment and died
there. Her character is familiar from the accounts of the New Testament.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[97:191](2010038.htm#fr_190) <span
id="iii.vi.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p7"></span> Aretas Æneas is identical with the
Aretas mentioned in <span id="iii.vi.xi-p7.1"></span>[2 Cor. xi.
32](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#032)<span id="iii.vi.xi-p7.2"></span>,
in connection with Paul’s flight from Jerusalem (cf. Wieseler, *Chron.
des ap. Zeitalters*, p. 142 and 167 sq.). He was king of Arabia Nabatæa,
whose capital was the famous rock city, Petra, which gave its name to
the whole country, which was in consequence commonly called Arabia
Petræa.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[97:192](2010038.htm#fr_191) <span
id="iii.vi.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p9"></span> In this emergency Herod appealed to
Tiberius, with whom he was a favorite, and the emperor commanded
Vitellius, the governor of Syria, to proceed against Aretas. The death
of Tiberius interrupted operations, and under Caligula friendship
existed between Aretas and the Romans.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[98:193](2010038.htm#fr_192) <span
id="iii.vi.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p11"></span> Josephus gives the account of Herod’s
banishment in his *Antiquities* XVIII. 7. 2, but names Lyons instead of
Vienne as the place of his exile. Eusebius here confounds the fate of
Herod with that of Archelaus, who was banished to Vienne (see above,
chap. 9, note 1).

<span id="fn_193"></span>[98:194](2010038.htm#fr_193) <span
id="iii.vi.xi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p13"></span> *Ant.*XVIII. 5. 2. This passage upon
John the Baptist is referred to by Origen in his *Contra Cels.* I. 47,
and is found in all our <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.xi-p13.1"></span>mss.</span> of Josephus. It is almost
universally admitted to be genuine, and there is no good reason to doubt
that it is, for such a dispassionate and strictly impartial account of
John could hardly have been written by a Christian interpolator.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[98:195](2010038.htm#fr_194) <span
id="iii.vi.xi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p16"></span> Josephus differs with the Evangelists
as to the reason for John’s imprisonment, but the accounts of the latter
bear throughout the stamp of more direct and accurate knowledge than
that of Josephus. Ewald remarks with truth, “When Josephus, however,
gives as the cause of John’s execution only the Tetrarch’s general fear
of popular outbreaks, one can see that he no longer had perfect
recollection of the matter. The account of Mark is far more exact and
instructive.”

<span id="fn_195"></span>[98:196](2010038.htm#fr_195) <span
id="iii.vi.xi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p17"></span> Machæra was an important fortress lying
east of the northern end of the Dead Sea. It was the same fortress to
which the daughter of Aretas had retired when Herod formed the design of
marrying Herodias; and the word “aforesaid” refers to Josephus’ mention
of it in that connection in the previous paragraph.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[98:197](2010038.htm#fr_196) <span
id="iii.vi.xi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p19"></span> *Ant.*XVIII. 3. 3. This account occurs
before that of John the Baptist, not after it. It is found in all our
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.vi.xi-p19.1"></span>mss.</span> of
Josephus, and was considered genuine until the sixteenth century, but
since then has been constantly disputed. Four opinions are held in
regard to it; (1) It is entirely genuine. This view has at present few
supporters, and is absolutely untenable. A Christian hand is
unmistakably apparent,—if not throughout, certainly in many parts; and
the silence in regard to it of all Christian writers until the time of
Eusebius is fatal to its existence in the original text. Origen, for
instance, who mentions Josephus’ testimony to John the Baptist in
*Contra Cels.* I. 47, betrays no knowledge of this passage in regard to
Christ. (2) It is entirely spurious. Such writers as Hase, Keim, and
Schürer adopt this view. (3) It is partly genuine and partly
interpolated. This opinion has, perhaps, the most defenders, among them
Gieseler, Weizsäcker, Renan, Edersheim, and Schaff. (4) It has been
changed from a bitter Jewish calumny of Christ to a Christian eulogy of
him. This is Ewald’s view. The second opinion seems to me the correct
one. The third I regard as untenable, for the reason that after the
obviously Christian passages are omitted there remains almost nothing;
and it seems inconceivable that Josephus should have given so colorless
a report of one whom the Jews regarded with such enmity, if he mentioned
him at all. The fourth view might be possible, and is more natural than
the third; but it seems as if some trace of the original calumny would
have survived somewhere, had it ever existed. To me, however, the
decisive argument is the decided break which the passage makes in the
context; §2 gives the account of a sedition of the Jews, and §4 opens
with the words, “About the same time also another sad calamity put the
Jews into disorder”; while §3, containing the account of Christ, gives
no hint of sedition or disorder among the Jews.

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p20"></span>It has been suggested that Eusebius
himself, who is the first one to quote this passage, introduced it into
the text of Josephus. This is possible, but there is no reason to
suppose it true, for it is contrary to Eusebius’ general reputation for
honesty, and the manner in which he introduces the quotation both here
and in his *Dem. Evang.* III. 5 certainly bears every mark of innocence;
and he would scarcely have dared to insert so important an account in
his *History* had it not existed in at least some <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.vi.xi-p20.1"></span>mss.</span> of Josephus.
We may be confident that the interpolation must have been made in the
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.vi.xi-p20.2"></span>mss.</span> of
Josephus before it appeared in the *History.* For a brief summary of the
various views upon the subject, see Schaff’s *Church History,* Vol. I.
p. 9 sq., and Edersheim’s article on Josephus in Smith and Wace’s *Dict.
of Christian Biography*. Compare also Heinichen’s *Excursus* upon the
passage in his edition of Eusebius, Vol. III. p. 623–654.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[98:198](2010038.htm#fr_197) <span
id="iii.vi.xi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p23"></span> See chap. 9, note 8, above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](2010039)
