[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010580)  [Next](2010582.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lxii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lxii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.lxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXII</span>.—*Constantine’s
Letter to the Council, depreciating the Removal of Eusebius from
Cæsarea.*

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lxii-p2"></span>“<span class="c13"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.lxii-p2.1"></span>Victor Constantinus, Maximus
Augustus</span>, to Theodotus, Theodorus, Narcissus, Aëtius, Alpheus,
and the rest of the bishops who are at Antioch.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lxii-p3"></span>“I have perused the letters written
by your Prudences, and highly approve of the wise resolution of your
colleague in the ministry, Eusebius. Having, moreover, been informed of
the circumstances of the case, partly by your letters, partly by those
of our illustrious counts, <span id="fr_3300"></span>[3301](#fn_3300.md)
Acacius and Strategius, after sufficient investigation I have written to
the people of Antioch, suggesting the course which will be at once
pleasing to God and advantageous for the Church. A copy of this I have
ordered to be subjoined to this present letter, in order that ye
yourselves may know what I thought fit, as an advocate of the cause of
justice, to write to that people: since I find in your letter this
proposal, that, in consonance with the choice of the people, sanctioned
by your own desire, Eusebius the holy bishop of Cæsarea should preside
over and take the charge of the church at Antioch. Now the letters of
Eusebius himself on this subject appeared to be strictly accordant with
the order prescribed by the Church. Nevertheless it is expedient that
your Prudences should be made acquainted with my opinion also. For I am
informed that Euphronius the presbyter, who is a citizen of Cæsarea in
Cappadocia, and George of Arethusa, likewise a presbyter, and appointed
to that office by Alexander at Alexandria, <span
id="fr_3301"></span>[3302](#fn_3301.md) are men of tried faith. It was
right, therefore, to intimate to your Prudences, that in proposing these
men and any others whom you may deem worthy the episcopal dignity, you
should decide this question in a manner conformable to the tradition of
the apostles. For in that case, your Prudences will be able, according
to the rule of the Church and apostolic tradition, to direct this
election in the manner which true ecclesiastical discipline shall
prescribe. God preserve you, beloved brethren!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3300"></span>[538:3301](2010581.htm#fr_3300.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.lxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lxii-p4"></span> The word has thus generally been
rendered by *Bag.,* and does probably refer to their official title,
although in this case and occasionally he translates “friends.”

<span id="fn_3301"></span>[538:3302](2010581.htm#fr_3301.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.lxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lxii-p5"></span> \[George (afterwards bishop of
Laodicea) appears to have been degraded from the office of presbyter on
the ground of impiety, by the same bishop who had ordained him. Both
George and Euphronius were of the Arian party, of which fact it is
possible that Constantine was ignorant.—*Bag.*\] Georgius was at one
time or another Arian, semi-Arian, and Anomoean, and is said to have
been called by Athanasius “the most wicked of all the Arians” (Venables
in Smith and Wace, *Dict.* 2. 637). He was constantly pitted against
Eustathius, which accounts for his appearance at this time. Euphronius
was the one chosen at this time. Compare Bennett, *Euphronius*, in Smith
and Wace, *Dict.* 2. 297.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXIII](2010582.md)
