[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010017)  [Next](2010019.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p1"></span> §2. *Catalogue of his Works*.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p2"></span>There is no absolutely complete
edition of Eusebius’ extant works. The only one which can lay claim even
to relative completeness is that of Migne: *Eusebii Pamphili, Cæsareæ
Palestinæ Episcopi, Opera omnia quæ extant, curis variorum, nempe:
Henrici Valesii, Francisci Vigeri, Bernardi Montfauconii, Card. Angelo
Maii edita; collegit et denuo recognovit J. P. Migne.* Par. 1857. 6
vols. (tom. XIX.–XXIV. of Migne’s *Patrologia Græca*). This edition
omits the works which are extant only in Syriac versions, also the
*Topica*, and some brief but important Greek fragments (among them the
epistles to Alexander and Euphration). The edition, however, is
invaluable and cannot be dispensed with. References to it (under the
simple title *Opera*) will be given below in connection with those works
which it contains. Many of Eusebius’ writings, especially the
historical, have been published separately. Such editions will be
mentioned in their proper place in the Catalogue.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p3"></span>More or less incomplete lists of our
author’s writings are given by Jerome (*De vir. ill*. 87); by Nicephorus
Callistus (*H. E*. VI. 37); by Ebedjesu (in Assemani’s *Bibl. Orient*.
III. p. 18 sq.); by Photius (*Bibl*. 9–13, 27, 39, 127); and by Suidas
(who simply copies the Greek version of Jerome). Among modern works all
the lives of Eusebius referred to in the previous chapter give more or
less extended catalogues of his writings. In addition to the works
mentioned there, valuable lists are also found in Lardner’s
*Credibility*, Part II chap. 72, and especially in Fabricius’ *Bibl.
Græca* (ed. 1714), vol. VI. p. 30 sq.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p4"></span>The writings of Eusebius that are
known to us, extant and non-extant, may be classified for convenience’
sake under the following heads: I. Historical. II. Apologetic. III.
Polemic. IV. Dogmatic. V. Critical and Exegetical. VI. Biblical
Dictionaries. VII. Orations. VIII. Epistles. IX. Spurious or doubtful
works. The classification is necessarily somewhat artificial, and claims
to be neither exhaustive nor exclusive. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md)

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p6"></span>I. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p6.1"></span>Historical Works</span>.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p7"></span>*Life of Pamphilus* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p7.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p7.2"></span>τοῦ Παμφίλου βίου
ἀναγραφή</span>; see *H. E*. VI. 32). Eusebius himself refers to this
work in four passages (*H. E*. VI. 32, VII. 32, VIII. 13, and *Mart.
Pal*. c. 11). In the last he informs us that it consisted of three
books. The work is mentioned also more than once by Jerome (*De vir.
ill*. 81; *Ep. ad Marcellam,* Migne’s ed. *Ep*. 34; *Contra Ruf*. I. 9),
who speaks of it in terms of praise, and in the last passage gives a
brief extract from the third book, which is, so far as known, the only
extant fragment of the work. The date of its composition can be fixed
within comparatively narrow limits. It must of course have been written
before the shorter recension of the *Martyrs of Palestine*, which
contains a reference to it (on its relation to the <span id="page_29">p.
29</span> <span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-Page_29"></span>longer recension,
which does not mention it, see below, p. 30), and also before the
*History,* (i.e. as early as 313 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p7.3"></span>a.d.</span> (?), see below, p. 45). On
the other hand, it was written after Pamphilus’ death (see *H. E*. VII.
32, 25), which occurred in 310.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p8"></span>*Martyrs of Palestine* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p8.1"></span>περὶ τῶν ἐν
Παλαιστίνῃ μαρτυρησ€ντων</span>). This work is extant in two recensions,
a longer and a shorter. The longer has been preserved entire only in a
Syriac version, which was published, with English translation and notes,
by Cureton in 1861. A fragment of the original Greek of this work as
preserved by Simon Metaphrastes had previously been published by
Papebroch in the *Acta Sanctorum* (June, tom. I. p. 64; reprinted by
Fabricius, *Hippolytus,* II. p. 217), but had been erroneously regarded
as an extract from Eusebius’ *Life of Pamphilus*. Cureton’s publication
of the Syriac version of the *Martyrs of Palestine* showed that it was a
part of the original of that work. There are extant also, in Latin, the
*Acts of St. Procopius*, which were published by Valesius (in his
edition of Eusebius’ *Hist. Eccles*. in a note on the first chapter of
the *Mart. Pal*.; reprinted by Cureton, *Mart. Pal*. p. 50 sq.).
Moreover, according to Cureton, Assemani’s *Acta SS. Martyrum Orient. et
Occidentalium*, part II. p. 169 sq. (Romæ, 1748) contains another Syriac
version of considerable portions of this same work. The Syriac version
published by Cureton was made within less than a century after the
composition of the original work (the manuscript of it dates from 411
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p8.2"></span>a.d.</span>; see
Cureton, *ib*., preface, p. i.), perhaps within a few years after it,
and there is every reason to suppose that it represents that original
with considerable exactness. That Eusebius himself was the author of the
original cannot be doubted. In addition to this longer recension there
is extant in Greek a shorter form of the same work which is found
attached to the *Ecclesiastical History* in most <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p8.3"></span>mss.</span> of the latter. In some of
them it is placed between the eighth and ninth books, in others at the
close of the tenth book, while one <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p8.4"></span>ms.</span> inserts it in the middle of
VIII. 13. In some of the most important <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p8.5"></span>mss.</span> it is wanting entirely, as
likewise in the translation of Rufinus, and, according to Lightfoot, in
the Syriac version of the *History*. Most editions of Eusebius’
*History* print it at the close of the eighth book. Migne gives it
separately in *Opera*, II. 1457 sq. In the present volume the
translation of it is given as an appendix to the eighth book, on p. 342
sq.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p9"></span>There can be no doubt that the
shorter form is younger than the longer. The mention of the *Life of
Pamphilus* which is contained in the shorter, but is not found in the
corresponding passage of the longer form would seem to indicate that the
former was a remodeling of the latter rather than the latter of the
former (see below, p. 30). Moreover, as Cureton and Lightfoot both point
out, the difference between the two works both in substance and in
method is such as to make it clear that the shorter form is a revised
abridgment of the longer. That Eusebius himself was the author of the
shorter as well as of the longer form is shown by the fact that not only
in the passages common to both recensions, but also in those peculiar to
the shorter one, the author speaks in the same person and as an
eye-witness of many of the events which he records. And still further,
in Chap. 11 he speaks of having himself written the *Life of Pamphilus*
in three books, a notice which is wanting in the longer form and
therefore must emanate from the hand of the author of the shorter. It is
interesting to inquire after Eusebius’ motive in publishing an abridged
edition of this work. Cureton supposes that he condensed it simply for
the purpose of inserting it in the second edition of his *History*.
Lightfoot, on the other hand, suggests that it may have formed “part of
a larger work, in which the sufferings of the martyrs were set off
against the deaths of the persecutors,” and he is inclined to see in the
brief appendix to the eighth book of the *History* (translated below on
p. 340) “a fragment of the second part of the treatise of which the
*Martyrs of Palestine* in the shorter recension formed the first.” The
suggestion is, to say the least, very plausible. If it be true, the
attachment of the shorter form of the *Martyrs of Palestine* to the
*Ecclesiastical History* was probably the work, not of Eusebius himself,
but of some copyist or copyists, and the disagreement among the various
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p9.1"></span>mss.</span> as to
its position in the *History* is more easily explained on this
supposition than on Cureton’s theory that it was attached to a later
edition of the latter work by Eusebius himself.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p10"></span><span id="page_30">p. 30</span>
<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-Page_30"></span>The date at which the *Martyrs
of Palestine* was composed cannot be determined with certainty. It was
at any rate not published until after the first nine books of the
*Ecclesiastical History* (i.e. not before 313, see below, p. 45), for it
is referred to as a projected work in *H. E*. VIII. 13. 7. On the other
hand, the accounts contained in the longer recension bear many marks of
having been composed on the spot, while the impressions left by the
martyrdoms witnessed by the author were still fresh upon him. Moreover,
it is noticeable that in connection with the account of Pamphilus’
martyrdom, given in the shorter recension, reference is made to the
*Life of Pamphilus* as a book already published, while in the
corresponding account in the longer recension no such book is referred
to. This would seem to indicate that the *Life of Pamphilus* was written
after the longer, but before the shorter recension of the *Martyrs*. But
on the other hand the *Life* was written before the *Ecclesiastical
History* (see above, p. 29), and consequently before the publication of
either recension of the *Martyrs*. May it not be that the accounts of
the various martyrdoms were written, at least some of them, during the
persecution, but that they were not arranged, completed, and published
until 313, or later? If this be admitted we may suppose that the account
of Pamphilus’ martyrdom was written soon after his death and before the
*Life* was begun. When it was later embodied with the other accounts in
the one work *On the Martyrs of Palestine* it may have been left just as
it was, and it may not have occurred to the author to insert a reference
to the *Life of Pamphilus* which had meanwhile been published. But when
he came to abridge and in part rewrite for a new edition the accounts of
the various martyrdoms contained in the work *On Martyrs* he would quite
naturally refer the reader to the *Life* for fuller particulars.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p11"></span>If we then suppose that the greater
part of the longer recension of the *Martyrs* was already complete
before the end of the persecution, it is natural to conclude that the
whole work was published at an early date, probably as soon as possible
after the first edition of the *History*. How much later the abridgment
was made we cannot tell. <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md)

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p13"></span>The differences between the two
recensions lie chiefly in the greater fullness of detail on the part of
the longer one. The arrangement and general mode of treatment is the
same in both. They contain accounts of the Martyrs that suffered in
Palestine during the years 303–310, most of whom Eusebius himself saw.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p14"></span>*Collection of Ancient Martyrdoms*
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p14.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p14.2"></span>ρχαίων μαρτυρίων
συναγωγή</span>). This work is mentioned by Eusebius in his *H. E.* IV.
15, V. præf., 4, 21. These notices indicate that it was not an original
<span id="page_31">p. 31</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-Page_31"></span>composition, but simply a compilation;
a collection of extant accounts of martyrdoms which had taken place
before Eusebius’ day. The work is no longer extant, but the accounts of
the martyrdom of Pamphilus and others at Smyrna, of the persecution in
Lyons and Vienne, and of the defense of Apollonius in Rome, which
Eusebius inserts in his *Ecclesiastical History* (IV. 15, V. 1, V. 21),
are taken, as he informs us, from this collection. As to the time of
compilation, we can say only that it antedates the composition of the
earlier books of the *History* (on whose date, see below, p. 45).

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p15"></span>*Chronicle* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p15.1"></span>χρονικοὶ
κανόνες</span>). Eusebius refers to this work in his *Church History*
(I. 1), in his *Præparatio Evang*. X. 9, and at the beginning of his
*Eclogæ propheticæ*. It is divided into two books, the first of which
consists of an epitome of universal history drawn from various sources,
the second of chronological tables, which “exhibit in parallel columns
the succession of the rulers of different nations in such a way that the
reader can see at a glance with whom any given monarch was
contemporary.” The tables “are accompanied by notes, marking the years
of some of the more remarkable historical events, these notes also
constituting an epitome of history.” Eusebius was not the first
Christian writer to compose a work on universal chronology. Julius
Africanus had published a similar work early in the third century, and
from that Eusebius drew his model and a large part of the material for
his own work. At the same time his *Chronicle* is more than a simple
revision of Africanus’ work, and contains the result of much independent
investigation on his own part. The work of Africanus is no longer
extant, and that of Eusebius was likewise lost for a great many
centuries, being superseded by a revised Latin edition, issued by
Jerome. Jerome’s edition, which comprises only the second book of
Eusebius’ *Chronicle*, is a translation of the original work, enlarged
by notices taken from various writers concerning human history, and
containing a continuation of the chronology down to his own time. This,
together with numerous Greek fragments preserved by various ancient
writers, constituted our only source for a knowledge of the original
work, until late in the last century an Armenian translation of the
whole work was discovered and published in two volumes by J. B. Aucher:
Venice, 1818. The Armenian translation contains a great many errors and
not a few *lacunæ*, but it is our most valuable source for a knowledge
of the original work.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p16"></span>The aim of the *Chronicle* was,
above all, apologetic, the author wishing to prove by means of it that
the Jewish religion, of which the Christian was the legitimate
continuation, was older than the oldest of heathen cults, and thus
deprive pagan opponents of their taunt of novelty, so commonly hurled
against Christianity. As early as the second century, the Christian
apologists had emphasized the antiquity of Judaism; but Julius Africanus
was the first to devote to the matter scientific study, and it was with
the same idea that Eusebius followed in his footsteps. The *Chronology*,
in spite of its errors, is invaluable for the light it throws on many
otherwise dark periods of history, and for the numerous extracts it
contains from works no longer extant.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p17"></span>There are good and sufficient
reasons (as is pointed out by Salmon in his article in Smith and Wace’s
*Dictionary of Christian Biography*) for supposing that two editions of
the *Chronicle* were published by Eusebius. But two of these reasons
need be stated here: first, the chronology of the Armenian version
differs from that of Jerome’s edition in many important particulars,
divergencies which can be satisfactorily accounted for only on the
supposition of a difference in the sources from which they respectively
drew; secondly, Jerome states directly that the work was brought down to
the *vicennalia* of Constantine,—that is, to the year 325,—but the
*Chronicle* is referred to as an already published work in the *Eclogæ
propheticæ* (I. 1), and in the *Præparatio Evang*. (X. 9), both of which
were written before 313. We may conclude, then, that a first edition of
the work was published during, or more probably before, the great
persecution, and that a second and revised edition was issued probably
in 325, or soon thereafter.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p18"></span>For further particulars in regard to
the *Chronicle* see especially the article of Salmon already referred
to. The work has been issued separately a great many times. We may refer
here to the edition of Scaliger, which was published in 1606 (2d ed.
1658), in which he attempted <span id="page_32">p. 32</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-Page_32"></span>to restore the Greek text from the
fragments of Syncellus and other ancient writers, and to the new edition
of Mai, which was printed in 1833 in his *Scriptorum veterum nova
collectio*, Tom. VIII., and reprinted by Migne, *Eusebii Opera*, I.
99–598. The best and most recent edition, however, and the one which
supersedes all earlier editions, is that of Alfred Schoene, in two
volumes: Berlin, 1875 and 1866.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p19"></span>*Ecclesiastical History* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p19.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p19.2"></span>κκλησιαστικὴ
ἱστορία</span>). For a discussion of this work see below, p. 45 sq.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p20"></span>*Life of Constantine* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p20.1"></span>εἰς τὸν βίον τοῦ
μακαρίου Κωνσταντίνου τοῦ βασιλέως</span>). For particulars in regard to
this work, see the prolegomena of Dr. Richardson, on pp. 466–469 sq., of
this volume.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p21"></span>II. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p21.1"></span>Apologetic Works.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p22"></span>*Against Hierocles* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p22.1"></span>πρὸς τοὺς ὑπὲρ
᾽Απολλωνίου τοῦ τυανέως ῾Ιεροκλέους λόγους</span>, as Photius calls it
in his *Bibl*. 39). Hierocles was governor of Bithynia during the early
years of the Diocletian persecution, and afterwards governor of Egypt.
In both places he treated the Christians with great severity, carrying
out the edicts of the emperors to the fullest extent, and even making
use of the most terrible and loathsome forms of persecution (see
Lactantius, *De Mort. Pers*. 16, and Eusebius, *Mart. Pal*. 5, Cureton’s
ed. p. 18). He was at the same time a Neo-Platonic philosopher,
exceedingly well versed in the Scriptures and doctrines of the
Christians. In a work against the Christians entitled <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p22.2"></span>λόγος φιλαλήθης πρὸς
τοὺς χριστιανούς</span>, he brought forward many scriptural difficulties
and alleged contradictions, and also instituted a comparison between
Christ and Apollonius of Tyana, with the intention of disparaging the
former. Eusebius feels called upon to answer the work, but confines
himself entirely to that part of it which concerned Christ and
Apollonius, leaving to some future time a refutation of the remainder of
the work, which indeed, he says, as a mere reproduction of the arguments
of Celsus, had been already virtually answered by Origen (see chap. 1).
Eusebius admits that Apollonius was a good man, but refuses to concede
that he was anything more, or that he can be compared with Christ. He
endeavors to show that the account of Apollonius given by Philostratus
is full of contradictions and does not rest upon trustworthy evidence.
The tone of the book is mild, and the arguments in the main sound and
well presented. It is impossible to fix the date of the work with any
degree of certainty. Valesius assigns it to the later years of the
persecution, when Eusebius visited Egypt; Stein says that it may have
been written about 312 or 313, or even earlier; while Lightfoot simply
remarks, “it was probably one of the earliest works of Eusebius.” There
is no ground for putting it at one time rather than another except the
intrinsic probability that it was written soon after the work to which
it was intended to be a reply. In fact, had a number of years elapsed
after the publication of Hierocles’ attack, Eusebius would doubtless, if
writing against it at all, have given a fuller and more complete
refutation of it, such as he suggests in the first chapter that he may
yet give. The work of Hierocles, meanwhile, must have been written at
any rate some time before the end of the persecution, for it is
mentioned in Lactantius’ *Div. Inst*. V. 2.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p23"></span>Eusebius’ work has been published by
Gaisford: *Eusebii Pamph. contra Hieroclem et Marcellum libri*, Oxon.
1852; and also in various editions of the works of Philostratus. Migne,
*Opera* IV. 795 sq., reprints it from Olearius’ edition of Philostratus’
works (Lips. 1709).

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p24"></span>*Against Porphyry* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p24.1"></span>κατὰ
Πορφυρίον</span>). Porphyry, the celebrated Neo-Platonic philosopher,
regarded by the early Fathers as the bitterest and most dangerous enemy
of the Church, wrote toward the end of the third century a work against
Christianity in fifteen books, which was looked upon as the most
powerful attack that had ever been made, and which called forth
refutations from some of the greatest Fathers of the age: from Methodius
of Tyre, Eusebius of Cæsarea, and Apollinaris of Laodicea; and even as
late as the end of the fourth or beginning of the fifth century the
historian Philostorgius thought it necessary to write another reply to
it (see his *H. E.* X. 10). Porphyry’s work is no longer extant, but the
fragments of it which remain show us that it was both learned and
skillful. He made much of the alleged contra<span id="page_33">p.
33</span> <span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-Page_33"></span>dictions in the Gospel
records, and suggested difficulties which are still favorite weapons in
the hands of skeptics. Like the work of Porphyry, and all the other
refutations of it, the Apology of Eusebius has entirely perished. It is
mentioned by Jerome (*de vir. ill*. 81 and *Ep. ad Magnum*, §3, Migne’s
ed. *Ep*. 70), by Socrates (*H. E.* III. 23), and by Philostorgius (*H.
E.* VIII. 14). There is some dispute as to the number of books it
contained. In his *Ep. ad Magn*. Jerome says that “Eusebius et
Apollinaris viginti quinque, et triginta volumina condiderunt,” which
implies that it was composed of twenty-five books; while in his *de ver.
ill*. 81, he speaks of thirty books, of which he had seen only twenty.
Vallarsi says, however, that all his <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p24.2"></span>mss.</span> agree in reading
“twenty-five” instead of “thirty” in the latter passage, so that it
would seem that the vulgar text is incorrect.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p25"></span>It is impossible to form an accurate
notion of the nature and quality of Eusebius’ refutation. Socrates
speaks of it in terms of moderate praise (“which \[i.e. the work of
Porphyry\] has been ably answered by Eusebius”), and Jerome does the
same in his *Ep. ad Magnum* (“Alteri \[i.e. Porphyry\] Methodius,
Eusebius, et Apollinaris fortissime responderunt”). At the same time the
fact that Apollinaris and others still thought it necessary to write
against Porphyry would seem to show that Eusebius’ refutation was not
entirely satisfactory. In truth, Jerome (*Ep. ad Pammachium et Oceanum*,
§2, Migne’s ed. *Ep*. 84) appears to rank the work of Apollinaris above
that of Eusebius, and Philostorgius expressly states that the former far
surpassed the latter (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p25.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p25.2"></span>πὶ πολὺ κρατεῖν ἠγωνισμένων ᾽Ευσεβί&
251· κατ᾽ αὐτοῦ</span>). The date of Eusebius’ work cannot be
determined. The fact that he never refers to it, although he mentions
the work of Porphyry a number of times, has been urged by Valesius and
others as proof that he did not write it until after 325 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p25.3"></span>a.d.</span>; but it is
quite possible to explain his silence, as Lardner does, by supposing
that his work was written in his earlier years, and that afterward he
felt its inferiority and did not care to mention it. It seems, in fact,
not unlikely that he wrote it as early, or even earlier than his work
against Hierocles, at any rate before his attention was occupied with
the Arian controversy and questions connected with it.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p26"></span>*On the Numerous Progeny of the
Ancients* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p26.1"></span>περὶ τῆς τῶν παλαιῶν ἀνδρῶν
πολυπαιδίας</span>). This work is mentioned by Eusebius in his *Præp.
Evang*. VII. 8. 20 (Migne, *Opera*, III. 525), but by no one else,
unless it be the book to which Basil refers in his *De Spir. Sancto*,
29, as *Difficulties respecting the Polygamy of the Ancients*. The work
is no longer extant, but we can gather from the connection in which it
is mentioned in the *Præparatio*, that it aimed at accounting for the
polygamy of the Patriarchs and reconciling it with the ascetic ideal of
the Christian life which prevailed in the Church of Eusebius’ lifetime.
It would therefore seem to have been written with an apologetic purpose.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p27"></span>*Præparatio Evangelica* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p27.1"></span>προπαρασκευὴ
εὐαγγελική</span>) and *Demonstratio Evangelica* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p27.2"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p27.3"></span>Ευαγγελικὴ
ἀπόδειξις</span>). These two treatises together constitute Eusebius’
greatest apologetic work. The former is directed against heathen, and
aims to show that the Christians are justified in accepting the sacred
books of the Hebrews and in rejecting the religion and philosophy of the
Greeks. The latter endeavors to prove from the sacred books of the
Hebrews themselves that the Christians do right in going beyond the
Jews, in accepting Jesus as their Messiah, and in adopting another mode
of life. The former is therefore in a way a preparation for the latter,
and the two together constitute a defense of Christianity against all
the world, Jews as well as heathen. In grandeur of conception, in
comprehensiveness of treatment, and in breadth of learning, this apology
undoubtedly surpasses all other apologetic works of antiquity. Lightfoot
justly says, “This great apologetic work exhibits the same merits and
defects which we find elsewhere in Eusebius. There is the same greatness
of conception marred by the same inadequacy of execution, the same
profusion of learning combined with the same inability to control his
materials, which we have seen in his *History*. The divisions are not
kept distinct; the topics start up unexpectedly and out of season. But
with all its faults this is probably the most important apologetic work
of the early Church. It necessarily lacks the historical interest of the
apologetic <span id="page_34">p. 34</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-Page_34"></span>writings of the second century; it
falls far short of the thoughtfulness and penetration which give a
permanent value to Origen’s treatise against Celsus as a defense of the
faith; it lags behind the Latin apologists in rhetorical vigor and
expression. But the forcible and true conceptions which it exhibits from
time to time, more especially bearing on the theme which may be briefly
designated ‘God in history,’ arrest our attention now, and must have
impressed his contemporaries still more strongly; while in learning and
comprehensiveness it is without a rival.” The wide acquaintance with
classical literature exhibited by Eusebius in the *Præparatio* is very
remarkable. Many writers are referred to whose names are known to us
from no other source, and many extracts are given which constitute our
only fragments of works otherwise totally lost. The *Præparatio* thus
does for classical much what the *History* does for Christian
literature.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p28"></span>A very satisfactory summary of the
contents of the *Præparatio* is given at the beginning of the fifteenth
book. In the first, second, and third books, the author exposes the
absurdities of heathen mythology, and attacks the allegorical theology
of the Neo-Platonists; in the fourth and fifth books he discusses the
heathen oracles; in the sixth he refutes the doctrine of fate; in the
seventh he passes over to the Hebrews, devoting the next seven books to
an exposition of the excellence of their system, and to a demonstration
of the proposition that Moses and the prophets lived before the greatest
Greek writers, and that the latter drew their knowledge from the former;
in the fourteenth and fifteenth books he exposes the contradictions
among Greek philosophers and the vital errors in their systems,
especially in that of the Peripatetics. The *Præparatio* is complete in
fifteen books, all of which are still extant.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p29"></span>The *Demonstratio* consisted
originally of twenty books (see Jerome’s *de vir. ill*. 81, and Photius’
*Bibl*. 10). Of these only ten are extant, and even in the time of
Nicephores Callistus no more were known, for he gives the number of the
books as ten (*H. E.* VI. 37). There exists also a fragment of the
fifteenth book, which was discovered and printed by Mai (*Script. vet.
nova coll*. I. 2, p. 173). In the first book, which is introductory,
Eusebius shows why the Christians pursue a mode of life different from
that of the Jews, drawing a distinction between Hebraism, the religion
of all pious men from the beginning, and Judaism, the special system of
the Jews, and pointing out that Christianity is a continuation of the
former, but a rejection of the latter, which as temporary has passed
away. In the second book he shows that the calling of the Gentiles and
the repudiation of the Jews are foretold in Scripture. In books three to
nine he discusses the humanity, divinity, incarnation, and earthly life
of the Saviour, showing that all were revealed in the prophets. In the
remainder of the work we may assume that the same general plan was
followed, and that Christ’s death, resurrection, and ascension, and the
spread of his Church, were the subjects discussed in this as in nearly
all works of the kind.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p30"></span>There is much dispute as to the date
of these two works. Stroth and Cave place them after the Council of
Nicæa, while Valesius, Lightfoot, and others, assign them to the
ante-Nicene period. In two passages in the *History* Eusebius has been
commonly supposed to refer to the *Demonstratio* (*H. E*. I. 2 and 6),
but it is probable that the first, and quite likely the second also,
refers to the *Eclogæ Proph*. We can, therefore, base no argument upon
those passages. But in *Præp. Evang*. XII. 10 (*Opera*, III. 969) there
is a reference to the persecution, which seems clearly to imply that it
was still continuing; and in the *Demonstratio* (III. 5 and IV. 6;
*Opera*, IV. 213 and 307), which was written after the *Præparatio*, are
still more distinct indications of the continuance of the persecution.
On the other hand, in V. 3 and VI. 20 (*Opera*, IV. 364 and 474) there
are passages which imply that the persecution has come to an end. It
seems necessary then to conclude, with Lightfoot, that the
*Demonstratio* was begun during the persecution, but not completed until
peace had been established. The *Præparatio*, which was completed before
the *Demonstratio* was begun (see the *proœmium* to the latter), must
have been finished during the persecution. It contains in X. 9 (*Opera*,
III. 807) a reference to the *Chronicle* as an already published work
(see above, p. 31).

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p31"></span><span id="page_35">p. 35</span>
<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-Page_35"></span>The *Præparatio* and
*Demonstratio* are found in Migne’s edition of the *Opera*, III. and IV.
9 sq. A more recent text is that of Dindorf in Teubner’s series, 1867.
The *Præparatio* has been published separately by Heinichen, 2 vols.,
Lips. 1842, and by Gaisford, 4 vols., Oxon. 1843. The latter contains a
full critical apparatus with Latin translation and notes, and is the
most useful edition which we have. Seguier in 1846 published a French
translation with notes. The latter are printed in Latin in Migne’s
edition of the *Opera*, III. 1457 sq. The French translation I have not
seen.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p32"></span>The *Demonstratio* was also
published by Gaisford in 2 vols., Oxon. 1852, with critical apparatus
and Latin translation. Hænell has made the two works the subject of a
monograph entitled *De Eusebio Cæsariensi religionis Christianæ
Defensore* (Gottingæ, 1843) which I know only from the mention of it by
Stein and Lightfoot.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p33"></span>*Præparatio Ecclesiastica* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p33.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p33.2"></span>Εκκλησιαστικὴ
Προπαρασκευή</span>), and *Demonstratio Ecclesiastica* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p33.3"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p33.4"></span>Εκκλησιαστικὴ
᾽Απόδειξις</span>). These two works are no longer extant. We know of the
former only from Photius’ reference to it in *Bibl*. 11, of the latter
from his mention of it in *Bibl*. 12.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p34"></span>Lightfoot says that the latter is
referred to also in the *Jus Græco-Romanum* (lib. IV. p. 295; ed.
Leunclav.). We know nothing about the works (except that the first
according to Photius contained extracts), and should be tempted to think
them identical with the *Præparatio* and *Demonstratio Evang*. were it
not that Photius expressly mentions the two latter in another part of
his catalogue (*Bibl*. 10). Lightfoot supposes that the two lost works
did for the society what the *Præp*. and *Dem. Evang*. do for the
doctrines of which the society is the depositary, and he suggests that
those portions of the *Theophania* (Book IV.) which relate to the
foundation of the Church may have been adopted from the *Dem.
Ecclesiastica*, as other portions of the work (Book V.) are adopted from
the *Dem. Evang*.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p35"></span>If there is a reference in the
*Præp. Evang*. I. 3 (*Opera*, III. 33) to the *Demonstratio Eccles*., as
Lightfoot thinks there may be, and as is quite possible, the latter
work, and consequently in all probability the *Præp. Eccles*. also, must
have been written before 313 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p35.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p36"></span>*Two Books of Objection and Defense*
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p36.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p36.2"></span>Ελέγχου καὶ
᾽Απολογίας λόγοι δύο</span>). These are no longer extant, but are
mentioned by Photius in his *Bibl*. 13. We gather from Photius’ language
that two editions of the work were extant in his time. The books, as
Photius clearly indicates, contained an apology for Christianity against
the attacks of the heathen, and not, as Cave supposed, a defense of the
author against the charge of Arianism. The tract mentioned by Gelasius
of Cyzicus (see below, p. 64) is therefore not to be identified with
this work, as Cave imagined that it might be.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p37"></span>*Theophania*or *Divine
Manifestation* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p37.1"></span>θεοφ€νεια</span>). A Syriac version of
this work is extant in the same <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p37.2"></span>ms.</span> which contains the *Martyrs
of Palestine*, and was first published by Lee in 1842. In 1843 the same
editor issued an English translation with notes and extended prolegomena
(Cambridge, 1 vol.). The original work is no longer extant in its
entirety, but numerous Greek fragments were collected and published by
Mai in 1831 and 1833 (*Script. vet. nov. coll*. I. and VIII.), and again
with additions in 1847 (*Bibl. Nova Patrum*, IV. 110 and 310; reprinted
by Migne, *Opera*, VI. 607–690. Migne does not give the Syriac version).
The manuscript which contains the Syriac version was written in 411, and
Lee thinks that the translation itself may have been made even during
the lifetime of Eusebius. At any rate it is very old and, so far as it
is possible to judge, seems to have reproduced the sense of the original
with comparative accuracy. The subject of the work is the manifestation
of God in the incarnation of the Word. It aims to give, with an
apologetic purpose, a brief exposition of the divine authority and
influence of Christianity. It is divided into five books which handle
successively the subject and the recipients of the revelation, that is,
the Logos on the one hand, and man on the other; the necessity of the
revelation; the proof of it drawn from its effects; the proof of it
drawn from its fulfillment of prophecy; finally, the common objections
brought by the heathen against Christ’s character and wonderful works.
Lee says of the work: “As a brief exposition of Christianity, <span
id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-Page_36"></span>particularly of its Divine authority,
and amazing influence, it has perhaps never been surpassed.” “When we
consider the very extensive range of inquiry occupied by our author, the
great variety both of argument and information which it contains, and
the small space which it occupies; we cannot, I think, avoid coming to
the conclusion, that it is a very extraordinary work, and one which is
as suitable to our own times as it was to those for which it was
written. Its chief excellency is, that it is argumentative, and that its
arguments are well grounded, and logically conducted.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p38"></span>The *Theophania* contains much that
is found also in other works of Eusebius. Large portions of the first,
second, and third books are contained in the *Oratio de Laudibus
Constantini*, nearly the whole of the fifth book is given in the *Dem.
Evang*., while many passages occur in the *Præp. Evang*.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p39"></span>These coincidences assist us in
determining the date of the work. That it was written after persecution
had ceased and peace was restored to the Church, is clear from II. 76,
III. 20, 79, V. 52. Lee decided that it was composed very soon after the
close of the Diocletian persecution, but Lightfoot has shown
conclusively (p. 333) from the nature of the parallels between it and
other writings of Eusebius, that it must have been written toward the
end of his life, certainly later than the *De Laud. Const*. (335 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p39.1"></span>a.d.</span>), and
indeed it is not improbable that it remained unfinished at the time of
his death.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p40"></span>III. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p40.1"></span>Polemic Works</span>.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p41"></span>*Defense of Origen* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p41.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p41.2"></span>Απολογία ὑπὲρ
᾽Ωριγένους</span>). This was the joint work of Eusebius and Pamphilus,
as is distinctly stated by Eusebius himself in his *H. E.* VI. 33, by
Socrates, *H. E.* III. 7, by the anonymous collector of the *Synodical
Epistles* (*Ep*. 198), and by Photius, *Bibl*. 118. The last writer
informs us that the work consisted of six books, the first five of which
were written by Eusebius and Pamphilus while the latter was in prison,
the last book being added by the former after Pamphilus’ death (see
above, p. 9). There is no reason to doubt the statement of Photius, and
we may therefore assign the first five books to the years 307–309, and
assume that the sixth was written soon afterward. The *Defense* has
perished, with the exception of the first book, which was translated by
Rufinus (*Rufin. ad Hieron*. I. 582), and is still extant in his Latin
version. Rufinus ascribed this book expressly to Pamphilus, and
Pamphilus’ name alone appears in the translation. Jerome (*Contra Ruf*.
I. 8; II. 15, 23; III. 12) maintains that the whole work was written by
Eusebius, not by Pamphilus, and accuses Rufinus of having deliberately
substituted the name of the martyr Pamphilus for that of the Arianizing
Eusebius in his translation of the work, in order to secure more
favorable acceptance for the teachings of Origen. Jerome’s unfairness
and dishonesty in this matter have been pointed out by Lightfoot (p.
340). In spite of his endeavor to saddle the whole work upon Eusebius,
it is certain that Pamphilus was a joint author of it, and it is quite
probable that Rufinus was true to his original in ascribing to Pamphilus
all the explanations which introduce and connect the extracts from
Origen, which latter constitute the greater part of the book. Eusebius
may have done most of his work in connection with the later books.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p42"></span>The work was intended as a defense
of Origen against the attacks of his opponents (see Eusebius’ *H. E.*
VI. 33, and the Preface to the *Defense* itself). According to Socrates
(*H. E.* VI. 13), Methodius, Eustathius, Apollinaris, and Theophilus all
wrote against Origen. Of these only Methodius had written before the
composition of the *Defense*, and he was expressly attacked in the sixth
book of that work, according to Jerome (*Contra Ruf*. I. 11). The wide
opposition aroused against Origen was chiefly in consequence not of his
personal character, but of his theological views. The *Apology*,
therefore, seems to have been devoted in the main to a defense of those
views over against the attacks of the men that held and taught opposite
opinions, and may thus be regarded as in some sense a regular polemic.
The extant book is devoted principally to a discussion of Origen’s views
on the Trinity and the Incarnation. It is not printed in Migne’s edition
of Eusebius’ *Opera*, but is published in the various editions of <span
id="page_37">p. 37</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-Page_37"></span>Origen’s works (in Lommatzsch’s
edition, XXIV. 289–412). For further particulars in regard to the work,
see Delarue’s introduction to it (Lommatzsch, XXIV. 263 sq.), and
Lightfoot’s article on Eusebius, pp. 340 and 341.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p43"></span>*Against Marcellus, Bishop of
Ancyra* (<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p43.1"></span>κατὰ
Μαρκέλλου τοῦ ᾽Αγκύρας ἐπισκόπου</span>). The occasion of this work has
been already described (see p. 25), and is explained by Eusebius himself
in Book II. chap. 4. The work must have been written soon after the
Council at which Marcellus was condemned. It aims simply to expose his
errors, exegetical as well as theological. The work consists of two
books, and is still extant (*Opera*, VI. 707–824).

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p44"></span>*On the Theology of the Church, a
Refutation of Marcellus* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p44.1"></span>οἱ πρὸς Μ€ρκελλον žλεγχοι περὶ τῆς
ἐκκλησιαστικῆς Θεολογίας</span>). The occasion of this work is stated in
the first chapter. In the previous work Eusebius had aimed merely to
expose the opinions of Marcellus, but in this he devotes himself to
their refutation, fearing that some might be led astray by their length
and plausibility. The work, which consists of three books, is still
extant, and is given by Migne in the *Opera*, VI. 825–1046. Both it and
the preceding are published with the *Contra Hieroclem* in Gaisford’s
*Euseb. Pamph. contra Hieroclem et Marcellum*, Oxon. 1852. Zahn has
written a valuable monograph entitled *Marcellus von Ancyra* (Gotha,
1867).

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p45"></span>*Against the Manicheans*. Epiphanius
(*Hær*. LXVI. 21) mentions, among other refutations of the Manicheans,
one by our Eusebius. The work is referred to nowhere else, and it is
possible that Epiphanius was mistaken in his reference, or that the
refutation he has in mind formed only a part of some other work, but we
are hardly justified in asserting, as Lightfoot does, that the work
cannot have existed.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p46"></span>IV. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p46.1"></span>Dogmatic Works</span>.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p47"></span>*General Elementary Introduction*
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p47.1"></span>῾</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p47.2"></span>Η καθόλου
στοιχειώδης εἰσαγωγή</span>). This work consisted of ten books, as we
learn from a reference to it in the *Eclogæ Propheticæ*, IV. 35. It was
apparently a general introduction to the study of theology, and covered
a great variety of subjects. Five brief fragments have been preserved,
all of them apparently from the first book, which must have dealt
largely with general principles of ethics. The fragments were published
by Mai (*Bibl. Nova Patrum*, IV. 316), and are reprinted by Migne
(*Opera*, IV. 1271 sq.). In addition to these fragments, the sixth,
seventh, eighth, and ninth books of the work are extant under the title:

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p48"></span>*Prophetical Extracts* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p48.1"></span>Προφητικαὶ
᾽Εκλογαί</span>). Although this formed a part of the larger work, it is
complete in itself, and circulated independently of the rest of the
*Introduction*. It contains extracts of prophetical passages from the
Old Testament relating to the person and work of Christ, accompanied by
explanatory notes. It is divided into four books, the first containing
extracts from the historical Scriptures, the second from the Psalms, the
third from the other poetical books and from the prophets, the fourth
from Isaiah alone. The personality of the Logos is the main topic of the
work, which is thus essentially dogmatic, rather than apologetic, as it
might at first glance seem to be. It was composed during the
persecution, which is clearly referred to in Book I. chap. 8 as still
raging; it must have been written therefore between 303 and 313. The
date of these books, of course, fixes the date of the *General
Introduction*, of which they formed a part. The *Eclogæ* are referred to
in the *History*, I. 2. On the other hand, they mention the *Chronicle*
as a work already written (I. 1: *Opera*, p. 1023); a reference which
goes to prove that there were two editions of the *Chronicle* (see
above, p. 31). The four books of the *Prophetical Extracts* were first
published by Gaisford in 1842 (Oxford) from a Vienna <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p48.2"></span>ms.</span> The <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p48.3"></span>ms.</span> is
mutilated in many places, and the beginning, including the title of the
work, is wanting. Migne has reprinted Gaisford’s edition in the *Opera*,
IV. 1017 sq.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p49"></span>*On the Paschal Festival* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p49.1"></span>περὶ τῆς τοῦ π€σχα
ἑ& 231·ρτης</span>). This work, as Eusebius informs us in his *Vita
Const*. IV. 34, was addressed to the Emperor Constantine, who commends
it very highly in an epistle to Eusebius preserved in the *Vita Const*.
IV. 35. From this epistle we learn, more<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>
<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-Page_38"></span>over, that the work had been
translated into Latin. It is no longer extant in its entirety, but a
considerable fragment of it was discovered by Mai in Nicetas’ *Catena on
Luke*, and published by him in his *Bibl. Nova Patrum*, IV. p. 208 sq.
The extant portion of it contains twelve chapters, devoted partly to a
discussion of the nature of the Passover and its typical significance,
partly to an account of the settlement of the paschal question at the
Council of Nicæa, and partly to an argument against the necessity of
celebrating the paschal feast at the time of the Jewish Passover, based
on the ground that Christ himself did not keep the Passover on the same
day as the Jews.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p50"></span>Jerome, although he does not mention
this work in his catalogue of Eusebius’ writings (*de vir. ill*. 81),
elsewhere (*ib*. 61) states that Eusebius composed a paschal canon with
a cycle of nineteen years. This cycle may have been published (as
Lightfoot remarks) as a part of the writing under discussion. The date
of the work cannot be determined with exactness. It was written after
the Council of Nicæa, and, as would seem from the connection in which it
is mentioned in the *Vita Constantini*, before the Emperor’s
*tricennalia* (335 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p50.1"></span>a.d.</span>), but not very long before.
The extant fragment, as published by Mai, is reprinted by Migne in the
*Opera*, VI. 693–706.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p51"></span>V. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p51.1"></span>Critical and Exegetical Works.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p52"></span>*Biblical Texts*. We learn from
Jerome (*Præf. in librum Paralip*.) that Eusebius and Pamphilus
published a number of copies of Origen’s edition of the LXX., that is,
of the fifth column of the Hexapla. A colophon found in a Vatican <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p52.1"></span>ms.</span>, and given
in facsimile in Migne’s *Opera*, IV. 875, contains the following account
of their labors (the translation is Lightfoot’s): “It was transcribed
from the editions of the Hexapla, and was corrected from the Tetrapla of
Origen himself, which also had been corrected and furnished with scholia
in his own handwriting; whence I, Eusebius, added the scholia, Pamphilus
and Eusebius corrected \[this copy\].” Compare also Field’s *Hexapla*,
I. p. xcix.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p53"></span>Taylor, in the *Dictionary of
Christian Biography*, III. p. 21, says: “The whole work \[i.e. the
Hexapla\] was too massive for multiplication; but many copies of its
fifth column alone were issued from Cæsarea under the direction of
Pamphilus the martyr and Eusebius, and this recension of the LXX. came
into common use. Some of the copies issued contained also marginal
scholia, which gave *inter alia* a selection of readings from the
remaining versions in the Hexapla. The oldest extant <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p53.1"></span>ms.</span> of this
recension is the Leiden *Codex Sarravianus* of the fourth or fifth
century.” These editions of the LXX. must have been issued before the
year 309, when Pamphilus suffered martyrdom, and in all probability
before 307, when he was imprisoned (see Lardner’s *Credibility*, Part
II. chap. 72.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p54"></span>In later years we find Eusebius
again engaged in the publication of copies of the Scriptures. According
to the *Vita Const*. IV. 36, 37, the Emperor wrote to Eusebius, asking
him to prepare fifty sumptuous copies of the Scriptures for use in his
new Constantinopolitan churches. The commission was carefully executed,
and the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p54.1"></span>mss.</span> prepared at great cost. It
has been thought that among our extant <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p54.2"></span>mss.</span> may be some of these copies
which were produced under Eusebius’ supervision, but this is extremely
improbable (see Lightfoot, p. 334).

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p55"></span>*Ten Evangelical Canons, with the
Letter to Carpianus prefixed* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p55.1"></span>κανόνες δέκα</span>; *Canones decem
harmoniæ evangeliorum præmissa ad Carpianum epistola*). Ammonius of
Alexandria early in the third century had constructed a harmony of the
Gospels, in which, taking Matthew as the standard, he placed alongside
of that Gospel the parallel passages from the three others. Eusebius’
work was suggested by this Harmony, as he tells us in his epistle to
Carpianus. An inconvenient feature of Ammonius’ work was that only the
Gospel of Matthew could be read continuously, the sequence of the other
Gospels being broken in order to bring their parallel sections into the
order followed by Matthew. Eusebius, desiring to remedy this defect,
constructed his work on a different principle. He made a table of ten
canons, each containing a list of passages as follows: Canon I. passages
common to all four Gospels; II. those common to Matthew, Mark, and Luke;
III. those <span id="page_39">p. 39</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-Page_39"></span>common to Matt., Luke, and John; IV.
those common to Matt., Mark, and John; V. those common to Matthew and
Luke; VI. those common to Matt. and Mark; VII. those common to Matt. and
John; VIII. those common to Luke and Mark; IX. those common to Luke and
John; X. those peculiar to each Gospel: first to Matthew, second to
Mark, third to Luke, and fourth to John.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p56"></span>Each Gospel was then divided into
sections, which were numbered continuously. The length of the section
was determined, not by the sense, but by the table of canons, each
section comprising a passage common to four, to three, to two Gospels,
or peculiar to itself, as the case might be. A single section therefore
might comprise even less than a verse, or it might cover more than a
chapter. The sections were numbered in black, and below each number was
placed a second figure in red, indicating the canon to which the section
belonged. Upon glancing at that canon the reader would find at once the
numbers of the parallel sections in the other Gospels, and could turn to
them readily. The following is a specimen of a few lines of the first
canon:—

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p57"></span>MT.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p58"></span>MP.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p59"></span>Λ.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p60"></span>ΙΩ.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p61"></span>η

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p62"></span>β

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p63"></span>ζ

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p64"></span>ι

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p65"></span>ια

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p66"></span>δ

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p67"></span>ι

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p68"></span>ς

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p69"></span>ια

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p70"></span>δ

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p71"></span>ι

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p72"></span>ιβ

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p73"></span>ια

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p74"></span>δ

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p75"></span>ι

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p76"></span>ιδ

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p77"></span>Thus, opposite a certain passage in
John, the reader finds <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p77.1"></span>ιβ</span> (12) written, and beneath it,
Α (1). He therefore turns to the first canon (A) and finds that sections
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p77.2"></span>ια</span>(11)
in Matthew, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p77.3"></span>δ</span> (4) in Mark, and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p77.4"></span>ι</span>(10) in Luke
are parallel with <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p77.5"></span>ιβ</span> in John. The advantage and
convenience of such a system are obvious, and the invention of it shows
great ingenuity. It has indeed never been superseded, and the sections
and canons are still indicated in the margins of many of our best Greek
Testaments (e.g., in those of Tregelles and of Tischendorf). The date of
the construction of these canons it is quite impossible to determine.
For further particulars in regard to them, see Lightfoot’s article on
Eusebius, p. 334 sq., and Scrivener’s *Introduction to the Criticism of
the New Testament,* 2d ed. p. 54 sq. The canons, with the letter to
Carpianus prefixed, are given by Migne, *Opera,* IV. 1275–1292.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p78"></span>*Gospel Questions and Solutions.*
This work consists of two parts, or of two separate works combined. The
first bears the title *Gospel Questions and Solutions addressed to
Stephanus* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p78.1"></span>πρὸς Στέφανον περὶ τῶν ἐν εὐαγγελίοις
ζητημ€των καὶ λύσεων</span>), and is referred to by Eusebius in his
*Dem. Evang.* VII. 3, as *Questions and Solutions on the Genealogy of
our Saviour* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p78.2"></span>τῶν εἰς τὴν γενεαλογίαν τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν
ζητημ€των καὶ λύσεων</span>). The second part is entitled *Gospel
Questions and Solutions addressed to Marinus* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p78.3"></span>πρὸς Μαρῖνον</span>). The first work
consisted of two books, we learn from the opening of the second work. In
that passage, referring to the previous work, Eusebius says that having
discussed there the difficulties which beset the beginning of the
Gospels, he will now proceed to consider questions concerning the latter
part of them, the intermediate portions being omitted. He thus seems to
regard the two works as in a sense forming parts of one whole. In his
*de vir ill.* 81, Jerome mentions among the writings of Eusebius one *On
the Discrepancy of the Gospels (De Evangeliorum Diaphonia),* and in his
*Comm. in Matt.* chap. I. vers. 16, he refers to Eusebius’ *libri* <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p78.4"></span>διαφωνίας
εὐαγγελίων</span>. Ebedjesu also remarks, “Eusebius Cæsariensis
composuit librum solutionis contradictionum evangelii.” In the sixteenth
century there were found in Sicily, according to the announcement of
Latino Latini, “libri tres Eusebii Cæsariensis de Evangeliorum
diaphonia,” but nothing more has been heard or seen of this Sicilian
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p78.5"></span>ms.</span> There
can be no doubt that the work referred to under the title *De
Evangeliorum Diaphonia* is identical with the *Gospel Questions and
Solutions,* for the discrepancies in the Gospels occupy a considerable
space in the *Questions and Solutions* as we have it, and the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p78.6"></span>διαφωνία</span>
occurs frequently. The three books mentioned by Latino Latini were
therefore the two books addressed to Stephanus which Eusebius himself
refers to, and the one book addressed to Marinus. The complete work is
no longer extant, but an epitome of <span id="page_40">p. 40</span>
<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-Page_40"></span>it was discovered and published
by Mai, together with numerous fragments of the unabridged work, two of
them in Syriac (*Bibl. Nova Patrum,* IV. 217 sq.; reprinted by Migne,
*Opera,* IV. 879–1016). In the epitome the work addressed to Stephanus
consists of sixteen chapters, and the division into two books is not
retained. The work addressed to Marinus consists of only four chapters.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p79"></span>The work purports to have been
written in answer to questions and difficulties suggested by Stephanus
and Marinus, who are addressed by Eusebius in terms of affection and
respect. The first work is devoted chiefly to a discussion of the
genealogies of Christ, as given by Matthew and Luke; the second work
deals with the apparent discrepancies between the accounts of the
resurrection as given by the different evangelists. Eusebius does not
always reach a solution of the difficulties, but his work is suggestive
and interesting. The question as to the date of the work is complicated
by the fact that there is in the *Dem. Evang.* VII. 3 a reference to the
*Questions and Solutions addressed to Stephanus,* while in the epitome
of the latter work (*Quæst.* VII. §7) there is a distinct reference to
the *Demonstratio Evang.* This can be satisfactorily explained only by
supposing, with Lightfoot, that the Epitome was made at a later date
than the original work, and that then Eusebius inserted this reference
to the *Demonstratio.* We are thus led to assume two editions of this
work, as of the others of Eusebius’ writings, the second edition being a
revised abridgement of the first. The first edition, at least of the
*Quæstiones ad Stephanum,* must have been published before the
*Demonstratio Evangelica.* We cannot fix the date of the epitome, nor of
the *Quæstiones ad Marinum.*

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p80"></span>*Commentary on the Psalms* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p80.1"></span>εἰς τοὺς
ψαλμούς</span>). This commentary is extant entire as far as the 118th
psalm, but from that point to the end only fragments of it have been
preserved. It was first published in 1707, by Montfaucon, who, however,
knew nothing of the fragments of the latter part of the work. These were
discovered and published by Mai, in 1847 (*Bibl. Nov. Patrum,* IV. 65
sq.), and the entire extant work, including these fragments, is printed
by Migne, *Opera,* V. and VI. 9–76. According to Lightfoot, notices of
extant Syriac extracts from it are found in Wright’s *Catal. Syr. <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p80.2"></span>mss.</span> Brit.
Mus.* pp. 35 sq. and 125. Jerome (*de vir. ill.* 96 and *Ep. ad
Vigilantium,* §2; Migne’s ed. *Ep.* 61) informs us that Eusebius of
Vercellæ translated this commentary into Latin, omitting the heretical
passages. This version is no longer extant. The commentary had a high
reputation among the Fathers, and justly so. It is distinguished for its
learning, industry, and critical acumen. The *Hexapla* is used with
great diligence, and the author frequently corrects the received LXX.
text of his day upon the authority of one of the other versions. The
work betrays an acquaintance with Hebrew, uncommon among the Fathers,
but by no means extensive or exact. Eusebius devotes considerable
attention to the historical relations of the Psalms, and exhibits an
unusual degree of good judgment in their treatment, but the allegorical
method of the school of Origen is conspicuous, and leads him into the
mystical extravagances so common to patristic exegesis.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p81"></span>The work must have been written
after the close of the persecution and the death of the persecutors (*in
Psal*. XXXVI. 12). In another passage (*in Psal*. LXXXVII. 11) there
seems to be a reference to the discovery of the site of the Holy
Sepulchre and the erection of Constantine’s basilica upon it (see *Vita
Const.* III. 28, 30, &c.). The basilica was dedicated in the year 335
(see above, p. 24), and the site of the sepulchre was not discovered
until the year 326, or later (see Lightfoot, p. 336). The commentary
must have been written apparently after the basilica was begun, and
probably after its completion. If so, it is to be placed among the very
latest of Eusebius’ works.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p82"></span>*Commentary on Isaiah* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p82.1"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p82.2"></span>πομνήματα εἰς
῾Ησαΐαν</span>). This work is also extant almost entire, and was first
published in 1706, by Montfaucon (*Coll. Nova Patrum et Script. Græc.*
II.; reprinted by Migne, *Opera,* VI. 77–526). In his *de vir. ill.* 81
Jerome refers to it as containing ten books (*in Isaiam libri decem*),
but in the preface to his *Comment. in Isaiam* he speaks of it as
composed of fifteen (*Eusebius quoque Pamphili juxta historicam
explanationem quindecim edidit* <span id="page_41">p. 41</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-Page_41"></span>*volumina*). In its present form there
is no trace of a division into books. The commentary is marked by the
same characteristics which were noticed in connection with the one on
the Psalms, though it does not seem to have acquired among the ancients
so great a reputation as that work. It must have been written after the
close of the persecution (*in Is*. XLIV. 5), and apparently after the
accession of Constantine to sole power (*in Is*. XLIX. 23 compared with
*Vita Const.* IV. 28). If the commentary on the Psalms was written
toward the close of Eusebius’ life, as assumed above, it is natural to
conclude that the present work preceded that.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p83"></span>*Commentary on Luke* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p83.1"></span>εἰς τὸ κατὰ Λουκᾶν
εὐαλλέλιον</span>). This work is no longer extant, but considerable
fragments of it exist and have been published by Mai (*Bibl. Nova
Patrum,* IV. 159 sq.; reprinted by Migne, *Opera,* VI. 529–606).
Although the fragments are all drawn from Catenæ on Luke, there are many
passages which seem to have been taken from a commentary on Matthew (see
the notes of the editor). A number of extracts from the work are found
in Eusebius’ *Theophania* (see Mai’s introduction to his fragments of
the latter work).

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p84"></span>The date of the commentary cannot be
fixed with certainty, but I am inclined to place it before the
persecution of Diocletian, for the reason that there appears in the
work, so far as I have discovered, no hint of a persecution, although
the passages expounded offer many opportunities for such a reference,
which it is difficult to see how the author could have avoided making if
a persecution were in progress while he was writing; and further,
because in discussing Christ’s prophecies of victory and dominion over
the whole world, no reference is made to the triumph gained by the
Church in the victories of Constantine. A confirmation of this early
date may be found in the extreme simplicity of the exegesis, which
displays neither the wide learning, nor the profound study that mark the
commentaries on the Psalms and on Isaiah.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p85"></span>*Commentary on the First Epistle to
the Corinthians.* This work is no longer extant, and we know of it only
from a reference in Jerome’s *Ep. ad Pammachium,* §3 (Migne’s ed. *Ep.*
49): “Origenes, Dionysius, Pierius, Eusebius Cæsariensis, Didymus,
Apollinaris latissime hanc Epistolam interpretati sunt.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p86"></span>*Exegetical Fragments.* Mai has
published brief fragments containing expositions of passages from
*Proverbs* (*Bibl. Nova Patrum,* IV. 316; reprinted by Migne, *Opera,*
VI. 75–78), from *Daniel* (*ib.* p. 314; Migne, VI. 525–528), and from
the *Epistle to the Hebrews* (*ib.* p. 207; Migne, VI. 605). Fabricius
mentions also fragments from a commentary on the *Song of Songs* as
published by Meursius, and says that other commentaries are referred to
by Montfaucon in his *Epistola de Therapeutis,* p. 151. We have no
references in the works of the ancients to any such commentaries, so far
as I am aware, and it is quite possible that the various fragments given
by Mai, as well as those referred to by Fabricius may have been taken
not from continuous commentaries, but from Eusebius’ *General Elementary
Introduction,* or others of his lost works. According to Migne (VI. 527)
some Greek Catenæ published by Cramer in Oxford in the year 1884 contain
extensive fragments on Matthew and John, which, however, have been taken
from Eusebius’ *Quæst. Evang.* Other fragments in Catenæ on the same
Evangelists and on Mark, have been taken, according to Migne, from the
*Quæstiones ad Stephanum,* or from the *Commentary on Luke.*

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p87"></span>It is, however, quite possible, as
it seems to me, that Eusebius wrote a commentary on Daniel. At any rate,
the exegetical fragments which we have, taken with the extended
discussions of certain passages found in the *Dem. Evang.* VIII. 2 and
in the *Eclogæ Proph.* III. 40 sq., show that he expounded at one time
or another a considerable portion of the book.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p88"></span>VI. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p88.1"></span>Biblical Dictionaries</span>.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p89"></span>*Interpretation of the Ethnological
Terms in the Hebrew Scriptures.* This work is no longer extant, but is
known to us from Eusebius’ reference to it in the preface to his work
*On the Names of Places,* where he writes as follows: <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p89.1"></span>τῶν ἀνὰ τὴν
οἰκουμένην ἐθνῶν ἐπὶ τὴν ἑλλ€δα φωνὴν μεταβαλὼν τὰς ἐν τῇ θεί& 139·
γραφῇ κειμένας ἑβραίοις ὀνόμασι προσρήσεις</span>. Jerome, in the
preface to his Latin version of the same work, also refers to it in the
following words: “…diversarum <span id="page_42">p. 42</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-Page_42"></span>vocabula nationum, quæ quomodo olim
apud Hebræos dicta sint, et nunc dicantur, exposuit.” No other ancient
authority mentions the work so far as I am aware.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p90"></span>*Chorography of Ancient Judea with
the Inheritances of the Ten Tribes.* This work too is lost, but is
referred to by Eusebius in the same preface in the following words:
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p90.1"></span>τῆς π€λαι
᾽Ιουδαίας ἀπὸ π€σης Βίβλου καταγραφὴν πεποιημένος καὶ τὰς ἐν αὐτῇ τῶν
δώδεκα φυλῶν διαιρῶν κλήρους</span>. Jerome (*ib.*) says:
“…Chorographiam terræ Judaeæ, et distinctas tribuum sortes …laboravit.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p91"></span>It is remarked by Fabricius that
this work is evidently intended by Ebedjesu in his catalogue, where he
mentions among the writings of Eusebius a *Librum de Figura Mundi* (cf.
Assemani’s *Bibl. Orient.* III. p. 18, note 7).

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p92"></span>*A Plan of Jerusalem and of the
Temple, accompanied with Memoirs relating to the Various Localities.*
This too is lost, but is referred to by Eusebius (*ib.*) in the
following words: <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p92.1"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p92.2"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p92.3"></span>ἐν γραφῆς τύπῳ τῆς π€λαι διαβοήτου
μητροπόλεως αὐτῆς</span> (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p92.4"></span>λέγω δὲ τὴν ῾Ιερουσαλήμ</span>) <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p92.5"></span>τοῦ τε ἐν αὐτῇ ἱεροῦ
τὴν εἰκόνα διαχαρ€ξας μετὰ παραθέσεως τῶν εἰς τοὺς τύπους
ὑπομνημ€των</span>. Jerome (*ib.*) says: “ipsius quoque Jerusalem
templique in ea cum brevissima expositione picturam, ad extremum in hoc
opusculo laboravit.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p93"></span>*On the Names of Places in Holy
Scripture* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p93.1"></span>περὶ τῶν τοπικῶν ὀνομ€των τῶν ἐν τῇ θεί&
139· γραφῇ</span>). In Jerome’s version this work bears the title *Liber
de Situ et Nominibus Locorum Hebraicorum,* but in his *de vir. ill.* 81,
he refers to it as <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p93.2"></span>τοπικῶν</span>, *liber unus,* and so it
is commonly called simply *Topica.* It is still extant, both in the
original Greek and in a revised and partly independent Latin version by
Jerome. Both are published by Vallarsi in *Hieronymi Opera,* III. 122
sq. Migne, in his edition of Eusebius’ works, omits the *Topica* and
refers to his edition of Jerome’s works, where, however, he gives only
Jerome’s version, not the original Greek (III. 859–928). The best
editions of the Greek text are by Larsow and Parthey (*Euseb. Pamph.
Episc. Cæs. Onomasticon,* &c., Berolini, 1862), and by Lagarde
(*Onomastica Sacra,* I. 207–304, Gottingæ, 1870). The work aims to give,
in the original language, in alphabetical order, the names of the
cities, villages, mountains, rivers, &c., mentioned in the Scriptures,
together with their modern designations and brief descriptions of each.
The work is thus of the same character as a modern dictionary or
Biblical geography. The other three works were narrower than this one in
their scope, but seem also to have been arranged somewhat on the
dictionary plan. The work is dedicated to Paulinus, a fact which leads
us to place its composition before 325 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p93.3"></span>a.d.</span>, when Paulinus was already
dead (see below, p. 369). Jerome, in the preface to his version, says
that Eusebius wrote the work after his *History* and *Chronicle.* We are
to conclude, then, either that the work was published in 324 or early in
325, within a very few months after the *History,* or, what is more
probable, that Jerome is mistaken in his statement. He is proverbially
careless and inaccurate, and Eusebius, neither in his preface—from which
Jerome largely quotes in his own—nor in the work itself, gives any hint
of the fact that his *History* and *Chronicle* were already written.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p94"></span>*On the Nomenclature of the Book of
the Prophets* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p94.1"></span>περὶ τῆς τοῦ βιβλίου τῶν προφητῶν
ὀνομασίας καὶ ἀπὸ μέρους τί περιέχει ἕκαστος</span>). This work contains
brief accounts of the several prophets and notes the subjects of their
prophecies. It is thus, so far as it goes, a sort of biographical
dictionary. It was first published by Curterius in his *Procopii
Sophistæ Christinæ variarum in Isaiam Prophetam commentationum epitome*
(Paris, 1850, under the title *De vitis Prophetarum,* by which it is
commonly known. We have no means of determining the date of its
composition. Curterius’ text has been reprinted by Migne, *Opera,* IV.
1261–1272.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p95"></span>VII. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p95.1"></span>Orations</span>.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p96"></span>*Panegyric on the Building of the
Churches, addressed to Paulinus, Bishop of Tyre* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p96.1"></span>Πανηγυρικὸς ἐπὶ τῇ
τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν οἰκοδομῇ, Παυλίνῳ Τυρίων ἐπισκόπῳ προσπεφωνημένος</span>).
This oration was delivered at the dedication of Paulinus’ new church in
Tyre, to which reference has already been made (see above, p. 11). It
has been preserved in Eusebius’ *History,* Book X. chap. 4 (see below,
p. 370. sq.).

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p97"></span><span id="page_43">p. 43</span>
<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-Page_43"></span>*Oration delivered at the
Vicennalia of Constantine*. Eusebius refers to this in the Preface to
his *Vita Constantini* as <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p97.1"></span>εἰκοσαετηρικοὶ ὕμνοι</span>. It is to be
identified with the oration delivered at the opening of the Council of
Nicæa (*Vita Const*. III. 11), as stated above, on p. 19. It is
unfortunately no longer extant.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p98"></span>*Oration on the Sepulchre of the
Saviour*. In his *Vita Const*. IV. 33 Eusebius informs us that he
delivered an oration on this subject (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p98.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p98.2"></span>μφὶ τοῦ σωτηρίου μνήματος λόγος</span>)
in the presence of the Emperor at Constantinople. In the same work, IV.
46, he says that he wrote a description of the church of the Saviour and
of his sepulchre, as well as of the splendid presents given by the
Emperor for their adornment. This description he gave in a special work
which he addressed to the Emperor (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p98.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p98.4"></span>ν οἰκεί& 251· συγγρ€μματι παραδόντες,
αὐτῷ βασιλεῖ προσεφωνήσαμεν</span>). If these two are identical, as has
always been assumed, the *Oration on the Sepulchre* must have been
delivered in 335, when Eusebius went to Constantinople, just after the
dedication of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem (see above,
p. 23), and just before the *Oratio deo laudibus Constantini* (see *ib*.
IV. 46). That the two are identical has always been assumed, and seems
most probable. At the same time it is worthy of notice that in IV. 33
Eusebius speaks as if he returned to Cæsarea immediately after
delivering his oration, and gives no hint of the delivery of his *De
laud. Const*. at that time. It is noticeable also that he speaks in IV.
46 of a *work* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p98.5"></span>σύγγραμμα</span>) not of an *oration*
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p98.6"></span>λόγος</span>), and that in IV. 45 he
mentions the fact that he has described the splendid edifice and gifts
of the Emperor *in writing* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p98.7"></span>διὰ γρ€μματος</span>), which would seem
to imply something else than an address. Finally, it is to be observed
that, whereas, in IV. 46, he expressly refers to the church erected by
Constantine and to his rich gifts in connection with its construction,
in IV. 33 he refers only to the sepulchre. It appears to me, in fact,
quite possible that Eusebius may be referring to two entirely different
compositions, the one an oration delivered after the discovery of the
sepulchre and before the Emperor had built the church (perhaps
containing the suggestion of such a building), the other a descriptive
work written after the completion of that edifice. I present this only
as a possibility, for I realize that against it may be urged the
unlikelihood that two separate works should have been composed by
Eusebius upon subjects so nearly, if not quite, identical, and also the
probability that, if there were two, both, and not one only, would have
been attached to the end of the *Vita Const*. with the *De laud Const*.
(see IV. 46). Neither the *Oration on the Sepulchre of the Saviour* nor
the *Work on the Church and the Sepulchre* (whether the two are the same
or not) is now extant.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p99"></span>*Oration delivered at the
Tricennalia of Constantine* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p99.1"></span>εἰς Κωνσταντῖνον τὸν βασιλέα
τριακονταετηρικός</span>), commonly known under the title *Oratio de
laudibus Constantini*. In his *Vita Const*. IV. 46, Eusebius promised to
append this oration, together with the writing *On the Church and the
Sepulchre*, to that work. The *de laudibus* is still found at the end of
the <span class="c13"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p99.2"></span>mss.</span>
of the *Vita*, while the other writing is lost. It was delivered in
Constantinople in 335 on the occasion of the Emperor’s *tricennalia*,
very soon after the dedication of the church of the Holy Sepulchre in
Jerusalem (see above, p. 25). It is highly panegyrical, but contains a
great deal of theology, especially in regard to the person and work of
the Logos. Large portions of it were afterward incorporated into the
*Vita Constantini* and the *Theophania*. The oration is published in
most, if not all, editions of the *Vita Constantini*; in Migne, *Opera*,
II. 1315–1440.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p100"></span>*Oration in Praise of the Martyrs*.
This oration is mentioned in the catalogue of Ebedjesu (*et orationem de
laudibus eorum* \[i.e. Martyrum Occidentalium\]; see Assemani, *Bibl.
Orient.* III. p. 19), and, according to Lightfoot, is still extant in a
Syriac version, which has been published in the *Journal of Sacred
Literature*, N. S., Vol. V. p. 403 sq., with an English translation by
B. H. Cowper, *ib*. VI. p. 129 sq. Lightfoot finds in it an indication
that it was delivered at Antioch, but pronounces it of little value or
importance.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p101"></span>*On the Failure of Rain*. This is
no longer extant, and is known to us only from a reference in the
catalogue of Ebedjesu (*et orationem de defectu pluviæ*; see Assemani,
*ib*.).

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p102"></span><span id="page_44">p. 44</span>
<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-Page_44"></span>VIII. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p102.1"></span>Epistles.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p103"></span>*To Alexander*, bishop of
Alexandria. The purpose and the character of this epistle have been
already discussed (see above). A fragment of it has been preserved in
the Proceedings of the Second Council of Nicæa, Act VI., Tom. V.
(*Labbei et Cossartii Conc.* VII. col. 497). For a translation of the
epistle, see below. This and the following epistle were written after
the outbreak of the Arian controversy, but before the Nicene Council.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p104"></span>*To Euphration*, bishop of Balaneæ
in Syria, likewise a strong opponent of the Arians (see Athan. *de
Fuga*, 3; *Hist. Ar. ad Mon.* 5). Athanasius states that this epistle
declared plainly that Christ is not God (Athan. *de Synod*. 17). A brief
fragment of it has been preserved in the Acts of the Second Council of
Nicæa (*l.c.*), which probably contains the very passage to which
Athanasius refers. Upon the interpretation and significance of the
fragment, see above.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p105"></span>*To Constantia Augusta*, the sister
of Constantine and wife of Licinius. Constantia had written to Eusebius
requesting him to send her a certain likeness of Christ of which she had
heard. Eusebius, in this epistle, rebukes her, and speaks strongly
against the use of such representations, on the ground that it tends
toward idolatry. The tone of the letter is admirable. Numerous fragments
of it have been discovered, so that we have it now almost entire. It is
printed in Migne, *Opera*, II. 1545–1550. We have no means of
ascertaining the date at which it was written.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p106"></span>*To the Church of Cæsarea*. This
epistle was written from Nicæa in 325 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p106.1"></span>a.d.</span>, during or immediately
after the Council. Its purpose and character have been discussed above
on p. 16 sq., where a translation of it is given. The epistle is
preserved by Athanasius (*de Decret. Syn. Nic.* app.); by Socrates, *H.
E.* I. 8; by Theodoret, *H. E.* I. 11, and others. It is printed by
Migne, *Opera*, II. 1535–1544.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p107"></span>In the Acts of the Second Council
of Nicæa (*l.c.*) we find a mention of “all the epistles” of Eusebius,
as if many were at that time extant. We know, however, only of those
which have been mentioned above.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p108"></span>IX. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p108.1"></span>Spurious or Doubtful Works.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p109"></span>Fourteen Latin *opuscula* were
discovered and published by Sirmond in 1643, and have been frequently
reprinted (Migne, *Opera*, VI. 1047–1208). They are of a theological
character, and bear the following titles:—

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p110"></span>De fide adv. Sabellium, libri duo.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p111"></span>De Resurrectione, libri duo.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p112"></span>De Incorporali et invisibili Deo.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p113"></span>De Incorporali.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p114"></span>De Incorporali Anima.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p115"></span>De Spiritali Cogitatu hominis.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p116"></span>De eo quod Deus Pater incorporalis
est, libri duo.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p117"></span>*De eo quod ait Dominus, Non veni
pacem,* etc.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p118"></span>*De Mandato Domini, Quod ait, Quod
dico vobis in aure,* etc.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p119"></span>De operibus bonis et malis.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p120"></span>De operibus bonis, ex epist. II. ad
Corinth.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p121"></span>Their authenticity is a matter of
dispute. Some of them may be genuine, but Lardner is doubtless right in
denying the genuineness of the two Against Sabellius, which are the most
important of all (see Lardner’s *Credibility*, Part II. chap. 72).

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p122"></span>Lightfoot states that a treatise,
*On the Star which appeared to the Magi*, was published by Wright in the
*Journal of Sacred Literature* (1866) from a Syriac <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p122.1"></span>ms.</span> It is
ascribed to Eusebius, but its genuineness has been disputed, and good
reasons have been given for supposing that it was written originally in
Syriac (see Lightfoot, p. 345).

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p123"></span><span id="page_45">p. 45</span>
<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-Page_45"></span>Fabricius (*Bibl. Gr*. VI. 104)
reports that the following works are extant in <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p123.1"></span>ms.</span>: *Fragmentum de Mensuris ac
Ponderibus* (<span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p123.2"></span>mss.</span> Is. Vossii, n. 179); *De
Morte Herodis* (<span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p123.3"></span>ms.</span> in Bibl. Basil.); *Præfatio
ad Canticum Mosis in Exodo* (Lambec. III. p. 35).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[28:4](2010018.htm#fr_3.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p5"></span> In the preparation of the following
Catalogue of Eusebius’ writings Stein, and especially Lightfoot, have
been found most helpful.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[30:5](2010018.htm#fr_4.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p12"></span> Since the above section was
written, another possibility has suggested itself to me. As remarked
below, on p. 45, it is possible that Eusebius issued a second edition of
his *History* in the year 324 or 325, with a tenth book added, and that
he inserted at that time two remarks not contained in the first edition
of the first nine books. It is possible, therefore to suppose that the
references to the *Vita Pamphili*, as an already published book, found
in *H. E.* VI. 32 and VII. 32, may have been added at the same time.
Turning to the latter passage we find our author saying, “It would be no
small matter to show what sort of man he \[Pamphilus\] was, and whence
he came. But we have described in a separate work devoted to him all the
particulars of his life, and of the school which he established, and the
trials which he endured in many confessions during the persecution, and
the crown of martyrdom with which he was finally honored. *But* of all
who were there he was the most admirable” (ἀλλ᾽ οὗτος μὲν τῶν τῇδε
θαυμασιώτατος). The ἀλλὰ, *but*, seems very unnatural after the
paragraph in regard to the work which Eusebius had already written. In
fact, to give the word its proper adversative force after what precedes
is quite impossible, and it is therefore commonly rendered (as in the
translation of the passage on p. 321, below) simply “indeed.” If we
suppose the passage in regard to the Biography of Pamphilus to be a
later insertion, the use of the ἀλλὰ becomes quite explicable. “It would
be no small matter to show what sort of man he was and whence he came.
*But* (this much I can say here) he was the most admirable of all who
were there.” Certainly the reference at this point to the *Vita
Pamphili* thus has something of the look of a later insertion. In VI.
32, the reference to that work might be struck out without in the least
impairing the continuity of thought. Still further, in VIII. 13, where
the *Vita* is mentioned, although the majority of the <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p12.1"></span>mss</span>. followed
by most of the modern editions have the past tense ἀνεγρ€ψαμεν “we have
written,” three of the best <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.ii-p12.2"></span>mss</span>. read ἀναγρ€ψομεν “we shall
write.” Might not this confusion have arisen from the fact that
Eusebius, in revising the *History*, instead of rewriting this whole
passage simply substituted in the copy which he had before him the word
ἀνεγρ€ψαμεν for the earlier ἀναγρ€ψομεν, and that some copyist, or
copyists, finding the earlier form still legible, preferred that to the
substituted form, thinking the latter to be an insertion by some
unauthorized person? If we were then to suppose that the *Vita Pamphili*
was written after the first edition of the *History*, but before the
issue of the complete work in its revised form, we should place its
composition later than the longer recension of the *Martyrs*, but
earlier than the shorter recension, and thus explain quite simply the
lack of any reference to the *Vita* in the former. Against the theory
stated in this note might be urged the serious objection that the
reference to the *Martyrs of Palestine* in VIII. 13 is allowed to remain
in the future tense even in the revised edition of the *History*, a fact
which of course argues against the change of ἀναγρ€ψομεν to ἀνεγρ€ψαμεν
in the reference to the *Vita* in the same chapter. Indeed, I do not
which to be understood as maintaining this theory, or as considering it
more probable than the one stated in the text. I suggest it simply as an
alternative possibility.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](2010019.md)
