[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010353)  [Next](2010355.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii.iii-p1"></span> §3. *Physical Characteristics.*

<span id="iv.iii.ii.iii-p2"></span>A graphic picture of his personal
appearance is drawn by Cedrenus (p. 472–3). “Constantinus Magnus was of
medium height, broad-shouldered, thick-necked, whence his epithet
Bull-necked. His complexion was ruddy, his hair neither thick nor crisp
curling, his beard scanty and not growing in many places, his nose
slightly hooked, and his eyes like the eyes of a lion. He was joyous of
heart and most cheery of countenance.” <span
id="fr_3039"></span>[3040](#fn_3039.md) Many points in this description are
confirmed by others, some apparently contradicted. Taken in detail, his
*Height* was probably above medium. Over against this statement of
Cedrenus (p. 472) that he was of middle height is that of the earlier
Malalas (13. 1), who, while confirming the ruddiness of complexion,
characterizes him as tall, and the explicit testimony of Eusebius, that
among those with Diocletian “there was no one comparable with him for
height” (*V. C.* 1. 19), and likewise among those present at Nicæa (*V.
C*. 3- 10). But a “thick-necked” form hardly belongs to the strictly
“tall” man, and a thick neck and broad shoulders would hardly belong to
a form of “distinguished comeliness,” if it were short (Lact. c. 18). It
may be supposed therefore that he can be described as above medium
height. Moreover, there would naturally have been more mention of height
by Lactantius and Panegyrists if it had been very extraordinary. In
respect of *Countenance* he was undoubtedly handsome. The “majestic
beauty of his face” mentioned by Theophanes (p. 29; cf. *V. C.* 1. 19;
3. 10) is confirmed by suggestions in the Panegyrists (e.g. Eumen. c.
17; Naz. c. 24), and all general testimony, and not belied by the coins.
His *Complexion* was ruddy; “reddish” in the expression of Cedrenus (p.
272), “fiery” in that of Malalas (13.1). His *Hair,* rather thin and
straight, scanty *Beard,* and “slightly hooked” *Nose* are shown also by
the coins, where the nose varies from a pronounced Roman or ungraceful
eagle’s beak to a very proportionate, slightly aquiline member. His
*Eyes* were lion-like (Cedren.), piercingly bright (Paneg. 313, c. 19;
also Eumen.). His *Expression* was bright and joyous (Cedren.),
characterized by “noble gravity mingled with hilarity” (Naz. *Paneg.* c.
24), by “serenity” and “cheerfulness” (cf. Euseb. *V. C.* 3. 11). In
brief, he seems to have been a type of the sanguine temperament.

<span id="iv.iii.ii.iii-p4"></span>Added to his beauty of face was an
unquestioned beauty of form. His distinguished comeliness of *Figure*
(Lact. c. 18) is a favorite theme with his enthusiastic friend Eusebius,
who says, “No one was comparable with him for grace and beauty of
person” (cf. Eumen. c. 17; *V. C.* 1. <span id="page_422">p. 422</span>
<span id="iv.iii.ii.iii-Page_422"></span>19; 3. 10), and that his figure
was “manly and vigorous” (1. 20). The broad *Shoulders* and thick *Neck*
prepare one for the testimony to his great bodily *Strength.* The feats
of personal valor in combat with the Sarmatian champions and the wild
beasts (cf. above), his personal energy in battle (e.g. before Verona;
cf. above), much special testimony (e.g. Eumen. *Paneg.* c. 4) and all
the general testimony, show that the superlative language of Eusebius is
well grounded, and interpreted with conservative imagination is to be
taken as fact. According to him, “he so far surpassed his compeers in
personal strength as to be a terror to them” (*V. C.* 1. 19), and in
respect of *Vigor* of body was such that at the Council of Nicæa his
very bearing showed that he surpassed all present in “invincible
strength and vigor”; while at the age of sixty or upwards, “he still
possessed a sound and vigorous body, free from all blemish and of more
than youthful vivacity; a noble mien and strength equal to any exertion,
so that he was able to join in martial exercises, to ride, endure the
fatigues of travel, engage in battle,” &c. (Vict. 4. 53). In *Bearing*
he was “manly” (*V. C.* 1. 20), self-possessed, calm (*V. C.* 3. 11),
dignified (“noble gravity,” Naz. c. 24; of. Eumen. &c.), with “majestic
dignity of mien” (*V. C.* 3. 10) and serenity (*V. C.* 3. 10). In
*Manners* he was “suave” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii.ii.iii-p4.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii.ii.iii-p4.2"></span>πιεικής</span>) (*V. C.* 3. 10) and
“affable to all” (*V. C.* 3. 13). This singular affability was such,
according to Lactantius (c. 18), as to endear him greatly to his
soldiers. Over against this, however, must be set the statement of
Victor, *Epit*. that he was “a scoffer \[*irrisor*\] rather than suave
\[*blandus*\]” (Vict. *Epit*. 51). But this seems founded on a false
exegesis (cf. above) and withal there is no absolute contradiction.
Moreover, all his intercourse with bishops, deputies, soldiers,
citizens, barbarians, seems to have generally made a favorable
impression, and such success without affability of manner would have
been marvelous. In *Dress* his taste, late in life at least, became
somewhat gorgeous. If he were reigning to-day, the comic papers would
undoubtedly represent him, like some other good and great men, with
exaggerated red neckties and figured waistcoats. He “always wore a
diadem,” according to Victor, *Epit.* (p. 51), and according to many
(Malal. 13. 7–8; Cedren.; Pseudo-Leo, &c.) “none of the emperors before
him” wore the diadem at all. Eusebius’ description of his appearance at
the Council of Nicæa would do credit to a Washington reporter on
wedding-toilets; he was “clothed in raiment which glittered, as it were,
with rays of light, reflecting the glowing radiance of a purple robe,
and adorned with the brilliant splendor of gold and precious stones”
(*V. C.* 3. 10).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3039"></span>[421:3040](2010354.htm#fr_3039.md) <span
id="iv.iii.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii.iii-p3"></span> Cf. Vict. *Epit.* p. 51, where
“bull-necked” is rendered as equal to “scoffer,” “such according to
physiognomical writers being the character of stout men,” Liddell and
Scott, *Lex.* p. 1569. But the very proverb on which Victor bases this
interpretation would seem to make it refer to energy and obstinate force
of character, which is altogether better fitting the word and the
physiognomical characteristic.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](2010355.md)
