[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010164)  [Next](2010166) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.xxv"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.—</span>*The Disagreement in
Asia.*

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xxv-p2.1"></span>But</span> the bishops of Asia, led by
Polycrates, decided to hold to the old custom handed down to them. <span
id="fr_1694"></span>[1695](#fn_1694) He himself, in a letter which he
addressed to Victor and the church of Rome, set forth in the following
words the tradition which had come down to him: <span
id="fr_1695"></span>[1696](#fn_1695)

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p5"></span>2. “We observe the exact day; neither
adding, nor taking away. For in Asia also great lights have fallen
asleep, which shall rise again on the day of the Lord’s coming, when he
shall come with glory from heaven, and shall seek out all the saints.
Among these are Philip, one of the twelve apostles, who fell asleep in
Hierapolis; and his two aged virgin daughters, and another daughter, who
lived in the Holy Spirit and now rests at Ephesus; and, moreover, John,
who was both a witness and a teacher, who reclined upon the bosom of the
Lord, and, being a priest, wore the sacerdotal plate.

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p6"></span>3. He fell asleep at Ephesus.

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p7"></span>4. And Polycarp <span
id="fr_1696"></span>[1697](#fn_1696) in Smyrna, who was a bishop and
martyr; and Thraseas, <span id="fr_1697"></span>[1698](#fn_1697) bishop
and martyr from Eumenia, who fell asleep in Smyrna.

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p10"></span>5. Why need I mention the bishop and
martyr Sagaris <span id="fr_1698"></span>[1699](#fn_1698) who fell
asleep in Laodicea, or the blessed Papirius, <span
id="fr_1699"></span>[1700](#fn_1699) or Melito, <span
id="fr_1700"></span>[1701](#fn_1700) the Eunuch who lived altogether in
the Holy Spirit, and who lies in Sardis, awaiting the episcopate from
heaven, when he shall rise from the dead?

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p14"></span>6. All these observed the fourteenth day
of the passover according to the Gospel, deviating in no respect, but
following the rule of faith. <span id="fr_1701"></span>[1702](#fn_1701)
And I also, Polycrates, the least of you all, do according to the
tradition of my relatives, some of whom I have closely followed. For
seven of my relatives were bishops; and I am the eighth. And my
relatives always observed the day when the people <span
id="fr_1702"></span>[1703](#fn_1702) put away the leaven.

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p17"></span>7. I, therefore, brethren, who have
lived sixty-five years in the Lord, and have met with the brethren
throughout the world, and have gone through every Holy Scripture, am not
affrighted by terrifying words. For those greater than I have said ‘We
ought to obey God rather than man.’” <span
id="fr_1703"></span>[1704](#fn_1703)

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p19"></span>8. He then writes of all the bishops who
were present with him and thought as he did. His words are as follows:

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p20"></span>“I could mention the bishops who were
present, whom I summoned at your desire; <span
id="fr_1704"></span>[1705](#fn_1704) whose names, should I write them,
would constitute a great multitude. And they, beholding my littleness,
gave their consent to the letter, knowing that I did not bear my gray
hairs in vain, but had always governed my life by the Lord Jesus.”

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p22"></span>9. Thereupon Victor, who presided over
the church at Rome, immediately attempted to cut off from the common
unity the parishes of all Asia, with the churches that agreed with them,
as heterodox; and he wrote letters and declared all the brethren there
wholly excommuni<span id="page_243">p. 243</span> <span
id="iii.x.xxv-Page_243"></span>cate. <span
id="fr_1705"></span>[1706](#fn_1705)

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p24"></span>10. But this did not please all the
bishops. And they besought him to consider the things of peace, and of
neighborly unity and love. Words of theirs are extant, sharply rebuking
Victor.

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p25"></span>11. Among them was Irenæus, who, sending
letters in the name of the brethren in Gaul over whom he presided,
maintained that the mystery of the resurrection of the Lord should be
observed only on the Lord’s day. He fittingly admonishes Victor that he
should not cut off whole churches of God which observed the tradition of
an ancient custom and after many other words he proceeds as
follows: <span id="fr_1706"></span>[1707](#fn_1706)

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p27"></span>12. “For the controversy is not only
concerning the day, but also concerning the very manner of the fast. For
some think that they should fast one day, others two, yet others more;
some, moreover, count their day as consisting of forty hours day and
night. <span id="fr_1707"></span>[1708](#fn_1707)

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p29"></span>13. And this variety in its observance
has not originated in our time; but long before in that of our
ancestors. <span id="fr_1708"></span>[1709](#fn_1708) It is likely that
they did not hold to strict accuracy, and thus formed a custom for their
posterity according to their own simplicity and peculiar mode. Yet all
of these lived none the less in peace, and we also live in peace with
one another; and the disagreement in regard to the fast confirms the
agreement in the faith.”

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p32"></span>14. He adds to this the following
account, which I may properly insert:

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p33"></span>“Among these were the presbyters before
Soter, who presided over the church which thou now rulest. We mean
Anicetus, and Pius, and Hyginus, and Telesphorus, and Xystus. They
neither observed it <span id="fr_1709"></span>[1710](#fn_1709)
themselves, nor did they permit those after them to do so. And yet
though not observing it, they were none the less at peace with those who
came to them from the parishes in which it was observed; although this
observance was more opposed to those who did not observe it. <span
id="fr_1710"></span>[1711](#fn_1710)

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p36"></span>15. But none were ever cast out on
account of this form; but the presbyters before thee who did not observe
it, sent the eucharist to those of other parishes who observed it. <span
id="fr_1711"></span>[1712](#fn_1711)

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p38"></span>16. And when the blessed Polycarp was at
Rome <span id="fr_1712"></span>[1713](#fn_1712) in the time of Anicetus,
<span id="page_244">p. 244</span> <span
id="iii.x.xxv-Page_244"></span>and they disagreed a little about certain
other things, they immediately made peace with one another, not caring
to quarrel over this matter. For neither could Anicetus persuade
Polycarp not to observe what he had always observed with John the
disciple of our Lord, and the other apostles with whom he had
associated; neither could Polycarp persuade Anicetus to observe it as he
said that he ought to follow the customs of the presbyters that had
preceded him.

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p40"></span>17. But though matters were in this
shape, they communed together, and Anicetus conceded the administration
of the eucharist in the church to Polycarp, manifestly as a mark of
respect. <span id="fr_1713"></span>[1714](#fn_1713) And they parted from
each other in peace, both those who observed, and those who did not,
maintaining the peace of the whole church.”

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p42"></span>18. Thus Irenæus, who truly was well
named, <span id="fr_1714"></span>[1715](#fn_1714) became a peacemaker in
this matter, exhorting and negotiating in this way in behalf of the
peace of the churches. And he conferred by letter about this mooted
question, not only with Victor, but also with most of the other rulers
of the churches. <span id="fr_1715"></span>[1716](#fn_1715)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1694"></span>[242:1695](2010165.htm#fr_1694) <span
id="iii.x.xxv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p3"></span> For a general account of the paschal
controversy, see the preceding chapter, note 1. On Polycrates, see chap.
22, note 9.

<span id="fn_1695"></span>[242:1696](2010165.htm#fr_1695) <span
id="iii.x.xxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p4"></span> A part of this passage from Polycrates’
epistle is quoted in Bk. III. chap. 31. The extract given there begins
with the second sentence of the fragment (“For in Asia great lights,”
&c.), and extends to the report of John’s burial at Ephesus. For
comments upon this portion of the fragment, see the notes given there.

<span id="fn_1696"></span>[242:1697](2010165.htm#fr_1696) <span
id="iii.x.xxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p8"></span> On Polycarp, see Bk. IV. chap. 14, note
5.

<span id="fn_1697"></span>[242:1698](2010165.htm#fr_1697) <span
id="iii.x.xxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p9"></span> This Thraseas, said by Polycrates to
have been bishop of Eumenia (a city in the southern part of Phrygia),
was mentioned also by Apollonius in his work against the Montanists
(according to Eusebius, chap. 18, §13, of this book). He is called by
Polycrates a martyr, and by Eusebius, in reference to Apollonius’
mention of him, “one of the martyrs of that time.” There is no reason to
doubt that he was a martyr, in the full sense, as Polycarp was; but upon
the more general use of the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxv-p9.1"></span>μ€ρτυς</span> as, e.g., in connection with
John just above, see Bk. III. chap. 32, note 15. We know nothing more
about this bishop Thraseas.

<span id="fn_1698"></span>[242:1699](2010165.htm#fr_1698) <span
id="iii.x.xxv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p11"></span> On Sagaris, see above, Bk. IV. chap.
26, note 22.

<span id="fn_1699"></span>[242:1700](2010165.htm#fr_1699) <span
id="iii.x.xxv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p12"></span> Polycrates does not call Papirius a
bishop or a martyr, and we know nothing about him. Simeon Metaphrastes,
upon whose reports little reliance can be placed, in his life of
Polycarp (according to Valesius), makes Papirius a successor of Polycarp
as bishop of Smyrna.

<span id="fn_1700"></span>[242:1701](2010165.htm#fr_1700) <span
id="iii.x.xxv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p13"></span> On Melito, see Bk. IV. chap. 26, note
1.

<span id="fn_1701"></span>[242:1702](2010165.htm#fr_1701) <span
id="iii.x.xxv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p15"></span> A careful exegesis of the passages in
John’s Gospel, which are supposed by some to contradict the synoptic
account, and to put Christ’s death on the fourteenth day of Nisan
instead of on the fifteenth, shows that John agrees with the Synoptists
in putting the passover meal on the fourteenth and the death of Christ
on the fifteenth (see Schaff’s *Ch. Hist.* Vol. I. p. 133 ff., and the
authorities referred to by him). The Asiatic churches, in observing the
fourteenth of Nisan, were commemorating the last passover feast and the
death of the paschal Lamb. Their practice did not imply that they
believed that Christ died on the fourteenth (as can be seen from
fragments of Apolinarius’ work quoted in the *Chron. Paschale,* and
referred to above; see, also, Schaff, Vol. II. p. 214). They were in
full agreement with all four Gospels in putting his death on the
fifteenth. But the paschal controversy did not hinge on the day of the
month on which Christ died,—in regard to which there was no widespread
disagreement,—but on the question as to whether a particular day of the
week or of the month was to be celebrated.

<span id="fn_1702"></span>[242:1703](2010165.htm#fr_1702) <span
id="iii.x.xxv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p16"></span> i.e. the Jews. The passover feast among
the Jews took place on the evening of the fourteenth of Nisan, and was
eaten with unleavened bread (<span id="iii.x.xxv-p16.1"></span>[Ex. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#006)<span id="iii.x.xxv-p16.2"></span>
*et passim*). It was on the fourteenth of Nisan, therefore, that the
Jews “threw away” the leaven, and until the evening of the twenty-first,
when the seven days’ feast of unleavened bread closed, they used no
leaven.

<span id="fn_1703"></span>[242:1704](2010165.htm#fr_1703) <span
id="iii.x.xxv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p18"></span> [Acts v.
29](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#029)<span id="iii.x.xxv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1704"></span>[242:1705](2010165.htm#fr_1704) <span
id="iii.x.xxv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p21"></span> According to this, the Asiatic Council
was summoned at the request of Victor of Rome, and in all probability
this was the case with all the councils referred to in the last chapter.

<span id="fn_1705"></span>[243:1706](2010165.htm#fr_1705) <span
id="iii.x.xxv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p23"></span> There has been considerable discussion
as to whether Victor actually excommunicated the Asiatic churches or
only threatened to do so. Socrates (*H. E.* V. 22) says directly that he
excommunicated them, but many have thought that Eusebius does not say
it. For my part, I cannot understand that Eusebius’ words mean anything
else than that he did actually cut off communion with them. The Greek
reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxv-p23.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxv-p23.2"></span>κοινωνήτους π€ντας ἄρδην τοὺς ἐκεῖσε
ἀνακηρύττων ἀδελφούς</span>. This seems to me decisive.

<span id="fn_1706"></span>[243:1707](2010165.htm#fr_1706) <span
id="iii.x.xxv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p26"></span> This epistle is no longer extant, but
in addition to the fragments given in this chapter by Eusebius, a few
other extracts from it are found in other writers; thus, in the
Pseudo-Justinian *Quæstiones et responsa ad orthodoxos* occurs a
quotation from Irenæus’ work *On Easter* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxv-p26.1"></span>περὶ τοῦ π€σχα</span>), which is doubtless
to be identified with this epistle to Victor (ed. Harvey, *Græc. fragm.*
7; Eng. translation in *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* I. p. 569). Maximus of
Turin, also, in his *Sermo VII. de Eleemos.,* gives a brief quotation
from “The epistle to Victor” (Harvey, *Græc. fragm.* 5, trans. *ibid.*).
It is possible that some other unnamed fragments given by Harvey are
from this epistle. From Eusebius’ words we learn that Irenæus agreed
with Victor as to the proper time of keeping the feast, and yet he did
not agree with him in his desire to excommunicate those who followed the
other practice.

<span id="fn_1707"></span>[243:1708](2010165.htm#fr_1707) <span
id="iii.x.xxv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p28"></span> The punctuation of this sentence is a
disputed matter. Some editors omit the semicolon after the words “yet
others more,” translating, “For some think that they should fast one
day, others two, yet others more, and some forty; and they count the
hours of the day and night together as their day.” The sense is thus
materially changed, but the Greek seems to necessitate rather the
punctuation which I have followed in my translation, and so that
punctuation is adopted by Valesius, Zimmermann, Burton, Schwegler,
Laemmer, Heinichen, Closs, Crusè, and others. We should expect,
moreover, that the forty hours’ fast should be mentioned in this
connection by Irenæus, as we learn from Tertullian that it was very
common; whereas we have no other trace of the forty days’ fast at so
early a date (cf. the next note).

<span id="fn_1708"></span>[243:1709](2010165.htm#fr_1708) <span
id="iii.x.xxv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p30"></span> The fast preceding the celebration of
the paschal supper, which has grown gradually into our Lent of forty
days preceding Easter, is, we are told here by Irenæus, much older than
his day. It is thus carried back at least close to apostolic times, and
there is no reason to think that it was not observed about as soon as
the celebration of the paschal supper itself was established. Tertullian
also mentions the fast, which continued, according to him (*de Jejunio,*
chap. 2), during the period “in which the bridegroom was taken away,”
i.e. in which Jesus was under the power of death.

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p31"></span>We learn from this passage of Irenæus’
epistle that the duration of the fast varied greatly. From Socrates (*H.
E.* V. 22) and Sozomen (*H. E.* VII. 19) we learn that the variation was
as great in their time. Some fasted three, some six, some seven weeks,
and so on. Socrates (*l.c.*) informs us that the fast, whatever its
duration, was always called <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxv-p31.1"></span>τεσσαρακοστή</span> (*quadrigesima*). He
does not know why this is, but says that various reasons are given by
others. The time between Jesus’ death and his resurrection was very
early computed as forty hours in length,—from noon of Friday to four
o’clock Sunday morning. This may have lain at the basis of the number
forty, which was so persistently used to designate the fast, for
Tertullian tells us that the fast was intended to cover the period
during which Jesus was dead. It is this idea which undoubtedly underlay
the fast of forty hours which Irenæus mentions. The fasts of Moses, of
Elijah, and of Jesus in the desert would also of course have great
influence in determining the length of this, the most important fast of
the year. Already before the end of the third century the fast had
extended itself in many quarters to cover a number of weeks, and in the
time of Eusebius the forty days’ fast had already become a common thing
(see his *de Pasch.* chap. 5), and even Origen refers to it (*Hom. in
Lev.* X. 2). The present duration of the fast—forty days exclusive of
Sundays—was fixed in the seventh or eighth century. Cf. Sinker’s article
on Lent in Smith’s *Dict. of Christ. Ant.* and Krieg’s article, *Feste,*
in Kraus’ *Encyclop. der Christ. Alterthümer,* I. p. 489.

<span id="fn_1709"></span>[243:1710](2010165.htm#fr_1709) <span
id="iii.x.xxv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p34"></span> i.e. the fourteenth day.

<span id="fn_1710"></span>[243:1711](2010165.htm#fr_1710) <span
id="iii.x.xxv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p35"></span> The Greek reads: <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xxv-p35.1"></span>καί τοι μᾶλλον ἐναντίον
ἦν τὸ τηρεῖν τοῖς μή τηροῦσι</span>. The meaning is, that the observance
of the fourteenth day by these strangers in Rome itself, among those who
did not observe that day, would be noticeable and more distasteful than
the mere report that the day was so observed in Asia could be. If
Victor’s predecessor, therefore, allowed such persons to observe that
day even in Rome, how much more should he allow the Asiatics to observe
it in their own land.

<span id="fn_1711"></span>[243:1712](2010165.htm#fr_1711) <span
id="iii.x.xxv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p37"></span> Valesius, followed by others,
interprets this sentence as meaning that the presbyters of Rome sent the
eucharist to other parishes where the paschal festival was observed on
the fourteenth of the month. The council of Laodicea (Can. 14) forbade
the sending of the eucharist to other parishes, which shows that the
custom must have been widespread before the end of the fourth century,
and it is therefore quite possible that the bishops of Rome, even as
early as the time of Irenæus, pursued the same practice. But in regard
to the statement made here by Irenæus, it must be said that, so far as
we are able to ascertain, only the churches of Asia Minor observed the
fourteenth day at that early date, and it is difficult to imagine that
the presbyters of Rome before Victor’s time had been in the habit of
sending the eucharist all the way from Rome to Asia Minor. Moreover,
this is the only passage in which we have notice, before the fourth
century, of the existence of the general practice condemned by the
council of Laodicea. The Greek reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxv-p37.1"></span>οἱ πρὸ σοῦ πρεσβύτεροι τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν
παροικιῶν τηροῦσιν žπεμπον εὐχαριστίαν</span>. These words taken by
themselves can as well, if not better, be understood of persons (whether
presbyters or others is not in any case distinctly stated) who had come
to Rome from other parishes, and who continued to observe the fourteenth
day. This transmission of the eucharist to communicants who were kept
away from the service by illness or other adequate cause was a very old
custom, being mentioned by Justin Martyr in his *Apol.* I. 65. It is
true that it is difficult to understand why Irenæus should speak in the
present case of sending the eucharist to those persons who observed the
fourteenth day, instead of merely mentioning the fact that the Roman
church communed with them. In the face of the difficulties on both sides
it must be admitted that neither of the interpretations mentioned can be
insisted upon. On the practice of sending the eucharistic bread to
persons not present at the service or to other parishes, see the article
*Eulogia*, in Smith’s *Dict. of Christ. Ant.*

<span id="fn_1712"></span>[243:1713](2010165.htm#fr_1712) <span
id="iii.x.xxv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxv-p39.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxv-p39.2"></span>πιδημήσαντος τῇ ῾Ρώμῃ</span>. Upon the
significance of this phrase, see Bk. IV. chap. 11, note 19. On the date
of Polycarp’s visit to Rome, see *ibid.,* chap. 14, note 2. In his *Adv.
Hær.,* where he mentions this visit (as quoted in chap. 14), Irenæus
does not speak of the affair of the passover which he refers to here.
The omission, however, has no significance, as he is discussing
Gnosticism there, and refers to Polycarp’s visit to Rome only because
his attitude toward Marcion was revealed in connection with it.

<span id="fn_1713"></span>[244:1714](2010165.htm#fr_1713) <span
id="iii.x.xxv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p41"></span> The meaning of this passage has been
disputed. The Greek reads: <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxv-p41.1"></span>καὶ ἐν τῇ ἐκκλησί& 139· παρεχώρησεν ὁ
᾽Ανίκητος τὴν εὐχαριστίαν τῷ Πολυκ€ρπῳ κατ᾽ ἐντροπὴν δηλονότι</span>.
Valesius understands Irenæus’ meaning to be that Anicetus invited
Polycarp to administer the eucharist in Rome; and this is the common
interpretation of the passage. Heinichen objects, however, that <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xxv-p41.2"></span>παρεχώρησεν τὴν
εὐχαριστίαν</span> cannot refer to the administration of the sacrament,
and hence concludes that Irenæus means simply to say that Anicetus
permitted Polycarp to partake of the eucharist in his church, thereby
proclaiming publicly their fraternal fellowship, in spite of their
differences on the paschal question. The common interpretation, however,
seems to the writer better than Heinichen’s; for if the latter be
adopted, the sentence in question says no more than the one which
precedes it,—“they communed with each other” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxv-p41.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxv-p41.4"></span>κοινώνησαν ἑαυτοῖς</span>). And moreover, as
Valesius remarks, Anicetus would in that case have shown Polycarp no
more honor than any other Christian pilgrim who might happen to be in
Rome. Irenæus seems to intend to say that Anicetus showed Polycarp
especial honor, and that in spite of their difference of opinion on the
paschal question. But simply to have allowed Polycarp to partake of the
eucharist in the church would certainly have been no honor, and, on the
other hand, not to invite him to assist in the administration of the
sacrament might have seemed a sign of disrespect, and have emphasized
their differences. The old interpretation, therefore, must be followed,
and so far as the Greek is concerned, there is no difficulty about the
construction. In the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxv-p41.5"></span>παρεχώρησεν</span> resides the idea of
“yielding,” “giving place to”; and so Anicetus yielded to Polycarp the
eucharist, or gave place to him in the matter of the eucharist. This in
fact brings out the force of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxv-p41.6"></span>παρεχώρησεν</span> better than Heinichen’s
interpretation.

<span id="fn_1714"></span>[244:1715](2010165.htm#fr_1714) <span
id="iii.x.xxv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p43"></span> The Greek form of the name is <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xxv-p43.1"></span>Εἰρηναῖος</span>, from
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xxv-p43.2"></span>εἰρήνη</span>,
which means “peace.”

<span id="fn_1715"></span>[244:1716](2010165.htm#fr_1715) <span
id="iii.x.xxv-p43.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxv-p44"></span> None of these epistles are extant; but
it is possible that some of the fragments commonly assigned to Irenæus’
epistle to Victor may belong to one or more of them (see the *Dict. of
Christ. Biog.* III. p. 265). We do not know to what bishops or churches
these epistles were sent. Jerome does not mention them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV](2010166)
