[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010370)  [Next](2010372) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv.v-p1"></span> 4. *Donation of Constantine*.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.v-p2"></span>This most remarkable of forgeries for
its practical effect on world-history has been the subject of endless
discussion. It is, in brief, a supposed grant to the Pope of Rome,
Silvester, of certain sweeping privileges in recognition of the miracle
he has wrought. The edict gives a long confession of faith followed by
an account of the miracle and mention of the churches he has built. Then
follow the grants to Silvester, sovereign Pontiff and Pope of Rome, and
all his successors until the end of the world,—the Lateran palace, the
diadem, phryginus, the purple mantle and scarlet robe, imperial
scepters, insignia, banners and the whole imperial paraphernalia, as
well as various clerical privileges and pretty much the whole world to
govern. It is impossible here even to represent in outline the history
of this extraordinary fiction. Composed not earlier than the latter part
of the eighth century (Martens et alt. 9 cent.; Grauert, 840–850; Hauck,
Bonneau, 752–757; Langen, 778, &c.; Friedrich acc. to Seeberg, divides
into an earlier \[653\] and a later \[753\] portion), it early came to
be general, though not unquestioned, authority. In 1229–1230 a couple of
unfortunates who ventured to doubt its authenticity were burned alive at
Strasburg (Documents communicated by Ristelhuber to Bonneau p. 57–58).
Not many years after, Dante seems (*Inf*. 19. 115) to have taken its
authenticity for granted; and although there is a possible doubting (*De
Monarch*. 4. 10), he does not venture to dispute this. He denies,
however, Constantine’s power or right to give, if he did give. In modern
times the fictitious character of the document is recognized by
Protestants and Catholics alike, and the discussion, so vigorous
for<span id="page_443">p. 443</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iv.v-Page_443"></span>merly, over this authenticity has
narrowed itself chiefly to a discussion of the place (France or Rome)
and date (653–753, ninth century) and possible author. The discussion
over these points has been lately renewed and is being carried on with
animation. Among the later monographs are those of Martens (1889) and
Friedrich (1889, not at hand). The latest treatise at hand is that of
Seeberg in the Theol. Literaturbl. of Jan. 17. 24. 31 of the current
year. For farther select literature, compare *Verzeichniss* in Martens;
for sources, the chapters of Martens and Preface of Bonneau; for older
literature, Muensch. p. 96–97, and in general the *Literature* of
Constantine, in this volume, although no attempt has been made to
exhaust the literature of this sub-topic there. Treatises on the
Donation will be found under the names of Albani, Altus, Arrhenius,
Bachmann, Bayet, Bonneau, Brunner, Chaulnes, Colombier, Cusa, Friedrich,
Genelin, Grauert, Hauck, Hildebrand, Jacobatius, Kaufman, Krüger,
Martens, Muench, Rallaye, Scheffer-Boichorst, Seeberg, Steuchus, Tacut,
Valla, Walther, Wieland, Zeumer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](2010372)
