[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010279)  [Next](2010281.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiv.x"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.x-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiv.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.</span>

<span id="iii.xiv.x-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiv.x-p2.1"></span>After</span> such noble acts of the
distinguished martyrs of Christ, the flame of persecution lessened, and
was quenched, as it were by their sacred blood, and relief and liberty
were granted to those who, for Christ’s sake, were laboring in the mines
of Thebais, and for a little time we were beginning to breath pure air.

<span id="iii.xiv.x-p3"></span>2. But by some new impulse, I know not
what, he who held the power to persecute was again aroused against the
Christians. Immediately letters from Maximinus against us were published
everywhere in every province. <span id="fr_2665"></span>[2666](#fn_2665.md)
The governors and the military prefect <span
id="fr_2666"></span>[2667](#fn_2666.md) urged by edicts and letters and
public ordinances the magistrates and generals and notaries <span
id="fr_2667"></span>[2668](#fn_2667.md) in all the cities to carry out the
imperial decree, which ordered that the altars of the idols should with
all speed be rebuilt; and that all men, women, and children, even
infants at the breast, should sacrifice and offer oblations; and that
with diligence and care they should cause them to taste of the execrable
offerings; and that the things for sale in the market should be polluted
with libations from the sacrifices; and that guards should be stationed
before the baths in order to defile with the abominable sacrifices those
who went to wash in them.

<span id="iii.xiv.x-p7"></span>3. When these orders were being carried
out, our people, as was natural, were at the beginning greatly
distressed in mind; and even the unbelieving heathen blamed the severity
and the exceeding absurdity of what was done. For these things appeared
to them extreme and burdensome.

<span id="iii.xiv.x-p8"></span>4. As the heaviest storm impended over
all in every quarter, the divine power of our Saviour again infused such
boldness into his athletes, <span id="fr_2668"></span>[2669](#fn_2668.md)
that without being drawn on or dragged forward by any one, they spurned
the threats. Three of the faithful joining together, rushed on the
governor as he was sacrificing to the idols, and cried out to him to
cease from his delusion, there being no other God than the Maker and
Creator of the universe. When he asked who they were, they confessed
boldly that they were Christians.

<span id="iii.xiv.x-p10"></span>5. Thereupon Firmilianus, being greatly
enraged, sentenced them to capital punishment without inflicting
tortures upon them. The name of the eldest of these was Antoninus; of
the next, Zebinas, who was a native of Eleutheropolis; and of the third,
Germanus. This took place on the thirteenth of the month Dius, the Ides
of November. <span id="fr_2669"></span>[2670](#fn_2669.md)

<span id="iii.xiv.x-p12"></span>6. There was associated with them on the
same day Ennathas, a woman from Scythopolis, who was adorned with the
chaplet of virginity. She did not indeed do as they had done, but was
dragged by force and brought before the judge.

<span id="iii.xiv.x-p13"></span>7. She endured scourgings and cruel
insults, which Maxys, a tribune of a neighboring district, without the
knowledge of the superior authority, dared to inflict upon her. He was a
man worse than his name, <span id="fr_2670"></span>[2671](#fn_2670.md)
sanguinary in other respects, exceedingly harsh, and altogether cruel,
and censured by all who knew him. This man stripped the blessed woman of
<span id="page_351">p. 351</span> <span
id="iii.xiv.x-Page_351"></span>all her clothing, so that she was covered
only from her loins to her feet and the rest of her body was bare. And
he led her through the entire city of Cæsarea, and regarded it as a
great thing to beat her with thongs while she was dragged through all
the market-places.

<span id="iii.xiv.x-p15"></span>8. After such treatment she manifested
the noblest constancy at the judgment seat of the governor himself; and
the judge condemned her to be burned alive. He also carried his rage
against the pious to a most inhuman length and transgressed the laws of
nature, not being ashamed even to deny burial to the lifeless bodies of
the sacred men.

<span id="iii.xiv.x-p16"></span>9. Thus he ordered the dead to be
exposed in the open air as food for wild beasts and to be watched
carefully by night and day. For many days a large number of men attended
to this savage and barbarous decree. And they looked out from their post
of observation, as if it were a matter worthy of care, to see that the
dead bodies should not be stolen. And wild beasts and dogs and birds of
prey scattered the human limbs here and there, and the whole city was
strewed with the entrails and bones of men,

<span id="iii.xiv.x-p17"></span>10. so that nothing had ever appeared
more dreadful and horrible, even to those who formerly hated us; though
they bewailed not so much the calamity of those against whom these
things were done, as the outrage against themselves and the common
nature of man.

<span id="iii.xiv.x-p18"></span>11. For there was to be seen near the
gates a spectacle beyond all description and tragic recital; for not
only was human flesh devoured in one place, but it was scattered in
every place; so that some said that limbs and masses of flesh and parts
of entrails were to be seen even within the gates.

<span id="iii.xiv.x-p19"></span>12. After these things had continued for
many days, a wonderful event occurred. The air was clear and bright and
the appearance of the sky most serene. When suddenly throughout the city
from the pillars which supported the public porches many drops fell like
tears; and the market places and streets, though there was no mist in
the air, were moistened with sprinkled water, whence I know not. Then
immediately it was reported everywhere that the earth, unable to endure
the abomination of these things, had shed tears in a mysterious manner;
and that as a rebuke to the relentless and unfeeling nature of men,
stones and lifeless wood had wept for what had happened. I know well
that this account may perhaps appear idle and fabulous to those who come
after us, but not to those to whom the truth was confirmed at the
time. <span id="fr_2671"></span>[2672](#fn_2671.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2665"></span>[350:2666](2010280.htm#fr_2665.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.x-p4"></span> This is the so-called Fifth Edict, and
was issued (according to the *Passio S. Theodori*) by Galerius and
Maximinus, but was evidently inspired by Maximinus himself. Mason speaks
of it as follows: “It would be inaccurate to say that this Fifth Edict
(if so we may call it) was worse than any of the foregoing. But there is
in it a thin bitterness, a venomous spitefulness, which may be noticed
as characteristic of all the later part of the persecution. This
spitefulness is due to two main facts. The first was that Paganism was
becoming conscious of defeat; the Church had not yielded a single point.
The second fact was that the Church had no longer to deal with the
sensible, statesmanlike hostility of Diocletian,—not even with the bluff
bloodiness of Maximian. Galerius himself was now, except in name, no
longer persecutor-in-chief. He was content to follow the lead of a man
who was in all ways even worse than himself. Galerius was indeed an Evil
Beast; his nephew was more like the Crooked Serpent. The artful sour
spirit of Maximin employed itself to invent, not larger measures of
solid policy against his feared and hated foes, but petty tricks to
annoy and sting them.” For a fuller discussion of the edict, see Mason,
p. 284 sq. It must have been published in the autumn of the year 308,
for the martyrdom of Paul, recorded in the previous chapter, took place
in July of that year, and some little time seems to have elapsed between
that event and the present. On the other hand, the martyrdoms mentioned
below, in §5, took place in November of this same year, so that we can
fix the date of the edict within narrow limits.

<span id="fn_2666"></span>[350:2667](2010280.htm#fr_2666.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.x-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiv.x-p5.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiv.x-p5.2"></span>τοῦ τῶν στρατοπέδων ἄρχειν
ἐπιτεταγμένος</span>. Many regard this officer as the prætorian prefect.
But we should naturally expect so high an official to be mentioned
before the governors (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiv.x-p5.3"></span>ἡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiv.x-p5.4"></span>γεμόνες</span>). It seems probable, in fact,
that the commander in charge of the military forces of Palestine, or
possibly of Syria, is referred to in the present case. See Valesius’
note, *ad locum.*

<span id="fn_2667"></span>[350:2668](2010280.htm#fr_2667.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.x-p5.5"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.x-p6"></span> Or “town clerks,” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiv.x-p6.1"></span>ταβουλ€ριοι</span>

<span id="fn_2668"></span>[350:2669](2010280.htm#fr_2668.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.x-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.x-p9"></span> Literally, “*its* athletes” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiv.x-p9.1"></span>αὐτῆς</span>), the
antecedent of the pronoun being “the divine power.”

<span id="fn_2669"></span>[350:2670](2010280.htm#fr_2669.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.x-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.x-p11"></span> i.e. Nov. 13, 308.

<span id="fn_2670"></span>[350:2671](2010280.htm#fr_2670.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.x-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.x-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiv.x-p14.1"></span>Μ€ξυς</span> is not a Greek word. Ruinart,
*Acta Martt.*, p. 327, remarks, *An a Syris repetenda, apud quos mochos
est pulicanus a casas increpare?* But the derivation is, to say the
least, very doubtful. Cureton throws no light on the matter. The word in
the Syriac version seems to be simply a reproduction of the form found
in the Greek original.

<span id="fn_2671"></span>[351:2672](2010280.htm#fr_2671.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.x-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.x-p20"></span> This is a glaring instance of
uncritical credulity on Eusebius’ part, and yet even Crusè can say:
“Perhaps some might smile at the supposed credulity of our author, but
the *miracle* in this account was not greater than the *malignity,* and
if man can perform miracles of vice, we can scarcely wonder if
Providence should present, at least, miracles of admonition.” Cureton
more sensibly remarks: “This, which doubtless was produced by natural
causes, seemed miraculous to Eusebius, more especially if he looked upon
it as fulfilling a prophecy of our Lord—<span
id="iii.xiv.x-p20.1"></span>[Luke xix.
40](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#040.md)<span id="iii.xiv.x-p20.2"></span>:
‘I tell you, that if these should hold their peace, the stones would
immediately cry out.’ See also [Hab. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.xiv.x-p20.3"></span>.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](2010281.md)
