[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010051)  [Next](2010053.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.—</span>*Agrippa, who was also
called Herod, having persecuted the Apostles, immediately experienced
the Divine Vengeance.*

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.xi-p2.1"></span>The</span> consequences of the king’s
undertaking against the apostles were not long deferred, but the
avenging minister of divine justice overtook him immediately after his
plots against them, as the Book of Acts records. <span
id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333.md) For when he had journeyed to Cæsarea,
on a notable feast-day, clothed in a splendid and royal garment, he
delivered an address to the people from a lofty throne in front of the
tribunal. And when all the multitude applauded the speech, as if it were
the voice of a god and not of a man, the Scripture relates that an angel
of the Lord smote him, and being eaten of worms he gave up the
ghost. <span id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334.md)

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p5"></span>2. We must admire the account of
Josephus for its agreement with the divine Scriptures in regard to this
wonderful event; for he clearly bears witness to the truth in the
nineteenth book of his Antiquities, where he relates the wonder in the
following words: <span id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335.md)

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p7"></span>3. “He had completed the third year of
his reign over all Judea <span id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336.md) when he
came to Cæsarea, which was formerly called Strato’s Tower. <span
id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337.md) There he held games in honor of Cæsar,
learning that this was a festival observed in behalf of Cæsar’s
safety. <span id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338.md) At this festival was
collected a great multitude of the highest and most honorable men in the
province.

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p11"></span>4. And on the second day of the games
he proceeded to the theater at break of day, wearing a garment entirely
of silver and of wonderful texture. And there the silver, illuminated by
the reflection of the sun’s earliest rays, shone marvelously, gleaming
so brightly as to produce a sort of fear and terror in those who gazed
upon him.

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p12"></span>5. And immediately his flatterers, some
from one place, others from another, raised up their voices in a way
that was not for his good, calling him a god, and saying, ‘Be thou
merciful; if up to this time we have feared thee as a man, henceforth we
confess that thou art superior to the nature of mortals.’

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p13"></span>6. The king did not rebuke them, nor
did he reject their impious flattery. But after a little, looking up, he
saw an angel sitting above his head. <span
id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339.md) And this he quickly perceived would be
the cause of evil as <span id="page_112">p. 112</span> <span
id="iii.vii.xi-Page_112"></span>it had once been the cause of good
fortune, <span id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340.md) and he was smitten with
a heart-piercing pain.

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p17"></span>7. And straightway distress, beginning
with the greatest violence, seized his bowels. And looking upon his
friends he said, ‘I, your god, am now commanded to depart this life; and
fate thus on the spot disproves the lying words you have just uttered
concerning me. He who has been called immortal by you is now led away to
die; but our destiny must be accepted as God has determined it. For we
have passed our life by no means ingloriously, but in that splendor
which is pronounced happiness.’ <span id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341.md)

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p19"></span>8. And when he had said this he labored
with an increase of pain. He was accordingly carried in haste to the
palace, while the report spread among all that the king would
undoubtedly soon die. But the multitude, with their wives and children,
sitting on sackcloth after the custom of their fathers, implored God in
behalf of the king, and every place was filled with lamentation and
tears. <span id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342.md) And the king as he lay in
a lofty chamber, and saw them below lying prostrate on the ground, could
not refrain from weeping himself.

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p21"></span>9. And after suffering continually for
five days with pain in the bowels, he departed this life, in the
fifty-fourth year of his age, and in the seventh year of his
reign. <span id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343.md) Four years he ruled under
the Emperor Caius—three of them over the tetrarchy of Philip, to which
was added in the fourth year that of Herod <span
id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344.md) —and three years during the reign of
the Emperor Claudius.”

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p24"></span>10. I marvel greatly that Josephus, in
these things as well as in others, so fully agrees with the divine
Scriptures. But if there should seem to any one to be a disagreement in
respect to the name of the king, the time at least and the events show
that the same person is meant, whether the change of name has been
caused by the error of a copyist, or is due to the fact that he, like so
many, bore two names. <span id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_333"></span>[111:334](2010052.htm#fr_333.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p3"></span> See [Acts xii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.vii.xi-p3.1"></span>
sqq.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[111:335](2010052.htm#fr_334.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p4"></span> [Acts xii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#023.md)<span id="iii.vii.xi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[111:336](2010052.htm#fr_335.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p6"></span> Josephus, *Ant.* XIX. 8. 2.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[111:337](2010052.htm#fr_336.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p8"></span> 44 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.xi-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span> Agrippa began to reign over the
whole kingdom in 41 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.xi-p8.2"></span>a.d.</span> See above, chap. 4, note 3.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[111:338](2010052.htm#fr_337.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xi-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p9"></span> Cæsarea lay upon the Mediterranean Sea,
northwest of Jerusalem. In the time of Strabo there was simply a small
town at this point, called “Strato’s Tower”; but about 10 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.vii.xi-p9.1"></span>b.c.</span> Herod the
Great built the city of Cæsarea, which soon became the principal Roman
city of Palestine, and was noted for its magnificence. It became, later,
the seat of an important Christian school, and played quite a part in
Church history. Eusebius himself was Bishop of Cæsarea. It was a city of
importance, even in the time of the crusades, but is now a scene of
utter desolation.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[111:339](2010052.htm#fr_338.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p10"></span> The occasion of this festival is
uncertain. Some have considered it the festival in honor of the birth of
Claudius; others, a festival in honor of the return of Claudius from
Britain. But neither of these suggestions is likely. It is more probable
that the festival mentioned was the *Quinquennalia,* instituted by Herod
the Great in honor of Augustus in 12 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.xi-p10.1"></span>b.c.</span> (see Josephus, *Ant.* XV. 8. 1;
*B. J.* I. 21. 8), and celebrated regularly every five years. See
Wieseler’s *Chronologie des ap. Zeitalters,* p. 131 sqq., where this
question is carefully discussed in connection with the date of Agrippa’s
death which is fixed by Wieseler as Aug. 6, 44 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.xi-p10.2"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_339"></span>[111:340](2010052.htm#fr_339.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p14"></span> The passage in Josephus reads: “But as
he presently afterward looked up he saw an owl sitting on a certain rope
over his head, and immediately understood that this bird was the
messenger of evil tidings, as it had once been the messenger of good
tidings to him.” This conveys an entirely different sense, the owl being
omitted in Eusebius. As a consequence most writers on Eusebius have made
the gravest charges against him, accusing him of a willful perversion of
the text of Josephus with the intention of producing a confirmation of
the narrative of the Acts, in which the angel of God is spoken of, but
in which no mention is made of an owl. The case certainly looks serious,
but so severe an accusation—an accusation which impeaches the honesty of
Eusebius in the most direct manner—should not be made except upon
unanswerable grounds. Eusebius elsewhere shows himself to be a writer
who, though not always critical, is at least honest in the use he makes
of his materials. In this case, therefore, his general conduct ought to
be taken into consideration, and he ought to be given the benefit of the
doubt. Lightfoot, who defends his honesty, gives an explanation which
appears to me sufficiently satisfactory. He says: “Doubtless also the
omission of the owl in the account of Herod Agrippa’s death was already
in some texts of Josephus. The manner in which Eusebius deals with his
very numerous quotations elsewhere, where we can test his honesty, is a
sufficient vindication against this unjust charge.” And in a note he
adds: “It is not the *substitution* of an angel for an owl, as the case
is not uncommonly stated. The result is produced mainly by the
*omission* of some words in the text of Josephus, which runs thus: <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xi-p14.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xi-p14.2"></span>νακύψας δ᾽ οὖν μετ᾽
ὀλίγον</span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.xi-p14.3"></span>τὸν βουβῶνα</span>\] <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xi-p14.4"></span>τῆς ἑαυτοῦ κεφαλῆς ὑπὲρ
καθεζόμενον εἶδεν</span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.xi-p14.5"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.xi-p14.6"></span>πὶ σχοινίου τινός</span>\] <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xi-p14.7"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xi-p14.8"></span>γγελόν</span>\[<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xi-p14.9"></span>τε</span>\] <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xi-p14.10"></span>τοῦτον εὐθὺς ἐνόησε
κακῶν εἶναι, τὸν καί ποτε τῶν ἀγαθῶν γενόμενον</span>. The words
bracketed are omitted, and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.xi-p14.11"></span>αἴτιον</span> is added after <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xi-p14.12"></span>εἶναι</span>, so that
the sentence runs, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.xi-p14.13"></span>εἶδεν ἄγγελον τοῦτον εὐθὺς ἐνόησε κακῶν
εἶναι αἴτιον κ.τ.λ</span>. This being so, I do not feel at all sure that
the change (by whomsoever made) was dictated by any disingenuous motive.
A scribe unacquainted with Latin would stumble over <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xi-p14.14"></span>τὸν βουβῶνα</span>,
which had a wholly different meaning and seems never to have been used
of an owl in Greek; and he would alter the text in order to extract some
sense out of it. In the previous mention of the bird (*Ant.* XVIII. 6,
7) Josephus, or his translator, gives it as a Latin name: <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xi-p14.15"></span>βουβῶνα δὲ οἱ ῾Ρωμαῖοι
τὸν ὄρνιν τοῦτον καλοῦσι</span>. Möller (quoted by Bright, p. XLV.)
calls this ‘the one case’ in which, so far as he recollects, ‘*a
sinceritatis via paululum deflexit noster*’; and even here the
indictment cannot be made good. The severe strictures against Eusebius,
made e.g. by Alford on [Acts xii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#021.md)<span
id="iii.vii.xi-p14.16"></span>, are altogether unjustifiable” (Smith and
Wace’s *Dict. of Christian Biog.* II. p. 325). The Greek word <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xi-p14.17"></span>βουβών</span> means,
according to Liddell and Scott, (1) *the groin,* (2) *a swelling in the
groin.* The Latin word *Bubo* signifies “an owl,” and the word is here
directly transferred by Josephus from the Latin into Greek without any
explanation. A scribe unacquainted with Latin might easily stumble at
the word, as Lightfoot suggests. In *Ant.* XVIII. 6, 7 where the bird is
mentioned, the name is, to be sure, explained; but the alteration at
this point was made apparently by a copyist of Eusebius, not of
Josephus, and therefore by one who had probably never seen that
explanation.

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p15"></span>Whiston in his translation of Josephus
inserts a note to the following effect: “We have a mighty cry made here
by some writers, as if the great Eusebius had on purpose falsified this
account of Josephus, so as to make it agree with the parallel account in
the Acts of the Apostles, because the present copies of his citation of
it, *Hist. Eccles.* Bk. II. chap. 10, omit the words <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xi-p15.1"></span>βουβῶνα</span> …<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xi-p15.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xi-p15.3"></span>πι σχοινίου,
τινος</span>, i.e. ‘an owl …on a certain rope,’ which Josephus’ present
copies retain, and only have the explanatory word <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xi-p15.4"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xi-p15.5"></span>γγελον</span>, or
‘angel,’ as if he meant that ‘angel of the Lord’ which St. Luke mentions
as smiting Herod, <span id="iii.vii.xi-p15.6"></span>[Acts xii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#023.md)<span id="iii.vii.xi-p15.7"></span>,
and not that owl, which Josephus called ‘an angel or messenger, formerly
of good but now of bad news,’ to Agrippa. This accusation is a somewhat
strange one in the case of the great Eusebius, who is known to have so
accurately and faithfully produced a vast number of other ancient
records and particularly not a few out of our Josephus also, without any
suspicion of prevarication. Now, not to allege how uncertain we are,
whether Josephus’ and Eusebius’ copies of the fourth century were just
like the present in this clause, which we have no distinct evidence of,
the following words preserved still in Eusebius will not admit of any
such exposition. ‘This \[bird\] (says Eusebius) Agrippa presently
perceived to be the cause of ill fortune, as it was once of good
fortune’; which can belong only to that bird the ‘owl,’ which, as it had
formerly foreboded his happy deliverance from imprisonment, *Ant.*
XVIII. 6. 7, so was it then foretold to prove afterward the unhappy
forewarner of his death in five days’ time. If the improper word <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xi-p15.8"></span>αἴτιον</span>, or
‘cause,’ be changed for Josephus’ proper word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.xi-p15.9"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.xi-p15.10"></span>γγελον</span>, ‘angel,’ or ‘messenger,’
and the foregoing words, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.xi-p15.11"></span>βουβῶνα ἐπὶ σχοινίου τινος</span>, be
inserted, Eusebius’ text will truly represent that in Josephus.”

<span id="fn_340"></span>[112:341](2010052.htm#fr_340.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xi-p15.12"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p16"></span> Josephus (*Ant.* XVIII. 6. 7) records
that while Agrippa was in chains—having been condemned to imprisonment
by Tiberius—an owl made its appearance and perched upon a tree near him.
A fellow-prisoner interpreted the event as a good omen, prophesying that
Agrippa would soon be released from his bonds and become king, but that
the same bird would appear to him again five days before his death.
Tiberius died in the following year, and the events prophesied came to
pass. The story was apparently implicitly believed by Josephus, who
relates it in good faith.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[112:342](2010052.htm#fr_341.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p18"></span> The text of Josephus, as well as the
majority of the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.xi-p18.1"></span>mss.</span> of Eusebius, followed by
Valesius, Stroth, Burton, and Schwegler, read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.xi-p18.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.xi-p18.3"></span>πὶ τῆς μακαριζομένης λαμπρότητος</span>,
which I have adopted in preference to the reading of Heinichen, who
follows a few good <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.xi-p18.4"></span>mss.</span> in substituting <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xi-p18.5"></span>μακαρί&
231·τητος</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.xi-p18.6"></span>λαμπρότητος</span>

<span id="fn_342"></span>[112:343](2010052.htm#fr_342.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p20"></span> This shows the success with which
Agrippa had courted the favor of the Jews. A far different feeling was
shown at his death from that exhibited at the death of his grandfather,
Herod the Great.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[112:344](2010052.htm#fr_343.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p22"></span> He was born in 10 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.vii.xi-p22.1"></span>b.c.</span>, and began to
reign as successor of Philip and Lysanias in 37 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.xi-p22.2"></span>a.d.</span> See above, chap. 4, note 3.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[112:345](2010052.htm#fr_344.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xi-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p23"></span> Herod Antipas.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[112:346](2010052.htm#fr_345.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p25"></span> Luke always calls the king, Herod,
which was the family name, while Josephus calls him by his given name
Agrippa. He is known to us under the name of Herod Agrippa I. It seems
strange that Eusebius should not have known that he bore the two names,
Herod Agrippa, instead of expressing doubt in the matter, as he does. In
the heading of the chapter he gives the king both names, without
intimating that he entertained any uncertainty in the matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](2010053.md)
