[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010519)  [Next](2010521) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_519">p. 519</span>
<span id="iv.vi.iii.i-Page_519"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.i-p1.1"></span>Book III.</span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.i-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.i-p2.1"></span>Chapter I</span>.—*A Comparison of
Constantine’s Piety with the Wickedness of the Persecutors.*

<span id="iv.vi.iii.i-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.i-p3.1"></span>In</span> this manner that spirit who is
the hater of good, actuated by envy at the blessing enjoyed by the
Church, continued to raise against her the stormy troubles of intestine
discord, in the midst of a period of peace and joy. Meanwhile, however,
the divinely-favored emperor did not slight the duties befitting him,
but exhibited in his whole conduct a direct contrast to those atrocities
of which the cruel tyrants had been lately guilty, <span
id="fr_3222"></span>[3223](#fn_3222) and thus triumphed over every enemy
that opposed him. For in the first place, the tyrants, being themselves
alienated from the true God, had enforced by every compulsion the
worship of false deities: Constantine convinced mankind by actions as
well as words, <span id="fr_3223"></span>[3224](#fn_3223) that these had
but an imaginary existence, and exhorted them to acknowledge the only
true God. They had derided his Christ with words of blasphemy: he
assumed that as his safeguard <span id="fr_3224"></span>[3225](#fn_3224)
against which they directed their blasphemies, and gloried in the symbol
of the Saviour’s passion. They had persecuted and driven from house and
home the servants of Christ: he recalled them every one, and restored
them to their native homes. They had covered them with dishonor: he made
their condition honorable and enviable in the eyes of all. They had
shamefully plundered and sold the goods of godly men: Constantine not
only replaced this loss, but still further enriched them with abundant
presents. They had circulated injurious calumnies, through their written
ordinances, against the prelates of the Church: he on the contrary,
conferred dignity on these individuals by personal marks of honor, and
by his edicts and statutes raised them to higher distinction than
before. They had utterly demolished and razed to the ground the houses
of prayer: he commanded that those which still existed should be
enlarged, and that new ones should be raised on a magnificent scale at
the expense of the imperial treasury. They had ordered the inspired
records to be burnt and utterly destroyed: he decreed that copies of
them should be multiplied, and magnificently adorned <span
id="fr_3225"></span>[3226](#fn_3225) at the charge of the imperial
treasury. They had strictly forbidden the prelates, anywhere or on any
occasion, to convene synods; whereas he gathered them to his court from
every province, received them into his palace, and even to his own
private apartments and thought them worthy to share his home and table.
They had honored the demons with offerings: Constantine exposed their
error, and continually distributed the now useless materials for
sacrifice, to those who would apply them to a better use. They had
ordered the pagan temples to be sumptuously adorned: he razed to their
foundations those of them which had been the chief objects of
superstitious reverence. They had subjected God’s servants to the most
ignominious punishments: he took vengeance on the persecutors, and
inflicted on them just chastisement in the name of God, while he held
the memory of his holy martyrs in constant veneration. They had driven
God’s worshipers from the imperial palaces: he placed full confidence in
them at all times, and knowing them to be the better disposed and more
faithful than any beside. They, the victims of avarice, voluntarily
subjected themselves as it were to the pangs of Tantalus: he with royal
magnificence unlocked all his treasures, and distributed his gifts with
rich and high-souled liberality. They committed countless murders, that
they might plunder or confiscate the wealth of their victims; while
throughout the reign of Constantine the sword of justice hung idle
everywhere, and both people and municipal magistrates <span
id="fr_3226"></span>[3227](#fn_3226) in every provence were governed
rather by paternal authority than by any constraining. <span
id="fr_3227"></span>[3228](#fn_3227) Surely <span id="page_520">p.
520</span> <span id="iv.vi.iii.i-Page_520"></span>it must seem to all
who duly regard these facts, that a new and fresh era of existence had
begun to appear, and a light heretofore unknown suddenly to dawn from
the midst of darkness on the human race: and all must confess that these
things were entirely the work of God, who raised up this pious emperor
to withstand the multitude of the ungodly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3222"></span>[519:3223](2010520.htm#fr_3222) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.i-p4"></span> Compare contrast with the other
emperors in Prolegomena, under *Life.*

<span id="fn_3223"></span>[519:3224](2010520.htm#fr_3223) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.i-p5"></span> Eusebius expressly states that
Constantine’s words had little result in conversion. It is meant here
that the success of one who relied on God itself proved the vanity of
idols.

<span id="fn_3224"></span>[519:3225](2010520.htm#fr_3224) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.i-p6"></span> This may perhaps mean “ordered to be
inscribed” or “wrote it to be his safeguard.” This form of *Bag.* is a
satisfactory paraphrase.

<span id="fn_3225"></span>[519:3226](2010520.htm#fr_3225) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.i-p7"></span> Their bindings were adorned with
precious stones according to Cedrenus. Compare Prolegomena, *Character,
Magnificence.*

<span id="fn_3226"></span>[519:3227](2010520.htm#fr_3226) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.i-p8"></span> \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.i-p8.1"></span>Πολιτευτῶν ἀνδρῶν</span>, here, apparently,
the Decurions, who formed the *corporations* of the cities, and were
subject to responsible and burdensome offices. Vide Gibbon, *Decline and
Fall,* chap. 17.—*Bag.*\] So Valesius maintains, and has been generally
if not universally followed. Though it might be overventuresome to
change the translation therefore, it befits the sense better and suits
the words admirably to apply to the different classes, Peregrini and
Cives. This distinction did not fully pass away until the time of
Justinian (Long, art. *Civitas,* in Smith, *Dict. Gr. and Rom. Ant.*),
and it seems certain that Eusebius meant this.

<span id="fn_3227"></span>[519:3228](2010520.htm#fr_3227) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.i-p9"></span> This above is a sort of resumé of the
life of Constantine. For illustration of the various facts mentioned,
compare the latter part of the *Church History* and the various acts and
documents in this Life. Compare also Prolegomena, under *Life,* and
especially under *Character.* It seems now and then to be like a little
homily on the glory of having the shoe on the other foot—the glory of
having done to others what others had done to them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](2010521)
