[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010227)  [Next](2010229.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.—</span>*Valerian and the
Persecution under him.*

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xii.xi-p2.1"></span>Gallus</span> and the other rulers, <span
id="fr_2209"></span>[2210](#fn_2209.md) having held the government less
than two years, were overthrown, and Valerian, with his son Gallienus,
received the empire. The circumstances which Dionysius relates of him we
may learn from his epistle to Hermammon, <span
id="fr_2210"></span>[2211](#fn_2210.md) in which he gives the following
account:

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p5"></span>2. “And in like manner it is revealed to
John; ‘For there was given to him,’ he says, ‘a mouth speaking great
things and blasphemy; and there was given unto him authority and forty
and two months.’ <span id="fr_2211"></span>[2212](#fn_2211.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p7"></span>3. It is wonderful that both of these
things occurred under Valerian; and it is the more remarkable in this
case when we consider his previous conduct, for he had been mild and
friendly toward the men of God, for none of the emperors before him had
treated them so kindly and favorably; and not even those who were said
openly to be Christians <span id="fr_2212"></span>[2213](#fn_2212.md)
received them with such manifest hospitality and friendliness as he did
at the beginning of his reign. For his entire house was filled with
pious persons and was a church of God.

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p9"></span>4. But the teacher and ruler of the
synagogue of the Magi from Egypt <span
id="fr_2213"></span>[2214](#fn_2213.md) persuaded him to change his course,
urging him to slay and persecute pure and holy men <span
id="fr_2214"></span>[2215](#fn_2214.md) because they opposed and hindered
the corrupt and abominable incantations. For there are and there were
men who, being present and being seen, though they only breathed and
spoke, were able to scatter the counsels of the sinful demons. And he
induced him to practice initiations and abominable sorceries and to
offer unacceptable sacrifices; to slay innumerable children and to
sacrifice the offspring of unhappy fathers; to divide the bowels of
new-born babes and to mutilate and cut to pieces the creatures of God,
as if by such practices they could attain happiness.”

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p12"></span>5. He adds to this the following:
“Splendid indeed were the thank-offerings which Macrianus brought
them <span id="fr_2215"></span>[2216](#fn_2215.md) for the empire which was
the object of his hopes. He is said to have been formerly the emperor’s
general finance minister <span id="fr_2216"></span>[2217](#fn_2216.md) ;
yet he did nothing praiseworthy or of general benefit, <span
id="fr_2217"></span>[2218](#fn_2217.md) but fell under the pro<span
id="page_299">p. 299</span> <span id="iii.xii.xi-Page_299"></span>phetic
saying,

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p16"></span>6. ‘Woe unto those who prophesy from
their own heart and do not consider the general good.’ <span
id="fr_2218"></span>[2219](#fn_2218.md) For he did not perceive the general
Providence, nor did he look for the judgment of Him who is before all,
and through all, and over all. Wherefore he became an enemy of his
Catholic <span id="fr_2219"></span>[2220](#fn_2219.md) Church, and
alienated and estranged himself from the compassion of God, and fled as
far as possible from his salvation. In this he showed the truth of his
own name.” <span id="fr_2220"></span>[2221](#fn_2220.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p20"></span>7. And again, farther on he says: “For
Valerian, being instigated to such acts by this man, was given over to
insults and reproaches, according to what was said by Isaiah: ‘They have
chosen their own ways and their abominations in which their soul
delighted; I also will choose their delusions and will render unto them
their sins.’ <span id="fr_2221"></span>[2222](#fn_2221.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p22"></span>8. But this man <span
id="fr_2222"></span>[2223](#fn_2222.md) madly desired the kingdom though
unworthy of it, and being unable to put the royal garment on his
crippled body, set forward his two sons to bear their father’s
sins. <span id="fr_2223"></span>[2224](#fn_2223.md) For concerning them the
declaration which God spoke was plain, ‘Visiting the iniquities of the
fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them
that hate me.’ <span id="fr_2224"></span>[2225](#fn_2224.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p26"></span>9. For heaping on the heads of his sons
his own evil desires, in which he had met with success, <span
id="fr_2225"></span>[2226](#fn_2225.md) he wiped off upon them his own
wickedness and hatred toward God.”

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p28"></span>Dionysius relates these things
concerning Valerian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2209"></span>[298:2210](2010228.htm#fr_2209.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xi-p3.1"></span>οἱ ἀμφὶ τὸν Γ€λλον</span>. Eusebius is
undoubtedly referring to Gallus, Volusian, his son and co-regent, and
Æmilian, his enemy and successor. Gallus himself, with his son Volusian,
whom he made Cæsar and co-regent, reigned from the latter part of the
year 251 to about the middle of the year 253, when the empire was
usurped by Æmilian, and he and his son were slain. Æmilian was
recognized by the senate as the legal emperor, but within four months
Valerian, Gallus’ leading general,—who had already been proclaimed
emperor by his legions,—revenged the murder of Gallus and came to the
throne. Valerian reigned until 260, when his son Gallienus, who had been
associated with him in the government from the beginning, succeeded him
and reigned until 268.

<span id="fn_2210"></span>[298:2211](2010228.htm#fr_2210.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p4"></span> Upon this epistle, see above, chap. 1,
note 3.

<span id="fn_2211"></span>[298:2212](2010228.htm#fr_2211.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p6"></span> [Rev. xiii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.xii.xi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2212"></span>[298:2213](2010228.htm#fr_2212.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p8"></span> Philip was the only emperor before this
time that was openly said to have been a Christian (see above, Bk. VI.
chap. 34, note 2). Alexander Severus was very favorable to the
Christians, and Eusebius may have been thinking of him also in this
connection.

<span id="fn_2213"></span>[298:2214](2010228.htm#fr_2213.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p10"></span> viz. Macrianus, one of the ablest of
Valerian’s generals, who had acquired great influence over him and had
been raised by him to the highest position in the army and made his
chief counselor. Dionysius is the only one to tell us that he was the
chief of the Egyptian magicians. Gibbon doubts the statement, but
Macrianus may well have been an Egyptian by birth and devoted, as so
many of the Egyptians were, to arts of magic, and have gained power over
Valerian in this way which he could have gained in no other. It is not
necessary of course to understand Dionysius’ words as implying that
Macrianus was officially at the head of the body of Egyptian magicians,
but simply that he was the greatest, or one of the greatest, of them. He
figures in our other sources simply as a military and political
character, but it was natural for Dionysius to emphasize his addiction
to magic, though he could hardly have done it had Macrianus’ practices
in this respect not been commonly known.

<span id="fn_2214"></span>[298:2215](2010228.htm#fr_2214.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p11"></span> The persecution which the Christians
suffered under Valerian was more terrible than any other except that of
Diocletian. Numerous calamities took place during his reign. The
barbarians were constantly invading and ravaging the borders of the
empire, and on the east the Persians did great damage. Still worse was
the terrible plague which had begun in the reign of Decius and raged for
about fifteen years. All these calamities aroused the religious fears of
the emperor. Dionysius tells us that he was induced by Macrianus to have
recourse to human sacrifices and other similar means of penetrating the
events of the future, and when these rites failed, the presence of
Christians—irreligious men hated by the gods—in the imperial family was
urged as the reason for the failure, and thus the hostility of the
emperor was aroused against all Christians. As a consequence an edict
was published in 257 requiring all persons to conform at least outwardly
to the religion of Rome on the penalty of exile. And at the same time
the Christians were prohibited from holding religious services, upon
pain of death. In 258 followed a rescript of terrible severity. Only the
clergy and the higher ranks of the laity were attacked, but they were
sentenced to death if they refused to repent, and the clergy,
apparently, whether they repented or not. The persecution continued
until Valerian’s captivity, which took place probably late in 260. The
dates during this period are very uncertain, but Dionysius’ statement
that the persecution continued forty-two months is probably not far out
of the way; from late in the year 257 to the year 261, when it was
brought to an end by Gallienus. In Egypt and the Orient the persecution
seems to have continued a few months longer than elsewhere (see chap.
13, note 3). The martyrs were very numerous during the Valerian
persecution, especially in Rome and Africa. The most noted were Cyprian
and Xystus II. On the details of the persecution, see Tillemont, *H. E.*
IV. p. 1 sq.

<span id="fn_2215"></span>[298:2216](2010228.htm#fr_2215.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p13"></span> i.e. the evil spirits. As Valesius
remarks, the meaning is that since the evil spirits had promised him
power, he showed his gratitude to them by inducing the Emperor Valerian
to persecute the Christians.

<span id="fn_2216"></span>[298:2217](2010228.htm#fr_2216.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xi-p14.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xi-p14.2"></span>πῖ τῶν καθόλου λόγων</span>. The phrase is
equivalent to the Latin *Rationalis* or *Procurator summæ rei,* an
official who had charge of the imperial finances, and who might be
called either treasurer or finance minister. The position which
Macrianus held seems to have been the highest civil position in the
empire (cf. Valesius’ note *ad locum*). Gibbon calls him Prætorian
Prefect, and since he was the most famous of Valerian’s generals, he
doubtless held that position also, though I am not aware that any of our
sources state that he did.

<span id="fn_2217"></span>[298:2218](2010228.htm#fr_2217.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xi-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p15"></span> The Greek contains a play upon the
words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xi-p15.1"></span>καθόλου</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xii.xi-p15.2"></span>λόγος</span> in this
sentence. It reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xi-p15.3"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xi-p15.4"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xi-p15.5"></span>πρότερον μὲν ἐπὶ τῶν καθόλου λόγων
λεγόμενος εἶναι βασιλέως, οὐδὲν εὔλογον οὐδὲ καθολικὸν ἐφρόνησεν</span>.
The play upon the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xi-p15.6"></span>καθόλου</span> continues in the next
sentence, where the Greek runs <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xi-p15.7"></span>τὸ καθόλου μὴ βλέπουσιν</span>, and in the
following, where it reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xi-p15.8"></span>οὐ γὰρ συνῆκε τὴν καθόλου πρόνοιαν</span>.
Again in the next sentence the adjective <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xi-p15.9"></span>καθολική</span> occurs: “his *universal*
Church.”

<span id="fn_2218"></span>[299:2219](2010228.htm#fr_2218.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p17"></span> [Ezek. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.xii.xi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2219"></span>[299:2220](2010228.htm#fr_2219.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xi-p18.1"></span>καθολικῆς</span>, “catholic” in the sense
of “general” or “universal,” the play upon the word still continuing.

<span id="fn_2220"></span>[299:2221](2010228.htm#fr_2220.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xi-p19.1"></span>Μακριανός</span>. The Greek word <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xii.xi-p19.2"></span>μακρ€ν</span> means
“far,” “at a distance.”

<span id="fn_2221"></span>[299:2222](2010228.htm#fr_2221.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p21"></span> <span
id="iii.xii.xi-p21.1"></span>[Isa.
66:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.xii.xi-p21.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2222"></span>[299:2223](2010228.htm#fr_2222.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p23"></span> i.e. Macrianus.

<span id="fn_2223"></span>[299:2224](2010228.htm#fr_2223.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p24"></span> Valerian reposed complete confidence
in Macrianus and followed his advice in the conduct of the wars against
the Persians. The result was that by Macrianus’ “weak or wicked counsels
the imperial army was betrayed into a situation where valor and military
skill were equally unavailing.” (Gibbon.) Dionysius, in chap. 23, below,
directly states that Macrianus betrayed Valerian, and this is the view
of the case commonly taken. Valerian fell into the hands of the Persians
(late in 260 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xii.xi-p24.1"></span>a.d.</span>), and Macrianus was proclaimed
emperor by his troops, and on account of his lameness (as both Dionysius
and Zonaras put it) or his age, associated with him his two sons,
Quietus and Macrianus. After some months he left his son Quietus in
charge of Syria, and designing to make himself master of the Occident,
marched with his son Macrianus against Gallienus, but was met in
Illyrium by the Pretender Aureolus (262) and defeated, and both himself
and son slain. His son Quietus meanwhile was besieged in Edessa by the
Pretender Odenathus and slain. Cf. Tillemont’s *Histoire des Empereurs,*
III. p. 333 sq. and p. 340 sq.

<span id="fn_2224"></span>[299:2225](2010228.htm#fr_2224.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p25"></span> [Ex. xx.
5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.xii.xi-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2225"></span>[299:2226](2010228.htm#fr_2225.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xi-p27.1"></span>ηὐτύχει</span>. Three <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xii.xi-p27.2"></span>mss.</span>, followed by
Stephanus, Valesius, Burton, Stroth (and by the translators Closs,
Crusè, and Salmond in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* VI. p. 107), read <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xii.xi-p27.3"></span>ἠ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xii.xi-p27.4"></span>τύχει</span>, “failed”
(“in whose gratification he failed”). <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xi-p27.5"></span>ηὐτύχει</span>, however, is supported by
overwhelming <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xii.xi-p27.6"></span>ms.</span> authority, and is adopted by
Schwegler and Heinichen, and approved by Valesius in his notes. It seems
at first sight the harder reading, and is, therefore, in itself to be
preferred to the easier reading, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xi-p27.7"></span>ἠ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xi-p27.8"></span>τύχει</span>. Although it seems harder, it
is really fully in accord with what has preceded. Macrianus had not made
himself emperor (if Dionysius is to be believed), but he had succeeded
fully in his desires, in that he had raised his sons to the purple. If
he had acquired such power as to be able to do that, he must have given
them the position, because he preferred to govern in that way; and if
that be so, he could hardly be said to have failed in his desires.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](2010229.md)
