[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010530)  [Next](2010532) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xii-p1"></span> <span id="page_523">p. 523</span>
<span id="iv.vi.iii.xii-Page_523"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII</span>.—*Constantine’s
Address to the Council concerning Peace.* <span
id="fr_3248"></span>[3249](#fn_3248)

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xii-p3"></span>“<span class="c13"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.xii-p3.1"></span>It</span> was once my chief desire,
dearest friends, to enjoy the spectacle of your united presence; and now
that this desire is fulfilled, I feel myself bound to render thanks to
God the universal King, because, in addition to all his other benefits,
he has granted me a blessing higher than all the rest, in permitting me
to see you not only all assembled together, but all united in a common
harmony of sentiment. I pray therefore that no malignant adversary may
henceforth interfere to mar our happy state; I pray that, now the
impious hostility of the tyrants has been forever removed by the power
of God our Saviour, that spirit who delights in evil may devise no other
means for exposing the divine law to blasphemous calumny; for, in my
judgment, intestine strife within the Church of God, is far more evil
and dangerous than any kind of war or conflict; and these our
differences appear to me more grievous than any outward trouble.
Accordingly, when, by the will and with the co-operation of God, I had
been victorious over my enemies, I thought that nothing more remained
but to render thanks to him, and sympathize in the joy of those whom he
had restored to freedom through my instrumentality; as soon as I heard
that intelligence which I had least expected to receive, I mean the news
of your dissension, I judged it to be of no secondary importance, but
with the earnest desire that a remedy for this evil also might be found
through my means, I immediately sent to require your presence. And now I
rejoice in beholding your assembly; but I feel that my desires will be
most completely fulfilled when I can see you all united in one judgment,
and that common spirit of peace and concord prevailing amongst you all,
which it becomes you, as consecrated to the service of God, to commend
to others. Delay not, then, dear friends: delay not, ye ministers of
God, and faithful servants of him who is our common Lord and Saviour:
begin from this moment to discard the causes of that disunion which has
existed among you, and remove the perplexities of controversy by
embracing the principles of peace. For by such conduct you will at the
same time be acting in a manner most pleasing to the supreme God, and
you will confer an exceeding favor on me who am your fellow-servant.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3248"></span>[523:3249](2010531.htm#fr_3248) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.xii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xii-p2"></span> The earnest desire of Constantine to
promote peace in the church makes one judge with leniency the rather
arbitrary and very mechanical method he often took to secure it. As over
against the unity of form or the unity of compromise, there is one only
real unity—a unity in the truth, being one in *the* Truth. The secret of
peace is reason with right.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](2010532)
