[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010111)  [Next](2010113.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.—</span>*The Apologists that
wrote in Defense of the Faith during the Reign of Adrian.*

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.iii-p2.1"></span>After</span> Trajan had reigned for nineteen
and a half years <span id="fr_981"></span>[982](#fn_981.md) Ælius Adrian
became his successor in the empire. To him Quadratus addressed a
discourse containing an apology for our religion, <span
id="fr_982"></span>[983](#fn_982.md) because certain wicked men <span
id="fr_983"></span>[984](#fn_983.md) had attempted to trouble the
Christians. The work is still in the hands of a great many of the
brethren, as also in our own, and furnishes clear proofs of the man’s
understanding and of his apostolic orthodoxy. <span
id="fr_984"></span>[985](#fn_984.md)

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p7"></span>2. He himself reveals the early date at
which he lived in the following words: “But the works of our Saviour
were always present, <span id="fr_985"></span>[986](#fn_985.md) for they
were genuine:—those that were healed, and those that were raised from
the dead, who were seen not only when they were healed and when they
were raised, but were also always present; and not merely while the
Saviour was on earth, but also after his death, they were alive for
quite a while, so that some of them lived even to our day.” <span
id="fr_986"></span>[987](#fn_986.md) Such then was Quadratus.

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p10"></span>3. Aristides also, a believer earnestly
devoted to our religion, left, like Quadratus, an apology for the faith,
addressed to Adrian. <span id="fr_987"></span>[988](#fn_987.md) His work,
too, has been preserved even to the present day by a great many persons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_981"></span>[175:982](2010112.htm#fr_981.md) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p3"></span> Trajan reigned from Jan. 27, 98, to
Aug. 7 or 8, 117.

<span id="fn_982"></span>[175:983](2010112.htm#fr_982.md) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p4"></span> The importance of Quadratus’ Apology in
the mind of Eusebius is shown by his beginning the events of Hadrian’s
reign with it, as well as by the fact that he gives it also in his
*Chronicle*, year 2041 of Abraham (124 to 125 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.iii-p4.1"></span>a.d</span>.), where he calls Quadratus
“*Auditor Apostolorum*.” Eusebius gives few events in his *Chronicle*,
and therefore the reference to this is all the more significant. We find
no mention of Quadratus and Aristides before Eusebius, and of the
Apology of Quadratus we have only the few lines which are given in this
chapter. In the *Chronicle* Eusebius says that Quadratus and Aristides
addressed apologies to Hadrian during his stay in Athens. One <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.iii-p4.2"></span>ms</span>. of the
*Chronicle* gives the date as 125 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.iii-p4.3"></span>a.d.</span> (2141 Abr.), and this is
correct; for, according to Dürr (*Die Reisen des Kaisers Hadrian*, Wien,
1881, p. 42 to 44, and 70 to 71), Hadrian was in Athens from the fall of
125 to the summer of 126 and from the spring of 129 to the spring of
130. Eusebius adds in his *Chronicle* (but omits here) that these
apologies were the cause of a favorable edict from Hadrian, but this is
incorrect. Eusebius (IV. 12) makes a similar statement in regard to the
Apology of Justin, making a favorable edict (which has been proved to be
unauthentic) of the Emperor Antoninus the result of it. (See Overbeck,
*Studien zur Geschichte der alten Kirche*, I. 108 sq., 139.) Quadratus
and Aristides are the oldest apologists known to us. Eusebius does not
mention them again. This Quadratus must not be confounded with
Quadratus, bishop of Athens in the time of Marcus Aurelius, who is
mentioned in chap. 23; for the apologist Quadratus who belonged to the
time of the apostles can hardly have been a bishop during the reign of
Marcus Aurelius. Nor is there any decisive ground to identify him with
the prophet mentioned in Bk. III. chap. 37 and Bk. V. chap. 7, for
Quadratus was a very common name, and the prophet and the apologist seem
to have belonged to different countries (see Harnack, *Ueberlieferung
der griech. Apol*. p. 103). Many scholars, however, identify the prophet
and the apologist, and it must be said that Eusebius’ mention of the
prophet in III. 37, and of the apologist in IV. 3, without any
qualifying phrases, looks as if one well-known Quadratus were referred
to. The matter must remain undecided. Jerome speaks of Quadratus and
Aristides once in the *Chronicle*, year 2142, and in *de vir. ill*.
chap. 19 and 20. In chap. 19 he identifies Quadratus, the apologist, and
Quadratus, the bishop of Athens, but he evidently had no other source
than Eusebius (as was usually the case, so that he can very rarely be
accepted as an independent witness), and his statements here are the
result simply of a combination of his own. The later scattering
traditions in regard to Quadratus and Aristides (chiefly in the
Martyrologies) rest probably only upon the accounts of Eusebius and
Jerome, and whatever enlargement they offer is untrustworthy. The
Apology of Quadratus was perhaps extant at the beginning of the seventh
century; see Photius, *Cod*. 162. One later tradition made Quadratus the
angel of Philadelphia, addressed in the Apocalypse; another located him
in Magnesia (this Otto accepts). Either tradition might be true, but one
is worth no more than the other. Compare Harnack, *Die Ueberlieferung
der griech. Apol*., and Otto, *Corpus Apol. Christ*. IX. p. 333 sq.

<span id="fn_983"></span>[175:984](2010112.htm#fr_983.md) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p4.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p5"></span> This phrase is very significant, as
showing the idea of Eusebius that the persecutions did not proceed from
the emperors themselves, but were the result of the machinations of the
enemies of the Christians.

<span id="fn_984"></span>[175:985](2010112.htm#fr_984.md) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p6"></span> ὀρθοτομία. Compare the use of
ὀρθομοῦντα in [2 Tim. ii. 15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#015.md)<span
id="iii.ix.iii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_985"></span>[175:986](2010112.htm#fr_985.md) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p8"></span> The fragment begins τοῦ δὲ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν
τὰ žργα ἀεὶ παρῆν. The δὲ seems to introduce a contrast, and allows us
to assume with some measure of assurance that an exposure of the
pretended wonders of heathen magicians, who were numerous at that time,
preceded this ocular proof of the genuineness of Christ’s miracles.

<span id="fn_986"></span>[175:987](2010112.htm#fr_986.md) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p9"></span> Quadratus had evidently seen none of
these persons himself; he had simply heard of them through others. We
have no record elsewhere of the fact that any of those raised by Christ
lived to a later age.

<span id="fn_987"></span>[175:988](2010112.htm#fr_987.md) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p11"></span> Aristides of Athens, a contemporary of
Quadratus, is called by Eusebius in his *Chronicle* “a philosopher”
(*nostri dogmatis philosophus Atheniensis*). Eusebius does not quote his
work, perhaps because he did not himself possess a copy, perhaps because
it contained no historical matter suitable to his purpose. He does not
mention him again (the Aristides, the friend of Africanus, of Bk. I.
chap. 7 and of Bk. VI. chap. 31, lived a century later), and his Apology
is quoted by none of the Fathers, so far as is known. Vague and
worthless traditions of the Middle Ages still kept his name alive, as in
the case of Quadratus, but the Apology itself disappeared long ago,
until in 1878 a fragment of an Apology, bearing the name of “Aristides,
the Philosopher of Athens,” was published by the Mechitarists from a
codex of the year 981. It is a fragment of an Armenian translation of
the fifth century; and although its genuineness has been denied, it is
accepted by most critics, and seems to be an authentic fragment from the
age of Hadrian. See especially Harnack, *ibid*. p. 109 sq., and again in
Herzog, 2d ed., Supplement Vol. p. 675–681; also Schaff, *Ch. Hist*. II.
p. 709.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](2010113.md)
