[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010255)  [Next](2010257) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV.—</span>*The Famous Martyrs of
God, who filled Every Place with their Memory and won Various Crowns in
behalf of Religion.*

<span id="iii.xiii.v-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiii.v-p2.1"></span>For</span> we might tell of many who showed
admirable zeal for the religion of the God of the universe, not only
from the beginning of the general persecution, but long before that
time, while yet peace prevailed.

<span id="iii.xiii.v-p3"></span>2. For though he who had received power
was seemingly aroused now as from a deep sleep, yet from the time after
Decius and Valerian, he had been plotting secretly and without notice
against the churches. He did not wage war against all of us at once, but
made trial at first only of those in the army. For he supposed that the
others could be taken easily if he should first attack and subdue these.
Thereupon many of the soldiers were seen most cheerfully embracing
private life, so that they might not deny their piety toward the Creator
of the universe.

<span id="iii.xiii.v-p4"></span>3. For when the commander, <span
id="fr_2510"></span>[2511](#fn_2510) whoever he was, <span
id="fr_2511"></span>[2512](#fn_2511) began to persecute the soldiers,
separating into tribes and purging those who were enrolled in the army,
giving them the choice either by obeying to receive the honor which
belonged to them, or on the other hand to be deprived of it if they
disobeyed the command, a great many soldiers of Christ’s kingdom,
without hesitation, instantly preferred the confession of him to the
seeming glory and prosperity which they were enjoying.

<span id="iii.xiii.v-p7"></span>4. And one and another of them
occasionally received in exchange, for their pious constancy, <span
id="fr_2512"></span>[2513](#fn_2512) not only the loss of position, but
death. But as yet the instigator of this plot proceeded with moderation,
and ventured so far as blood only in some instances; for the multitude
of believers, as it is likely, made him afraid, and deterred him from
waging war at once against all.

<span id="iii.xiii.v-p9"></span>5. But when he made the attack more
boldly, it is impossible to relate how many and what sort of martyrs of
God could be seen, among the inhabitants of all the cities and
countries. <span id="fr_2513"></span>[2514](#fn_2513)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2510"></span>[326:2511](2010256.htm#fr_2510) <span
id="iii.xiii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.v-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.v-p5.1"></span>στρατοπεδ€ρχης</span>

<span id="fn_2511"></span>[326:2512](2010256.htm#fr_2511) <span
id="iii.xiii.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.v-p6"></span> In the *Chron.* we are told of a
commander by name Veturius, who is doubtless to be identified with the
one referred to here. Why Eusebius does not give his name in the
History, we do not know. There seems to be contempt in the phrase,
“whoever he was,” and it may be that he did not consider him worth
naming. In Jerome’s version of the *Chron.* (sixteenth year of
Diocletian) we read: *Veturius magister militiæ Christianos milites
persequitur, paulatim ex illo jam tempore persecutione adversum nos
incipiente;* in the Armenian (fourteenth year): *Veturius magister
militiæ eos qui in exercitu Christiani erant, clanculum opprimebat atque
ex hoc inde tempore ubique locorum persecutio se extendit.* Evidently
the occurrence took place a few years before the outbreak of the regular
persecution, but the exact date cannot be determined. It is probable,
moreover, from the way in which Eusebius refers to the man in the
History that he was a comparatively insignificant commander, who took
the course he did on his own responsibility. At least, there is no
reason to connect the act with Diocletian and to suppose it ordered by
him. All that we know of his relation to the Christians forbids such a
supposition. There may have been some particular occasion for such a
move in the present instance, which evidently affected only a small part
of the army, and resulted in only a few deaths (see the next paragraph).
Perhaps some insubordination was discovered among the Christian
soldiers, which led the commander to be suspicious of all of them, and
hence to put the test to them,—which was always in order,—to prove their
loyalty. It is plain that he did not intend to put any of them to death,
but only to dismiss such as refused to evince their loyalty by offering
the customary sacrifices. Some of the Christian soldiers, however, were
not content with simple dismission, but in their eagerness to evince
their Christianity said and did things which it was impossible for any
commander to overlook (cf. the instances given by Mason, p. 41 sq.). It
was such soldiers as these that suffered death; and they of course were
executed, not because they were Christians, but because they were
insubordinate. Their death was brought on themselves by their foolish
fanaticism; and they have no claim to be honored as martyrs, although
Eusebius evidently regarded them as such.

<span id="fn_2512"></span>[326:2513](2010256.htm#fr_2512) <span
id="iii.xiii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.v-p8"></span> We should rather say “for their rash
and unjustifiable fanaticism.”

<span id="fn_2513"></span>[326:2514](2010256.htm#fr_2513) <span
id="iii.xiii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.v-p10"></span> In this sentence reference is made to
the general persecution, which did not begin until some time after the
events recorded in the previous paragraphs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](2010257)
